The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

GSSNN: Graph Smoothing Splines Neural Networks
Shichao Zhu,1,3∗ Lewei Zhou,2,4∗ Shirui Pan,5 Chuan Zhou,2,3 Guiying Yan,2,4 Bin Wang6
1

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
5
Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia, 6 Xiaomi AI Lab, Beijing, China
zhushichao@iie.ac.cn, {zhoulevi, zhouchuan, yangy}@amss.ac.cn, shirui.pan@monash.edu, wangbin11@xiaomi.com
2

deﬁne an aggregation operation, which propagates the
neighbor information to a target node in an iterative manner. This aggregation operation can be further interpreted as
two sequential steps, 1) applying a feature ﬁtting function
g(X) = XW on the node feature matrix X with a learnable
parameter matrix W , then 2) propagating the new representation on the graph adjacency matrix A by using A · g(X)
before ﬁtting it into a nonlinear activation function. While
being mathematically simple and easy to implement, these
GNNs may result in degenerated node embedding due to the
non-smooth feature ﬁtting function g(X) employed in the
ﬁrst step, particularly in graphs with noisy features. What is
more, when the resulted node embedding is further used to
perform downstream graph classiﬁcation via summarization
or pooling operation, the over-ﬁtting of nodes features and
spread of noise features will render the entire graph vulnerable, leading to suboptimal results. This problem, unfortunately, has not been studied in all existing GNNs.

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have achieved state-of-theart performance in many graph data analysis tasks. However, they still suffer from two limitations for graph representation learning. First, they exploit non-smoothing node
features which may result in suboptimal embedding and degenerated performance for graph classiﬁcation. Second, they
only exploit neighbor information but ignore global topological knowledge. Aiming to overcome these limitations simultaneously, in this paper, we propose a novel, ﬂexible, and endto-end framework, Graph Smoothing Splines Neural Networks (GSSNN), for graph classiﬁcation. By exploiting the
smoothing splines, which are widely used to learn smoothing ﬁtting function in regression, we develop an effective feature smoothing and enhancement module Scaled Smoothing
Splines (S3 ) to learn graph embedding. To integrate global
topological information, we design a novel scoring module,
which exploits closeness, degree, as well as self-attention values, to select important node features as knots for smoothing
splines. These knots can be potentially used for interpreting
classiﬁcation results. In extensive experiments on biological
and social datasets, we demonstrate that our model achieves
state-of-the-arts and GSSNN is superior in learning more robust graph representations. Furthermore, we show that S3
module is easily plugged into existing GNNs to improve their
performance.

The second limitation of current GNN-based approaches
in the graph classiﬁcation task is that they only exploit local information via convolution or neighbor aggregation,
but have largely ignored the global topological information.
They either summarize the embedding for all the nodes via
a simple readout function, or apply a pooling operation sequentially in the GNNs frameworks. The former approaches
such as GIN (Xu et al. 2019) can not distinguish the importance of different nodes, while the latter methods, such
as DiffPool (Ying et al. 2018) and SAGPool (Lee, Lee, and
Kang 2019), coarsen the graph structure progressively and
thus will lose important information for nodes. How to incorporate the global information in GNNs to improve the
graph representation learning is less studied in the literature.

Introduction
Deep learning on graphs is an important and ubiquitous task
with a broad set of domains ranging from social networks
to biological networks (Zhou et al. 2018; Qiu et al. 2018;
Duvenaud et al. 2015; Shi et al. 2019). Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) is a general type of deep-learning architectures that can be directly applied to structured data (Battaglia
et al. 2018). The success of GNNs in node representation
learning has inspired many deep-learning-based approaches
to leverage on node embeddings extracted from GNNs to
generate graph embeddings for graph-based applications
(Zhang et al. 2018; Xu et al. 2019).
The key to many graph neural networks (Kipf and Welling
2017; Klicpera, Bojchevski, and Günnemann 2019) is to

Motivated by the above observations, in this paper, we
propose a novel framework, Graph Smoothing Splines Neural Networks (GSSNN), to address both limitations in
an end-to-end framework. To address the ﬁrst problem,
we develop a feature smoothing component which applies
smoothing splines to enhance the node features. Speciﬁcally,
we construct a natural cubic splines function with two continuous derivatives to minimize the penalized residual sum
of squares. Fig. 1 illustrates the effectiveness of smoothing
splines. This feature smoothing operation will dramatically

∗

Equal Contributions
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7007

