The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Crowd Counting
Ao Luo,1 Fan Yang,2 Xin Li,2 Dong Nie,3 Zhicheng Jiao,4 Shangchen Zhou,5 Hong Cheng1∗
1

Center for Robotics, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
Inception Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
3
Department of Computer Science, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
4
University of Pennsylvania 5 Nanyang Technological University
aoluo uestc@hotmail.com, hcheng@uestc.edu.cn

Localization branch

(a) Input image

Counting branch
(b) Backbone

Multi-scale pooling

Crowd counting is an important yet challenging task due to
the large scale and density variation. Recent investigations
have shown that distilling rich relations among multi-scale
features and exploiting useful information from the auxiliary
task, i.e., localization, are vital for this task. Nevertheless,
how to comprehensively leverage these relations within a uniﬁed network architecture is still a challenging problem. In
this paper, we present a novel network structure called Hybrid
Graph Neural Network (HyGnn) which targets to relieve the
problem by interweaving the multi-scale features for crowd
density as well as its auxiliary task (localization) together and
performing joint reasoning over a graph. Speciﬁcally, HyGnn
integrates a hybrid graph to jointly represent the task-speciﬁc
feature maps of diﬀerent scales as nodes, and two types of
relations as edges: (i) multi-scale relations capturing the feature dependencies across scales and (ii) mutual beneﬁcial relations building bridges for the cooperation between counting
and localization. Thus, through message passing, HyGnn can
capture and distill richer relations between nodes to obtain
more powerful representations, providing robust and accurate
results. Our HyGnn performs signiﬁcantly well on four challenging datasets: ShanghaiTech Part A, ShanghaiTech Part
B, UCF CC 50 and UCF QNRF, outperforming the state-ofthe-art algorithms by a large margin.

Multi-scale pooling

Abstract

(c) Domain specific branches

࣡ ൌ ሺࣰǡ ࣟሻ

Update

(d) HyGnn

(e) results

Figure 1: Illustration of the proposed HyGnn model. (a) Input image, in which crowds have heavy overlaps and occlusions. (b) Backbone, which is a truncated VGG-16 model.
(c) Domain-speciﬁc branches: one for crowd counting and
the other for localization. (d)HyGnn, which represents the
features from diﬀerent scales and domains as nodes, while
the relations between them as edges. After several message passing iterations, multiple types of useful relations are
built. (e) Crowd density map (for counting) and localization
map (as the auxiliary task).

crowd density map, whose values are summed to give the
entire crowd count.
Recent studies (Shen et al. 2018; Cao et al. 2018; Li et
al. 2017; 2018) have shown that multi-scale information, or
relations across multiple scales helps to capture contextual
knowledge which beneﬁts crowd counting. Moreover, the
crowd counting and its auxiliary task (localization), in spite
of analyzing the crowd scene from diﬀerent perspectives,
could provide beneﬁcial clues for each other (Liu, Weng,
and Mu 2019; Lian et al. 2019). Crowd density map can
oﬀer guidance information and self-adaptive perception for
precise crowd localization, and on the other hand, crowd
localization can help to alleviate local inconsistency issue
in density map. The mutual cooperation, or called mutual
beneﬁcial relation, is the key factor in estimating the highquality density map. However, most methods only consider
the crowd counting problem from one aspect, while ignore
the other one. Consequently, they fail to fully utilize mul-

Introduction
Crowd counting, with the purpose of analyzing large crowds
quickly, is a crucial yet challenging computer vision and AI
task. It has drawn a lot of attention due to its potential applications in public security and planning, traﬃc control, crowd
management, public space design, etc.
Same as many other computer vision tasks, the performance of crowd counting has been substantially improved
by Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs). Recently, the
state-of-the-art crowd counting methods (Liu, Weng, and
Mu 2019; Liu, Salzmann, and Fua 2019; Wan et al. 2019;
Liu, Salzmann, and Fua 2019; Jiang et al. 2019) mostly follow the density-based paradigm. Given an image or video
frame, CNN-based regressors are trained to estimate the
∗

denotes the Corresponding Author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11693

