The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Towards Hands-Free Visual Dialog Interactive Recommendation
Tong Yu, Yilin Shen, Hongxia Jin
Samsung Research America
Mountain View, CA, USA
{tong.yu, yilin.shen, hongxia.jin}@samsung.com

Abstract
With the recent advances of multimodal interactive recommendations, the users are able to express their preference by
natural language feedback to the item images, to ﬁnd the desired items. However, the existing systems either retrieve only
one item or require the user to specify (e.g., by click or touch)
the commented items from a list of recommendations in each
user interaction. As a result, the users are not hands-free and
the recommendations may be impractical.
We propose a hands-free visual dialog recommender system
to interactively recommend a list of items. At each time, the
system shows a list of items with visual appearance. The user
can comment on the list in natural language, to describe the
desired features they further want. With these multimodal
data, the system chooses another list of items to recommend.
To understand the user preference from these multimodal
data, we develop neural network models which identify the
described items among the list and further predict the desired
attributes. To achieve efﬁcient interactive recommendations,
we leverage the inferred user preference and further develop
a novel bandit algorithm. Speciﬁcally, to avoid the system
exploring more than needed, the desired attributes are utilized to reduce the exploration space. More importantly, to
achieve sample efﬁcient learning in this hands-free setting,
we derive additional samples from the user’s relative preference expressed in natural language and design a pairwise logistic loss in bandit learning. Our bandit model is jointly updated by the pairwise logistic loss on the additional samples
derived from natural language feedback and the traditional
logistic loss. The empirical results show that the probability
of ﬁnding the desired items by our system is about 3 times as
high as that by the traditional interactive recommenders, after
a few user interactions.

Figure 1: An example in our hands-free recommender system. In each round, the user provides one comment to the
recommended list, and the system is not aware of which
item(s) among the list are commented. The system predicts
which parts are commented by the user, understands the user
preference, and provides another list of recommendations.
Yu et al. 2019). However, the existing systems either retrieve
only one item or require the user to specify (e.g., by click or
touch) the commented items in each user interaction. As a
result, the recommendations are less efﬁcient and the users
are not hands-free. In certain user scenarios of personal assistants, such as Amazon echo show1 and Google home hub2 ,
the hands-free feature is very desirable. For instance, when
the users prepare foods or take care of babies, it is unrealistic
to expect the users to easily touch or click the screen.
In this paper, (i) we design a hands-free interactive recommender system, based on which (ii) we further develop a
bandit algorithm to efﬁciently ﬁnd the desired items. In our
hands-free system, without touching or clicking the screens,
the users ﬁnd the items by providing natural language feedback to the item images. At each time, the user is provided
a list of recommended items. Then, the user provides one
comment to the list of items, to approach the desired item.
Figure 1 shows an example. The recommendations are provided to a user with multiple rounds. Assume the user wants
black ﬂats with open toe and ﬂoral pattern. In the ﬁrst round,
the user is recommended with a list of shoes. The user views
the list and provides a comment ‘I prefer shoes in black
color’. Then, the system updates and give recommendations
in the second round. The user gets more recommendations of
black shoes, and makes another comment ‘I prefer ﬂats with

Introduction
In traditional interactive recommender systems, the user
feedback (i.e., rating or click) is continuously collected to
improve the recommendations. The recent advances of recommenders enable the users to comment on the item images via natural language, to express their preference (Guo
et al. 2018; 2019; Vo et al. 2019; Yu, Shen, and Jin 2019;

1
https://www.amazon.com/All-new-Echo-Show-2nd-Gen/dp/
B077SXWSRP
2
https://store.google.com/product/google home hub

Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1137

