The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Integrating Overlapping Datasets Using Bivariate Causal Discovery
Anish Dhir,1 Ciarán M. Lee1,2
1

2

Babylon Health, London, United Kingdom
University College London, United Kingdom
{anish.dhir, ciaran.lee}@babylonhealth.com

For instance, in certain countries medical variables could
be censored diﬀerently, meaning we only have access to
joint measurements of certain variables; distinct medical
sensors may measure diﬀerent but overlapping aspects of
a particular disease or physiological function, for example
fMRI machines are unable to obtain measurements for every region of the brain simultaneously (Tillman and Spirtes
2011). In these examples, we are provided with multiple
datasets, each recording a potentially diﬀerent, but overlapping, set of variables. Such overlapping datasets occur frequently in medicine—clinical studies require strict ethical
approval which restricts the ability to measure variables not
required by the study, resulting in many studies which measure overlapping, but not coinciding, variables. Can these
datasets be combined in such a way that causal relations
between non-overlapping variables—which have never been
jointly measured—be discovered?
This problem was ﬁrst studied in (Danks, Glymour, and
Tillman 2009), with the state of the art achieved by the integration of overlapping datasets (IOD) algorithm of (Tillman
and Spirtes 2011). The authors employed conditional independence tests to learn the Markov equivalence class of each
individual dataset, using this to determine the equivalence
classes of consistent joint structures among all variables in
the union of datasets. A ‘consistent’ joint structure is one
whose conditional independences do not contradict those already learned from each individual dataset.
Approaches based on conditional independence tests are
limited as they can only determine causal structures up to a
Markov equivalence class. Due to this, conditional independence approaches result in too many consistent answers, especially when the number of overlapping variables is small.
They also fail to distinguish multiple causal structures between small numbers of variables, such as those depicted
in Fig. 1—as they all belong to the same Markov equivalence class. As many medical studies individually measure
relatively small numbers of variables, this is a major roadblock to extracting useful causal information. For instance,
(Savastano et al. 2017) provide clinical studies that support
the role of obesity in the development of low vitamin D,
while (Després and Lemieux 2006) provide separate studies which associate obesity with an increased risk of heart
failure. To extract useful information about the causal relationship between heart failure and vitamin D deﬁciency from

Abstract
Causal knowledge is vital for eﬀective reasoning in science,
as causal relations, unlike correlations, allow one to reason
about the outcomes of interventions. Algorithms that can discover causal relations from observational data are based on
the assumption that all variables have been jointly measured
in a single dataset. In many cases this assumption fails. Previous approaches to overcoming this shortcoming devised
algorithms that returned all joint causal structures consistent with the conditional independence information contained
in each individual dataset. But, as conditional independence
tests only determine causal structure up to Markov equivalence, the number of consistent joint structures returned by
these approaches can be quite large. The last decade has
seen the development of elegant algorithms for discovering causal relations beyond conditional independence, which
can distinguish among Markov equivalent structures. In this
work we adapt and extend these so-called bivariate causal
discovery algorithms to the problem of learning consistent
causal structures from multiple datasets with overlapping
variables belonging to the same generating process, providing a sound and complete algorithm that outperforms previous approaches on synthetic and real data.

1

Introduction

Causal knowledge is fundamental to many domains of science and medicine. This is due to the fact that causal relations, unlike correlations, allow one to reason counterfactually and to analyse the consequences of interventions (Pearl
2009; Richens, Lee, and Johri 2019; Perov et al. 2019).
While powerful approaches to discovering causal relations
between multiple variables in the absence of randomised
controlled trials have been developed (Hoyer et al. 2009;
Shimizu et al. 2006; Janzing et al. 2012b; Mitrovic, Sejdinovic, and Teh 2018; Janzing et al. 2012a; Goudet et
al. 2018; Zhang and Hyvärinen 2009; Fonollosa 2016;
Lee and Spekkens 2017; Gasse, Aussem, and Elghazel 2012;
Tsamardinos, Brown, and Aliferis 2006; Pearl 2009; Spirtes,
Glymour, and Scheines 2000; Kalainathan et al. 2018), many
of these require all variables to be jointly measured in a
single dataset. In many domains this assumption does not
hold, due to ethical concerns, or technological constraints.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3781

