The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Context-Aware Zero-Shot Recognition
Ruotian Luo

Ning Zhang

Bohyung Han

Linjie Yang

TTI-Chicago
rluo@ttic.edu

Vaitl Inc.
ning@vaitl.ai

Seoul National University
bhhan@snu.ac.kr

ByteDance AI Lab
linjie.yang@bytedance.com

Abstract
We present a novel problem setting in zero-shot learning,
zero-shot object recognition and detection in the context.
Contrary to the traditional zero-shot learning methods, which
simply infers unseen categories by transferring knowledge
from the objects belonging to semantically similar seen categories, we aim to understand the identity of the novel objects in an image surrounded by the known objects using the
inter-object relation prior. Speciﬁcally, we leverage the visual
context and the geometric relationships between all pairs of
objects in a single image, and capture the information useful to infer unseen categories. We integrate our context-aware
zero-shot learning framework into the traditional zero-shot
learning techniques seamlessly using a Conditional Random
Field (CRF). The proposed algorithm is evaluated on both
zero-shot region classiﬁcation and zero-shot detection tasks.
The results on Visual Genome (VG) dataset show that our
model signiﬁcantly boosts performance with the additional
visual context compared to traditional methods.

1

Prior knowledge:
object relationships

Seen Objects

Person
play with

Dog
play with

Unseen object: frisbee

Figure 1: An example of zero-shot recognition with context
information. It contains two seen objects (person and dog)
and one unseen object (frisbee). The prior knowledge of relationships between seen and unseen categories provide cues
to resolve the category of the unseen object.

Introduction

Supervised object recognition has achieved substantial performance improvement thanks to the advance of deep convolutional neural networks in the last few years (Ren et
al. 2015; Redmon and Farhadi 2017; Hu et al. 2018; Girshick 2015). Large-scale datasets with comprehensive annotations, e.g., COCO (Lin et al. 2014), facilitate deep neural
networks to learn semantic knowledge of the objects within
a predeﬁned set of classes.
However, it is impractical to obtain rich annotations for
every class in the world while it is important to develop the
models that can generalize to new categories without extra
annotations. On the other hand, human beings have capability to understand the unseen object categories using external
knowledge such as language descriptions and object relationships. The problem of inferring objects in unseen categories is referred to as zero-shot object recognition in recent
literature (Fu et al. 2018; Xian et al. 2018).
In the absence of direct supervision, other resources
of information such as semantic embedding (Norouzi et

al. 2013), knowledge graph (Wang, Ye, and Gupta 2018;
Rohrbach, Stark, and Schiele 2011), and attributes (Sung et
al. 2018; Changpinyo et al. 2016) are often employed to infer the appearance of novel object categories through knowledge transfer from seen categories. The assumption behind
the approaches is semantic similarity can transfer to visual
similarity.
Besides inferring novel object categories using visual
similarity, human often capture the information of an object
in the scene context. For example, if we do not know what
the red disk-like object in Figure 1 is, it is possible to guess
its category even with the limited visual cues by recognizing
two other objects in the neighborhood, a person and a dog,
using the prior knowledge that a person and a dog potentially play with together. Suppose that a frisbee is known to
be such kind of an object, we can infer the object as a frisbee
even without seeing it before. In this scenario, the interaction
between multiple objects, e.g.. person, dog, and frisbee, pro-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11709

