The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Privacy-Preserving Gaussian
Process Regression – A Modular Approach
to the Application of Homomorphic Encryption
Peter Fenner, Edward O. Pyzer-Knapp
IBM Research UK
Sci-Tech Daresbury
Warrington, UK.
peter.fenner1@ibm.com, epyzerk3@uk.ibm.com
provider. The service provider is unlikely to be willing to
share their model or data with the client, as this would undermine their ability to continue offering the service. Since
neither party is willing to share their data with the other,
combining the data to make predictions poses a problem.
One potential solution to this problem is found in fully
homomorphic encryption (FHE), which allows for calculations to be made on encrypted data. Privacy is ensured
by encrypting the client’s data and sending it to the service provider, then allowing the service provider to perform calculations on the encrypted data before returning
the results to the client, who can then decrypt them. This
problem has been considered for several machine learning
algorithms. The paper Implementing ML Algorithms with
HE (Du et al. 2017) describes implementations of linear
regression and K-means clustering under FHE, and gives
an overview of other machine learning algorithms which
have been implemented by others, including Ridge Regression (Nikolaenko et al. 2013), Linear Means Classiﬁers
(Graepel, Lauter, and Naehrig 2012), Naive Bayes, Decision
Trees and Support Vector Machines (Bost et al. 2014), KNearest Neighbour (Samet, Miri, and Orozco-Barbosa 2007;
Clifton 2003), and Neural Networks (Dowlin et al. 2016).
The use of FHE for machine learning is not, however,
the panacea it may at ﬁrst appear to be. Performing computation on encrypted data is much slower than performing
the same computation on plain-text, and there are limits on
the types of operations which can be used. Some machine
learning algorithms will therefore lend themselves to FHE
better than others. For example, parts of some popular algorithms cannot realistically be accurately computed under
FHE and must be approximated, with more accurate approximations requiring greater computational expense, and so a
choice must be made between speed and accuracy.
Gaussian process regression is one example of a machine
learning algorithm which provides a challenge when applying FHE, and as a result there does not (to our knowledge) currently exist any application of FHE to Gaussian
processes. Smith et al. (Smith, Zwiessele, and Lawrence
2018) have considered an alternative approach to the problem of applying privacy-enhancing techniques to Gaussian
processes, using differential privacy, but their approach pro-

Abstract
Much of machine learning relies on the use of large amounts
of data to train models to make predictions. When this data
comes from multiple sources, for example when evaluation
of data against a machine learning model is offered as a service, there can be privacy issues and legal concerns over the
sharing of data. Fully homomorphic encryption (FHE) allows
data to be computed on whilst encrypted, which can provide a
solution to the problem of data privacy. However, FHE is both
slow and restrictive, so existing algorithms must be manipulated to make them work efﬁciently under the FHE paradigm.
Some commonly used machine learning algorithms, such as
Gaussian process regression, are poorly suited to FHE and
cannot be manipulated to work both efﬁciently and accurately. In this paper, we show that a modular approach, which
applies FHE to only the sensitive steps of a workﬂow that
need protection, allows one party to make predictions on their
data using a Gaussian process regression model built from another party’s data, without either party gaining access to the
other’s data, in a way which is both accurate and efﬁcient.
This construction is, to our knowledge, the ﬁrst example of
an effectively encrypted Gaussian process.

1

Introduction

As increasingly large amounts of data are becoming available, machine learning techniques are increasingly essential for gaining insights into trends and patterns which can
be used to make predictions about new data. Indeed, many
industries already beneﬁt greatly from the use of machine
learning for tasks such as drug discovery and fraud detection, and thus as the application areas continue to broaden,
the servitization of machine learning capabilities seems inevitable. However, this capability relies on the sharing of
data for training the required machine learning models, or
for predicting on new data, and is thus limited by any constraints on the disclosure of this information.
For many reasons, including legal restrictions or competitive advantage, people and organisations may wish to keep
their data private. In the case where machine learning is offered as a service, if the client wishes to keep their data private then they may be unwilling to share it with the service
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3866

