The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Hyperbolic Interaction Model for Hierarchical Multi-Label Classiﬁcation
Boli Chen, Xin Huang, Lin Xiao, Zixin Cai, Liping Jing
Beijing Key Lab of Trafﬁc Data Analysis and Mining
Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
{18120345, 18120367, 17112079, 18120340, lpjing}@bjtu.edu.cn

demonstrated. In literatures, label correlations can be determined from label matrix (Zhang et al. 2018) or label content
(Wang et al. 2018). The main idea is to project the labels
into a latent vectorial space, where each label is represented
as a dense low-dimensional vector, so that the label correlations can be characterized in this latent space. For hierarchical multi-label classiﬁcation (HMLC), labels are organized into a hierarchy and located at different hierarchical
levels accordingly. Since a parent label generally has several child labels, the number of labels grows exponentially
in child levels. In some special cases, most labels are located
at the lower levels, and few training instances belong to each
of them. In other words, tail labels also exist in HMLC. Different from the traditional MLC, the label structure, which
is intuitively useful to detect label correlations, is well provided in HMLC.
Inspired by recent works on learning hierarchical representations (Nickel and Kiela 2017), we propose to embed
the label hierarchy in the hyperbolic space. Taking advantage of the hyperbolic representation capability, we design
a Hyperbolic Interaction Model (HyperIM) to classify hierarchically structured labels. HyperIM embeds both document words and labels jointly in the hyperbolic space to
preserve their latent structures (e.g. structures of conceptual
relations between words and parent-child relations between
labels). Semantic connections between words and labels can
be furthermore explicitly measured according to the word
and label embeddings, which beneﬁts extracting the most
related components from documents and constructing the
label-aware document representations. The prediction is directly optimized by minimizing the cross-entropy loss. Our
contributions are summarized as follows:

Abstract
Different from the traditional classiﬁcation tasks which assume mutual exclusion of labels, hierarchical multi-label
classiﬁcation (HMLC) aims to assign multiple labels to every instance with the labels organized under hierarchical relations. Besides the labels, since linguistic ontologies are intrinsic hierarchies, the conceptual relations between words can
also form hierarchical structures. Thus it can be a challenge
to learn mappings from word hierarchies to label hierarchies.
We propose to model the word and label hierarchies by embedding them jointly in the hyperbolic space. The main reason is that the tree-likeness of the hyperbolic space matches
the complexity of symbolic data with hierarchical structures.
A new Hyperbolic Interaction Model (HyperIM) is designed
to learn the label-aware document representations and make
predictions for HMLC. Extensive experiments are conducted
on three benchmark datasets. The results have demonstrated
that the new model can realistically capture the complex data
structures and further improve the performance for HMLC
comparing with the state-of-the-art methods. To facilitate future research, our code is publicly available.

Introduction
Traditional classiﬁcation methods suppose the labels are
mutually exclusive, whereas for hierarchical classiﬁcation,
labels are not disjointed but organized under a hierarchical
structure. Such structure can be a tree or a Directed Acyclic
Graph, which indicates the parent-child relations between
labels. Typical hierarchical classiﬁcation tasks include protein function prediction in bioinformatics tasks (Wehrmann
et al. 2017), image annotation (Dimitrovski et al. 2011) and
text classiﬁcation (Meng et al. 2019). In this paper, we focus
on hierarchical multi-label text classiﬁcation, which aims to
assign multiple labels to every document instance with the
labels hierarchically structured.
In multi-label classiﬁcation (MLC), there usually exist a
lot of infrequently occurring tail labels (Bhatia et al. 2015),
especially when the label sets are large. The fact that tail
labels lack of training instances makes it hard to train an
efﬁcacious classiﬁer. Fortunately, the effectiveness of utilizing label correlations to address this problem has lately been

• We adopt hyperbolic space to improve HMLC. A novel
model HyperIM is designed to embed the label hierarchy
and the document text in the same hyperbolic space. For
the classiﬁcation, semantic connections between words
and labels are explicitly measured to construct the labelaware document representations.
• We present partial interaction to improve the scalability
of the interaction model. For large label spaces, negative
sampling is used to reduce the memory usage during interaction.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7496

