The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Fairness in Network Representation by
Latent Structural Heterogeneity in Observational Data
Xin Du, Yulong Pei, Wouter Duivesteijn, Mykola Pechenizkiy
Technische Universiteit Eindhoven
the Netherlands
{x.du, y.pei.1, w.duivesteijn, m.pechenizkiy}@tue.nl

allel, fairness of representation learning receives a lot of
attentions (Edwards and Storkey 2015; Song et al. 2018;
Madras et al. 2018). Among these methods, people are trying to learn similar representations for different groups, to
ensure that the consequent decision making is independent
of group attributes (Zhao and Gordon 2019).

Abstract
While recent advances in machine learning put many focuses
on fairness of algorithmic decision making, topics about fairness of representation, especially fairness of network representation, are still underexplored. Network representation
learning learns a function mapping nodes to low-dimensional
vectors. Structural properties, e.g. communities and roles,
are preserved in the latent embedding space. In this paper,
we argue that latent structural heterogeneity in the observational data could bias the classical network representation
model. The unknown heterogeneous distribution across subgroups raises new challenges for fairness in machine learning. Pre-deﬁned groups with sensitive attributes cannot properly tackle the potential unfairness of network representation.
We propose a method which can automatically discover subgroups which are unfairly treated by the network representation model. The fairness measure we propose can evaluate complex targets with multi-degree interactions. We conduct randomly controlled experiments on synthetic datasets
and verify our methods on real-world datasets. Both quantitative and quantitative results show that our method is effective to recover the fairness of network representations. Our
research draws insight on how structural heterogeneity across
subgroups restricted by attributes would affect the fairness of
network representation learning.

1

Despite the recent research focus on fair machine learning, the study of fair representation in networks still lacks
exploration. Comparing with existing work, the challenges
are two-fold: on the one hand, unlike statistical quantities
of single decision variables, fairness of network representation requires to compare multi-degree interactions between
nodes. We need to develop a new statistical measure to
evaluate the differences between node representations. On
the other hand, as pointed out by some research, when we
only ensure fairness for some small amount of pre-deﬁned
subgroups, it might actually increase rather than decrease
model discrimination (Kearns et al. 2017). In order to prevent this problem, we propose to investigate the fairness of
network representation by generating subgroups with regard
to any combinations of attributes. Computational cost would
be very high due to the exponentially increasing amount
of subgroups. We tackle this problem by employing exceptional model mining (Duivesteijn, Feelders, and Knobbe
2016), a framework of generating and evaluating subgroups
by heuristically exploring the attribute space.

Introduction

There are increasing demands for machine learning on diverse real-world applications such as policing (Brennan,
Dieterich, and Ehret 2009), lending (Mahoney and Mohen
2007) and credit scoring (Khandani, Kim, and Lo 2010).
Fair decision making has become more and more important for machine learning research. Several notions have
been deﬁned for algorithmic fairness (Dwork et al. 2012;
Hardt et al. 2016; Zafar et al. 2015). Among these methods,
fairness is measured for individuals or pre-deﬁned groups
based on statistical quantities like false positive / negative
rates or classiﬁcation rates. Recently, more and more papers notice that the fairness of decision making process is
highly dependent on biases which already exist in data collection process (Chen, Johansson, and Sontag 2018). In par-

Before discussing fairness of network representation, we
ﬁrstly focus on structural heterogeneity in networks. Unknown heterogeneity across the data can lead a model to be
very effective for some subpopulations and ineffective for
some other subpopulations (Pearl 2017). We argue in this
paper that the potential unfairness of network representation
is associated with the structural heterogeneity in networks.
In Figure 1, we demonstrate a toy example of structural heterogeneity and show how it can affect the network representation. As we can see, the network structure in subgroups
‘x = 1’ and ‘x = 0’ are very different from each other. A
random walk based neighborhood function will generate different distributions of nodes in neighborhoods conditioned
on different attributes. The classical network representation
model could be biased. These biased representations might
lead to unfairness of consequential decision making models.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3809

