The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Practical Approach to Forgetting in Description Logics with Nominals
Yizheng Zhao,1 Renate A. Schmidt,2 Yuejie Wang,3 Xuanming Zhang,4 Hao Feng5
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
Department of Computer Science, The University of Manchester, UK
3
School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University, China
4
School of Computer Science, University of Nottingham Ningbo China, China
5
School of Knowledge Engineering, North China University of Science and Technology, China
zhaoyz@nju.edu.cn, renate.schmidt@manchester.ac.uk, {kathywangyuejie, hao.feng0429}@gmail.com
zy21855@nottingham.edu.cn
ticular signature. Uniform interpolation is thus a weaker notion of forgetting than semantic forgetting; the results of
uniform interpolation (uniform interpolants), are in general
weaker than those of semantic forgetting (semantic solutions). This means for a speciﬁc language semantic solutions
are always uniform interpolants, but not the other way round.
Practical methods for computing uniform interpolants include the approach of L ETHE (Koopmann and Schmidt
2013a; 2013b; 2014; 2015), the one developed by (Ludwig
and Konev 2014), and the one by (Zhao et al. 2019). L ETHE
handles ALCH, SIF, SHQ-TBoxes, and ALC-ontologies.
The latter two handle ALC-TBoxes.
FAME (Zhao and Schmidt 2018) is presently the only semantic forgetting tool for ontologies. It is also the only semantic forgetting tool for description logics with nominals;
it handles ALCOIH-ontologies (Zhao and Schmidt 2016).
In this approach, the target language is not the same as the
source language, in particular, it is more expressive in order
to capture semantic solutions. This is however not satisfactory for users like S NOMED CT (Spackman 2000) who do
not have the ﬂexibility to easily switch to a more expressive language, or are bound by the application, the available
support and tooling, to a speciﬁc language. Tracking logical
difference between two ontology versions is one application
where the target language should coincide with the source
language (Zhao et al. 2019).
In this paper we consider catering for the situation where
the description logic ALCO serves as both source and target languages. One option is to attempt to approximate the
semantic solutions for ALCO inputs to ALCO-ontologies.
Actually there is current research concerned with reduction
of expressiveness by approximation (Brandt et al. 2002).
However, rather than going down that route, we develop a
novel practical forgetting approach for ALCO-ontologies.
The approach is deductive but incorporates also techniques
from semantic forgetting, called Ackermann’s Lemma. The
method always terminates, and is sound in the sense that the
forgetting solution computed by the method has the same
logical consequences with the original ontology. It is so far
the only approach to deductive forgetting for description logics with nominals. An evaluation of the method over ALCOontologies shows that it has similar speed as semantic for-

Abstract
This paper investigates the problem of forgetting in description logics with nominals. In particular, we develop a practical method for forgetting concept and role names from ontologies speciﬁed in the description logic ALCO, extending
the basic ALC with nominals. The method always terminates,
and is sound in the sense that the forgetting solution computed by the method has the same logical consequences with
the original ontology. The method is so far the only approach
to deductive forgetting in description logics with nominals.
An evaluation of a prototype implementation shows that the
method achieves a signiﬁcant speed-up and notably better
success rates than the L ETHE tool which performs deductive
forgetting for ALC-ontologies. Compared to FAME, a semantic forgetting tool for ALCOIH-ontologies, better success
rates are attained. From the perspective of ontology engineering this is very useful, as it provides ontology curators with a
powerful tool to produce views of ontologies.

Introduction
Forgetting is an ontology engineering technique that seeks to
produce views of ontologies. This is achieved by eliminating
from ontologie a subset of their signature, namely the forgetting signature, in such a way that all logical consequences up
to the remaining signature are preserved. Forgetting is useful
for many ontology engineering tasks such as reuse (Wang
et al. 2014), alignment and merging (Wang et al. 2005),
versioning (Klein and Fensel 2001), debugging (Ribeiro
and Wassermann 2009), repair (Troquard et al. 2018), logical difference (Konev, Walther, and Wolter 2008; 2009;
Ludwig and Konev 2014; Zhao et al. 2019), and related
tasks (Bicarregui et al. 2001; Lang, Liberatore, and Marquis 2003; Ghilardi, Lutz, and Wolter 2006; Eiter et al. 2006;
Grau and Motik 2012; Ludwig and Konev 2013).
Forgetting is basically a non-standard reasoning problem
which can be deﬁned deductively as the dual of uniform interpolation (Visser 1996; Lutz and Wolter 2011) or modeltheoretically as semantic forgetting (Wang et al. 2014). Uniform interpolation preserves logical consequences and semantic forgetting preserves semantic equivalence over a parc 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3073

