The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Modality to Modality Translation: An Adversarial
Representation Learning and Graph Fusion Network for Multimodal Fusion
Sijie Mai, Haifeng Hu,∗ Songlong Xing
School of Electronics and Information Technology, Sun Yat-sen University
{maisj, xingslong}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, huhaif@mail.sysu.edu.cn

How to fuse representations of various modalities has always been an open research. A key issue in multimodal fusion lies in the heterogeneous data distributions from different modalities (Baltrušaitis, Ahuja, and Morency 2019),
leading to the difﬁculty in mining complementary information across modalities which is critical for a comprehensive
interpretation of multimodal information. The majority of
previous works do not devote efforts to learn joint embedding space for various modalities to match multimodal distributions. Instead, they apply a subnetwork to each modality and then conduct fusion immediately (Zadeh et al. 2017;
Poria et al. 2017b; Liu et al. 2018). However, due to the heterogeneity across divergent modalities (Lin et al. 2015), the
transformed representations learnt by these approaches can
still follow unknown yet complex distributions.

Abstract
Learning joint embedding space for various modalities is of
vital importance for multimodal fusion. Mainstream modality fusion approaches fail to achieve this goal, leaving a
modality gap which heavily affects cross-modal fusion. In
this paper, we propose a novel adversarial encoder-decoderclassiﬁer framework to learn a modality-invariant embedding
space. Since the distributions of various modalities vary in
nature, to reduce the modality gap, we translate the distributions of source modalities into that of target modality via
their respective encoders using adversarial training. Furthermore, we exert additional constraints on embedding space by
introducing reconstruction loss and classiﬁcation loss. Then
we fuse the encoded representations using hierarchical graph
neural network which explicitly explores unimodal, bimodal
and trimodal interactions in multi-stage. Our method achieves
state-of-the-art performance on multiple datasets. Visualization of the learned embeddings suggests that the joint embedding space learned by our method is discriminative.

Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et
al. 2014) have achieved signiﬁcant progress, which can explicitly map one distribution to another prior distribution
using adversarial training (Makhzani et al. 2016). Based
on its unique characteristics, adversarial training is suitable
for modality distribution translation. Motivated by it, we
propose an adversarial encoder framework to match transformed distributions of all modalities and learn a modalityinvariant embedding space. Speciﬁcally, source modalities’
encoders, transforming the unimodal raw features into embedding space, try to fool the discriminator into distinguishing their encoded representations as those from target
modality, while discriminator aims to classify the encoded
representations from target modality as true but others as
false. We also deﬁne one decoder for each modality that
seeks to reconstruct the raw features to prevent unimodal
information from being lost. Moreover, a classiﬁer is built
to classify the encoded representations into true category,
which ensures that the embedding space is discriminative
for learning task.

Introduction
Multimodal machine learning, where multiple data sources
are available, always fares better compared with the situation
where only single data source is utilized (Baltrušaitis, Ahuja,
and Morency 2019). For example, sentiment analysis of text
has been widely explored for a long time (Liu and Zhang
2012). But recent research shows that information from text
is not sufﬁcient for mining opinions of human (Poria et al.
2017a), especially under the situation where sarcasm or ambiguity is included. Nevertheless, if machine is able to understand a speaker’s facial expression and how spoken language is uttered, it would be much easier to ﬁgure out the
real sentiment. In this paper, we focus on analyzing human multimodal language from videos, where acoustic, language and visual modalities are included (Liang et al. 2018;
Zadeh et al. 2018c). We can easily extend our work to other
machine learning tasks as long as multiple modalities are
presented, such as audio-visual speech recognition (Su, Lan,
and Liu 2018) and cross-modal retrieval (Xing et al. 2018).

Furthermore, many prior methods fail to conduct fusion
in a hierarchical way and are unable to explicitly model
the interaction between each subset of multiple modalities
(Poria et al. 2017b; Liu et al. 2018; Zadeh et al. 2018b).
In contrast, we interpret multimodal fusion as a hierarchical interaction learning procedure where ﬁrstly bimodal interactions are generated based on unimodal dynamics, and

∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
164

