The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Gamma-Nets: Generalizing Value Estimation over Timescale
Craig Sherstan,1 Shibhansh Dohare,1 James MacGlashan,2
Johannes Günther,1 Patrick M. Pilarski1
1

Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
2
Cogitai, USA
{sherstan, pilarski}@ualberta.ca


Γtγ γ γ  

Abstract
Temporal abstraction is a key requirement for agents making
decisions over long time horizons—a fundamental challenge
in reinforcement learning. There are many reasons why value
estimates at multiple timescales might be useful; recent work
has shown that value estimates at different time scales can be
the basis for creating more advanced discounting functions
and for driving representation learning. Further, predictions at
many different timescales serve to broaden an agent’s model
of its environment. One predictive approach of interest within
an online learning setting is general value function (GVFs),
which represent models of an agent’s world as a collection of
predictive questions each deﬁned by a policy, a signal to be
predicted, and a prediction timescale. In this paper we present
Γ-nets, a method for generalizing value function estimation
over timescale, allowing a given GVF to be trained and queried
for arbitrary timescales so as to greatly increase the predictive
ability and scalability of a GVF-based model. The key to our
approach is to use timescale as one of the value estimator’s
inputs. As a result, the prediction target for any timescale is
available at every timestep and we are free to train on any
number of timescales. We ﬁrst provide two demonstrations
by 1) predicting a square wave and 2) predicting sensorimotor
signals on a robot arm using a linear function approximator.
Next, we empirically evaluate Γ-nets in the deep reinforcement learning setting using policy evaluation on a set of Atari
video games. Our results show that Γ-nets can be effective for
predicting arbitrary timescales, with only a small cost in accuracy as compared to learning estimators for ﬁxed timescales.
Γ-nets provide a method for accurately and compactly making predictions at many timescales without requiring a priori
knowledge of the task, making it a valuable contribution to ongoing work on model-based planning, representation learning,
and lifelong learning algorithms.










γk
 

 γk
 γk

δ

δ

δ





Figure 1: Training γ-nets. Values are estimated by providing state and timescale, γ, as inputs to the network parameterized by weights w. An agent in state S takes action A
and transitions to state S  receiving the new target signal C.
The agent selects a set of timescales Γt on which to train
and for each γk ∈ Γt computes values V (S, γk ; w) and
V (S  , γk ; w). For each γk , the TD error is calculated according to δk = C + γk V (S  , γk ; w) − V (S, γk ; w). The TD
errors are then collected and used to update w using a chosen
TD learning algorithm, such as TD(λ) or GTD.
use value estimates to learn a policy—a way of behaving—
which maximizes the amount of reward received.
Sutton et al. (2011) broadened the use of value estimation
by introducing general value functions (GVFs), in which
value estimates are made of other sensorimotor signals, not
just reward. GVFs can be thought of as representing an
agent’s model of itself and its environment as a collection
of questions about future sensorimotor returns; a predictive
representation of state (Dayan 1993). A GVF is deﬁned by
three elements: 1) the policy, 2) the cumulant (the sensorimotor signal to be predicted), and 3) the prediction timescale, γ.
Considering a simple mobile robot, examples of GVF questions include “How much current will my motors consume
over the next 3 seconds if I spin clockwise?” or “How long
until my bump sensor goes high if I drive forward?”
Modeling the world at many timescales is seen as a key
problem in artiﬁcial intelligence (Sutton 1995; Sutton, Precup, and Singh 1999). Further, there is evidence that humans
and other animals make estimates of reward and other sig-

Value Functions and Timescale
Reinforcement learning (RL) studies algorithms in which an
agent learns to maximize the amount of reward it receives
over its lifetime. A key method in RL is the estimation of
value—the expected cumulative sum of discounted future
rewards (called the return). In loose terms this tells an agent
how good it is to be in a particular state. The agent can then
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5717

