The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Solving Sequential Text Classiﬁcation as Board-Game Playing
Chen Qian

Fuli Feng

Lijie Wen∗

Tsinghua University
qc16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

National University of Singapore
fulifeng93@gmail.com

Tsinghua University
wenlj@tsinghua.edu.cn

Zhenpeng Chen

Li Lin

Peking University
czp@pku.edu.cn

Tsinghua University
veralin1994@gmail.com

Yanan Zheng

Tat-Seng Chua

Tsinghua University
National University of Singapore
zhengyanan932@gmail.com
chuats@comp.nus.edu.sg
Two minutes later, add some sugar, and warm milk, until boiling.

Abstract

f1 (CD)

Sequential Text Classiﬁcation (STC) aims to classify a sequence of text fragments (e.g., words in a sentence or sentences in a document) into a sequence of labels. In addition to the intra-fragment text contents, considering the interfragment context dependencies is also important for STC.
Previous sequence labeling approaches largely generate a sequence of labels in left-to-right reading order. However,
the need for context information in making decisions varies
across different fragments and is not strictly organized in a
left-to-right order. Therefore, it is appealing to label the fragments that need less consideration of context information ﬁrst
before labeling the fragments that need more. In this paper,
we propose a novel model that labels a sequence of fragments
in jumping order. Speciﬁcally, we devise a dedicated boardgame to develop a correspondence between solving STC and
board-game playing. By deﬁning proper game rules and devising a game state evaluator in which context clues are injected, at each round, each player is effectively pushed to ﬁnd
the optimal move without position restrictions via considering the current game state, which corresponds to producing
a label for an unlabeled fragment jumpily with the consideration of the contexts clues. The ﬁnal game-end state is
viewed as the optimal label sequence. Extensive results on
three representative datasets show that the proposed approach
outperforms the state-of-the-art methods with statistical signiﬁcance.

CDғCondition

f2 (AI)
AIғAction and Ingredient

f3 (AI)

f4 (CD)

IOғIngredient Only

→ғContext Flow

f 1 f2 f 3 f4

f 1 f2 f 3 f 4

f1 f2 f 3 f4

f1 f 2 f 3 f 4

CD

CD AI

CD AI IO

CD AI IO CD

f1 f2 f3 f4
CD

f1 f 2 f3 f 4
AI

CD

f1 f2 f3 f4

f1 f 2 f 3 f 4

CD AI

CD AI AI CD

CD

Figure 1: Traditional successive labeling (above) produces
a sequence of labels in left-to-right order, while our proposed jump labeling (below) produces a sequence of labels
in jumping order.

2017), ﬁne-grained sentiment analysis (Wang et al. 2018)
and clause-level aspect classiﬁcation (Friedrich, Palmer, and
Pinkal 2016).
The key challenge of STC is how to effectively capture
and utilize context information because the label of a fragment would be better forecasted if we consider the text information and label information of other fragments (Yang
et al. 2016; Lee and Dernoncourt 2016). Recent studies
show that the use of both the bidirectional language representation models to encode the contextual text information
and sequence labeling models to model the contextual label
dependencies is a promising solution (Kumar et al. 2018;
Al-Zaidy, Caragea, and Giles 2019). However, in the labeling process, almost all of methods impose the Markov
assumption (Rabiner 1989) that the current state is conditionally dependent upon the previous state(s); thus, they label a sequence in the left-to-right reading order (referred to
as successive labeling). This restricts their ability to capture
more beneﬁcial context clues. The upper part of Figure 1
gives an example that illustrates the processes by which a
linear-chain conditional random ﬁeld (LCRF) model classiﬁes a sequence of clause-level fragments. We can see that
the LCRF classiﬁes the four fragments in the left-to-right
order. In such a case, it might misclassify the third fragment
“and warm milk” as IO (instead of AI) without considering the backward clue from the subsequent neighbor “until
boiling”.
Must the label generation process be following the left-

Introduction
Sequential Text Classiﬁcation (STC) is a fundamental and
critical research problem in natural language processing
(NLP) (Lee and Dernoncourt 2016). The goal of STC is to
classify a sequence of text fragments into a sequence of labels. STC involves different text granularities (e.g., words in
a sentence or sentences in a document) and serves dual purposes: 1) improving the accuracy of single text classiﬁcation
by incorporating context information (Lee and Dernoncourt
2016); and 2) mining informative text clues at different levels of granularity (Qian et al. 2019). STC can beneﬁt a diversity of NLP tasks, such as the part-of-speech tagging (Ratnaparkhi 1996), dialog act recognition (Liu, Han, and others
∗

Lijie Wen is the corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8640

