The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

AtLoc: Attention Guided Camera Localization
Bing Wang, Changhao Chen,* Chris Xiaoxuan Lu, Peijun Zhao,
Niki Trigoni, Andrew Markham
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford
ﬁrstname.lastname@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Deep learning has achieved impressive results in camera localization, but current single-image techniques typically suffer
from a lack of robustness, leading to large outliers. To some
extent, this has been tackled by sequential (multi-images) or
geometry constraint approaches, which can learn to reject dynamic objects and illumination conditions to achieve better
performance. In this work, we show that attention can be used
to force the network to focus on more geometrically robust
objects and features, achieving state-of-the-art performance
in common benchmark, even if using only a single image as
input. Extensive experimental evidence is provided through
public indoor and outdoor datasets. Through visualization of
the saliency maps, we demonstrate how the network learns
to reject dynamic objects, yielding superior global camera
pose regression performance. The source code is avaliable at
https://github.com/BingCS/AtLoc.

3RVH1HW

$W/RF 2XUV

Figure 1: Saliency maps of one scene selected from Oxford
RobotCar (Maddern et al. 2017) indicate that AtLoc is able
to force the neural network model to focus on geometrically
robust objects (e.g. building structures in the right) rather
than environmental dynamics (e.g. moving vehicles in the
left) compared with PoseNet+ (Brahmbhatt et al. 2018).

Introduction
Location information is of key importance to wide variety
of applications, from virtual reality to delivery drones, to
autonomous driving. One particularly promising research
direction is camera pose regression or localization - the problem of recovering the 3D position and orientation of a camera
from an image or set of images.
Camera localization has been previously tackled by exploiting the appearance and geometry in a 3D scene, for example,
key points and lines, but suffers from performance degradation when deployed in the wild (Brachmann et al. 2017;
Walch et al. 2017). This is due to the fact that the handcrafted features change signiﬁcantly across different scenarios due to lighting, blur and scene dynamics leading to poor
global matches. Recent deep learning based approaches are
able to automatically extract features and directly recover
the absolute camera pose from a single image, without any
hand-engineering effort, as was demonstrated in the seminal
PoseNet (Kendall, Grimes, and Cipolla 2015). Extensions
include the use of different encoder networks e.g. ResNet
in PoseNet Hourglass (Melekhov et al. 2017) or geometric

constraints (Kendall and Cipolla 2017). Although these techniques show good performance in general, they are plagued
by a lack of robustness when faced with dynamic objects
or changes in illumination. This is particularly apparent in
outdoor datasets where scenes are highly variable e.g. due to
moving vehicles or pedestrians.
To tackle this lack of robustness, further techniques have
considered using multiple images as input to the network,
with the premise being that the network can learn to reject
temporally inconsistent features across frames. Examples
include VidLoc (Clark et al. 2017) and the recent MapNet (Brahmbhatt et al. 2018) which achieves state-of-the-art
performance in camera pose regression.
In this work we pursue an alternative approach to achieve
robust camera localization and ask if we can achieve or
even surpass the performance of multi-frame, sequential techniques by learning to attentively focus on parts of the image
that are temporally consistent and informative e.g. buildings,
whilst ignoring dynamic parts like vehicles and pedestrians,
using a single image as input, as shown in Figure 1. We
propose AtLoc - Attention Guided Camera Localization, an

* Changhao Chen is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10393

