The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Preserving Ordinal Consensus: Towards Feature Selection for Unlabeled Data
Jun Guo,1 Heng Chang,1 Wenwu Zhu1,2,3
1

Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen 518055, China
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
3
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, Beijing 100084, China
eeguojun@outlook.com, changh17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, wwzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn
2

makes feature selection based applications more challenging. Semi-supervised feature selection (Xu et al. 2010;
Chang et al. 2014) is desired to tackle the predicament of
rare labelled samples and abundant unlabelled data. Unsupervised feature selection aims to ﬁlter out the unimportant features of unlabeled data. Similar to the class labels
in supervised scenarios, cluster structure can be discovered in many ways (Du and Shen 2015; Wei et al. 2017;
Du et al. 2018; Guo and Zhu 2018; Zheng et al. 2018).
For unsupervised feature selection, ﬁlters (Dash et al.
2002), wrappers (Roth and Lange 2004), and embedding
(Hou et al. 2014) are three common branches. Recent literatures (Yang et al. 2011; Li et al. 2012; Qian and Zhai 2013;
Wang, Tang, and Liu 2015; Han and Kim 2015; Nie, Zhu,
and Li 2016; Zhu et al. 2017; Li et al. 2018) have witnessed
fast development of the third branch “embedding”, whose
goal is to combine feature selection and pseudo label learning into a uniﬁed problem. In these works, a commonly-used
mechanism is to leverage the manifold structure and sparse
learning. Most of them beneﬁt from various geometric information of data. However, they focus too much on the
sample-level structures, i.e., relations among samples, failing in fully exploiting the feature-level geometric information. The major reasons and analyses are two-folds:
Above all, unsupervised feature selection aims to select
discriminative features meanwhile remove redundant features. These two points are NOT the same. If two features
are similar, they usually encourage similar contributions for
clustering. If two similar features are both relevant to current
tasks, they should be simultaneously selected into the desired feature subset. However, previous works consider this
case as feature redundancy, and try to repeal it. We think
that feature-level relations can help select more relevant features. Hence, our work prefers to select more discriminative
features rather than remove similar features.
Furthermore, in the “embedding” branch of unsupervised feature selection, various proposed graph-based models are utilized to uncover similarities (neighborhood relationships), whereas few of them address the relative proximities (neighborhood rankings). Besides feature-level similarities, relative proximities among features are also important
in unsupervised scenarios. For a feature, this type of ordinal

Abstract
To better pre-process unlabeled data, most existing feature
selection methods remove redundant and noisy information
by exploring some intrinsic structures embedded in samples.
However, these unsupervised studies focus too much on the
relations among samples, totally neglecting the feature-level
geometric information. This paper proposes an unsupervised
triplet-induced graph to explore a new type of potential structure at feature level, and incorporates it into simultaneous
feature selection and clustering. In the feature selection part,
we design an ordinal consensus preserving term based on a
triplet-induced graph. This term enforces the projection vectors to preserve the relative proximity of original features,
which contributes to selecting more relevant features. In the
clustering part, Self-Paced Learning (SPL) is introduced to
gradually learn from ‘easy’ to ‘complex’ samples. SPL alleviates the dilemma of falling into the bad local minima incurred by noise and outliers. Speciﬁcally, we propose a compelling regularizer for SPL to obtain a robust loss. Finally,
an alternating minimization algorithm is developed to efﬁciently optimize the proposed model. Extensive experiments
on different benchmark datasets consistently demonstrate the
superiority of our proposed method.

1

Introduction

Real-world data is often redundant or even noisy, which
may lead to heavy computational complexity and poor performance (John, Kohavi, and Pﬂeger 1994; Liu and Motoda 2007). Then, feature selection is proposed to help remove unimportant information (Yang et al. 2011; Witten
and Tibshirani 2012), which is beneﬁcial for various applications (Law, Figueiredo, and Jain 2004; Nie et al. 2010;
Wang et al. 2016; Cheng, Li, and Liu 2017).
Feature selection can be roughly grouped into three major categories in terms of label availability, i.e., supervised,
semi-supervised, and unsupervised (Han and Shen 2016).
Supervised feature selection (Jian et al. 2016; Fan et al.
2017a) is utilized to select discriminative features because
the class labels of data containing the essential discrimination are provided. However, the acquisition of class label
information is very laborious and time-consuming, which
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
75

