The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

On the Learning Property of Logistic
and Softmax Losses for Deep Neural Networks
Xiangrui Li, Xin Li, Deng Pan, Dongxiao Zhu∗
Department of Computer Science
Wayne State University
{xiangruili, xinlee, pan.deng, dzhu}@wayne.edu

(unweighted) loss, resulting in performance degradation
for minority classes. To remedy this issue, the class-wise
reweighted loss is often used to emphasize the minority
classes that can boost the predictive performance without
introducing much additional difﬁculty in model training
(Cui et al. 2019; Huang et al. 2016; Mahajan et al. 2018;
Wang, Ramanan, and Hebert 2017). A typical choice of
weights for each class is the inverse-class frequency.
A natural question then to ask is what roles are those
class-wise weights playing in CNN training using LGL
or SML that lead to performance gain? Intuitively, those
weights make tradeoffs on the predictive performance
among different classes. In this paper, we answer this question quantitatively in a set of equations that tradeoffs are
on the model predicted probabilities produced by the CNN
models. Surprisingly, effectiveness of the reweighting mechanism for LGL is rather different from SML. Here, we view
the conventional (e.g., no reweighting) LGL or SML as a
special case where all classes are weighted equally.
As these tradeoffs are related to the logistic and softmax
losses, answering the above question actually leads us to answering a more fundamental question about their learning
behavior: what is the property that the decision boundary
must satisfy when models are trained? To our best knowledge, this question has not been investigated systematically,
despite logistic and softmax losses are extensively exploited
in deep leaning community.
While SML can be viewed as a multi-class extension of
LGL for binary classiﬁcation, LGL is a different learning
objective when used in multi-class classiﬁcation (Bishop
2006). From the perspective of learning structure of data
manifold as pointed out in (Belkin, Niyogi, and Sindhwani
2006; Bishop 2006; Dong, Zhu, and Gong 2019), SML treats
all class labels equally and poses a competition between true
and other class labels for each training sample, which may
distort data manifold; for LGL, the one-vs.-all approach it
takes avoids this limitation as it models each target class independently, which may better capture the in-class structure
of data. Though LGL enjoys such merits, it is rarely adopted
in existing CNN models. The property that LGL and SML
decision boundaries must satisfy further reveals the difference between LGL and SML (see Eq. (9), (10) with anal-

Abstract
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) trained with logistic and softmax losses have made signiﬁcant advancement
in visual recognition tasks in computer vision. When training
data exhibit class imbalances, the class-wise reweighted version of logistic and softmax losses are often used to boost performance of the unweighted version. In this paper, motivated
to explain the reweighting mechanism, we explicate the learning property of those two loss functions by analyzing the necessary condition (e.g., gradient equals to zero) after training
CNNs to converge to a local minimum. The analysis immediately provides us explanations for understanding (1) quantitative effects of the class-wise reweighting mechanism: deterministic effectiveness for binary classiﬁcation using logistic loss yet indeterministic for multi-class classiﬁcation using
softmax loss; (2) disadvantage of logistic loss for single-label
multi-class classiﬁcation via one-vs.-all approach, which is
due to the averaging effect on predicted probabilities for the
negative class (e.g., non-target classes) in the learning process. With the disadvantage and advantage of logistic loss
disentangled, we thereafter propose a novel reweighted logistic loss for multi-class classiﬁcation. Our simple yet effective formulation improves ordinary logistic loss by focusing
on learning hard non-target classes (target vs. non-target class
in one-vs.-all) and turned out to be competitive with softmax
loss. We evaluate our method on several benchmark datasets
to demonstrate its effectiveness.

Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) trained with
logistic or softmax losses (LGL and SML respectively for
brevity), e.g., logistic or softmax layer followed by crossentropy loss, have achieved remarkable success in various
visual recognition tasks (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015;
Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; He et al. 2016;
Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; Szegedy et al. 2015). The
success mainly accredits to CNN’s merit of high-level feature learning and loss function’s differentiability and simplicity for optimization. When training data exhibit class
imbalances, training CNNs with gradient descent is biased towards learning majority classes in the conventional
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4739

