The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Long-Term Loop Closure Detection through
Visual-Spatial Information Preserving Multi-Order Graph Matching
Peng Gao, Hao Zhang
Human-Centered Robotics Laboratory, Colorado School of Mines, Golden, CO 80401
{gaopeng, hzhang}@mines.edu

Triangular Relp.

Abstract
Loop closure detection is a fundamental problem for simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) in robotics. Most of
the previous methods only consider one type of information,
based on either visual appearances or spatial relationships of
landmarks. In this paper, we introduce a novel visual-spatial
information preserving multi-order graph matching approach
for long-term loop closure detection. Our approach constructs
a graph representation of a place from an input image to integrate visual-spatial information, including visual appearances
of the landmarks and the background environment, as well as
the second and third-order spatial relationships between two
and three landmarks, respectively. Furthermore, we introduce
a new formulation that formulates loop closure detection as a
multi-order graph matching problem to compute a similarity
score directly from the graph representations of the query and
template images, instead of performing conventional vectorbased image matching. We evaluate the proposed multi-order
graph matching approach based on two public long-term loop
closure detection benchmark datasets, including the St. Lucia
and CMU-VL datasets. Experimental results have shown that
our approach is effective for long-term loop closure detection
and it outperforms the previous state-of-the-art methods.

Distance Relp.

Visual
appearance

Query Image
Template Image

Graph
Representation

Visual-Spatial Info-Preserving
Multi-Order Graph Matching
Triangular Relp.

Same
Place

Distance Relp.

Visual
appearance

Figure 1: Overview of the proposed visual-spatial information preserving multi-order graph matching approach. It creates graph representations from the query and template images to integrate information of both visual appearances and
multi-order spatial relationships, and it formulates loop closure detection as a new multi-order graph matching problem
to perform place matching directly from the graph representations, instead of relying on vector-based place representation and matching.
different times of a day, or over months and seasons). Longterm changes in the environment makes long-term loop closure detection a challenging problem to solve. For example,
when an autonomous vehicle operates over various seasons,
the same place in the environment can look quite differently
due to long-term changes, including illumination (e.g., noon
versus midnight), weather (rainy versus sunny), and vegetation changes.
Given the importance of long-term loop closure detection, a number of methods were developed to address this
problem (Sünderhauf, Neubert, and Protzel 2013; Linegar,
Churchill, and Newman 2016). A category of these methods
focused on using visual appearance information to represent
and match places, e.g., based on local features (Cummins
and Newman 2008; Mur-Artal and Tardós 2014) and visual
holistic scenes (Naseer et al. 2014; Latif et al. 2014). Another category of these previous methods considered spatial
relationships of landmarks for loop closure detection (Ho
and Newman 2006; Panphattarasap and Calway 2016). In
spite of their promising performance, the problem of how
to integrate visual appearance cues and spatial relationships

Introduction
Loop closure detection (also referred to as place recognition)
is a fundamental challenge for visual simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) in robotics, which has become an
active research ﬁeld over the past decades. The goal of loop
closure detection is to determine whether the robot’s current
location has been previously visited by matching the current
robot’s observation with previous experiences. Loop closure
detection is a necessary component for all SLAM techniques
to reduce ambiguity and accumulated errors in constructed
maps, thus signiﬁcantly improving a robot’s localization and
mapping accuracy (Durrant-Whyte and Bailey 2006).
Over the past several years, long-term loop closure detection has attracted an increasing attention for visual SLAM
in various real-world long-term autonomy applications, such
as autonomous driving, with the goal to identify previously
visited locations during long-term robot operations (e.g., at
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10369

