The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Commonsense Knowledge Base Completion with Structural and Semantic Context
Chaitanya Malaviya,♦ Chandra Bhagavatula,♦ Antoine Bosselut,♦♣ Yejin Choi♦♣
♦

Allen Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence
♣
University of Washington
{chaitanyam, chandrab}@allenai.org, {antoineb, yejin}@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
e

MotivatedByGoal

1

eat
candy

Ha

sP

re
re
q

ui
sit

Automatic KB completion for commonsense knowledge
graphs (e.g., ATOMIC and ConceptNet) poses unique challenges compared to the much studied conventional knowledge bases (e.g., Freebase). Commonsense knowledge graphs
use free-form text to represent nodes, resulting in orders of
magnitude more nodes compared to conventional KBs ( ∼18x
more nodes in ATOMIC compared to Freebase (FB15K237)). Importantly, this implies signiﬁcantly sparser graph
structures — a major challenge for existing KB completion
methods that assume densely connected graphs over a relatively smaller set of nodes.
In this paper, we present novel KB completion models that
can address these challenges by exploiting the structural and
semantic context of nodes. Speciﬁcally, we investigate two
key ideas: (1) learning from local graph structure, using
graph convolutional networks and automatic graph densiﬁcation and (2) transfer learning from pre-trained language
models to knowledge graphs for enhanced contextual representation of knowledge. We describe our method to incorporate information from both these sources in a joint
model and provide the ﬁrst empirical results for KB completion on ATOMIC and evaluation with ranking metrics
on ConceptNet. Our results demonstrate the effectiveness of
language model representations in boosting link prediction
performance and the advantages of learning from local graph
structure (+1.5 points in MRR for ConceptNet) when training
on subgraphs for computational efﬁciency. Further analysis
on model predictions shines light on the types of commonsense knowledge that language models capture well.1

prevent
tooth
decay

go to
dentist

Causes

brush
your tooth
Ha

Causes

irs

tooth
decay

tS

ub

ev

en

t

bacteria

pick
up your
toothbrush

Pre

requ

isite

sF

ire

s

Has

ReceivesAction
es

Causes

No

tD

good
breath

person

treat by
dentist

infection
in cut

Figure 1: Subgraph from ConceptNet illustrating semantic
diversity of nodes. Dashed blue lines represent potential
edges to be added to the graph.

ods to address these challenges, and provide comprehensive
empirical insights and analysis.
The key challenge in completing commonsense KGs is
the scale and sparsity of the graphs. Unlike conventional
KBs, commonsense KGs consist of nodes that are represented by non-canonicalized, free-form text, as shown in
Figure 1. For example, the nodes ”prevent tooth decay” and
”tooth decay” are conceptually related, but not equivalent,
thus represented as distinct nodes. This conceptual diversity
and expressiveness of the graph, imperative for representing
commonsense, implies that the number of nodes is orders
of magnitude larger, and graphs are substantially sparser
than conventional KBs. For instance, an encyclopedic KB
like FB15K-237 (Toutanova and Chen 2015) has 100x the
density of ConceptNet and ATOMIC (node in-degrees visualized in Figure 2).
In this work, we provide empirical insights on how the
sparsity of commonsense KGs poses a challenge to existing
KB completion models that implicitly assume densely connected graphs. Figure 3 provides a brief preview of this evidence, where the performance of ConvTransE (Shang et al.

Introduction and Motivation

While there has been a substantial amount of work on KB
completion for conventional knowledge bases such as Freebase, relatively little work exists for KB completion for
commonsense knowledge graphs such as ATOMIC (Sap et
al. 2019) and ConceptNet (Speer and Havasi 2013). The
distinct goals of this paper are to identify unique challenges
in commonsense KB completion, investigate effective methc 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Code and dataset are available at github.com/allenai/
commonsense-kg-completion.
2925

