The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference (IAAI-20)

AI Trust in Business Processes: The Need for Process-Aware Explanations
Steve T. K. Jan,1 Vatche Ishakian,2 Vinod Muthusamy2
1

Virginia Tech, 2 IBM Research AI

Abstract

Example of process-aware explanations

Business processes underpin a large number of enterprise operations including processing loan applications, managing invoices, and insurance claims. There is a large opportunity for
infusing AI to reduce cost or provide better customer experience and the BPM literature is rich in machine learning solutions. More recently, deep learning models have been applied to process predictions. Unfortunately, companies have
applied or adopted very few of these innovations. We assert
that a reason for this lack of adoption is that business users are
risk-averse and do not implicitly trust AI models. We challenge the BPM community to build on the AI interpretability
literature, and the AI Trust community to understand what it
means to take advantage of business process artifacts in order
to provide business level explanations.

Consider the example loan application process in Fig. 1.
Suppose we build a sequence model that takes as input the
activities and features observed in the process and predicts
the outcome, in this case whether a loan will be approved.
Such models have been shown to achieve accuracies of up to
85% (Evermann, Rehse, and Fettke 2017). We can then use
tools such as LIME (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016) to
explain the prediction, and as we see in Fig. 2, LIME suggests that the presence of the skilled agent activity causes
the application to be rejected.
A subject matter expert, however, would understand from
the process description that large loan requests from borrowers with low credit scores are the ones most likely to end up
routed to a skilled agent. This is an example of a causal relationship that can be inferred from the process description:
the LOAN AMOUNT and/or CREDIT SCORE features are the
cause of the feature associated with the skilled agent activity.
The explanations from LIME are based on sampling perturbations around the input features and measuring how the
predictions change with the perturbations. It turns out in our
example, that many of the perturbations do not conform to
the process description and hence can never occur. Once we
apply the causal relationship above to constrain the perturbation sampling, LIME offers the explanation in Fig. 3 where
the CREDIT SCORE is now prominent.
This simple example illustrates how directly applying interpretability techniques to process models results in incomplete or potentially misleading explanations. We also see
how by being process-aware we can augment existing algorithms to improve the quality of explanations. This is a
nascent and fertile research area that we have only scratched
the surface of.
As stated earlier, virtually all AI models in the BPM literature train models with features from process traces, depicted as “state of the art” in Fig. 4.There is an opportunity to apply known interpretability approaches in a BPM
context, denoted as L EVEL 1 in Fig. 4. For example, a regression model to predict process completion time (Polato
et al. 2014) can be augmented by techniques to make regression models more interpretable (Schielzeth 2010). The same
can apply to deep learning models for process prediction
tasks. Most of the current techniques, however, are based
on sequence models including LSTMs and RNNs (Tax et
al. 2017; Evermann, Rehse, and Fettke 2017). While there
has been a lot of research on explaining deep learning models based on CNNs for image classiﬁcation tasks (Gan et

Introduction
Business processes underpin a large number of enterprise
operations including loan origination, invoice management,
and insurance claims processing (Van Der Aalst and others
2011). The business process management (BPM) industry
is expected to approach $16 billion by 2023 (Marketwatch
2019). There is a great opportunity for infusing AI to reduce
cost or provide better customer experience (Rao and Verweij
2017), and the BPM literature is rich in machine learning solutions to gain insights on clusters of process traces (Nguyen
et al. 2016; 2019), predict outcomes (Breuker et al. 2016),
and recommend decisions (Mannhardt et al. 2016). Deep
learning models including from the NLP domain have also
been applied (Tax et al. 2017; Evermann, Rehse, and Fettke
2017).
Unfortunately, very little of these innovations have been
applied and adopted by enterprise companies (Daugherty
and Wilson 2018), and those adopted are limited to narrow
domains such as customer services, enterprise risk and compliance (Wilson, Alter, and Shukla 2016).
We assert that a large reason for the lack of adoption of AI
models in BPM is that business users are risk-averse and do
not implicitly trust AI models. There has been little attention
paid to explaining model predictions to business users with
process context. These business users are typically experts
in their ﬁelds but not data scientists, and explanations must
be presented in their business domain vocabulary. We challenge the BPM community to build on the AI interpretability
literature, and the AI Trust community to take advantage of
business process artifacts.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13403

