The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Associating Natural Language Comment and Source Code Entities
Sheena Panthaplackel,1 Milos Gligoric,2 Raymond J. Mooney,1 Junyi Jessy Li3
1

Department of Computer Science
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
3
Department of Linguistics
The University of Texas at Austin
{spantha, mooney}@cs.utexas.edu, gligoric@utexas.edu, jessy@austin.utexas.edu
2

in the corresponding code. Prior work on detecting inconsistencies between code and comments (Tan et al. 2007;
Khamis, Witte, and Rilling 2010; Ratol and Robillard 2017)
incorporate task-speciﬁc rules to link comment components
to aspects of the code. Recent work in automatic comment generation (Hu et al. 2018; Fernandes, Allamanis, and
Brockschmidt 2019) rely on an attention mechanism which
implicitly approximates the parts of the code that should be
attended to when generating certain terms in the comment.

Abstract
Comments are an integral part of software development; they
are natural language descriptions associated with source code
elements. Understanding explicit associations can be useful
in improving code comprehensibility and maintaining the
consistency between code and comments. As an initial step
towards this larger goal, we address the task of associating entities in Javadoc comments with elements in Java source code.
We propose an approach for automatically extracting supervised data using revision histories of open source projects and
present a manually annotated evaluation dataset for this task.
We develop a binary classiﬁer and a sequence labeling model
by crafting a rich feature set which encompasses various aspects of code, comments, and the relationships between them.
Experiments show that our systems outperform several baselines learning from the proposed supervision.

1

In contrast to these approaches, we formulate a task
which aims to learn explicit associations between entities
in a comment and elements in the corresponding source
code. We believe explicit associations can lead to improved
systems for downstream applications. For tasks like code
and comment generation, they could serve as a mechanism for supervised attention (Liu et al. 2016) and augment neural models with explicit knowledge, which often
leads to signiﬁcant gains in performance (He et al. 2017;
Marcheggiani, Frolov, and Titov 2017; Strubell et al. 2018).
Moreover, this provides a means of doing more ﬁne-grained
code/comment inconsistency detection, as opposed to the
common approach of identifying whether a full comment is
inconsistent with a body of code (Tan et al. 2012; Khamis,
Witte, and Rilling 2010). Such a system could be a valuable component for automated code/comment maintenance
which aims to keep comments consistent with the code they
serve to describe. By providing a signal about which elements in the code are referred to by a given entity in the comment, the system can automatically detect when an entity in
the comment becomes inconsistent with the code based on
changes to these terms in the code.

Introduction

Natural language elements are used to document various
aspects of source code. Summaries provide a high-level
overview of the functionality of a given code snippet, commit messages describe the code changes that are made between two versions of a software project, and API comments
deﬁne speciﬁc properties of a body of code such as preconditions and the return value. Each of these serves as a crucial mode of communication among developers and is critical to an effective development process. These natural language elements are becoming increasingly prevalent in research within the Natural Language Processing (NLP) community for code summarization (Iyer et al. 2016), commit
message generation (Loyola, Marrese-Taylor, and Matsuo
2017), and code generation (Rabinovich, Stern, and Klein
2017; Guu et al. 2017; Yin and Neubig 2017; Yu et al. 2018;
Richardson, Berant, and Kuhn 2018; Hayati et al. 2018;
Yin and Neubig 2018; 2019).
In particular, there is growing interest in cross-modal
tasks combining natural language comments and source
code. To successfully perform such tasks, it is necessary to
understand how elements in a comment relate to elements

As an initial step towards learning these associations, we
focus on Javadoc @return comments, which serve to describe the return type and potential return values that are dependent on various conditions within a given method. We
observe that the @return comment tends to be more structured than other forms of comments, making it a cleaner data
source and consequently, a reasonable starting point for the
proposed task. Furthermore, we observe that comments generally describe entities and actions within a given body of
code, which map to noun phrases and verb phrases in natural language. In regards to @return comments speciﬁ-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8592

