The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Finding Good Subtrees for Constraint
Optimization Problems Using Frequent Pattern Mining
Hongbo Li,1 Jimmy H.M. Lee,2∗ He Mi,1 Minghao Yin1*
1

School of Information Science and Technology, Northeast Normal University, Changchun, China
{lihb905, mih221, ymh}@nenu.edu.cn
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, N.T., Hong Kong
jlee@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

and efﬁciency for some classic datamining problems, such
as clustering (Dao, Duong, and Vrain 2017) and frequent
pattern mining (Guns, Nijssen, and Raedt 2011; Lazaar et al.
2016; Schaus, Aoga, and Guns 2017; Guns et al. 2017). On
the other hand, a number of studies have shown the beneﬁts
of applying machine learning in constraint solving (Epstein
and Petrovic 2007; Xu, Stern, and Samulowitz 2009; Loth
et al. 2013; Hurley et al. 2014; Chu and Stuckey 2015;
Balafrej, Bessiere, and Paparrizou 2015; Bachiri et al. 2015;
Xia and Yap 2018; Cappart et al. 2019). In addition, some
datamining techniques have been applied in heuristic methods for solving some combinatorial problems (Samorani and
Laguna 2012; Zhou, Hao, and Duval 2017).

Abstract
Making good decisions at the top of a search tree is important
for ﬁnding good solutions early in constraint optimization.
In this paper, we propose a method employing frequent
pattern mining (FPM), a classic datamining technique, to ﬁnd
good subtrees for solving constraint optimization problems.
We demonstrate that applying FPM in a small number of
random high-quality feasible solutions enables us to identify
subtrees containing optimal solutions in more than 55% of
problem instances for four real world benchmark problems.
The method works as a plugin that can be combined with
any search strategy for branch-and-bound search. Exploring
the identiﬁed subtrees ﬁrst, the method brings substantial
improvements for four efﬁcient search strategies in both total
runtime and runtime of ﬁnding optimal solutions.

This work proposes to employ frequent pattern mining
(FPM), a classic datamining technique, to speed up the
ﬁrst phase of BBS for solving COPs. The intuition behind
the proposed method is that the frequent patterns extracted
from high-quality solutions identify promising regions in
the search space that are worthy of being explored ﬁrst.
The method runs a FPM algorithm to mine useful patterns
from a set of high-quality feasible solutions, called probes,
which are generated by a random probing procedure. After
the mining, the best patterns are selected according to a
measurement considering the qualities of the probes containing the pattern, the support number and pattern length,
and the top patterns are combined to generate a partial
assignment. Then we run BBS exploring ﬁrst the subtree
under this partial assignment before the rest of the complete
search tree. The method is not a search heuristic per se,
and can be readily combined with any search strategies
for BBS. It identiﬁes and zooms directly into a subtree
with high possibility of containing optimal solutions. We
expect the method to work well on loosely constrained
optimization problems, where feasible solutions are easy to
ﬁnd by probing.

Introduction
Constraint programming (CP) is a powerful paradigm
for solving discrete combinatorial optimization problems.
Depth-ﬁrst branch-and-bound search (BBS) is a complete
method for solving constraint optimization problems
(COPs). BBS can be divided into two phases. The ﬁrst
phase ﬁnds an optimal solution and the second phase
proves the optimality. If a better solution is found earlier,
BBS could prune the search space more efﬁciently. Thus,
much work has been done on devising search strategies to
speed up the ﬁrst phase. For instance, Chu and Stuckey
use machine learning to design search strategies (Chu and
Stuckey 2015). Counting-Based Search (Pesant 2016) uses
cost-based solution density to guide search. ObjectiveBased Selector (OBS) (Palmieri and Perez 2018) uses
objective variables as a feature for decisions within search
strategies. To ﬁnd good solutions early, the Bound-Impact
Value Selector (BIVS) (Fages and Prud’Homme 2017)
chooses the value of a variable that would lead to the best
objective bound after a propagation.
We note also the multitude of recent work in integrating
CP and datamining/machine learning. On the one hand, the
CP-based approaches offer a trade-off between generality

We have tested the method on the Uncapacitated
Warehouse Location Problem (UncapWLP), the
Multidimensional-Knapsack Problem (MKnap), the
Traveling Tournament Problem with Predeﬁned Venues
(TTPPV) and the Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP). The
results show that the method ﬁnds the subtrees involving
optimal solutions in over 55% of benchmark instances.

∗

Corresponding authors
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1577

