The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

KPNet: Towards Minimal Face Detector
Guanglu Song,1,3 Yu Liu,2∗ Yuhang Zang,1 Xiaogang Wang,2 Biao Leng,3,4 Qingsheng Yuan5
1

SenseTime X-Lab
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
4
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data and Brain Computing, Beihang University, Beijing, 100191
5
National Computer network Emergency Response technical Team/Coordination Center of China
1
{songguanglu, zangyuhang}@sensetime.com, 2 {yuliu, xgwang}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk, 3 lengbiao@buaa.edu.cn, 5 yqs@cert.org.cn
2



Abstract

*

The small receptive ﬁeld and capacity of minimal neural networks limit their performance when using them to be the
backbone of detectors. In this work, we ﬁnd that the appearance feature of a generic face is discriminative enough
for a tiny and shallow neural network to verify from the
background. And the essential barriers behind us are 1) the
vague deﬁnition of the face bounding box and 2) tricky design of anchor-boxes or receptive ﬁeld. Unlike most topdown methods for joint face detection and alignment, the
proposed KPNet detects small facial keypoints instead of the
whole face by in the bottom-up manner. It ﬁrst predicts the
facial landmarks from a low-resolution image via the welldesigned ﬁne-grained scale approximation and scale adaptive soft-argmax operator. Finally, the precise face bounding
boxes, no matter how we deﬁne it, can be inferred from the
keypoints. Without any complex head architecture or meticulous network designing, the KPNet achieves state-of-theart accuracy on generic face detection and alignment benchmarks with only ∼ 1M parameters, which runs at 1000fps on
GPU and is easy to perform real-time on most modern frontend chips.



*

*

*

*

*

*

*
*

5HFDOORQ)''%

*


*



CNN-50L, RP481
CNN-41L, RP289
CNN-26L, RP129



CNN-17L, RP65
*


>@


>@


,PDJHUHVROXWLRQ

>@


Figure 1: Performance of different networks with variant
input resolutions on FDDB. RP # means the receptive
ﬁeld and the numbers along with the points represent the
multiply-add operations. The distribution diagram in the
lower-left corner represents the scale distribution of ground
truth boxes when the input image resolution is [200, 400].

Introduction

of-the-art algorithms (Tang et al. 2018; Chi et al. 2018;
Li et al. 2018) construct adaptive receptive ﬁelds to detect
faces. They either detect targets with different scales at different levels of the network or detect targets by fusing enhanced features generated by different levels. With the assistance of complex deep backbone (He et al. 2016), improving face detection performance with reﬁned receptive
ﬁeld (Zhang et al. 2017d; Najibi et al. 2017) or embedding
new enhanced modules (Tang et al. 2018; Chi et al. 2018;
Li et al. 2018) has become the guidance in the ﬁeld of
face detection. However, these top-down approaches with
complex backbone networks lead to a heavy computational
burden, even though some novel works (Song et al. 2018;
Liu et al. 2017) are proposed to accelerate them. Under the
constraints of these current mechanisms, we naturally raise a
question: can large scale-variance be solved only through
a deeper and more complex backbone with well-designed
strategies?
Keep the bottleneck of current research in mind, this paper tries to seek the answer to this question. We re-explore

The performance of face detection has been constantly improved thanks to the anchor-based mechanism (Girshick
2015; Ren et al. 2015) with the top-down strategy. By simply assigning dense anchor templates in complex models,
we can obtain a face detector with excellent performance.
In the current state-of-the-art research, the essence of face
detection is how to design the receptive ﬁeld adaptive to
large scale-variance. With the emergence of some seminal works (Hu and Ramanan 2017; Zhang et al. 2017d;
Najibi et al. 2017) to explore the relationship between the
receptive ﬁeld and the large scale-variance, the performance
of face detection is further improved. Inspired by this, the
FPN-style framework (Lin et al. 2017) has become a priority choice for researchers and it can effectively enhance the
performance of face detectors to handle faces with different scales. Encouraged by these insights, most of the state∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12015

