The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Neural Architecture Search Using Deep
Neural Networks and Monte Carlo Tree Search
Linnan Wang,∗1 Yiyang Zhao,∗2 Yuu Jinnai,1 Yuandong Tian,3 Rodrigo Fonseca1
1

Brown University 2 Worcester Polytechnic Institute 3 Facebook AI Research

Abstract

 

Neural Architecture Search (NAS) has shown great success
in automating the design of neural networks, but the prohibitive amount of computations behind current NAS methods requires further investigations in improving the sample
efﬁciency and the network evaluation cost to get better results
in a shorter time. In this paper, we present a novel scalable
Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) based NAS agent, named
AlphaX, to tackle these two aspects. AlphaX improves the
search efﬁciency by adaptively balancing the exploration and
exploitation at the state level, and by a Meta-Deep Neural
Network (DNN) to predict network accuracies for biasing the
search toward a promising region. To amortize the network
evaluation cost, AlphaX accelerates MCTS rollouts with a
distributed design and reduces the number of epochs in evaluating a network by transfer learning, which is guided with
the tree structure in MCTS. In 12 GPU days and 1000 samples, AlphaX found an architecture that reaches 97.84% top-1
accuracy on CIFAR-10, and 75.5% top-1 accuracy on ImageNet, exceeding SOTA NAS methods in both the accuracy
and sampling efﬁciency. Particularly, we also evaluate AlphaX on NASBench-101, a large scale NAS dataset; AlphaX
is 3x and 2.8x more sample efﬁcient than Random Search
and Regularized Evolution in ﬁnding the global optimum. Finally, we show the searched architecture improves a variety
of vision applications from Neural Style Transfer, to Image
Captioning and Object Detection.

1







  

 
 

(a) random search
" 

" 

 
 ! 
   

(b) greedy methods

$#
'

&

&
%

%



$

$


 
 

 
! 
   

(c) MCTS

(d) Performance

Figure 1: Comparisons of NAS algorithms: (a) random
search makes independent decision without using prior rollouts (previous search trajectories). An online model is to
evaluate how promising the current search branch based
on prior rollouts, and random search has no online model.
(b) Search methods guided by online performance models
built from previous rollouts. With static, coarse-grained exploration strategy (e.g., -greedy in Q-learning), they may
quickly be stuck in a sub-optimal solution; and the chance
to escape is exponentially decreasing along the trajectory. (c)
AlphaX builds online models of both performance and visitation counts for adaptive exploration. The numbers in nodes
represent values. (d) Performance of different search algorithms on NASBench-101. AlphaX is 3x, 1.5x more sampleefﬁcient than random search and -greedy based Q-learning.

Introduction

Designing efﬁcient neural architectures is extremely laborious. A typical design iteration starts with a heuristic design hypothesis from domain experts, followed by the design validation with hours of GPU training. The entire design process requires many of such iterations before ﬁnding a satisfying architecture. Neural Architecture Search has
emerged as a promising tool to alleviate human effort in this
trial and error design process, but the tremendous computing
resources required by current NAS methods motivate us to
investigate both the search efﬁciency and the network evaluation cost.
AlphaGo/AlphaGoZero (Silver et al. 2016; Tian et al.
2019) have recently shown super-human performance in
playing the game of Go, by using a speciﬁc search algorithm called Monte-Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) (Kocsis

and Szepesvári 2006). Given the current game state, MCTS
gradually builds an online model for its subsequent game
states to evaluate the winning chance at that state, based
on search experiences in the current and prior games, and
makes a decision. The search experience is from the previous search trajectories (called rollouts) that have been tried,
and their consequences (whether the player wins or not).
Different from the traditional MCTS approach that evalu-

∗

Linnan Wang and Yiyang Zhao contributed equally
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9983

