The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Sentence Generation for Entity Description with Content-Plan Attention
Bayu Distiawan Trisedya, Jianzhong Qi, Rui Zhang∗
School of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne
btrisedya@student.unimelb.edu.au, {jianzhong.qi, rui.zhang}@unimelb.edu.au

Input

name; Keanu Reeves
birth place; Beirut, Lebanon
occupation; actor
occupation; musician
birth date; September 2, 1964
residence; California, U.S.
birth name; Keanu Charles Reeves
citizenship; Canada
citizenship; United States

Output

Keanu Charles Reeves (born
September 2, 1964 in Beirut,
Lebanon) is a American actor
who lives in California,
U.S.

Abstract
We study neural data-to-text generation. Speciﬁcally, we consider a target entity that is associated with a set of attributes.
We aim to generate a sentence to describe the target entity. Previous studies use encoder-decoder frameworks where
the encoder treats the input as a linear sequence and uses
LSTM to encode the sequence. However, linearizing a set of
attributes may not yield the proper order of the attributes,
and hence leads the encoder to produce an improper context to generate a description. To handle disordered input, recent studies propose two-stage neural models that use pointer
networks to generate a content-plan (i.e., content-planner)
and use the content-plan as input for an encoder-decoder
model (i.e., text generator). However, in two-stage models,
the content-planner may yield an incomplete content-plan,
due to missing one or more salient attributes in the generated
content-plan. This will in turn cause the text generator to generate an incomplete description. To address these problems,
we propose a novel attention model that exploits contentplan to highlight salient attributes in a proper order. The challenge of integrating a content-plan in the attention model of
an encoder-decoder framework is to align the content-plan
and the generated description. We handle this problem by devising a coverage mechanism to track the extent to which the
content-plan is exposed in the previous decoding time-step,
and hence it helps our proposed attention model select the attributes to be mentioned in the description in a proper order.
Experimental results show that our model outperforms stateof-the-art baselines by up to 3% and 5% in terms of BLEU
score on two real-world datasets, respectively.

1

Table 1: Data-to-text generation.

illustrates the input and output of the task; in this example,
the attributes are name, birth place, etc and their values are "Keanu Reeves", "Beirut, Lebanon", etc.
Here, the attributes may have been extracted from a table,
which makes the task table-to-text generation, or a knowledge graph (KG), which makes the task rdf-to-text generation. In table-to-text generation, the attributes are extracted
from a two-column table (e.g., Wikipedia infobox) where
the ﬁrst column indicates the key and the second column indicates the value of the attributes. In rdf-to-text generation,
the attributes are extracted by querying a KG for RDF triples
(i.e., subject, predicate, object) that contain the
target entity as the subject. In both cases, the input will form
a star-shaped graph with the target entity as the center of the
star-shaped graph, the attribute values as the points of the
star, and the attribute keys as the edges (cf. Fig. 1).
Recent studies proposed end-to-end models by adapting
the encoder-decoder framework. The encoder-decoder
framework is a sequence-to-sequence model that has
been successfully used in many tasks including machine
translation (Cho et al. 2014), data-to-text generation (Liu et
al. 2018), and relation extraction (Trisedya et al. 2019). The
adaption of the sequence-to-sequence model for data-to-text
generation includes representing the input as a sequence,
and hence the order of attributes is important to guide the
decoder to generate a good description (Vinyals, Bengio,
and Kudlur 2016). Here, our deﬁnition of a proper order
of attributes is the reasonable order of attributes in a

Introduction

Generating natural language description of an entity from
structured data is important for various applications such as
question answering (Bordes, Chopra, and Weston 2014) and
proﬁle summarizing (Lebret, Grangier, and Auli 2016). In
this paper, we study how to generate an entity description
from its attributes. Speciﬁcally, we aim to generate a description from a set of attributes of a target entity A; the
attributes are in the form of pairs of key and value, i.e.,
A = {k1 ; v1 , k2 ; v2 , ...kn ; vn }, where kn is the key
of the attribute and vn is the value of the attribute. Table 1
∗

Rui Zhang is the corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9057

