The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Bayesian Optimization for Categorical and Category-Speciﬁc Continuous Inputs
Dang Nguyen, Sunil Gupta, Santu Rana, Alistair Shilton, Svetha Venkatesh
Applied Artiﬁcial Intelligence Institute (A2 I2 ), Deakin University, Geelong, Australia
{d.nguyen, sunil.gupta, santu.rana, alistair.shilton, svetha.venkatesh}@deakin.edu.au

work, (Golovin et al. 2017) used one-hot encoding for categorical variables, increasing the input dimension by one extra
variable per category. Since the categories are mutually exclusive, all the extra variables are set to zero except the active
variable (corresponding to the required category) which is set
to one. After converting the categorical variables to one-hot
encoding, this approach treats extra variables as continuous
in [0, 1] and uses a typical BO algorithm to optimize them.
Unfortunately, this type of encoding imposes equal measure
of covariance between all category pairs, totally ignoring the
fact that they may have different or no correlations at all.
Further, the recommendations can get repeated as they are
generated via rounding-off at the end. To address the latter
problem, (Garrido-Merchán and Hernández-Lobato 2018) assumed that the objective function does not change its values
except at the designated points of 0 and 1. This is achieved
by using a kernel function that computes covariances after
the input is rounded off. However, this makes the resulting
acquisition function step-wise, which is hard to optimize.
In many optimization problems, an additional challenge
arises – each category is coupled with a different continuous
search space. For example, consider the problem of automated machine learning (Feurer et al. 2019) where we need
to automatically select the best performing machine learning
model along with its optimal hyper-parameters. Each machine learning model can be viewed as a distinct value (or
choice) of a categorical variable while the hyper-parameters
of the model can be viewed as category-speciﬁc continuous
variables. None of the current GP-based BO methods can be
applied to such complex search spaces.
To incorporate categorical inputs and deal with categoryspeciﬁc continuous search spaces, tree-based methods have
been proposed. For example, SMAC tackles this problem
by using random forest in place of GP (Hutter, Hoos, and
Leyton-Brown 2011). However, random forest has a wellknown limitation in performing extrapolation and thus is not a
good choice for BO (Lakshminarayanan, Roy, and Teh 2016).
Yet another method, tree-structured parzen window based
approach (TPE) (Bergstra et al. 2011) can naturally cope
with both categorical and continuous variables. In contrast to
GP based approaches, TPE models two likelihood functions
to assess if the function value at any point would be in the
range of top few observations or not. The disadvantage is that
this approach requires higher number of initial data points

Abstract
Many real-world functions are deﬁned over both categorical
and category-speciﬁc continuous variables and thus cannot be
optimized by traditional Bayesian optimization (BO) methods. To optimize such functions, we propose a new method
that formulates the problem as a multi-armed bandit problem,
wherein each category corresponds to an arm with its reward
distribution centered around the optimum of the objective
function in continuous variables. Our goal is to identify the
best arm and the maximizer of the corresponding continuous
function simultaneously. Our algorithm uses a Thompson sampling scheme that helps connecting both multi-arm bandit and
BO in a uniﬁed framework. We extend our method to batch
BO to allow parallel optimization when multiple resources
are available. We theoretically analyze our method for convergence and prove sub-linear regret bounds. We perform a
variety of experiments: optimization of several benchmark
functions, hyper-parameter tuning of a neural network, and
automatic selection of the best machine learning model along
with its optimal hyper-parameters (a.k.a automated machine
learning). Comparisons with other methods demonstrate the
effectiveness of our proposed method.

Introduction
Bayesian optimization (BO) (Shahriari et al. 2016) provides
a powerful and efﬁcient framework for global optimization
of expensive black-box functions. Typically, at each iteration
a BO method ﬁrst models the black-box function via a statistical model (e.g. a Gaussian process (GP)) and then seeks
out the next function evaluation points by maximizing an
easy to optimize function (a.k.a. acquisition function) that
balances the two conﬂicting requirements: exploitation of
current function knowledge and exploration to gain more
function knowledge. A notable strength of BO is that its
convergence is well studied (Bull 2011).
Most BO methods assume that the function inputs are
continuous variables. In reality, however, a function may be
deﬁned over diverse input types – for example, categorical,
integer or continuous. Categorical type variables are particularly challenging since they do not have a natural ordering
as in integer and continuous variables. Limited work has addressed incorporation of categorical input types. In a recent
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5256

