The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Towards Building a Multilingual Sememe
Knowledge Base: Predicting Sememes for BabelNet Synsets
Fanchao Qi,1∗ Liang Chang,2∗† Maosong Sun,1,3‡ Sicong Ouyang,2† Zhiyuan Liu1
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Tsinghua University
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology
2
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
3
Jiangsu Collaborative Innovation Center for Language Ability, Jiangsu Normal University
qfc17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, changliang@bupt.edu.cn
{sms, liuzy}@tsinghua.edu.cn, scouyang4354@gmail.com
Abstract

word

A sememe is deﬁned as the minimum semantic unit of human
languages. Sememe knowledge bases (KBs), which contain
words annotated with sememes, have been successfully applied to many NLP tasks. However, existing sememe KBs are
built on only a few languages, which hinders their widespread
utilization. To address the issue, we propose to build a uniﬁed sememe KB for multiple languages based on BabelNet, a
multilingual encyclopedic dictionary. We ﬁrst build a dataset
serving as the seed of the multilingual sememe KB. It manually annotates sememes for over 15 thousand synsets (the
entries of BabelNet). Then, we present a novel task of automatic sememe prediction for synsets, aiming to expand the
seed dataset into a usable KB. We also propose two simple
and effective models, which exploit different information of
synsets. Finally, we conduct quantitative and qualitative analyses to explore important factors and difﬁculties in the task.
All the source code and data of this work can be obtained on
https://github.com/thunlp/BabelNet-Sememe-Prediction.

husband

sense

"married man"

"carefully use"

human

economize

sememe
family

male

spouse

Figure 1: Sememe annotation of the word “husband” in
HowNet.
sememes to annotate senses of over 100 thousand Chinese
and English words. Figure 1 illustrates an example of how
words are annotated with sememes in HowNet.
Different from most linguistic KBs like WordNet (Miller
1995), which explain meanings of words by word-level relations, sememe KBs like HowNet provide intensional deﬁnitions for words using infra-word sememes. Sememe KBs
have two unique strengths. The ﬁrst one is their sememe-toword semantic compositionality, which endows them with
special suitability for integration into neural networks (Gu
et al. 2018; Qi et al. 2019a). The second one is their nature that limited sememes can represent unlimited meanings,
which makes sememes very useful in low data regimes, e.g.,
improving embeddings of low-frequency words (Sun and
Chen 2016; Niu et al. 2017). In fact, sememe KBs have been
proven beneﬁcial to various NLP tasks such as word sense
disambiguation (Duan, Zhao, and Xu 2007) and sentiment
analysis (Fu et al. 2013).
Most languages have no sememe KBs, which prevents
NLP applications of these languages beneﬁting from sememe knowledge. However, building a sememe KB for a
new language from scratch is time-consuming and laborintensive — the construction of HowNet takes several linguistic experts more than two decades. To tackle this challenge, Qi et al. (2018) present the task of cross-lingual lexical sememe prediction (CLSP), aiming to facilitate the construction of a new language’s sememe KB by predicting sememes for words in that language. However, CLSP can pre-

Introduction
A word is the smallest element of human languages that can
stand by itself, but not the smallest indivisible semantic unit.
In fact, the meaning of a word can be divided into smaller
components. For example, one of the meanings of “man”
can be represented as the composition of the meanings
of “human”, “male” and “adult”. In linguistics, a sememe
(Bloomﬁeld 1926) is deﬁned as the minimum semantic unit
of human languages. Some linguists believe that meanings
of all the words in any language can be decomposed of a
limited set of predeﬁned sememes, which is related to the
idea of universal semantic primitives (Wierzbicka 1996).
Sememes are implicit in words. To utilize them in practical applications, people manually annotate words with predeﬁned sememes to construct sememe knowledge bases
(KBs). HowNet (Dong and Dong 2003) is the most famous one, which uses about 2, 000 language-independent
∗

Indicates equal contribution
Work done during internship at Tsinghua University
‡
Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

8624

