The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

On Adaptivity in Information-Constrained Online Learning
Siddharth Mitra,1 Aditya Gopalan2
1

Chennai Mathematical Institute, smitra@cmi.ac.in
2
Indian Institute of Science, aditya@iisc.ac.in

Azar, Osband, and Munos 2017), stochastic partial monitoring (Bartók, Pál, and Szepesvári 2011), etc., which often yields performance guarantees that are strong but can
closely depend on the stochastic models at hand. On the other
hand, much work has been devoted to studying non-stochastic
(or arbitrary or adversarial) models of environments from a
worst-case point of view – prediction with experts, bandits
and partial monitoring problems to name a few (Cesa-Bianchi
and Lugosi 2006) – which naturally yields rather pessimistic
guarantees.
Recent efforts have focused on bridging this spectrum
of modeling structure in online learning problems as arising from non-stochastic environments with loss function
sequences exhibiting adequate temporal regularity. These
include the derivation of ﬁrst-order regret bounds or adapting to loss sequences with low loss of the best action (Allenberg et al. 2006), second-order bounds or adapting to
loss sequences with low variation in prediction with experts
(Rakhlin and Sridharan 2012; Steinhardt and Liang 2014)
and ‘benign’ multi-armed bandits (Hazan and Kale 2011;
Bubeck et al. 2019; Bubeck, Cohen, and Li 2017; Wei and
Luo 2018).
In this regard, this paper is an attempt to extend our understanding of adaptivity to low variation in several standard online learning problems where information comes at
a cost, namely label efﬁcient prediction (Cesa-Bianchi, Lugosi, and Stoltz 2005), label efﬁcient bandits (Cesa-Bianchi
and Lugosi 2006) and classes of partial monitoring problems
(Bartók et al. 2014). In the process, we uncover new ways of
using existing online learning techniques within the Online
Mirror Descent (OMD) family, and partially make progress
towards a program of studying the impact of ‘easy’ (i.e.,
slowly-varying) environments in information-constrained online learning and partial monitoring problems. Our speciﬁc
contributions are:

Abstract
We study how to adapt to smoothly-varying (‘easy’) environments in well-known online learning problems where acquiring information is expensive. For the problem of label efﬁcient
prediction, which is a budgeted version of prediction with
expert advice, we present an online algorithm whose regret
depends optimally on the number of labels allowed and Q∗
(the quadratic variation of the losses of the best action in hindsight), along with a parameter-free counterpart whose regret
depends optimally on Q (the quadratic variation of the losses
of all the actions). These quantities can be signiﬁcantly smaller
than T (the total time horizon), yielding an improvement over
existing, variation-independent results for the problem. We
then extend our analysis to handle label efﬁcient prediction
with bandit (partial) feedback, i.e., label efﬁcient bandits. Our
work builds upon the framework of optimistic online mirror
descent, and leverages second order corrections along with
a carefully designed hybrid regularizer that encodes the constrained information structure of the problem. We then consider revealing action-partial monitoring games – a version
of label efﬁcient prediction with additive information costs –
which in general are known to lie in the hard class of games
2
having minimax regret of order T /3 . We provide a strategy
1/3
∗
with an O((Q T ) ) bound for revealing action games, along
1
with one with a O((QT ) /3 ) bound for the full class of hard
partial monitoring games, both being strict improvements over
current bounds.

1

Introduction

Online learning is a branch of machine learning that is concerned with the problem of dynamically optimizing utility (or
loss) over time in the face of uncertainty, and gives valuable
principles to reason about acting under uncertainty. The study
of online learning has developed along two concrete lines
insofar as modeling the uncertain environment is concerned.
On one hand, there is a rich body of work on learning in
stochastic environments from an average-case point of view,
such as i.i.d. multi-armed bandits (see, e.g., the survey of
(Bubeck, Cesa-Bianchi, and others 2012)), online learning in
Markov decision processes (Jaksch, Ortner, and Auer 2010;

1. For the label efﬁcient prediction game with expert advice,
algorithm with a regret bound of

we∗give a learning
(Q
T
log
K)
O
/n where Q∗ is the quadratic variation of
the best expert, T is the time horizon of the game, K is the
number of experts and n is the bound on label queries; the
∗
bound holds for all regimes except when nQ /T = 
O(K 2 ).
We follow this up with an algorithm with an unconditional

Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5199

