The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning the Graphical Structure of Electronic
Health Records with Graph Convolutional Transformer
Edward Choi,1 Zhen Xu,1 Yujia Li,2 Michael W. Dusenberry,1
Gerardo Flores,1 Emily Xue,1 Andrew M. Dai1
1

Google, Mountain View, USA, 2 DeepMind, London, UK

Abstract
Eﬀective modeling of electronic health records (EHR) is
rapidly becoming an important topic in both academia and
industry. A recent study showed that using the graphical structure underlying EHR data (e.g. relationship between diagnoses
and treatments) improves the performance of prediction tasks
such as heart failure prediction. However, EHR data do not always contain complete structure information. Moreover, when
it comes to claims data, structure information is completely unavailable to begin with. Under such circumstances, can we still
do better than just treating EHR data as a ﬂat-structured bagof-features? In this paper, we study the possibility of jointly
learning the hidden structure of EHR while performing supervised prediction tasks on EHR data. Speciﬁcally, we discuss
that Transformer is a suitable basis model to learn the hidden
EHR structure, and propose Graph Convolutional Transformer,
which uses data statistics to guide the structure learning process. The proposed model consistently outperformed previous
approaches empirically, on both synthetic data and publicly
available EHR data, for various prediction tasks such as graph
reconstruction and readmission prediction, indicating that it
can serve as an eﬀective general-purpose representation learning algorithm for EHR data.

1

Figure 1: Graphical structure of electronic health records. A
visit consists of multiple types of features, and their connections (red edges) reﬂect the physician’s decision process.

in a relational database that can be represented as a hierarchical graph depicted in Figure 1. The common approach
for processing EHR data with neural networks has been to
treat each encounter as an unordered set of features, or in
other words, a bag of features. However, the bag of features
approach completely disregards the graphical structure that
reﬂects the physician’s decision process. For example, if we
treat the encounter in Figure 1 as a bag of features, we will
lose the information that Benzonatate was ordered because
of Cough, not because of Abdominal pain.
Recently, motivated by this EHR structure, (Choi et al.
2018) proposed MiME, a model architecture that reﬂects
EHR’s encounter structure, speciﬁcally the relationships between the diagnosis and its treatment. MiME outperformed
various bag of features approaches in prediction tasks such as
heart failure diagnosis prediction. Their study, however, naturally raises the question: when the EHR data do not contain
structure information (the red edges in Figure 1), can we still
do better than bag of features in learning the representation of
the data for various prediction tasks? This question emerges
in many occasions, since EHR data do not always contain
the entire structure information. For example, some dataset
might describe which treatment lead to measuring certain
lab values, but might not describe the reason diagnosis for
ordering that treatment. Moreover, when it comes to claims
data, such structure information is completely unavailable to
begin with.

Introduction

Large medical records collected by electronic healthcare
records (EHR) systems in healthcare organizations enabled
deep learning methods to show impressive performance in
diverse tasks such as predicting diagnosis (Lipton et al. 2015;
Choi et al. 2016a; Rajkomar et al. 2018), learning medical concept representations (Che et al. 2015; Choi, Chiu,
and Sontag 2016; Choi et al. 2016b; Miotto et al. 2016),
and making interpretable predictions (Choi et al. 2016c;
Ma et al. 2017). As diverse as they are, one thing shared
by all tasks is the fact that, under the hood, some form of
neural network is processing EHR data to learn useful patterns from them. To successfully perform any EHR-related
task, it is essential to learn eﬀective representations of various EHR features: diagnosis codes, lab values, encounters,
and even patients themselves. EHR data are typically stored
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
606

