The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

CONAN: Complementary Pattern Augmentation for Rare Disease Detection
Limeng Cui,1,2 Siddharth Biswal,1,3 Lucas M. Glass,1 Greg Lever,1 Jimeng Sun,3 Cao Xiao1
1

Analytic Center of Excellence, IQVIA, Cambridge, MA, USA
College of Information Sciences and Technology, The Pennsylvania State University, PA, USA
3
College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA
lzc334@psu.edu, sbiswal7@gatech.edu, {lucas.glass, greg.lever, cao.xiao}@iqvia.com, jsun@cc.gatech.edu
2

mainly focuses on common chronic diseases such as Parkinson’s disease progression modeling (Baytas et al. 2017;
Che et al. 2017a) and heart failure prediction (Choi et al.
2018), deep learning models for rare disease prediction are
lacking.
Two key challenges are presented for rare disease detection. First, the low prevalence rates of rare diseases limit
the number of positive subjects in the training data (i.e., patients with a conﬁrmed diagnosis of the rare disease). Thus
the disease patterns are hard to extract. Second, there exist
many patients with uncertain diagnosis due to the long period needed for rare diseases to be correctly diagnosed. The
existence of large number of such uncertain patients can potentially help the disease detector perform better, as they are
inherently close to positive patients who has conﬁrmed diagnosis of the rare disease.
Related setting can be found in Positive-Unlabeled (PU)
learning, which assumes the unlabeled data can contain both
positive and negative examples (Bekker and Davis 2018).
Existing PU learning methods (Elkan and Noto 2008;
Kiryo et al. 2017) often identify reliable negative examples
and then learn based on the labeled positives and reliable
negatives (Liu et al. 2003). However, it is difﬁcult to apply
existing PU learning methods for the rare disease detection
problem as the key difﬁculty here is to distinguish positive
patients from negative ones with similar conditions. The reliable negative examples (e.g., healthy individuals and patients with similar diseases) will yield a more relaxed classiﬁcation hyperplane and thus generate many false positive
cases due to the low prevalence rates of rare diseases.
To mitigate the aforementioned problem, researchers
adopt the generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014) to augment the minor class and balance
the distribution (McLachlan, Dube, and Gallagher 2016;
Choi et al. 2017). However, several challenges are still
present in GAN based methods:

Abstract
Rare diseases affect hundreds of millions of people worldwide but are hard to detect since they have extremely low
prevalence rates (varying from 1/1,000 to 1/200,000 patients) and are massively underdiagnosed. How do we reliably detect rare diseases with such low prevalence rates?
How to further leverage patients with possibly uncertain diagnosis to improve detection? In this paper, we propose a
Complementary pattern Augmentation (CONAN) framework
for rare disease detection. CONAN combines ideas from both
adversarial training and max-margin classiﬁcation. It ﬁrst
learns self-attentive and hierarchical embedding for patient
pattern characterization. Then, we develop a complementary
generative adversarial networks (GAN) model to generate
candidate positive and negative samples from the uncertain
patients by encouraging a max-margin between classes. In
addition, CONAN has a disease detector that serves as the
discriminator during the adversarial training for identifying
rare diseases. We evaluated CONAN on two disease detection
tasks. For low prevalence inﬂammatory bowel disease (IBD)
detection, CONAN achieved .96 precision recall area under the
curve (PR-AUC) and 50.1% relative improvement over the
best baseline. For rare disease idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis
(IPF) detection, CONAN achieves .22 PR-AUC with 41.3%
relative improvement over the best baseline.

Introduction
There are more than 7,000 of diseases that are individually rare but collectively common. These rare diseases affect 350 million people worldwide and incur a huge loss
in quality of life and large ﬁnancial cost (Vickers 2019).
As these diseases are rare individually, initial misdiagnosis is common. On average it can take more than seven
years for rare disease patients to receive the accurate diagnosis with the help of 8 physicians (Shire 2013). Thus,
it is important to detect and intervene with the rare disease before it becomes life-threatening and consumes excessive medical resources. In recent years, the availability
of massive electronic health records (EHR) data enables
the training of deep learning models for accurate predictive
health (Xiao, Choi, and Sun 2018). However, current success

1. They often focus on generating raw patient data, which
is an extremely difﬁcult problem on its own. The resulting synthetic data can easily be non-realistic and thus not
useful for disease detection.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2. They often try to augment data based on the rare class
only. However, due to the low prevalence rate, rare class
614

