The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Sequential Recommendation with Relation-Aware Kernelized Self-Attention
Mingi Ji, Weonyoung Joo, Kyungwoo Song, Yoon-Yeong Kim, Il-Chul Moon
Korea Advenced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Korea
{qwertgfdcvb, es345, gtshs2, yoonyeong.kim, icmoon}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Recent studies identiﬁed that sequential Recommendation is
improved by the attention mechanism. By following this
development, we propose Relation-Aware Kernelized SelfAttention (RKSA) adopting a self-attention mechanism of the
Transformer with augmentation of a probabilistic model. The
original self-attention of Transformer is a deterministic measure without relation-awareness. Therefore, we introduce a
latent space to the self-attention, and the latent space models
the recommendation context from relation as a multivariate
skew-normal distribution with a kernelized covariance matrix from co-occurrences, item characteristics, and user information. This work merges the self-attention of the Transformer and the sequential recommendation by adding a probabilistic model of the recommendation task speciﬁcs. We experimented RKSA over the benchmark datasets, and RKSA
shows signiﬁcant improvements compared to the recent baseline models. Also, RKSA were able to produce a latent space
model that answers the reasons for recommendation.

Figure 1: Each entry of the co-occurrence matrix means the
number of users that each movie pair appeared together in
an user sequence in the MovieLens dataset. We can see that
there are many users who watched Star Wars movies together. This allows modifying the attention weight from blue
to red using co-occurrence information, when Star Wars 6 is
a query.

Introduction
Recommendation is one of the key application areas of artiﬁcial intelligence in the big data era. The recommendation tasks are supported by large scale data, and users need
to select a speciﬁc item from many alternative items. This
selection requirement motivates the utilization of attention
mechanism in the recommendation task. The attention is applied to the item selection, and the sequential recommendation particularly selects the past item choice records to
consider the recommendation at the current timestep with
the attention mechanism (Wang et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2018;
Li et al. 2017; Ying et al. 2018; Yu et al. 2019; Huang et al.
2018).
Given the relationship between the attention and the
recommendation, adopting a new attention mechanism to
the recommendation has been a research trend. For instance, Self-Attentive Sequential Recommendation (SASRec) (Kang and McAuley 2018) adopted the self-attention
mechanism of the Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017) to the
recommendation task. This adaptation is interesting, but it

was limitedly customized to meet the task speciﬁcs. Recommendation often requires understanding items, users, browsing sequences, etc, and the recommendation models need
to consider such contexts which SASRec does not provide.
Following SASRec, there have been developments in using
the self-attention mechanism of the Transformer to model a
task speciﬁc feature of sequential recommendation. For example, ATRank (Zhou et al. 2018) utilized the self-attention
mechanism for considering the inﬂuences from heterogenous behavior representations. To model the user’s shortterm intent, AttRec (Zhang et al. 2019) adopted the selfattention mechanism on the user interaction history. Similar to ATRank and AttRec, BST (Chen et al. 2019) used the
self-attention mechanism for aggregate of the auxiliary user
and item features.
Given the success of the self-attention (Tan et al. 2018;
Devlin et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2018), the recommendation task can be improved from the sequential information,
which was limitedly used in the previous works. Moreover,
such utilization on the sequential information provides a
new approach to customize the self-attention structure to the

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4304

