The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A corrigendum has been appended to this paper.

Multi-Fidelity Multi-Objective Bayesian
Optimization: An Output Space Entropy Search Approach
Syrine Belakaria, Aryan Deshwal, Janardhan Rao Doppa
School of EECS, Washington State University
{syrine.belakaria, aryan.deshwal, jana.doppa}@wsu.edu

employ a acquisition function (AF) that is parameterized by
the model, e.g., upper-conﬁdence bound, to score the utility
of evaluating candidate inputs; and select the highest scoring
input for evaluation in each iteration. Existing AFs can be
broadly classiﬁed into two categories. First, myopic AFs rely
on improving a “local” measure of utility (e.g., expected improvement). Second, non-myopic AFs measure the “global”
utility of evaluating a candidate input for solving the blackbox optimization problem (e.g., predictive entropy search).
Prior work has shown the advantages of non-myopic AFs over
myopic AFs in terms of both theory and practice (Jiang et al.
2017; Hernández-Lobato, Hoffman, and Ghahramani 2014;
Wang and Jegelka 2017; Hoffman and Ghahramani 2015).
In this paper, we propose a novel and principled approach
referred as Multi-Fidelity Output Space Entropy Search
for Multi-objective Optimization (MF-OSEMO) to solve
multi-objective optimization problems via multi-ﬁdelity function evaluations. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
ﬁrst work to study this problem within ML literature. MFOSEMO employs an output space entropy based non-myopic
acquisition function to select the candidate inputs and ﬁdelity vectors for evaluation. Output space entropy search
has many advantages over other non-myopic AFs based
on input space entropy (Hoffman and Ghahramani 2015;
Wang and Jegelka 2017): a) allows much tighter approximation; b) signiﬁcantly cheaper to compute; and c) naturally
lends itself to robust optimization. We provide two qualitatively different approximations to efﬁciently compute the
entropy, which is a key step for MF-OSEMO. These approximations make different trade-offs in terms of accuracy and
computational-efﬁciency: one has a closed-form expression
and another employs numerical integration.
Contributions. We make the following key contributions.

Abstract
We study the novel problem of blackbox optimization of multiple objectives via multi-ﬁdelity function evaluations that vary
in the amount of resources consumed and their accuracy. The
overall goal is to appromixate the true Pareto set of solutions
by minimizing the resources consumed for function evaluations. For example, in power system design optimization,
we need to ﬁnd designs that trade-off cost, size, efﬁciency,
and thermal tolerance using multi-ﬁdelity simulators for design evaluations. In this paper, we propose a novel approach
referred as Multi-Fidelity Output Space Entropy Search for
Multi-objective Optimization (MF-OSEMO) to solve this problem. The key idea is to select the sequence of candidate input and ﬁdelity-vector pairs that maximize the information
gained about the true Pareto front per unit resource cost. Our
experiments on several synthetic and real-world benchmark
problems show that MF-OSEMO, with both approximations,
signiﬁcantly improves over the state-of-the-art single-ﬁdelity
algorithms for multi-objective optimization.

1

Introduction

Multi-objective optimization of expensive black-box functions has many real-world applications. For example, creating
hardware to optimize performance, reliability, and thermal
objectives. There are two key challenges in solving these
problems. First, the objective functions are unknown and we
need to select from experiments of different ﬁdelity to evaluate each candidate input. These multi-ﬁdelity experiments
vary in the amount of resources consumed and the accuracy
of evaluation. Second, all the objectives cannot be optimized
simultaneously due to their conﬂicting nature. Hence, we resort to ﬁnding the Pareto optimal set of solutions. A solution
is called Pareto optimal if it cannot be improved in any of
the objectives without compromising some other objective.
The overall goal is to approximate the optimal Pareto set by
minimizing the overall resource cost of function evaluations.
Bayesian optimization (BO) (Shahriari et al. 2016) is a popular framework for solving blackbox optimization problems.
BO methods build a surrogate statistical model, e.g., Gaussian process, from the training data of function evaluations;

• Developing a principled approach referred as MF-OSEMO
to solve multi-ﬁdelity multi-objective blackbox optimization problems. MF-OSEMO employs an output space entropy based acquisition function to select the sequence of
candidate inputs and ﬁdelity vectors for evaluation. Providing two different approximations within MF-OSEMO.
• Experimental evaluation on synthetic and real-world
benchmark problems to show the effectiveness of MFOSEMO over state-of-the-art single-ﬁdelity algorithms.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10035

