The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

OMuLeT: Online Multi-Lead Time Location
Prediction for Hurricane Trajectory Forecasting
Ding Wang,1 Boyang Liu,1 Pang-Ning Tan,1 Lifeng Luo2
1

Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Michigan State University
2
Department of Geography, Michigan State University
{wangdin1, liuboya2, ptan, lluo}@msu.edu

forecast errors and variability among the model predictions
still increase with lead time.
Ensemble forecasting seeks to better represent the range
of forecast uncertainties by combining outputs generated by
multiple dynamical models (Zhang and Krishnamurti 1999;
Gneiting and Raftery 2005; Leutbecher and Palmer 2008).
Each dynamical model can produce one or more ensemble
member outputs by perturbing its initial conditions or model
parameters. The ensemble mean or median are commonly
used as the deterministic forecast from the ensemble. These
estimates assume that every member is equally skillful, and
thus, their predictions should be weighted equally. Such an
assumption may not be realistic due to the inherent differences in the way the ensemble member outputs are generated. Thus in an operational forecast environment when such
ensemble forecasts are issued on a regular basis, the weight
of each member must be established based on their accuracy in predicting the hurricane tracks (DeMaria et al. 2005).
However, determining the appropriate weights is not a trivial
task as the skills of the models may vary from one hurricane
to another. To overcome this challenge, the primary goal of
this paper is to develop an online hurricane trajectory forecasting framework that can dynamically update the weights
of the ensemble members based on their past and recent performance when veriﬁed against observations.
In the United States, the National Hurricane Center
(NHC) is responsible for monitoring and providing ofﬁcial
forecasts of hurricane trajectories and their intensities to the
public. With a set of dynamical model forecasts as guidance,
the ofﬁcial NHC forecasts are produced based on the experience and judgment of the forecasters. A secondary goal of
this paper is to investigate the feasibility of using an online
learning approach to generate forecasts that are equally or
more skillful than the ofﬁcial forecasts reported by NHC.
In addition to the dynamical models, various statistical
(DeMaria et al. 2005; Reich and Fuentes 2007) and hybrids
of statistical-dynamical models (Kim and Webster 2010;
Vecchi et al. 2011) have been developed. There has also
been growing interest in recent years to apply machine learning methods to the hurricane trajectory forecasting problem
(Lee and Liu 2000; Kordmahalleh, Seﬁdmazgi, and Homaifar 2016; Alemany et al. 2019). However, there are sev-

Abstract
Hurricanes are powerful tropical cyclones with sustained
wind speeds ranging from at least 74 mph (for category 1
storms) to more than 157 mph (for category 5 storms). Accurate prediction of the storm tracks is essential for hurricane
preparedness and mitigation of storm impacts. In this paper,
we cast the hurricane trajectory forecasting task as an online multi-lead time location prediction problem and present
a framework called OMuLeT to improve path prediction by
combining the 6-hourly and 12-hourly forecasts generated
from an ensemble of dynamical (physical) hurricane models. OMuLeT employs an online learning with restart strategy
to incrementally update the weights of the ensemble model
combination as new observation data become available. It can
also handle the varying dynamical models available for predicting the trajectories of different hurricanes. Experimental
results using the Atlantic and Eastern Paciﬁc hurricane data
showed that OMuLeT signiﬁcantly outperforms various baseline methods, including the ofﬁcial forecasts produced by the
U.S. National Hurricane Center (NHC), by more than 10% in
terms of its 48-hour lead time forecasts.

Introduction
Hurricanes are one of the most powerful storms on Earth that
have the potential to cause devastating losses and destruction
along their paths. For example, the Galveston Hurricane of
1900 is considered the deadliest hurricane in United States,
responsible for at least 8000 deaths (Blake, Landsea, and
Gibney 2011). In 2005, Hurricane Katrina took away more
than 1500 lives and caused at least $108 billion of property
damages (Blake, Landsea, and Gibney 2011). Given their
severe impact, accurate long-range prediction of hurricane
tracks is critical to give ample time for emergency response
teams to take appropriate actions that will minimize property
damages and loss of human lives. Towards this end, dynamical models such as NOAA’s Hurricane Weather Research
and Forecasting (HWRF) system and U.S. Navy Global Environmental Model (NAVGEM) have been widely used as
the primary tool for hurricane forecasting (Vickery, Skerlj,
and Twisdale 2000; Davis et al. 2008). Although the skills
of these models have improved steadily over the years, the
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
963

