The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Accurate Structured-Text Spotting for Arithmetical Exercise Correction
Yiqing Hu, Yan Zheng, Hao Liu, Deqiang Jiang, Yinsong Liu, Bo Ren
Youtu Lab, Tencent
{hooverhu, neoyzheng, ivanhliu, dqiangjiang, jasonysliu, timren}@tencent.com

Abstract
Correcting arithmetical exercise is a labor intensive and time
consuming task for primary school teachers all the time.
To reduce their burdens, we propose Arithmetical Exercise
Checker (AEC), which is the ﬁrst system that automatically
evaluates all arithmetical expressions (AEs) on exercise images. The major challenge is that AE is formed by printed
and handwritten texts with particular arithmetical patterns
(e.g., multi-line, fraction). Despite being part of AE, handwritten texts usually lead to zigzag boundaries and tangled
rows. What’s worse, AE may be arithmetical incorrect, which
makes the contextual information less valuable for recognition. To tackle these problems, we introduce integrated detection, recognition and evaluation branches by leveraging AE’s
intrinsic features, namely 1) boundary indistinctive, 2) locally
relevant patterns and 3) globally irrelevant symbols. Experimental results demonstrate that AEC yields a 93.72% correction accuracy on 40 kinds of mainstream primary arithmetical
exercises. So far, the online service of AEC processes 75, 000
arbitrary exercises on average per day, and already reduced
the burden of over 1, 000, 000 users. AEC shows the beneﬁts for implementing an vision-based system as a way to aid
teachers in reducing reduplicative tasks.

1

Figure 1: AEC: correcting arithmetical exercise. It localizes,
recognizes and evaluates all arithmetical expressions on the
exercise, then returns correction results and suggestions.

ents. Most parents are not familiar with the curriculum and
could not give effective guidance to children.
In this paper, we aim to design such a system that automatically corrects primary arithmetical exercise. To realize
this goal, we develop a novel end-to-end approach, arithmetical exercise checker (AEC). It ﬁrst extracts all AEs by
detection, then conducts recognition to convert them to texts.
Finally, their correctness is evaluated by arithmetical logics,
as shown in Fig. 1. With AEC, the instructors could ﬁnish
the correction of an exercise within a few seconds, while
manual work usually takes a few minutes.
The design of AEC is a non-trivial task. AE is formed
by printed and handwritten texts with arithmetical patterns.
It has no ﬁxed format according to different publishers and
grades, and it could be even purely handwritten. Compared
with printed texts, handwritten texts are usually scratchy and
lead to 1) zigzag boundaries and 2) tangled rows, as shown
in Fig. 2. Zigzag boundaries hamper mainstream anchorboxes based approaches like SSD (Liu et al. 2016) and
Faster-RCNN (Ren et al. 2015), for generated marginal areas are padded by background and lack obvious visual features. What’s worse, these approaches tend to set a loose intersection over union (IoU) threshold to balance the number

Introduction

With the rapid development of technology, the primary education is evolving all the time. By the end of 2018, there
are about a hundred million of primary students in China,
and the number is continuing to increase (chE 2018). Now
the consensus is that primary teachers should pay more attention to daily performance and learning methodologies of
students, which puts forward a higher standard for teachers. However, the time of teachers is still occupied by highly
repeated works like correcting exercises. Our survey in 4
primary schools demonstrates that a primary math teacher
corrects on average 6, 000 exercises per semester. To tackle
this problem, one feasible solution is to have the student parents to correct the homework of their children by their own
(which is now a common phenomenon in China), but it requires professional knowledge and not suitable for all parc 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
686

