The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

iFAN: Image-Instance Full Alignment Networks for Adaptive Object Detection
Chenfan Zhuang, Xintong Han, Weilin Huang,∗ Matthew R. Scott
Malong Technologies, Shenzhen, China
Shenzhen Malong Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research Center, Shenzhen, China
{fan, xinhan, whuang, mscott}@malong.com

to train a high-performance unsupervised domain adaptive
object detector on a fully-annotated source domain and apply it to an unlabeled target domain. For example, an object detector, trained on synthesized images generated from
a game engine such as SIM10K (Johnson-Roberson et al.
2017) where object bounding boxes are readily available,
can be applied to real-world images from a target domain,
such as Cityscapes (Cordts et al. 2016) or KITTI (Geiger et
al. 2013).

Abstract
Training an object detector on a data-rich domain and applying it to a data-poor one with limited performance drop is
highly attractive in industry, because it saves huge annotation cost. Recent research on unsupervised domain adaptive
object detection has veriﬁed that aligning data distributions
between source and target images through adversarial learning is very useful. The key is when, where and how to use
it to achieve best practice. We propose Image-Instance Full
Alignment Networks (iFAN) to tackle this problem by precisely aligning feature distributions on both image and instance levels: 1) Image-level alignment: multi-scale features
are roughly aligned by training adversarial domain classiﬁers in a hierarchically-nested fashion. 2) Full instance-level
alignment: deep semantic information and elaborate instance
representations are fully exploited to establish a strong relationship among categories and domains. Establishing these
correlations is formulated as a metric learning problem by
carefully constructing instance pairs. Above-mentioned adaptations can be integrated into an object detector (e.g. Faster RCNN), resulting in an end-to-end trainable framework where
multiple alignments can work collaboratively in a coarse-toﬁne manner. In two domain adaptation tasks: synthetic-toreal (SIM10K → Cityscapes) and normal-to-foggy weather
(Cityscapes → Foggy Cityscapes), iFAN outperforms the
state-of-the-art methods with a boost of 10%+ AP over the
source-only baseline.

Recently, many efforts have been devoted into developing
cross-domain models with unsupervised domain adaption.
Existing approaches mainly focus on aligning deep features
directly between source domain and target domain. In the
context of object detection, the alignment is usually achieved
by domain-adversarial training (Ganin and Lempitsky 2015;
Tzeng et al. 2017) at different stages of object detectors.
For example, based on a Faster R-CNN framework (Ren
et al. 2015), (Chen et al. 2018) aligned the feature maps
in backbone with an image-level adaptation module; then
aligned the ROI-pooled features before feeding them into
the ﬁnal classiﬁer and box regressor. (Saito et al. 2019)
strongly aligned patch distributions of the low-level features
(e.g. conv3 layer) to enhance local consistence and weakly
aligned the global image-level features before RPN.
We follow this line of research to develop multi-level
domain alignments for cross-domain object detection, as
shown in Figure 1. Unlike previous approaches that merely
concern image-level alignment at a single convolutional
layer (e.g. (Wang et al. 2019a; Chen et al. 2018)), we design hierarchically-nested domain discriminators to reduce
domain discrepancies in accordance with various characteristics in the network hierarchies (Figure 1a); meanwhile
the instance-level features are carefully aligned, making use
of the ROI-level representations. Notice that the traditional
instance-level alignments, such as (Chen et al. 2018), attempt to learn domain-invariant features without fully exploring the semantic category-level information. This inevitably leads to a performance drop due to the misalignment of objects within the same category. To address this
problem, we develop a category-aware instance-level adaptation by leveraging object classiﬁcation results of the detector (Figure 1b). Finally, we propose a novel category-

Introduction
Training neural networks on one domain that generalizes
well on another domain can signiﬁcantly reduce the cost
for human labeling, making domain adaptation a hot research topic. Researchers have studied the effectiveness of
domain adaptation in various tasks, including image classiﬁcation (Kumar et al. 2018; Saito, Ushiku, and Harada 2017;
Shu et al. 2018; Long et al. 2018; 2017), object detection
(Chen et al. 2018; Saito et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2019a;
RoyChowdhury et al. 2019; Cai et al. 2019; Zhu et al. 2019)
and semantic segmentation (Wu et al. 2018; Zhang, David,
and Gong 2017; Hoffman et al. 2018). In this paper, we aim
∗

Corresponding author: whuang@malong.com
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13122

