The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Universal-RCNN: Universal Object Detector via Transferable Graph R-CNN
∗

∗

Hang Xu,1 Linpu Fang,2 Xiaodan Liang,3†
Wenxiong Kang,2 Zhenguo Li1
1

2

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
South China University of Technology
3
Sun Yat-Sen University

Examples of Different Datasets

Abstract

Graph Transfer and Reasoning
MSCOCO

table

cell_phone

TV

The dominant object detection approaches treat each dataset
separately and ﬁt towards a speciﬁc domain, which cannot
adapt to other domains without extensive retraining. In this
paper, we address the problem of designing a universal object detection model that exploits diverse category granularity from multiple domains and predict all kinds of categories
in one system. Existing works treat this problem by integrating multiple detection branches upon one shared backbone
network. However, this paradigm overlooks the crucial semantic correlations between multiple domains, such as categories hierarchy, visual similarity, and linguistic relationship. To address these drawbacks, we present a novel universal object detector called Universal-RCNN that incorporates graph transfer learning for propagating relevant semantic information across multiple datasets to reach semantic
coherency. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst generate a global semantic
pool by integrating all high-level semantic representation of
all the categories. Then an Intra-Domain Reasoning Module
learns and propagates the sparse graph representation within
one dataset guided by a spatial-aware GCN. Finally, an InterDomain Transfer Module is proposed to exploit diverse transfer dependencies across all domains and enhance the regional
feature representation by attending and transferring semantic
contexts globally. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the
proposed method signiﬁcantly outperforms multiple-branch
models and achieves the state-of-the-art results on multiple
object detection benchmarks (mAP: 49.1% on COCO).

person

cell_phone
tv

cell_phone
cord

cellphone

person

sleeve
hand
mouse

mouse

keyboard

keyboard

hair

Visual Genome
table

woman
head
sleeve

monitor

man
keyboard

laptop

cord
mouse

hair

hand

hair

table

hand
shirt

sleeve

Unannotated VG Domain Objects

Intra-Domain Connections

cord

Inter-Domain Connections

Figure 1: To identify objects in the upper image from
COCO, we could use graph transfer and reasoning across
COCO and Visual Genome (VG) (bottom): 1) Objects like
“TV”, and “keyboard” in the upper image could help to identify “mouse” and “person”, which requires reasoning and
this inspires our Intra-Domain Reasoning Module (blue). 2)
Although “table”, “hand”, and “cord” are not annotated in
the COCO image but present in VG, recognition of them
could help to recognize “mouse”, “keyboard”, which motivates us the Inter-Domain Transfer Module (green to blue).

categories) and BDD (Yu et al. 2018) (10 categories). Those
highly-tuned networks have sacriﬁced the generalization capability and only ﬁt towards each dataset domain. It is impossible to directly adapt the model trained on one dataset to
another related task, and thus requires new data annotations
and additional computation to train each speciﬁc model. In
contrast, human is capable of identifying all kinds of objects
precisely under complex circumstances and reaches a holistic recognition across different domains. This may be due
to the remarkable reasoning and transferring ability about
the relationship, visual similarity and categories hierarchy
across scenes. This inspires us to explore how to endow
the current detection system the ability of incorporating and
transferring relevant semantic information across multiple
domains in an effective way, in order to mimic human recognition procedure.
With different categories and granularity across domains,
transferring relevant information and reasoning among objects can help to make a correct identiﬁcation. An example

Introduction
Object detection is a fundamental vision task that recognizes
object’s location and category in an image. Modern object
detectors widely beneﬁts autonomous vehicles, surveillance
camera, mobile phone, to name a few. According to the individual application, datasets annotated with different categories were created to train a highly-speciﬁc and distinct
detector e.g. PASCAL VOC (Everingham et al. 2010) (20
categories), MSCOCO (Lin et al. 2014) (80 categories) , Visual Genome (VG) (Krishna et al. 2016) (more than 33K
∗

Both authors contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding Author: xdliang328@gmail.com
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

12492

