The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

MAPF Scenario: Software for Evaluating MAPF Plans on Real Robots
Roman Barták, Jiřı́ Švancara, Ivan Krasičenko
Charles University, Faculty of Mathematics and Physics
Malostranské nám. 25, Praha, Czech Republic
bartak@ktiml.mff.cuni.cz

still that all agents are perfectly synchronized. The experimental study, where the MAPF plans obtained from different abstract models were executed on real robots, showed
big discrepancies between expected and real performance
of agents (Barták et al. 2019). This makes research on how
to run abstract MAPF plans on real robots highly important
speciﬁcally because of practical applications such as automated warehousing that work with physical agents (robots).

Abstract
Multi-Agent Path Finding (MAPF) deals with ﬁnding collision free paths for a set of agents (robots) moving on a graph.
The interest in MAPF in the research community started to
increase recently partly due to practical applications in areas
such as warehousing and computer games. However, the academic community focuses mostly on solving the abstract version of the problem (moving of agents on the graph) with only
a few results on real robots. The presented software MAPF
Scenario provides a tool for specifying MAPF problems on
grid maps, solving the problems using various abstractions
(for example, assuming rotation actions or not), simulating
execution of plans, and translating the abstract plans to control programs for small robots Ozobots. The tool is intended
as a research platform for evaluating abstract MAPF plans
on real robots and as an educational and demonstration tool
bridging the areas of artiﬁcial intelligence and robotics.

MAPF Scenario
MAPF Scenario is a software developed for evaluating
MAPF plans on real robots. Technically, it is a Java application so it runs on various computer platforms. MAPF Scenario is an integrated environment, where the user can handle MAPF problems from their speciﬁcation, through their
solving, until the execution of plans on robots. The system
works with grid maps (typically used in MAPF), the user can
specify their dimensions and deﬁne obstacles by removing
edges and vertices. Then, initial and goal locations of agents
(robots) are selected on the map. For solving MAPF problems, MAPF Scenario uses a compilation-based approach,
where various models are implemented in the Picat programming language (Barták et al. 2017). The system automatically transforms visually-deﬁned problem instances to input for the Picat solver. The user just selects one of the predeﬁned Picat models and the built-in solver generates a plan.
The architecture also supports adding own models so users
may experiment with other abstractions of MAPF. The obtained plan can then be visualized as a classical Gantt chart
and execution of the plan can be shown in simulation on a
computer screen. The ﬁnal step is generating control programs for real robots. MAPF Scenario is designed to work
with Ozobot Evo, small educational robots, and the control
programs are encoded in the Ozoblockly language (Evollve, Inc. 2018). The programs are then uploaded to individual robots so the generated plans can be executed and tested
on real robots. The grid maps, on which the robots run, can
be either printed from the application or they can be displayed on a computer screen. The robots can then move on
the printed map or on the displayed map. The maps, problem
instances, and plans can be saved for future usage. Figure 1
shows the integrated user interface of MAPF Scenario.

Introduction to Multi-Agent Path Finding
Multi-Agent Path Finding is the problem of navigating a set
of agents in a shared environment represented as a graph in
such a way that the agents do not collide with each other. The
deﬁnition of a collision varies based on the environment and
the agents. The most widely used are vertex collisions – no
two agents can be at the same vertex at the same time – and
swapping collisions – agents cannot swap their positions using the same edge. Other variants of MAPF exist, but MAPF
is still seen as a special kind of a planning problem, where
each agent can either move to a neighbouring node or wait
in the current node (Stern et al. 2019).
Most of current MAPF models deal with abstraction of
the real problem that does not take into account execution
on real robots. There are only a few notable exceptions, for
example, models that assume large agents (typically each
agent occupies one node of the graph) (Li et al. 2019)
and models with any-angle paths (typically, agents move to
neighboring nodes only) (Yakovlev and Andreychuk 2017)
and continuous time (typically, actions have uniform duration) (Andreychuk et al. 2019). The major assumption is
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13602

