The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Adaptive Factorization Network: Learning Adaptive-Order Feature Interactions
Weiyu Cheng, Yanyan Shen,∗ Linpeng Huang
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{weiyu cheng, shenyy, lphuang}@sjtu.edu.cn

volving higher-order feature combinations were also introduced in the original work (Rendle 2010).
Despite the superior predictive power, there remain two
critical questions in FMs/HOFMs to be answered. First,
what is the maximum order of cross features we should consider? While a larger order enables the modeling of more
complex feature interactions and seems to be beneﬁcial, the
number of cross features can increase exponentially with the
value of the maximum order, resulting in high computational
complexity. Some recent works (Blondel et al. 2016) focus
on reducing the time complexity of training HOFMs. However, due to the large model size, the time cost of model
training and prediction is still high for a large maximum order, which limits the practical usage of higher-order cross
features.
Second, what is the set of useful cross features under the
maximum order? It is important to recognize that not all
the features contain useful signals for estimating the target,
and different cross features usually have different predictive
power. Interactions among irrelevant features can be considered as noises, which have no contribution to the prediction
or even degrade model performance. To deal with this problem, Xiao et al. (2017) proposed Attentional Factorization
Machines (AFM) to distinguish the importance of factorized
interactions by reweighing each cross feature with an attention score (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015). The inﬂuence
of useless cross features can be compromised by assigning
lower weights. Nevertheless, applying the attention mechanism over complex feature combinations increases the computational cost signiﬁcantly. As such, AFM aims at modeling second-order feature interactions only.
In this paper, we argue that existing factorization methods fail to answer the above two questions appropriately. In
general, they follow an enumerating-and-ﬁltering manner to
model feature interactions for prediction. The typical procedure is to predeﬁne the maximum order, enumerate all the
cross features within the maximum order, and then ﬁlter irrelevant cross features via training. This procedure consists
of two major drawbacks. First, predeﬁning a maximum order (which is typically small) restricts model’s potential in
ﬁnding discriminative cross features, because of the tradeoff between expressive higher-order cross features and com-

Abstract
Various factorization-based methods have been proposed to
leverage second-order, or higher-order cross features for
boosting the performance of predictive models. They generally enumerate all the cross features under a predeﬁned
maximum order, and then identify useful feature interactions
through model training, which suffer from two drawbacks.
First, they have to make a trade-off between the expressiveness of higher-order cross features and the computational
cost, resulting in suboptimal predictions. Second, enumerating all the cross features, including irrelevant ones, may introduce noisy feature combinations that degrade model performance. In this work, we propose the Adaptive Factorization
Network (AFN), a new model that learns arbitrary-order cross
features adaptively from data. The core of AFN is a logarithmic transformation layer that converts the power of each feature in a feature combination into the coefﬁcient to be learned.
The experimental results on four real datasets demonstrate the
superior predictive performance of AFN against the state-ofthe-arts.

1

Introduction

Feature engineering is typically recognized as central to successful machine learning tasks, such as recommender systems (Lian et al. 2017), computational advertising (He et al.
2014) and search ranking (Lian and Xie 2016). Except for
exploiting raw features, it is usually crucial to ﬁnd effective
transformations of raw features to boost the performance of
predictive models. Cross features are a major type of feature transformations, where multiplication is performed over
sparse raw features to form new features (Cheng et al. 2016).
However, handcrafting useful cross features is inevitably
expensive and time-consuming, and the results may not
generalize to unseen feature interactions. In order to solve
this problem, Factorization Machines (FMs) (Rendle 2010;
2012) are proposed to explicitly model second-order cross
features by parameterizing the weight of a cross feature as
the inner product of the embedding vectors of the raw features. To be more general, higher-order FMs (HOFMs) in∗

Corresponding Author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3609

