The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

AWR: Adaptive Weighting Regression for 3D Hand Pose Estimation
Weiting Huang,1,2∗ Pengfei Ren,1,2∗ Jingyu Wang,1,2† Qi Qi,1,2† Haifeng Sun1,2†
1

State Key Laboratory of Networking and Switching Technology,
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, P.R. China
2
EBUPT Information Technology Co., Ltd., Beijing 100191, P.R. China
{huangweiting, renpengfei, wangjingyu, qiqi, sunhaifeng}@ebupt.com

Abstract
In this paper, we propose an adaptive weighting regression
(AWR) method to leverage the advantages of both detectionbased and regression-based method. Hand joint coordinates
are estimated as discrete integration of all pixels in dense representation, guided by adaptive weight maps. This learnable
aggregation process introduces both dense and joint supervision that allows end-to-end training and brings adaptability to weight maps, making network more accurate and robust. Comprehensive exploration experiments are conducted
to validate the effectiveness and generality of AWR under various experimental settings, especially its usefulness for different types of dense representation and input modality. Our
method outperforms other state-of-the-art methods on four
publicly available datasets, including NYU, ICVL, MSRA
and HANDS 2017 dataset.

1

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: Weight maps produced during aggregation for
(a) standard detection-based methods and (b) our method,
followed by their estimation results and (c) corresponding
ground truth labels under situations where the target joint
(index ﬁngertip) is visible (top row) or occluded (middle
row) and when there exists self-similarity among ﬁngers
(bottom row). Figure is best viewed in color.

Introduction

Accurate and robust 3D hand pose estimation is crucial in
applications of human-computer interaction, such as virtual
reality and augmented reality. The accuracy and speed have
improved signiﬁcantly in recent years thanks to the emergence of deep cameras and deep learning. However, it is
still challenging to achieve accurate and robust results due
to the low quality of depth images, extreme viewpoints, severe self-occlusion and self-similarity among ﬁngers.
Recently, deep neural network based methods have shown
great performance in 3D hand pose estimation (Tompson et
al. 2014; Ge, Ren, and Yuan 2018; Ren et al. 2019; Wang et
al. 2018; Chen et al. 2018a; Moon, Chang, and Lee 2018b;
Wan et al. 2018; Xiong et al. 2019; Zhang and Zhang 2019;
Ge et al. 2017). These works can be divided into two categories according to networks’ output type — regressionbased methods and detection-based methods. Regressionbased methods directly map input depth images to 3D hand
pose parameters or hand joint coordinates. They allow different regions on feature maps to be weighted in the fully

connected layers to regress joint coordinates. Thus it captures global constraints among hand joints and performs
better in extreme viewpoints where severe occlusion occurs
(Yuan et al. 2018). However, fully connected layers ﬂatten
the feature map and destroy the spatial structure in it, making it hard to learn the highly non-linear mapping from image space to joint space.
Detection-based methods instead generate dense estimations such as heatmaps(Li and Lee 2019; Xiao, Wu, and
Wei 2018) or offset vector ﬁelds(Wan et al. 2018; Ren et
al. 2019), then the joint coordinates are inferred through a
non-learnable information aggregation process such as the
taking argmax operation or mean-shift estimation, guided
by weight maps. The fully convolutional network architecture keeps the spatial structure of extracted feature maps and
better exploits local evidence in depth images. However, the
information aggregation is treated as post processing and
separated from network training, posing gaps between training and inferencing. Besides, detection-based methods force

∗
The authors have equal contribution to the work and are listed
in alphabetical order.
†
Corresponding authors.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11061

