The Tenth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (EAAI-20)

Multiple Data Augmentation Strategies for
Improving Performance on Automatic Short Answer Scoring
Jiaqi Lun,1 Jia Zhu,1,3,∗ Yong Tang,1 Min Yang2
2

1
School of Computer, South China Normal University, Guangzhou, China
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Guangzhou Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Education
{jiaqilun, jzhu, ytang}@m.scnu.edu.cn, min.yang@siat.ac.cn

In general, traditional methods and neural network methods are employed in the ASAS task. Traditional methods
are driven by handcrafted features, such as lexical similarity
features (Dzikovska, Nielsen, and Brew 2012), clear criteria (Siddiqi, Harrison, and Siddiqi 2010), and graph alignment features (Mohler, Bunescu, and Mihalcea 2011). Neural network methods are driven by the rapid development of
deep learning techniques (Mueller and Thyagarajan 2016;
Zhao et al. 2017). Recently, Saha et al. (Saha et al. 2019)
have used InferSent (Conneau et al. 2017) and neural domain adaptation to obtain state-of-art results in the ASAS
task. Deep learning has proven to be effective in long text
NLP tasks. Due to the lack of information in the short sentence of the ASAS corpus, it seems not good enough in the
ASAS task. The urge to obtain more information is the key
to the current problem.

Abstract
Automatic short answer scoring (ASAS) is a research subject of intelligent education, which is a hot ﬁeld of natural
language understanding. Many experiments have conﬁrmed
that the ASAS system is not good enough, because its performance is limited by the training data. Focusing on the problem, we propose MDA-ASAS, multiple data augmentation
strategies for improving performance on automatic short
answer scoring. MDA-ASAS is designed to learn language
representation enhanced by data augmentation strategies,
which includes back-translation, correct answer as reference
answer, and swap content. We argue that external knowledge has a profound impact on the ASAS process. Meanwhile, the Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT) model has been shown to be effective for
improving many natural language processing tasks, which
acquires more semantic, grammatical and other features in
large amounts of unsupervised data, and actually adds external knowledge. Combining with the latest BERT model, our
experimental results on the ASAS dataset show that MDAASAS brings a signiﬁcant gain over state-of-art. We also perform extensive ablation studies and suggest parameters for
practical use.

In fact, data augmentation is very popular in the research
areas of vision (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012)
and speech (Ko et al. 2015). However, it is rarely applied
in the NLP task. In the past three years, many scholars have
explored some methods to augment data, which have also
proven to be effective in the ASAS task. General methods of
text data augmentation are to replace words with their synonyms selected from a handcrafted ontology such as WordNet (Zhang, Zhao, and LeCun 2015) or word similarity calculation (Wang and Yang 2015). However, these methods
are done at the word level, which is easy to lose the semantic information of the entire sentence.

Introduction
In recent years, the number of online educational applications has been growing rapidly, consisting of intelligent tutoring systems, e-learning environments, distance education,
and massive open online courses. Automatically scoring
short student answers is important for building intelligent tutoring systems. In general, computer-aided assessment systems are particularly useful because scoring by humans can
become monotonous and tedious (Kumar et al. 2017). Automatic scoring systems can help teachers save lots of time
from duplication of marking student’s homework. Formally,
the problem of automatic scoring short answer is deﬁned as
scoring the question in the context of the student answer and
its reference answer. Table 1 shows an example of a short
answer scoring task.

In this paper, we propose MDA-ASAS, multiple data
augmentation strategies for improving performance on automatic short answer scoring. It is designed to learn language representation enhanced by data augmentation strategies, which includes three data augmentation strategies. In
the ﬁrst strategy, we propose back-translation to augment
the ASAS training data. The second strategy, we hypothesize that the student answers which received correct scores
by the teacher are equivalent to teacher-provided reference
answers. The third strategy, we propose a swapping content method between original data and twin data to achieve
the best performance of data augmentation. Meanwhile, the
BERT (Devlin et al. 2018) model has achieved excellent
results in question-answer and natural language inference.

∗

Corresponding author is Jia Zhu.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13446

