The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Achieving Fairness in the Stochastic Multi-Armed Bandit Problem
Vishakha Patil, Ganesh Ghalme, Vineet Nair, Y. Narahari
Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, India
{patilv, ganeshg, vineet, narahari}@iisc.ac.in

receives a reward drawn from the corresponding (a priori
unknown) distribution1 . The goal of the decision maker is
to maximize the cumulative reward in expectation accrued
through a sequence of arm pulls, i.e. if the process repeats
for T rounds then in each round the decision maker selects
an arm with the objective of maximizing the total expected
reward2 .

Abstract
We study an interesting variant of the stochastic multi-armed
bandit problem, which we call the FAIR -MAB problem,
where, in addition to the objective of maximizing the sum of
expected rewards, the algorithm also needs to ensure that at
any time, each arm is pulled at least a pre-speciﬁed fraction
of times. We investigate the interplay between learning and
fairness in terms of a pre-speciﬁed vector denoting the fractions of guaranteed pulls. We deﬁne a fairness-aware regret,
which we call r-Regret, that takes into account the above fairness constraints and extends the conventional notion of regret
in a natural way. Our primary contribution is to obtain a complete characterization of a class of FAIR -MAB algorithms via
two parameters: the unfairness tolerance and the learning algorithm used as a black-box. For this class of algorithms, we
provide a fairness guarantee that holds uniformly over time,
irrespective of the choice of the learning algorithm. Further,
when the learning algorithm is UCB1, we show that our algorithm achieves constant r-Regret for a large enough time
horizon. Finally, we analyze the cost of fairness in terms of
the conventional notion of regret. We conclude by experimentally validating our theoretical results.

1

Several variations of the MAB problem have been extensively studied in the literature. Various papers study MAB
problems with additional constraints which include bandits
with knapsack constraints (Badanidiyuru, Kleinberg, and
Slivkins 2013), bandits with budget constraints (Xia et al.
2015), sleeping bandits (Kleinberg, Niculescu-Mizil, and
Sharma 2010; Chatterjee et al. 2017), etc. In this paper we
consider FAIR -MAB, a variant of the MAB problem where,
in addition to maximizing the cumulative expected reward,
the algorithm also needs to ensure that uniformly (i.e., at
the end of every round) each arm is pulled at least a prespeciﬁed fraction of times. This imposes an additional constraint on the algorithm which we refer to as a fairness constraint, speciﬁed in terms of a vector r ∈ Rk .
Formally, each component ri of the given vector r speciﬁes a fairness-quota for arm i and the online algorithm must
ensure that for all time steps t (i.e. uniformly), each arm i
is pulled at least ri · t times in t rounds. The goal of the
online algorithm is to minimize expected regret while satisfying the fairness requirement of each arm. The expected
regret in this setting, which we call r-Regret, is computed
with respect to the optimal fair policy (see Deﬁnition 4).
We note that the difﬁculty of this problem is in satisfying
these fairness constraints at the end of every round, which
in particular ensures fairness even when the time horizon is
unknown to the algorithm beforehand. It is relevant to note
that the current work contributes to the long line of work
in constrained variants of the MAB problem (Badanidiyuru,
Kleinberg, and Slivkins 2013; Kleinberg, Niculescu-Mizil,
and Sharma 2010; Xia et al. 2015).

Introduction

The multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem is a classic framework for sequential decision-making in uncertain environments. Starting with the seminal work of Robbins (1952),
over the years, a signiﬁcant body of work has been developed to address both theoretical aspects and practical applications of this problem; see (Bubeck and Cesa-Bianchi
2012; Lattimore and Szepesvári 2018; Slivkins 2019) for
textbook expositions of the MAB problem. Indeed, the
study of the MAB problem and its numerous variants continues to be a central pursuit in multiple ﬁelds such as online
learning and reinforcement learning. In the MAB setup, at
every round a decision maker (an online algorithm) is faced
with k choices, which correspond to unknown (to the algorithm) reward distributions. Each choice is referred to as an
arm and when the decision maker pulls a speciﬁc arm she

1

The arms which are not pulled do not give any reward.
We study the standard setup in which T is not known upfront
to the online algorithm.
2

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5379

