The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

MaskGEC: Improving Neural
Grammatical Error Correction via Dynamic Masking
Zewei Zhao, Houfeng Wang
MOE Key Lab of Computational Linguistics, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, China
{zhaozewei, wanghf}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Grammatical error correction (GEC) is a promising natural language processing (NLP) application, whose goal is to
change the sentences with grammatical errors into the correct
ones. Neural machine translation (NMT) approaches have
been widely applied to this translation-like task. However,
such methods need a fairly large parallel corpus of errorannotated sentence pairs, which is not easy to get especially
in the ﬁeld of Chinese grammatical error correction. In this
paper, we propose a simple yet effective method to improve
the NMT-based GEC models by dynamic masking. By adding
random masks to the original source sentences dynamically
in the training procedure, more diverse instances of errorcorrected sentence pairs are generated to enhance the generalization ability of the grammatical error correction model
without additional data. The experiments on NLPCC 2018
Task 2 show that our MaskGEC model improves the performance of the neural GEC models. Besides, our single model
for Chinese GEC outperforms the current state-of-the-art ensemble system in NLPCC 2018 Task 2 without any extra
knowledge.

Figure 1: An example of error-corrected sentence pairs and
the generated noisy sentence pairs during the whole training
time. The placeholder ’@’ denotes any possible word that is
chosen as a replacement.

Introduction
Grammatical error correction (GEC) has attracted much interest as a natural language processing (NLP) application in
recent years. The deﬁnition of the grammatical error correction task is: given a sentence which may contain grammatical errors, one is required to detect and correct the errors
presented in the sentence, and return its error-free natural
language representation. Regarding the incorrect sentences
as source language and the corrected sentences as target language, the GEC task can be treated as a machine translation
(MT) task. For example, English GEC can be converted to
the translation from “bad” English to “good” English.
With the rapid development of deep learning, neural machine translation (NMT) approaches based on sequenceto-sequence (seq2seq) models have become mainstream
in the ﬁeld of machine translation. Recently, quite a few
works (Yuan and Briscoe 2016; Ji et al. 2017; Chollampatt
and Ng 2018) have applied the neural seq2seq models to
the grammatical error correction tasks and have made some

progress. However, these NMT-based models for GEC face
a problem. Due to the limited size of the parallel corpus of
error-corrected sentence pairs, the seq2seq models for GEC,
which usually contain millions of parameters, are difﬁcult to
be trained sufﬁciently. Therefore, even if a test case sentence
is just slightly different from a training instance, the models
may fail to correct it.
In order to overcome the drawback of neural grammatical error correction models which is mentioned above, we
propose a simple yet effective dynamic masking method to
enhance the performance of neural GEC models.
In the training procedure, We add various kinds of random
noises to the inputs via masking to generate noisy source
sentences dynamically, but keep the target sentences unchanged. By pairing the new source sentences with the corresponding target sentences, we can obtain more abundant
error-corrected sentence pairs, as Figure 1 shows. For the
sake of convenience, we call the newly constructed errorcorrected sentence pairs through random noising noisy sentence pairs. Rather than use the aforementioned noisy sen-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1226

