The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Balancing Quality and Human Involvement: An
Effective Approach to Interactive Neural Machine Translation
Tianxiang Zhao,1∗ Lemao Liu,2 Guoping Huang,2 Zhaopeng Tu,2 Huayang Li,2
Yingling Liu,3 Guiquan Liu,3 Shuming Shi2
1

Penn State University, 2 Tencent AI Lab
University of Science and Technology of China
tkz5084@psu.edu, {gqliu, ylliu22}@ustc.edu.cn
{redmondliu, donkeyhuang, zptu, alanili, shumingshi}@tencent.com
3

time the user validates all words in a preﬁx and corrects one
of them, and then the machine generates new words based on
the corrected preﬁx until the translation process is ﬁnished.

Abstract
Conventional interactive machine translation typically requires a human translator to validate every generated target
word, even though most of them are correct in the advanced
neural machine translation (NMT) scenario. Previous studies
have exploited conﬁdence approaches to address the intensive human involvement issue, which request human guidance only for a few number of words with low conﬁdences.
However, such approaches do not take the history of human
involvement into account, and optimize the models only for
the translation quality while ignoring the cost of human involvement. In response to these pitfalls, we propose a novel
interactive NMT model, which explicitly accounts the history
of human involvements and particularly is optimized towards
two objectives corresponding to the translation quality and
the cost of human involvement, respectively. Speciﬁcally, the
model jointly predicts a target word and a decision on whether
to request human guidance, which is based on both the partial translation and the history of human involvements. Since
there is no explicit signals on the decisions of requesting human guidance in the bilingual corpus, we optimize the model
with the reinforcement learning technique which enables our
model to accurately predict when to request human guidance.
Simulated and real experiments show that the proposed model
can achieve higher translation quality with similar or less human involvement over the conﬁdence-based baseline.

Despite its appealing performance, the user has to validate all words generated by a machine although most of
them are actually correct, leading to considerable human involvement (Uefﬁng and Ney 2005). Many efforts (GonzálezRubio, Ortiz-Martı́nez, and Casacuberta 2010b; Cheng et
al. 2016; Knowles and Koehn 2018) thereby have been
made to reduce human involvement based on the notion of
conﬁdence estimation (Blatz et al. 2004; González-Rubio,
Ortiz-Martı́nez, and Casacuberta 2010a; Lam, Kreutzer, and
Riezler 2018). They query for human guidance for few of
those words with low conﬁdences so that prevent manually validating other words with high conﬁdences. However, in these conﬁdence based approaches, the conﬁdence
model is either an external classiﬁer (Uefﬁng and Ney 2005;
Cheng et al. 2016) or inherited from the standard translation
models (Knowles and Koehn 2018) and they do not take the
human guidance into account at all. Moreover, their learning objectives for both the conﬁdence and translation models
completely ignore human guidance. As a result, their performance could be limited, failing to catch the long-term inﬂuence of human involvement.
In this paper, we propose a novel interactive machine
translation to jointly predict a word and a decision on when
to request human guidance, which not only reduces human
involvement but also generates excellent translations. We
cast the query action as a special token in the output dictionary. At each time, the proposed NMT model predicts
either a target word or the special token which indicates a
request for the correct word from human. Furthermore, our
NMT model is trained towards two objectives, i.e., improving translation quality and reducing human involvement required. Since there is no explicit signals on the decisions
of requesting human guidance in the bilingual corpus, we
employ the reinforcement learning (RL) technique to optimize the joint model which is able to predict when to request human guidance. Unfortunately, the reward includes
two objectives which are somehow contradictory with each
other: a higher translation quality often requires more human
guidance, the standard RL learning algorithm (Bahdanau et

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed a breakthrough in neural machine translation (NMT) (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015;
Vaswani et al. 2017), but its translation quality is still incapable of satisfying the requirements in many industrial
applications. Interactive machine translation (IMT) (Foster,
Isabelle, and Plamondon 1997; Langlais, Foster, and Lapalme 2000), where human and machines collaborate to
translate in a joint strategy, has thereby drawn much research attention (Green et al. 2014; Wuebker et al. 2016;
Knowles and Koehn 2016; Peris, Domingo, and Casacuberta
2017). In the conventional IMT, a user and machine collaboratively generate the translation from left-to-right: at each
∗
This work was mainly done when Tianxiang Zhao was an intern at Tencent AI Lab. Lemao Liu is the corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9660

