The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Beyond Trees: Analysis and Convergence of
Belief Propagation in Graphs with Multiple Cycles
Roie Zivan, Omer Lev, Rotem Galiki
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
Beer-Sheva, Israel
{zivanr, omerlev, rosha}@bgu.ac.il

will incur for assigning each of their possible value assignments to their variable.
Max-sum is a version of belief propagation that is used
for solving distributed constraint optimization problems
(DCOPs). It has drawn considerable attention in recent
years, including being proposed for multi-agent applications
such as sensor systems (Teacy et al. 2008; Stranders et al.
2009) and task allocation for rescue teams in disaster areas
(Ramchurn et al. 2010). For convenience of presentation, we
will focus on this version of belief propagation. However, all
results that we present here apply in general to other versions
of belief propagation as well.
Belief propagation is known to converge to the optimal
solution when solving problems, which are represented by
an acyclic graph. On problems represented by graphs that
include cycles, the beliefs may fail to converge, and the resulting assignments that are considered optimal under those
beliefs may be of low quality (Yanover, Meltzer, and Weiss
2006; Farinelli et al. 2008b; Zivan et al. 2017). This occurs
because cyclic information propagation leads to inaccurate
and inconsistent information being computed by the agents
(Pearl 1988).
To decrease the effect of cyclic information propagation
in belief propagation, the method of damping has been suggested, which balances the weight of the new calculation
performed in each iteration and the weight of calculations
performed in previous iterations. As a result, it increases the
probability for convergence (Lazic, Frey, and Aarabi 2010;
Som and Chockalingam 2010; Tarlow et al. 2011; Pretti
2005). Recently, splitting nodes in the factor graph on which
belief propagation operates has been shown to be an effective method for triggering convergence of the algorithm,
when combined with damping (Ruozzi and Tatikonda 2013;
Cohen and Zivan 2018).
On graphs with a single cycle, it is known that belief
propagation is not guaranteed to converge. However, when
it does converge, the result is the optimal solution (Weiss
2000; Forney et al. 2001). Moreover, the conditions for convergence of belief propagation on a single cycle, are known:
Forney et al. (2001) show the resemblance between the operation of the algorithm on a single cyclic graph and a chain
of assignments (a route), which incurs costs with respect to

Abstract
Belief propagation, an algorithm for solving problems represented by graphical models, has long been known to converge to the optimal solution when the graph is a tree. When
the graph representing the problem includes a single cycle,
the algorithm either converges to the optimal solution or performs periodic oscillations. While the conditions that trigger
these two behaviors have been established, the question regarding the convergence and divergence of the algorithm on
graphs that include more than one cycle is still open.
Focusing on Max-sum, the version of belief propagation
for solving distributed constraint optimization problems
(DCOPs), we extend the theory on the behavior of belief
propagation in general – and Max-sum speciﬁcally – when
solving problems represented by graphs with multiple cycles.
This includes: 1) Generalizing the results obtained for graphs
with a single cycle to graphs with multiple cycles, by using
backtrack cost trees (BCT). 2) Proving that when the algorithm is applied to adjacent symmetric cycles, the use of a
large enough damping factor guarantees convergence to the
optimal solution.

Introduction
The belief propagation algorithm (Pearl 1988; Yanover,
Meltzer, and Weiss 2006) is an incomplete inference (GDLbased) algorithm for solving problems that can be represented by graphical models. For example, constraint optimization (Dechter 2003), which is a general model for centralized and distributed problem solving, has a wide range
of applications in artiﬁcial intelligence and multi agent systems (Ramchurn et al. 2010; Farinelli, Rogers, and Jennings
2014). In belief propagation, each node in the graph acts as
an agent within a distributed algorithm, i.e., in each iteration of the algorithm it receives messages from its neighboring nodes, performs computation and sends messages to its
neighbors. The agents maintain and propagate their beliefs
regarding the differences in the cost (or utility)1 , which they
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
In the rest of the paper we will assume, without loss of generality, that the problem is a minimization problem and therefore that
violating a constraint incurs a ﬁnite cost.
7333

