The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Optimal Common Contract with Heterogeneous Agents∗
Shenke Xiao,1 Zihe Wang,2 Mengjing Chen,1 Pingzhong Tang,1 Xiwang Yang3
1

Tsinghua University, 2 Shanghai University of Finance and Economics, 3 ByteDance
xsk15@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, wang.zihe@mail.shufe.edu.cn, ccchmj@qq.com,
kenshinping@gmail.com, yangxiwang@bytedance.com

deﬁned to be his bonus minus his efforts. The ﬁrm’s utility is
the revenue generated from selling products minus the bonus
paid to salesmen. The central question in this research ﬁeld
asks: What is the principal’s optimal contract?
Due to the wide application, principal-agent model has
been extensively studied (Holmstrom and Milgrom 1991;
1987; Chen et al. 2019; Grossman and Hart 1992; Bolton,
Dewatripont, and others 2005). The agent takes a hidden
action like effort which cannot be observed by the principal directly. The principal can only observe the outcome
of this action and the contract is designed to depend on
the outcome only. Most works focus on the problem with
one principal and one agent (Armstrong and Vickers 2010;
Kleinberg and Kleinberg 2018). When the agent takes different actions, there is a different distribution over principal’s
reward. Given the distribution information, the optimal contract can be computed efﬁciently through linear programs.
In this paper, we consider the problem when there is one
principal and multiple heterogeneous agents. These agents
could be good at different tasks and we do not assume any
relationship between the cost for different tasks among different agents. For sake of the fairness, we do not allow the
principal design personal contracts for different agents. Instead, the principal has to design a common contract that
applies to every agents. We assume the mapping from the
action played to the outcome is deterministic. So the principal
knows every agent’s action by observing her outcome. The
difﬁculty in our model stems from the multiple agents. Since
the principal can only use a common contract, he needs to
balance the incentivization for every agent.

Abstract
We consider the principal-agent problem with heterogeneous
agents. Previous works assume that the principal signs independent incentive contracts with every agent to make them
invest more efforts on the tasks. However, in many circumstances, these contracts need to be identical for the sake of
fairness. We investigate the optimal common contract problem.
To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst attempt to consider this natural and important generalization. We ﬁrst show this problem
is NP-complete. Then we provide a dynamic programming
algorithm to compute the optimal contract in O(n2 m) time,
where n, m are the number of agents and actions, under the
assumption that the agents’ cost functions obey increasing
difference property. At last, we generalize the setting such
that each agent can choose to directly produce a reward in
[0, 1]. We provide an O(log n)-approximate algorithm for this
generalization.

Introduction
Principal-agent theory is a subﬁeld of mechanism design
theory. The principal hires an agent to accomplish a task.
The agent is able to take actions on behalf of the principal.
Agent’s different actions lead to different rewards the principal receives. Moral hazard occurs when the agent acts in
his own interest which may be in conﬂict with the principal’s
interest. Therefore the principal designs an incentive contract
with the agent to maximize the principal’s utility subject to
the agent’s utility being maximized. The contract is a transfer
function from the principal to the agent which could depend
on the outcome which is affected by the agent’s action.
Many economic interactions ﬁt in the principal-agent
model. For example, a ﬁrm (principal) hires a salesman
(agent) to sell products. The salesman invests effort on selling
products. More efforts he invests, more products will be sold.
To incentivize salesman invest more efforts, the ﬁrm can set
a bonus depending on the amount of products a salesman
has sold. A salesman wants to maximize his utility which is

Our Contribution
Our contribution can be summarized as follows.
1. We ﬁrst show that the optimal contract problem with heterogeneous agents is strongly NP-complete.
2. We then propose an O(n2 m) dynamic programming algorithm, where n is the number of agents and m is the
number of actions, to compute an optimal contract under the assumption that the agents’ costs obey increasing
differences.

∗

This work is supported by Science and Technology Innovation
2030 –“New Generation Artiﬁcial Intelligence” Major Project No.
(2018AAA0100904), Beijing Academy of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
(BAAI), the Shanghai Sailing Program (Grant No. 18YF1407900),
and the National NSFC (Grant No. 61806121).
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3. Next, we generalize the discrete-action setting such that
each agent can choose to directly produce a reward in
[0, 1]. We show that this generalization is harder than the
7309

