The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Relational Graph Neural Network with
Hierarchical Attention for Knowledge Graph Completion
Zhao Zhang,1,2 Fuzhen Zhuang,1,2,∗ Hengshu Zhu,3 Zhiping Shi,4 Hui Xiong,3,5 Qing He1,2
1

Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
3
Baidu Talent Intelligence Center, Baidu Inc., Beijing, China
4
Capital Normal University, Beijing 100048, China
5
Business Intelligence Lab, Baidu Inc., Beijing, China
{zhangzhao2017, zhuangfuzhen, heqing}@ict.ac.cn, zhuhengshu@baidu.com, shizp@cnu.edu.cn, xionghui@gmail.com
their coverage is still far from complete and comprehensive,
which motivates the research in knowledge graph completion (KGC), i.e., to predict the missing values in incomplete
knowledge triples. More formally, the goal of KGC is to predict either the head entity in a given query (?, r, t) or the tail
entity in a given query (h, r, ?).
In literature, state-of-the-art KGC models usually based
on knowledge graph embedding (Bordes et al. 2013;
Wang et al. 2014; Yang et al. 2015; Schlichtkrull et al.
2018). Speciﬁcally, these models ﬁrst learn the latent lowdimensional representations of entities and relations in the
KG, and then predict the missing values in incomplete
knowledge triples based on linear or neural network models
with corresponding representations. However, most of these
models treat the triples in KGs independently, and fail to pay
attention to the local neighborhood of an entity, which may
also contain plenty of valuable and inherent information.
In this paper, we aim to take full advantage of the local
neighborhood information of each entity for enhancing the
KGC task. Speciﬁcally, we treat the neighborhood of an entity as a hierarchical structure. Figure 1 shows an example
of an entity and its neighborhood. From the left part of Figure 1, it can be seen the central entity e1 is surrounded by
three neighboring relations r1 , r2 and r3 , and each relation
links e1 to one or more neighboring entities. We ﬁnd the local neighborhood of e1 can be viewed as a hierarchical structure, which is shown in the right part of Figure 1, where Nh,r
denotes the set of neighboring entities of entity h under relation r. The intuition underlying our model is that (i) not all
neighboring relations are equally relevant for representing
the central entity, and (ii) not all neighboring entities in each
Nh,r are equally important in indicating the central entity.
Under the above observation, here we propose a novel
neighborhood-aware model, named Relational Graph neural network with Hierarchical ATtention (RGHAT) for KGC.
In RGHAT, we design a novel hierarchical attention mechanism to compute different weights for different neighboring relations and entities. Speciﬁcally, inspired by that the
importance of different relations differ greatly in indicating an entity, RGHAT ﬁrst computes the weights for different neighboring relations, which is the ﬁrst-level attention. Next, RGHAT computes the attention scores for dif-

Abstract
The rapid proliferation of knowledge graphs (KGs) has
changed the paradigm for various AI-related applications.
Despite their large sizes, modern KGs are far from complete and comprehensive. This has motivated the research
in knowledge graph completion (KGC), which aims to infer missing values in incomplete knowledge triples. However,
most existing KGC models treat the triples in KGs independently without leveraging the inherent and valuable information from the local neighborhood surrounding an entity. To
this end, we propose a Relational Graph neural network with
Hierarchical ATtention (RGHAT) for the KGC task. The proposed model is equipped with a two-level attention mechanism: (i) the ﬁrst level is the relation-level attention, which is
inspired by the intuition that different relations have different
weights for indicating an entity; (ii) the second level is the
entity-level attention, which enables our model to highlight
the importance of different neighboring entities under the
same relation. The hierarchical attention mechanism makes
our model more effective to utilize the neighborhood information of an entity. Finally, we extensively validate the superiority of RGHAT against various state-of-the-art baselines.

Introduction
Nowadays, large-scale knowledge graphs (KGs) have become one of the most important resources for enhancing
AI-related applications, such as information retrieval (Dalton, Dietz, and Allan 2014), question answering (Ferrucci
et al. 2010), and information extraction (Mintz et al. 2009).
Indeed, KGs can be represented as multi-relational directed
graphs composed of entities as nodes and relations as edges.
The information of real-world entities and relations is modeled in the form of knowledge triples, which are denoted
as (h, r, t), where h and t correspond to the head and
tail entities and r denotes the relation between them, e.g.,
(Paris, capital of, France). Despite the success and popularity of modern KGs such as Freebase (Bollacker et al. 2008),
Yago (Suchanek, Kasneci, and Weikum 2007), Gene Ontology (Ashburner et al. 2000) and NELL (Carlson et al. 2010),
∗

Corresponding author: Fuzhen Zhuang
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9612

