The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Gated Convolutional Networks with Hybrid Connectivity for Image Classiﬁcation
Chuanguang Yang,1,2 Zhulin An,1∗ Hui Zhu,1,2 Xiaolong Hu,1,2
Kun Zhang,1,2 Kaiqiang Xu,1,2 Chao Li,1 Yongjun Xu1
1

Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{yangchuanguang, anzhulin, zhuhui, huxiaolong18g, zhangkun17g, xukaiqiang, lichao, xyj}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract

Hybrid Block

We propose a simple yet effective method to reduce the redundancy of DenseNet by substantially decreasing the number of stacked modules by replacing the original bottleneck
by our SMG module, which is augmented by local residual.
Furthermore, SMG module is equipped with an efﬁcient twostage pipeline, which aims to DenseNet-like architectures that
need to integrate all previous outputs, i.e., squeezing the incoming informative but redundant features gradually by hierarchical convolutions as a hourglass shape and then exciting it
by multi-kernel depthwise convolutions, the output of which
would be compact and hold more informative multi-scale features. We further develop a forget and an update gate by introducing the popular attention modules to implement the effective fusion instead of a simple addition between reused and
new features. Due to the Hybrid Connectivity (nested combination of global dense and local residual) and Gated mechanisms, we called our network as the HCGNet. Experimental
results on CIFAR and ImageNet datasets show that HCGNet
is more prominently efﬁcient than DenseNet, and can also
signiﬁcantly outperform state-of-the-art networks with less
complexity. Moreover, HCGNet also shows the remarkable
interpretability and robustness by network dissection and adversarial defense, respectively. On MS-COCO, HCGNet can
consistently learn better features than popular backbones.

Cell 1

Cell 2

Cell 1

Module 1

Cell 2

Module 2
Dense connectivity

Residual connectivity

Figure 1: The diagram of a hybrid block including n = 2
modules, where n ⩾ 2. The symbol ”+” and ”” denote element-wise addition and channel-wise concatenation
among multiple feature maps, respectively.

parameter sharing mechanism and thus leads to low redundancy, but lacks the capability of feature preservation and
exploration. To enjoy their advantages and avoid inherent
limitations, many networks combine them to build a more
effective aggregation topology, such as DPN (Chen et al.
2017), MixNet (Wang et al. 2018a) and AOGNet (Li, Song,
and Wu 2019). Different from them, we develop a hybrid
connectivity (Figure 1) with nested aggregation that facilitates feature ﬂow by dense connectivity for global channelwise concatenation of outputs produced by all precedent
modules (blue links in Figure 1) and residual connectivity
for local element-wise addition within the module (red links
in Figure 1).
Our main motivation for this pattern design originates
from reducing the redundancy of dense connectivity. As the
depth of network linearly increases, the number of skip connections and required parameters grow by a rate of O(n2 ),
where n denotes the number of stacked modules under dense
connectivity. Meanwhile, early superﬂuous features which
have few contributions are transferred quadratically to subsequent modules. So one simple method to reduce redundancy is to decrease the number of modules directly, but it
can attenuate the representational power of features and then
deteriorate the performance. Thus we develop a novel module by embedding the residual connectivity to assist feature
learning within the local module. Experimentally, the number of our proposed modules under dense connectivity can
be quite fewer than that of classical modules in the dense
block but without sacriﬁcing the performance.

Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are becoming
more and more efﬁcient in parameter and computation without sacriﬁcing the performance owing to novel architectures
design. ResNet (He et al. 2016) introduces the residual connectivity to implement the addition of the input and output
features for each micro-block. DenseNet (Huang et al. 2017)
holds the dense connectivity by changing skip connections
from addition to concatenation. Both of their feature aggregation connectivities can not only encourage feature reuse,
but also ease the training problems. For a detailed comparison, dense connectivity is more effect for feature exploitation and exploration but exists a certain redundancy, while
residual connectivity contributes to efﬁcient feature reuse by
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12581

