The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

IntroVNMT: An Introspective Model for Variational Neural Machine Translation
Xin Sheng,1 Linli Xu,1∗ Junliang Guo,1 Jingchang Liu,2 Ruoyu Zhao,1 Yinlong Xu1
1

2

School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{xins, guojunll, zry1997}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {linlixu, ylxu}@ustc.edu.cn, jliude@cse.ust.hk

sufﬁcient to generate natural and accurate target sentences
compared to the ground-truth, because the Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) principle employed by standard
NMT models is not entirely suitable for the machine translation task. More speciﬁcally, these models are only designed
to maximize the posterior probability of the target groundtruth sentence given the source sentence but not to guarantee
the translation quality. On the other hand, standard attention
based methods cannot capture the complete information of
the source sentence from the source-side memory banks (Tu
et al. 2016) due to the possibility of errors in the semantic
alignments between source and target words identiﬁed by
the attention mechanism.

Abstract
We propose a novel introspective model for variational neural
machine translation (IntroVNMT) in this paper, inspired by
the recent successful application of introspective variational
autoencoder (IntroVAE) in high quality image synthesis. Different from the vanilla variational NMT model, IntroVNMT
is capable of improving itself introspectively by evaluating
the quality of the generated target sentences according to the
high-level latent variables of the real and generated target sentences. As a consequence of introspective training, the proposed model is able to discriminate between the generated
and real sentences of the target language via the latent variables generated by the encoder of the model. In this way, IntroVNMT is able to generate more realistic target sentences
in practice. In the meantime, IntroVNMT inherits the advantages of the variational autoencoders (VAEs), and the model
training process is more stable than the generative adversarial
network (GAN) based models. Experimental results on different translation tasks demonstrate that the proposed model
can achieve signiﬁcant improvements over the vanilla variational NMT model.

Thanks to the rise of generative models, many attempts
have been made to address the challenges mentioned above
with generative frameworks. To relieve the dependency of
MLE, (Wu et al. 2017) adopts a generative adversarial network (GAN) based method, which directly minimizes the divergence between the distributions of the ground-truth sentences and the translations by incorporating a Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN) based discriminator into the typical
NMT model. To address the issues of the attention mechanism, variational NMT (VNMT) is proposed to add a latent variable into NMT which serves as a global semantic
representation to facilitate generating better translations. In
VNMT, in addition to the variational neural encoder and the
variational neural decoder which work just like the encoder
and decoder in a standard NMT model, there is a variational
neural inferer that infers the latent variable z with a neural
prior model and neural posterior approximator. Further, to
alleviate the limitation of the static latent variable of VNMT,
variational recurrent NMT (VRNMT) is introduced (Su et
al. 2018) to incorporate a sequence of dynamic variables z
= {z1 , z2 , . . . , zT y } into the decoder input where the iteratively generated variable zj will participate in the generation
of the next target token yj .

Introduction
Neural Machine Translation (NMT) has achieved remarkable success in recent years and produces superior performance over statistical machine translation (SMT). In general, most NMT models ultilize the sequence-to-sequence
discriminative framework which consists of two neural networks: an RNN based encoder network transforming a
source sentence x = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xT x } into a sequence of
source-side memory banks, and an RNN based decoder
generating a target sentence y = {y1 , y2 , . . . , yT y } sequentially with the use of the source-side memory banks via
the attention mechanism (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015;
Luong, Pham, and Manning 2015). Due to the effectiveness
and simplicity of this end-to-end model structure, NMT has
been attracting more and more research interests recently.
Meanwhile, despite the signiﬁcant success, there still exist
some challenges for standard attention based NMT models. On the one hand, traditional NMT models may not be

However, the GAN and VAE based NMT models discussed above are restricted in the following perspectives.
Firstly, different from traditional GANs which assume that
the space of generator is continuous, the NMT model is instead a probabilistic transformation that maps a source sentence to a target sentence which are both in discrete spaces.

∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8830

