The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Efﬁcient Automatic CASH via Rising Bandits
Yang Li,1 Jiawei Jiang,2 Jinyang Gao,3 Yingxia Shao,4 Ce Zhang,2 Bin Cui1
1

Key Laboratory of High Conﬁdence Software Technologies (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University, Beijing, China
2
Department of Computer Science, Systems Group, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
3
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
4
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
{liyang.cs, bin.cui}@pku.edu.cn, {jiawei.jiang, ce.zhang}@inf.ethz.ch
jinyang.gjy@alibaba-inc.com, shaoyx@bupt.edu.cn

machine learning (Quanming et al. 2018; Zöller and Huber
2019) has attracted lots of interest from both industry and
academia.
Given a learning problem, the ﬁrst thing is to decide
which ML algorithm should be applied – from SVM, Adaboost, GBDT (Jiang et al. 2018; 2017) to deep neural networks. According to the No Free Lunch theorem (Ho and
Pepyne 2001), no single ML algorithm can achieve the best
performance for all the learning problems; and there is often no golden standard to predict which ML algorithm performs the best. As a result, we typically spend computational
resources across all reasonable ML algorithms, and choose
the one with the best performance after the optimization of
their hyperparameters and network architectures. However,
solving the algorithm selection problem after sufﬁciently optimizing the hyperparameters of each ML algorithm leads
to inefﬁcient usage of computational resources. Resources
consumed by the poor-performing algorithms are greatly
wasted. To this end, the Combined Algorithm Selection and
Hyperparameter optimization (CASH) problem (Feurer et
al. 2015; Kotthoff et al. 2017) is proposed to jointly optimize
the selection of algorithm and its hyperparameters, which is
the core focus of this paper.
To solve the CASH problem, a class of methods (Komer,
Bergstra, and Eliasmith 2014; Feurer et al. 2015; Kotthoff
et al. 2017) transform the CASH problem into a uniﬁed hyperparameter optimization (HPO) problem by merging the
hyperparameter space for all ML algorithms and treating the
selection of algorithm as a new hyperparameter. Then classical Bayesian optimization (BO) methods (Shahriari et al.
2015) are utilized to solve this HPO problem. Consequently,
these methods incorporate a huge optimization space with
high-dimensional hyperparameters for BO methods. Past
works (Eggensperger et al. 2013) show that BO methods
perform well for relatively low-dimensional hyperparameters. However, for high-dimensional problems, standard BO
methods perform even worse than random search (Wang et
al. 2013). Thus, such a huge hyperparameter space greatly
hampers the efﬁciency of Bayesian optimization.
To alleviate the above issue, it is natural to consider another paradigm where the BO methods are used to solve
the HPO problem for each ML algorithm separately, and

Abstract
The Combined Algorithm Selection and Hyperparameter optimization (CASH) is one of the most fundamental problems
in Automatic Machine Learning (AutoML). The existing
Bayesian optimization (BO) based solutions turn the CASH
problem into a Hyperparameter Optimization (HPO) problem
by combining the hyperparameters of all machine learning
(ML) algorithms, and use BO methods to solve it. As a result, these methods suffer from the low-efﬁciency problem
due to the huge hyperparameter space in CASH. To alleviate this issue, we propose the alternating optimization framework, where the HPO problem for each ML algorithm and the
algorithm selection problem are optimized alternately. In this
framework, the BO methods are used to solve the HPO problem for each ML algorithm separately, incorporating a much
smaller hyperparameter space for BO methods. Furthermore,
we introduce Rising Bandits, a CASH-oriented Multi-Armed
Bandits (MAB) variant, to model the algorithm selection in
CASH. This framework can take the advantages of both BO
in solving the HPO problem with a relatively small hyperparameter space and the MABs in accelerating the algorithm
selection. Moreover, we further develop an efﬁcient online
algorithm to solve the Rising Bandits with provably theoretical guarantees. The extensive experiments on 30 OpenML
datasets demonstrate the superiority of the proposed approach
over the competitive baselines.

Introduction
Machine learning (ML) has made great strides in many
application areas, e.g., recommendation, computer vision,
ﬁnancial market analysis, etc (Goodfellow, Bengio, and
Courville 2016; He et al. 2017; Ma et al. 2019; Zhao, Shen,
and Huang 2019). However, given a practical application,
it is usually knowledge-intensive and labor-intensive to develop customized solutions with satisﬁed learning performance, where the exploration may include but is not limited to selecting ML algorithms, conﬁguring hyperparameters and network architecture searching. To facilitate the
deployment of ML applications and democratize the usage
of machine learning, it is of vital importance to reduce human efforts during such exploration. Naturally, automatic
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4763

