The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

TextScanner: Reading Characters in Order for Robust Scene Text Recognition
Zhaoyi Wan,1 ∗ Minghang He,2∗ Haoran Chen,3 Xiang Bai,2† Cong Yao1†
1

Megvii, 2 Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 3 Beijing Institute of Technology
i@wanzy.me, {minghanghe09, xbai}@hust.edu.cn, xidianchr@163.com, yaocong2010@gmail.com

Abstract
Driven by deep learning and a large volume of data, scene
text recognition has evolved rapidly in recent years. Formerly,
RNN-attention-based methods have dominated this ﬁeld, but
suffer from the problem of attention drift in certain situations. Lately, semantic segmentation based algorithms have
proven effective at recognizing text of different forms (horizontal, oriented and curved). However, these methods may
produce spurious characters or miss genuine characters, as
they rely heavily on a thresholding procedure operated on
segmentation maps. To tackle these challenges, we propose
in this paper an alternative approach, called TextScanner, for
scene text recognition. TextScanner bears three characteristics: (1) Basically, it belongs to the semantic segmentation
family, as it generates pixel-wise, multi-channel segmentation maps for character class, position and order; (2) Meanwhile, akin to RNN-attention-based methods, it also adopts
RNN for context modeling; (3) Moreover, it performs paralleled prediction for character position and class, and ensures
that characters are transcripted in the correct order. The experiments on standard benchmark datasets demonstrate that
TextScanner outperforms the state-of-the-art methods. Moreover, TextScanner shows its superiority in recognizing more
difﬁcult text such as Chinese transcripts and aligning with target characters.

1

Figure 1: Our Motivation. RNN-attention-based methods
may encounter the problem of attention drift (Cheng et
al. 2017) (see the red rectangle), thus leading to incorrect prediction of character class. In semantic segmentation
based algorithms, the search of connected components depends on a thresholding operation, which is prone to oversegmentation or under-segmentation, thus generating spurious characters or missing genuine characters (see the red
rectangles). In contrast, TextScanner scans characters one
by one and ensures that characters are read in right order
and separated properly.

The former (Shi et al. 2016; Cheng et al. 2018), drawing inspiration from neural machine translation (Bahdanau, Cho,
and Bengio 2014), encodes images into features and employs an attention mechanism to align and decode characters. The latter (Lyu et al. 2018; Liao et al. 2019), approaching text recognition from a 2D perspective, ﬁrst adopts a
fully convolutional network (FCN) to perform semantic segmentation, then seeks connected components in the segmentation maps, and ﬁnally infers the class of each connected
component (each is taken as a character).

Introduction

In the past decades, scene text detection and recognition
have drawn considerable attention from the computer vision community, due to its wide applications, e.g, automatic
driving (Graves et al. 2006), visual auxiliaries (Ghosh, Valveny, and Bagdanov 2017), and human-computer interaction (Wang et al. 2012). As scene text provides pivotal and
speciﬁc information, accurate recognition of text plays crucial roles in various real-world scenarios (Phan et al. 2013).
Among the state-of-the-art methods for scene text recognition, there are two prevalent paradigms: RNN-attentionbased methods and semantic segmentation based algorithms.

Motivation Essentially, to correctly recognize the content
in a cropped text image, the number of characters as well as
the order and class of each character should be accurately
predicted. RNN-attention based methods usually work well
in most cases. However, when there is noise in the background or irregular text shape , the attention mechanism may
fail that the center of the estimated attention map targets to

∗

Authors contribute equally
Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

12120

