The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning Counterfactual Representations
for Estimating Individual Dose-Response Curves
Patrick Schwab,1 Lorenz Linhardt,2 Stefan Bauer,3 Joachim M. Buhmann,2 Walter Karlen1
1

Institute of Robotics and Intelligent Systems, 2 Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
3
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
patrick.schwab@hest.ethz.ch

Schwab, Linhardt, and Karlen 2018): Firstly, we only observe the factual outcome and never the counterfactual outcomes that would potentially have happened had we chosen a different treatment option. In medicine, for example,
we only observe the outcome of giving a patient a speciﬁc
treatment at a speciﬁc dosage, but we never observe what
would have happened if the patient was instead given a potential alternative treatment or a different dosage of the same
treatment. Secondly, treatments are typically not assigned at
random in observational data. In the medical setting, physicians take a range of factors, such as the patient’s expected
response to the treatment, into account when choosing a
treatment option. Due to this treatment assignment bias, the
treated population may differ signiﬁcantly from the general
population. A supervised model naı̈vely trained to minimise
the factual error would overﬁt to the properties of the treated
group, and therefore not generalise to the entire population.
To address these problems, we introduce a novel methodology for training neural networks for counterfactual inference that extends to any number of treatments with continuous dosage parameters. In order to control for the biased
assignment of treatments in observational data, we combine
our method with a variety of regularisation schemes originally developed for the discrete treatment setting, such as
distribution matching (Johansson, Shalit, and Sontag 2016;
Shalit, Johansson, and Sontag 2017), propensity dropout
(PD) (Alaa, Weisz, and van der Schaar 2017), and matching on balancing scores (Rosenbaum and Rubin 1983; Ho et
al. 2007; Schwab, Linhardt, and Karlen 2018). In addition,
we devise performance metrics, model selection criteria and
open benchmarks for estimating individual dose-response
curves. Our experiments demonstrate that the methods developed in this work set a new state-of-the-art in inferring
individual dose-response curves. The source code for this
work is available at https://github.com/d909b/drnet.

Abstract
Estimating what would be an individual’s potential response
to varying levels of exposure to a treatment is of high practical relevance for several important ﬁelds, such as healthcare,
economics and public policy. However, existing methods for
learning to estimate counterfactual outcomes from observational data are either focused on estimating average doseresponse curves, or limited to settings with only two treatments that do not have an associated dosage parameter. Here,
we present a novel machine-learning approach towards learning counterfactual representations for estimating individual
dose-response curves for any number of treatments with continuous dosage parameters with neural networks. Building
on the established potential outcomes framework, we introduce performance metrics, model selection criteria, model architectures, and open benchmarks for estimating individual
dose-response curves. Our experiments show that the methods developed in this work set a new state-of-the-art in estimating individual dose-response.

Introduction
Estimating dose-response curves from observational data is
an important problem in many domains. In medicine, for example, we would be interested in using data of people that
have been treated in the past to predict which treatments
and associated dosages would lead to better outcomes for
new patients (Imbens 2000). This question is, at its core,
a counterfactual one, i.e. we are interested in predicting
what would have happened if we were to give a patient
a speciﬁc treatment at a speciﬁc dosage in a given situation. Answering such counterfactual questions is a challenging task that requires either further assumptions about
the underlying data-generating process or prospective interventional experiments, such as randomised controlled trials (RCTs) (Stone 1993; Pearl 2009; Peters, Janzing, and
Schölkopf 2017). However, performing prospective experiments is expensive, time-consuming, and, in many cases,
ethically not justiﬁable (Schafer 1982). Two aspects make
estimating counterfactual outcomes from observational data
alone difﬁcult (Yoon, Jordon, and van der Schaar 2018;

Contributions. We present the following contributions:
• We introduce a novel methodology for training neural networks for counterfactual inference that, in contrast to existing methods, is suitable for estimating counterfactual
outcomes for any number of treatment options with associated exposure parameters.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5612

