The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Commentary on the Unsupervised Learning of Disentangled Representations
Francesco Locatello,2,3 Stefan Bauer,3 Mario Lucic,1 Gunnar Rätsch,2
Sylvain Gelly,1 Bernhard Schölkopf,3 Olivier Bachem1
1

Google Research, Brain Team
ETH Zurich, Department for Computer Science
3
Max-Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
Correspondence to francesco.locatello@inf.ethz.ch and bachem@google.com
2

State-of-the-art approaches for unsupervised disentanglement learning are largely based on variants of Variational
Autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma and Welling 2014) where the
encoder is further regularized to encourage disentanglement.
In this paper, we comment on some of the key contributions of (Locatello et al. 2019b):
• We discuss why it is impossible to learn disentangled representations for arbitrary data sets without supervision or
inductive biases.
• We provide a sober look at the performances of state-ofthe-art approaches. We highlight challenges for model selection and identify critical areas for future research.
• To facilitate future research and reproducibility, we release a library to train and evaluate disentangled representations on standard benchmark data sets.

Abstract
The goal of the unsupervised learning of disentangled representations is to separate the independent explanatory factors of variation in the data without access to supervision.
In this paper, we summarize the results of (Locatello et al.
2019b) and focus on their implications for practitioners. We
discuss the theoretical result showing that the unsupervised
learning of disentangled representations is fundamentally impossible without inductive biases and the practical challenges
it entails. Finally, we comment on our experimental ﬁndings,
highlighting the limitations of state-of-the-art approaches and
directions for future research.

Introduction
In representation learning, we often have access to highdimensional observations x (e.g., images or videos) without additional annotations. However, such observations are
often assumed to be the manifestation of a set of low dimensional ground truth factors of variations z. For example, the
factors of variation in natural images may be pose, content,
location of objects, and lighting conditions.
The goal of representation learning is to learn a vector
r(x) which is low dimensional and useful for any downstream task (Bengio, Courville, and Vincent 2013). The key
idea of disentangled representations is that they capture the
information about the explanatory factors of variations independently: each factor of variation is separately represented in just a few dimensions of the representation (Bengio, Courville, and Vincent 2013). In our example of natural
images, we may wish to encode separately pose, content, location of objects, and lighting conditions.
Disentangled representations hold the promise to be both
interpretable, robust, and to simplify downstream prediction
tasks (Bengio, Courville, and Vincent 2013). Recently, disentanglement has been found useful for a variety of downstream tasks including fair machine learning (Locatello et
al. 2019a; Creager et al. 2019), abstract visual reasoning
tasks (van Steenkiste et al. 2019) and real-world robotic data
sets (Gondal et al. 2019).

Background
For the purpose of disentanglement learning, the world is
modeled as a two-step generative process. First, we sample
a latent variable z from a distribution with factorized density
d
p(z) = i=1 p(zi ). Each dimension of z corresponds to an
independent factor of variation such as pose, content, locations of objects and lighting conditions in an image. Second,
the observations are obtained as samples from p(x|z).
The goal of disentanglement is to encode the factors of
variation in a vector r(x) independently. The key idea is
that a change in a dimension of z corresponds to a change
in a dimension (or subset of dimensions) of r(x) (Bengio,
Courville, and Vincent 2013). This deﬁnition has been further extended in the languages of group theory (Higgins et
al. 2018) and causality (Suter et al. 2019).
Metrics The lack of a formal deﬁnition of disentanglement resulted in a variety of different metrics. We assume
access to z and characterize the structure of the statistical relations between z and r(x). Intuitively, we measure
how the information about z is encoded in r(x). The BetaVAE (Higgins et al. 2017) and FactorVAE (Kim and Mnih
2018) scores measures disentanglement by predicting the
index of a ﬁxed factor. Other scores are typically composed of two steps: ﬁrst, they estimate a matrix relating z

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13681

