The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Interactive Dual Generative Adversarial Networks for Image Captioning
Junhao Liu,1,2 Kai Wang,1 Chunpu Xu,3 Zhou Zhao,4 Ruifeng Xu,5 Ying Shen,6 Min Yang1∗
1

Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
4
Zhejiang University 5 Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
6
Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School
{jh.liu, kai.wang, min.yang}@siat.ac.cn, cpx@hust.edu.cn, zhaozhou@zju.edu.cn
xuruifeng@hit.edu.cn, shenying@pkusz.edu.cn
captioning as a ranking or retrieval task, and introduced a
ranking-based method to evaluate systems on a sentencebased image description. (Gong et al. 2014) associated images with descriptive sentences by projecting them into a
common latent space. Although retrieval-based methods can
produce general and syntactically correct captions, the retrieved captions are not tailored for the query images and
limited by the capacity of the pre-constructed repository.

Abstract
Image captioning is usually built on either generationbased or retrieval-based approaches. Both ways have certain strengths but suffer from their own limitations. In this
paper, we propose an Interactive Dual Generative Adversarial Network (IDGAN) for image captioning, which mutually
combines the retrieval-based and generation-based methods
to learn a better image captioning ensemble. IDGAN consists of two generators and two discriminators, where the
generation- and retrieval-based generators mutually beneﬁt
from each other’s complementary targets that are learned
from two dual adversarial discriminators. Speciﬁcally, the
generation- and retrieval-based generators provide improved
synthetic and retrieved candidate captions with informative
feedback signals from the two respective discriminators that
are trained to distinguish the generated captions from the
true captions and assign top rankings to true captions respectively, thus featuring the merits of both retrieval-based
and generation-based approaches. Extensive experiments on
MSCOCO dataset demonstrate that the proposed IDGAN
model signiﬁcantly outperforms the compared methods for
image captioning.

1

To make a caption tailored appropriately for the query
image, a better way is to generate a new one accordingly. A typical generation-based image captioning model
is encoder-decoder paradigm (Karpathy and Fei-Fei 2015;
Vinyals et al. 2015), which consists of two neural networks:
a convolutional neural network (CNN) based encoder encodes a given image into a vector representation, based on
which a long short-term memory network (LSTM) decoder
decodes the vector representation to generate a variablelength image caption word by word. For example, (Xu et
al. 2015) proposed an attentive encoder-decoder neural network to dynamically attend to different locations of the images when decoding different words in the captions. (Mun,
Cho, and Han 2017) used associated captions that were retrieved from training data to learn visual attention for image
captioning. These methods can synthesize a new sentence as
the caption, which brings the results of good ﬂexibility and
quality. Nevertheless, a well-known problem for generationbased methods is that they are prone to generate universal or
non-ﬂuent captions, which do not appropriately reﬂect the
meaning of the given image.

Introduction

Automatic image captioning aims to produce a textual description (usually a sentence) that verbalizes the visual content of an image. Image captioning methods can be roughly
divided into two categories: retrieval-based and generationbased methods. Retrieval-based methods describe images
by retrieving pre-existing captions from a repository, while
generation-based methods synthesize a textual description
(typically a sentence) that verbalizes the query image. Both
ways have certain advantages but suffer from their own disadvantages.
When a user issues a query image, the retrieval-based
methods search a corresponding caption that best matches
the query image in a pre-constructed image-caption repository (Ordonez, Kulkarni, and Berg 2011; Hodosh, Young,
and Hockenmaier 2013; Gong et al. 2014). For example,
(Hodosh, Young, and Hockenmaier 2013) performed image

Previously, the retrieval-based and generation-based systems with their own characteristics have been developed separately. In this paper, we are seeking to absorb their merits. We propose an Interactive Dual Generative Adversarial Network (IDGAN) for image captioning,
which bridges the communication between generation- and
retrieval-based methods by mutually reviewing each other.
The dual adversarial training mechanism is established between two generation- and retrieval-based generators, and
two generation- and retrieval-based discriminators, to make
the generated captions indistinguishable from the groundtruth captions. Speciﬁcally, a language model (LM) generator Gθ1 synthesizes tailored captions for the query im-

∗

Min Yang is corresponding author (min.yang@siat.ac.cn).
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11588

