The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Cardinal Improvement to Pseudo-Boolean Solving
Jan Elffers,1,2 Jakob Nordström2,3
1

2

Lund University, University of Copenhagen, 3 KTH Royal Institute of Technology
jan.elffers@cs.lth.se, jn@di.ku.dk

over Boolean variables, which gives a succinct way of
encoding problems in many domains. CDCL solvers can
then be applied to such problems by translating the input
to CNF (as in, e.g., MiniSat+ (Eén and Sörensson 2006),
Open-WBO (Martins, Manquinho, and Lynce 2014), and
NaPS (Sakai and Nabeshima 2015)) or by keeping the
pseudo-Boolean input but deriving new constraints in the
form of disjunctive clauses (as in methods implemented in
clasp (Gebser, Kaufmann, and Schaub 2012) and the Sat4j
library (Le Berre and Parrain 2010)). Another approach,
which is quite attractive from a theoretical point of view,
is to go beyond resolution and try to harness the power
of cutting planes (Cook, Coullard, and Turán 1987). The
conﬂict-driven paradigm has been extended to this setting
in pseudo-Boolean solvers like PRS (Dixon and Ginsberg
2002), Galena (Chai and Kuehlmann 2005), Pueblo (Sheini
and Sakallah 2006), Sat4j (Le Berre and Parrain 2010), and
RoundingSat (Elffers and Nordström 2018).

Abstract
Pseudo-Boolean solvers hold out the theoretical potential of
exponential improvements over conﬂict-driven clause learning (CDCL) SAT solvers, but in practice perform very poorly
if the input is given in the standard conjunctive normal form
(CNF) format. We present a technique to remedy this problem by recovering cardinality constraints from CNF on the
ﬂy during search. This is done by collecting potential building
blocks of cardinality constraints during propagation and combining these blocks during conﬂict analysis. Our implementation has a non-negligible but manageable overhead when detection is not successful, and yields signiﬁcant gains for some
SAT competition and crafted benchmarks for which pseudoBoolean reasoning is stronger than CDCL. It also boosts performance for some native pseudo-Boolean formulas where
this approach helps to improve learned constraints.

1

Introduction

The Boolean satisﬁability problem (SAT) is one of the most
formidable challenges—and impressive success stories—
of computer science. Although SAT is an NP-complete
problem (Cook 1971; Levin 1973), and is widely believed to be exponentially hard in the worst case, the last
few decades have witnessed the emergence of highly efﬁcient SAT solvers based on conﬂict-driven clause learning
(CDCL) (Marques-Silva and Sakallah 1999),1 with further
improvements in (Moskewicz et al. 2001) and later papers.
Today, these solvers are routinely used to solve large-scale
real-world problems in a wide range of application areas
(see (Biere et al. 2009) for a comprehensive reference).
One shortcoming of CDCL is that it uses a fairly weak
method of reasoning—namely resolution, for which exponential lower bounds are known even for simple combinatorial principles (Haken 1985; Urquhart 1987). Another weakness is that the input must be encoded in conjunctive normal
form (CNF), which deprives the solver of the possibility to
reason with more expressive higher-level constraints.
A natural strengthening of CNF is to allow pseudoBoolean (PB) constraints, i.e., integral linear inequalities

A critical ﬂaw of current cutting-planes-based solvers,
however, is that while this method of reasoning is exponentially more powerful than resolution in theory, and does not
care much about whether the input is presented in CNF or
pseudo-Boolean form, the algorithms actually used in implementations of such solvers make them collapse to CDCL
as soon as the input is given in CNF (Hooker 1988; 1992;
Vinyals et al. 2018). This is clearly a highly unsatisfactory
state of affairs—all the more so since a user of the solver
might not be aware of that a problem can be rewritten more
efﬁciently using pseudo-Boolean constraints, or that such
low-level details of the syntactic representation can make an
exponential difference in performance.
Our goal is to address this problem in a principled way,
by rewriting CNF when a more efﬁcient representation is
possible, while maintaining good overall performance when
no obvious improvement can be made. More concretely, in
this work we propose a way of recovering cardinality constraints, saying that at most k variables (or at least k variables) in some subset can be true, from CNF. Cardinality
constraints are already enough to make pseudo-Boolean reasoning exponentially stronger than resolution, and have been
argued to capture most of the improvement over CDCL in
practice (Chai and Kuehlmann 2005).

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
A similar idea in the context of CSPs was independently developed in (Bayardo Jr. and Schrag 1997).
1495

