The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Preventing Arbitrage from Collusion When Eliciting Probabilities
Rupert Freeman,1 David M. Pennock,1 Dominik Peters,2 Bo Waggoner3
1

Microsoft Research, 2 Carnegie Mellon University, 3 CU Boulder
{rupert.freeman, dpennock}@microsoft.com, dominikp@cs.cmu.edu, bwag@colorado.edu

if it rains, and $0.96 + $0.84 + $0.64 = $2.44 otherwise.
If the group instead decided to calculate their mean belief
(0.4) and report p̂ = (0.4, 0.4, 0.4), then quadratic score
payments are $0.64 + $0.64 + $0.64 = $1.92 if it rains,
and $0.84 + $0.84 + $0.84 = $2.52 otherwise. In both
cases, the group obtains strictly more money than before.
They could then distribute their gains in some way so that
each member is strictly better off, no matter the outcome.
This example is general: groups with at least some disagreement are always strictly better off if they report their mean
belief. French (1985) shows that this is true not only for
Brier’s quadratic rule, but for every concave scoring rule.
Chun and Shachter (2011) termed this phenomenon arbitrage, since it allows groups of colluding agents to risklessly increase their payoff. They showed that all strictly
proper scoring rules, whether concave or not, permit arbitrage, and that more complicated multi-agent rules are also
vulnerable, including market scoring rules (Hanson 2003)
and competitive scoring rules (Kilgour and Gerchak 2004;
Lambert et al. 2008).
We may hope that collusion of this type is uncommon due
to coordination and communication difﬁculties. However,
it is often the case that forecasters are assigned to small
groups for the purposes of deliberation before reporting their
probabilities.1 While deliberation of this type can improve
forecast accuracy by encouraging information sharing, it
also provides an opportunity for collusion. Further, the proﬁt
opportunity might encourage third parties to act as hidden
intermediaries, by collecting individual reports, reporting
aggregate beliefs to the principal, and then keeping the gain
from arbitrage.
Wide-spread arbitrage can come at a high cost to the principal’s goals. For example, if the principal plans to pool the
reports into an aggregate forecast, the result will be distorted.2
In our example, all colluding agents report the same probability, thereby hiding the true level of disagreement among

Abstract
We consider the design of mechanisms to elicit probabilistic
forecasts when agents are strategic and may collude with one
another. Chun and Shachter (2011) have shown that when
agents may form coalitions, many known mechanisms for elicitation permit arbitrage, allowing the coalition members to
guarantee themselves higher payments by misreporting their
beliefs. We consider two approaches to protect against colluding agents. First, we present a novel strictly proper mechanism
that does not admit arbitrage provided that the reports of the
agents are bounded away from 0 and 1, a common assumption
in many settings. Second, we discover strictly arbitrage-free
mechanisms that satisfy an intermediate guarantee between
weak and strict properness.

1

Introduction

Suppose that a decision maker, the principal, asks an agent
to estimate the probability that it will rain tomorrow. The
principal would like the agent to respond with their true belief.
The principal can incentivize truthfulness by asking the agent
for the prediction today, then paying the agent an amount of
money tomorrow that depends on whether it actually rained
and how accurate the prediction was. Payment schemes in this
setting are called scoring rules. For example, using Brier’s
(1950) famous quadratic scoring rule, the principal would
pay the agent $1 − (1 − p̂)2 if it rains, and $1 − p̂2 if it does
not, where p̂ is the probability that the agent reported. For
example, if p̂ = 0.6, then the agent earns $0.84 if it rains and
$0.64 otherwise. Calculus shows that if the agent wishes to
maximize their expected payment, it is uniquely optimal for
the agent to report their truthful subjective belief. Scoring
rules with this property are called strictly proper.
The principal may wish to obtain an estimate from several agents. If each agent is paid their quadratic score, every agent is incentivized to report truthfully, just as in the
single-agent case. However, French (1985) observed that
the quadratic score may not be incentive compatible if
agents are able to collude. Assume that the agents know
each other, can communicate their beliefs, and can transfer money among themselves. Suppose three agents were
to truthfully report p̂ = (0.2, 0.4, 0.6). Then the quadratic
score pays them a total of $0.36 + $0.64 + $0.84 = $1.84

1

For example, the Good Judgment Project (Tetlock and Gardner
2015), the winning competitor in the recent IARPA ACE forecasting
competititon, employed this technique.
2
The unweighted arithmetic mean does not change if colluding agents report their group mean, as in our example. However,
the principal may wish to compute a weighted mean, a geometric
mean (Genest and Zidek 1986), or another aggregate measure such
as a supra-Bayesian inference (Morris 1977).

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1958

