The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Probing Brain Activation Patterns by
Dissociating Semantics and Syntax in Sentences
Shaonan Wang,1,2 Jiajun Zhang,1,2 Nan Lin,3,4 Chengqing Zong1,2,5
1

2

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, CAS
School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
CAS Key Laboratory of Behavioural Science, Institute of Psychology
4
Department of Psychology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
{shaonan.wang, jjzhang, cqzong}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn; linn@psych.ac.cn
feature. For instance, subtracting neuron activations of random word-lists from natural sentences to study syntactic
representations in the brain; subtracting neuron activations
of jabberwocky sentences (which are created by replacing
the content words including nouns, verbs, adjectives, and
adverbs in the sentences by pronounceable nonwords) from
natural sentences to study semantic representations in the
brain (Fedorenko, Nieto-Castanon, and Kanwisher 2012).
This paradigm with controlled stimuli is extensively applied
in neurosciences, making precise conclusions with carefully designed materials. However, it is not clear whether
fake sentences would introduce agnostic factors to brain
processing and whether this paradigm can generalize beyond the experimental setting (Hasson and Honey 2012;
Wehbe 2015).

Abstract
The relation between semantics and syntax and where they
are represented in the neural level has been extensively debated in neurosciences. Existing methods use manually designed stimuli to distinguish semantic and syntactic information in a sentence that may not generalize beyond the experimental setting. This paper proposes an alternative framework
to study the brain representation of semantics and syntax.
Speciﬁcally, we embed the highly-controlled stimuli as objective functions in learning sentence representations and propose a disentangled feature representation model (DFRM) to
extract semantic and syntactic information in sentences. This
model can generate one semantic and one syntactic vector for
each sentence. Then we associate these disentangled feature
vectors with brain imaging data to explore brain representation of semantics and syntax. Results have shown that semantic feature is represented more robustly than syntactic feature
across the brain including the default-mode, frontoparietal,
visual networks, etc.. The brain representations of semantics
and syntax are largely overlapped, but there are brain regions
only sensitive to one of them. For instance, several frontal and
temporal regions are speciﬁc to the semantic feature; parts of
the right superior frontal and right inferior parietal gyrus are
speciﬁc to the syntactic feature.

This paper proposes an alternative framework to study the
brain representation of semantics and syntax. Drawing on
the ideas of controlled-stimuli methods, we propose a disentangled feature representation model (DFRM) that can extract the semantic and syntactic information in a sentence,
generating one semantic and one syntactic vector for each
sentence. To disassociate semantics from syntax in a sentence, we utilize word average encoder and Long ShortTerm Memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997)
encoder to represent semantic and syntactic information respectively. Then by introducing objective functions of learning paraphrases and jabberwocky sentences, the semantic
and syntactic vectors tend to accumulate semantic and syntactic knowledge respectively. To improve the quality of syntactic vectors, we also utilize the word position loss to capture more syntactic information.

Knowing the meanings of individual words (semantics) and
understanding how these words can combine (syntax) to
create new, complex meanings are core components of our
language knowledge. Neuroimaging studies have evidenced
that our brains process semantic information differently
from syntactic information (Dapretto and Bookheimer 1999;
Friederici, Opitz, and Von Cramon 2000; Matchin et al.
2019). However, at present, there is still a poor understanding of whether and where this distinction is represented at
the neural level, especially outside of controlled experimental settings.
Due to the complexity of language processing in the brain,
most existing neuroimaging studies employ the hypothesisbased method and investigate the brain language representations with highly-controlled stimuli. Generally, they design
different experimental conditions and employ the subtraction method to explore the brain process for each language

Based on the learned disentangled feature vectors, we explore the brain representation of semantics and syntax by associating these vectors with brain imaging data. We ﬁnd that
both semantic and syntactic features are involved in several
frontal and temporal regions, with the semantic feature distributed more robustly and widely across the brain. There are
also speciﬁc brain regions only sensitive to the semantic or
syntactic features. For instance, several frontal and temporal
regions are speciﬁc to the semantic feature; parts of the right
superior frontal and right inferior parietal gyrus are speciﬁc
to the syntactic feature.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9201

