The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Improved Algorithms for Conservative Exploration in Bandits
Evrard Garcelon,1 Mohammad Ghavamzadeh,1 Alessandro Lazaric,1 Matteo Pirotta1
1
Facebook AI Research,
evrard.garcelon@gmail.com, {mgh, lazaric, pirotta}@fb.com

Thomas, Theocharous, and Ghavamzadeh 2015a; 2015b;
Swaminathan and Joachims 2015; Petrik, Ghavamzadeh,
and Chow 2016) and online (Mansour, Slivkins, and Syrgkanis 2015; Wu et al. 2016; Kazerouni et al. 2017; Katariya et
al. 2019) settings.

Abstract
In many ﬁelds such as digital marketing, healthcare, ﬁnance,
and robotics, it is common to have a well-tested and reliable
baseline policy running in production (e.g., a recommender
system). Nonetheless, the baseline policy is often suboptimal. In this case, it is desirable to deploy online learning
algorithms (e.g., a multi-armed bandit algorithm) that interact with the system to learn a better/optimal policy under
the constraint that during the learning process the performance is almost never worse than the performance of the
baseline itself. In this paper, we study the conservative learning problem in the contextual linear bandit setting and introduce a novel algorithm, the Conservative Constrained L IN UCB (CLUCB2). We derive regret bounds for CLUCB2
that match existing results and empirically show that it outperforms state-of-the-art conservative bandit algorithms in a
number of synthetic and real-world problems. Finally, we
consider a more realistic constraint where the performance
is veriﬁed only at predeﬁned checkpoints (instead of at every
step) and show how this relaxed constraint favorably impacts
the regret and empirical performance of CLUCB2.

In the online setting, which is the focus of this paper, the
learning algorithm updates its policy while interacting with
the system. Although the algorithm eventually learns a good
or an optimal policy, there is no guarantee on the performance of the intermediate policies, especially at the very
beginning, when the algorithm needs to heavily explore different options. Therefore, in order to make sure that at any
point in time the (cumulative) performance of the policies
generated by the algorithm is not worse than the baseline,
it is important to control the exploration and make it more
conservative. Consider a recommender system that runs our
learning algorithm. Although we are conﬁdent that our algorithm will eventually learn a strategy that performs as well
as the baseline, and possibly even better, we should control
its exploration not to lose too many customers, as a result of
providing them with unsatisfactory recommendations. This
setting has been studied in multi-armed bandits (Wu et al.
2016), contextual linear bandits (Kazerouni et al. 2017), and
stochastic combinatorial semi-bandits (Katariya et al. 2019).
These papers formulate the problem using a constraint deﬁned based on the performance of the baseline policy (mean
of the baseline arm in the multi-armed bandit case), and
modify the corresponding UCB-type algorithm (Auer, CesaBianchi, and Fischer 2002a) to satisfy this constraint. At
each round, the conservative bandit algorithm computes the
action suggested by the corresponding UCB algorithm, if the
action satisﬁes the constraint, it is taken, otherwise, the algorithm acts according to the baseline policy. Another algorithm in the online setting is by (Mansour, Slivkins, and
Syrgkanis 2015) that balances exploration and exploitation
such that the actions taken are compatible with the agent’s
(customer’s) incentive formulated as a Bayesian prior.

Introduction
Many problems in ﬁelds such as digital marketing, healthcare, ﬁnance, and robotics can be formulated as decisionmaking under uncertainty. Although many learning algorithms have been developed to ﬁnd a good/optimal policy
for these problems, a major obstacle in using them in realworld applications is the lack of guarantees for the actual
performance of the policies they execute over time. Therefore, for the applicability of these algorithms, it is important that they execute policies that are guaranteed to perform at least as well as an existing baseline. We can think
of the baseline either as a baseline value or the performance of a baseline policy. It is important to note that
since the learning algorithms generate these polices from
data, they are random variables, and thus, all the guarantees on their performance should be in high probability.
This problem has been recently studied under the general
title of safety w.r.t. a baseline in bandits and reinforcement learning (RL), in both ofﬂine (Bottou et al. 2013;

In this paper, we focus on UCB-type algorithms and improve the design and empirical performance of the conservative algorithms in the contextual linear bandit setting. We
ﬁrst highlight the limitations of the existing conservative
bandit algorithms (Wu et al. 2016; Kazerouni et al. 2017)

Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3962

