The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Adapting Stable Matchings to Evolving Preferences
Robert Bredereck,1 Jiehua Chen,2 Dušan Knop,1,3 Junjie Luo,1 Rolf Niedermeier1
1

Technische Universität Berlin, Chair of Algorithmics and Computational Complexity
2
Algorithms and Complexity Group, TU Wien, Vienna, Austria
3
Department of Theoretical Computer Science, Faculty of Information Technology,
Czech Technical University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic
{robert.bredereck, junjie.luo, rolf.niedermeier}@tu-berlin.de, jiehua.chen@tuwien.ac.at, dusan.knop@ﬁt.cvut.cz

In stable matching scenarios or, in other words, in matching under preferences (Manlove 2013), one is given a set
of agents, each of them having preferences over (some of)
the other agents, and the goal is to match pairs of agents
such that the outcome is stable. Informally speaking, stability
means that there are no two agents that would both prefer to
be matched with each other instead to their current partners
in the matching (or being unmatched). Two classic problems
here are the bipartite case with two equal-sized sets of agents
(referred to as S TABLE M ARRIAGE) and the general case of
an even number of agents (referred to as S TABLE ROOM MATES ). Motivated by the introductory considerations, we
next deﬁne “incremental versions” of both problems; further
formal deﬁnitions are presented later.

Abstract
Adaptivity to changing environments and constraints is key to
success in modern society. We address this by proposing “incrementalized versions” of S TABLE M ARRIAGE and S TABLE
ROOMMATES. That is, we try to answer the following question:
for both problems, what is the computational cost of adapting
an existing stable matching after some of the preferences of
the agents have changed. While doing so, we also model the
constraint that the new stable matching shall be not too different from the old one. After formalizing these incremental
versions, we provide a fairly comprehensive picture of the
computational complexity landscape of I NCREMENTAL S TA BLE M ARRIAGE and I NCREMENTAL S TABLE ROOMMATES.
To this end, we exploit the parameters “degree of change” both
in the input (difference between old and new preference proﬁle) and in the output (difference between old and new stable
matching). We obtain both hardness and tractability results, in
particular showing a ﬁxed-parameter tractability result with
respect to the parameter “distance between old and new stable
matching”.

I NCREMENTAL S TABLE M ARRIAGE (resp. I NCREMEN TAL S TABLE ROOMMATES )

Input: Two disjoint sets U and W of n agents each
(resp. a set V of 2n agents), two preference proﬁles P1
and P2 for U  W (resp. V ), a stable matching M1 for
proﬁle P1 , and a non-negative integer k.
Question: Does U  W (resp. V ) admit a stable matching M2 for proﬁle P2 such that dist(M1 , M2 ) =
|M1 ΔM2 | ≤ k?

Introduction
Imagine the following scenario. A manager responsible for
a group of 2n workers has to form n two-worker teams
based on the preferences over potential work partners of
each worker. The manager, being interested in a robust solution, computes a stable matching (indeed, this refers to the
S TABLE ROOMMATES problem). However, say every month
the workers may update their preferences about wanted work
partners (the updates may be based on gained experiences,
new information, newly developed personal skills etc.). The
team manager then has to ﬁnd a new stable matching respecting the individually evolved preferences. To this end,
however, the team manager may not want to allow too radical
changes in the composition of the two-worker teams because
this might e.g. overburden administration. Thus, a moderate
change is acceptable, but too radical changes in the team compositions should be avoided whenever possible. We address
this scenario by introducing and studying “incremental versions” of the two most prominent stable matching problems,
namely S TABLE M ARRIAGE and S TABLE ROOMMATES.

Herein, M1 ΔM2 is the symmetric difference between the
two matchings (sets of edges) M1 and M2 .
In both deﬁnitions there are two main regulating screws.
First, we are given two preference proﬁles, the old P1 and the
new P2 , thereby reﬂecting the change of preferences. Indeed,
to reﬂect only moderate changes (“evolution”), we will subsequently measure the difference between the two proﬁles (later
referred to as swap distance), yielding a natural problemspeciﬁc parameter (the smaller it is, the less revolutionary the
changes are). Second, the number k can be interpreted as a
locality parameter—it exposes how close the new matching
has to be to the old one. The smaller we choose k, the more
conservative we are with respect to change in the outcome
(namely the difference between old and new stable matching).
Together, we thus have one parameter to regulate the degree
of change measured in the input preferences and one parameter to regulate the degree of change measured in the output
stable matching solution. Taking up these two parameters,
we provide a thorough parameterized complexity analysis of

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1830

