The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Efﬁcient Projection-Free Online
Methods with Stochastic Recursive Gradient
Jiahao Xie,1 Zebang Shen,∗2 Chao Zhang,1,3 Boyu Wang,4 Hui Qian1
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
University of Pennsylvania 3 Tencent AI Lab 4 University of Western Ontario
{xiejh, qianhui, zczju}@zju.edu.cn, zebang@seas.upenn.edu, bwang@csd.uwo.ca
2

Existing methods for solving OCO problems can be
divided into two categories: (i) projection-based methods (Zinkevich 2003; Shalev-Shwartz and Singer 2007;
Xiao 2010; Duchi, Hazan, and Singer 2011; Cutkosky and
Boahen 2017), and (ii) projection-free methods (Hazan and
Kale 2012; Hazan 2016; Lafond, Wai, and Moulines 2015;
Chen et al. 2018). For high-dimensional applications with
complicated constraints (e.g., low rank matrix completion (Chandrasekaran et al. 2009), network routing (Hazan
2016), and structural SVMs (Lacoste-Julien et al. 2013)),
the projection operation can be computationally expensive
or even intractable, rendering projection-based methods impractical. In contrast, projection-free methods such as FrankWolfe-type methods (Hazan and Kale 2012; Hazan 2016)
only require to solve linear optimization problems over the
constraint set, which is usually simpler than projection. Thus
projection-free methods have attracted considerable attention in recent years.
However, existing projection-free online methods suffer
from a trade-off between regret and computational complexity. The seminal work, the Online Frank-Wolfe (OFW)
method (Hazan and Kale 2012), achieves an O(T 3/4 ) regret in the adversarial setting. Besides, in the
√ stochastic setting, OFW achieves a nearly optimal Õ( T ) regret1 with
high probability. For both settings, the per-round computational cost of OFW (O(T ) on average) is considerably
high. The Regularized OFW method (Hazan 2016) improves
the per-round computational cost to O(1) in the adversarial setting while remaining the same O(T 3/4 ) regret bound
as OFW. Additionally, OFW and Regularized OFW require
to access exact gradients of ft ’s, which can be computationally prohibitive in online applications with large-scale
streaming data where a large batch of data arrives in each
round (Dekel et al. 2012). To tackle this problem, Chen et
al. (2018) propose two methods called Meta-Frank-Wolfe
and OSFW, which use stochastic gradient estimates, for
the adversarial and stochastic settings, respectively. MetaFrank-Wolfe requires O(T 3/2 ) stochastic gradient evalua-

Abstract
This paper focuses on projection-free methods for solving
smooth Online Convex Optimization (OCO) problems. Existing projection-free methods either achieve suboptimal regret
bounds or have high per-round computational costs. To ﬁll
this gap, two efﬁcient projection-free online methods called
ORGFW and MORGFW are proposed for solving stochastic
and adversarial OCO problems, respectively. By employing a
recursive gradient estimator, our methods achieve optimal regret bounds (up to a logarithmic factor) while possessing low
per-round computational costs. Experimental results demonstrate the efﬁciency of the proposed methods compared to
state-of-the-arts.

1

Introduction

We consider the following smooth Online Convex Optimization (OCO) problem. In each round t = 1, . . . , T , a learner
chooses a decision xt from a compact convex set C ⊆ Rd .
Then a smooth convex loss function ft is revealed and the
learner suffers the loss ft (xt ). We consider both adversarial and stochastic settings. In the adversarial setting, the sequence of functions {ft }Tt=1 can be arbitrary (possibly adversarial), while in the stochastic setting, the loss functions
are sampled i.i.d. from some ﬁxed distribution ft ∼ D. The
target of the learner is to produce a sequence of decisions
{xt } that minimizes the regret, which is the cumulative loss
suffered by the learner compared to that of the best ﬁxed
decision in hindsight, i.e.,
T
T
∗
t=1 ft (xt ) −
t=1 ft (x ),
T
where x∗ ∈ argminx∈C t=1 ft (x) in the adversarial setting and x∗ ∈ argminx∈C Eft ∼D [ft (x)] in the stochastic setting, respectively.
This model captures a wide range of real-world applications in which data points arrive sequentially, e.g., online recommendation systems, online spam email ﬁltering,
online prediction in ﬁnancial markets, online portfolio selection, to name a few (Hazan 2016; Hoi et al. 2018;
Cesa-Bianchi and Lugosi 2006; Agarwal et al. 2006).

1

It is known√that the optimal regret bound for general OCO
√
problems is O( T ) (see, e.g., (Hazan 2016)). We call Õ( T )
nearly optimal, where Õ() suppresses a poly-logarithmic factor.

∗

Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6446

