The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Nonlinear System Identiﬁcation via Tensor Completion
Nikos Kargas,1 Nicholas D. Sidiropoulos2
1

Department of ECE, University of Minnesota, MN, USA
2
Department of ECE, University of Virginia, VA, USA
karga005@umn.edu, nikos@virginia.edu

and have been successfully applied in many supervised
machine learning tasks (Hastie, Tibshirani, and Friedman
2009). Each of the aforementioned methods can be well
suited for a particular problem, but may perform badly for
another. In general it is seldom known in advance which
method will perform best for any given problem.

Abstract
Function approximation from input and output data pairs constitutes a fundamental problem in supervised learning. Deep
neural networks are currently the most popular method for
learning to mimic the input-output relationship of a general
nonlinear system, as they have proven to be very effective
in approximating complex highly nonlinear functions. In this
work, we show that identifying a general nonlinear function
y = f (x1 , . . . , xN ) from input-output examples can be formulated as a tensor completion problem and under certain
conditions provably correct nonlinear system identiﬁcation
is possible. Speciﬁcally, we model the interactions between
the N input variables and the scalar output of a system by a
single N -way tensor, and setup a weighted low-rank tensor
completion problem with smoothness regularization which
we tackle using a block coordinate descent algorithm. We extend our method to the multi-output setting and the case of
partially observed data, which cannot be readily handled by
neural networks. Finally, we demonstrate the effectiveness of
the approach using several regression tasks including some
standard benchmarks and a challenging student grade prediction task.

This paper presents a simple and elegant alternative for
nonlinear system identiﬁcation based on low-rank tensor
decomposition. Tensor decomposition is a powerful tool
for analyzing multi-way data and has had major successes
in applications spanning machine learning, statistics, signal processing and data mining (Sidiropoulos et al. 2017).
The Canonical Polyadic Decomposition (CPD) model is one
of the most popular tensor models mainly due to its simplicity and its uniqueness properties. The CPD model has
been applied in various machine learning applications, including recommender systems to model time-evolving relational data (Xiong et al. 2010), community detection and
clustering to model user interactions across different networks (Papalexakis, Akoglu, and Ience 2013), knowledge
base completion and link prediction for discovering unobserved subject-object interactions (Lacroix, Usunier, and
Obozinski 2018) and in latent variable models for parameter identiﬁcation (Anandkumar et al. 2014). These works
deal with relatively low-order tensors; however, high-order
tensors also arise in practical scenarios – e.g., a joint probability mass function of N categorical random variables can
be naturally regarded as an N -th order tensor and modeled
using a CPD model (Kargas, Sidiropoulos, and Fu 2018).

The problem of identifying a nonlinear function
y = f (x1 , . . . , xN ) from input-output examples is of
paramount importance in machine learning, dynamical
system identiﬁcation and control, communications, and
many other disciplines. In machine learning in particular,
most of the supervised learning tasks are nonlinear system
identiﬁcation problems. For example, binary/multiclass
classiﬁcation, where the goal is to predict a discrete variable
denoting the class label of each realization, and regression/prediction, where the goal is to predict real or complex
valued variables. Algorithmic advancements, availability of
vast amounts of data and increasing computational power
have led to the development of state-of-the-art prediction
models with unprecedented success in various domains
such as image classiﬁcation, speech recognition, and language processing. Kernel methods, random forests, neural
networks and deep learning are powerful classes of machine
learning models that can learn highly nonlinear functions

In this work, we show that the CPD model offers an appealing solution for modeling and learning a general nonlinear system using a single high-order tensor. Tensors have
been used to model low-order multivariate polynomial systems: a multivariate polynomial of order d is represented
by a tensor of order d – e.g., a second-order polynomial is
represented by a quadratic form involving a single matrix
(Rendle 2010). However, such an approach requires prior
knowledge of polynomial order, and assuming that one deals
with a polynomial of a given degree can be highly restrictive in practice. Instead, what we advocate here is a simple and general approach: a nonlinear system having N
discrete inputs and a single output can be naturally repre-

Dedicated to John S. Baras.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4420

