The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference (IAAI-20)

Analog Accelerator for Simulation and Diagnostics
Alexander Feldman,1 Ion Matei,1 Emil Totev,2 Johan de Kleer1
1

PARC Inc., 3333 Coyote Hill Road, Palo Alto, 94304 CA, USA
e-mail: {afeldman,ion.matei, dekleer}@parc.com
2
Philips Research, High Tech Campus 4, 5656 AE Eindhoven, The Netherlands
e-mail: emil.totev@philips.com

however, methods from S UNDIALS may be slow or they may
fail to converge.
Instead of evaluating the right-hand side of an integration
problem as is done traditionally, our IC uses analog computing and eliminates the need of any clocks during the computation. The integration is entirely driven by the propagation
of electrical signal and transistor switching time is reduced
to minimum.
To map a system of simultaneous ODEs to our ACU we
propose a calculus that is based on elementary computational elements, built of operational ampliﬁers (op-amps).
The IC design we propose is mixed analog and digital.
There is a classical ARM core that is responsible for conﬁguring the ACU. The ﬁrmware conﬁgures all transistor
switches connecting the op-amps to the analog data buses.
The digital core is also responsible for calibrating the analog computational elements to compensate for environmental factors such as temperature.
The approach we present in this paper faces many challenges. Real analog components behave differently from
their idealized models. Electrical noise propagates alongside the computation and decreases the precision of the result. Environmental factors such as temperature variations
increase the computational error. Transistor size in analog
ICs is typically larger than in digital ones which makes the
analog approach less competitive. Making linear resistors
and digital potentiometers that are both accurate, linear, and
with high resolution is an open topic of research. Power consumption of analog components is generally increased and
thermal management could be a problem by itself.
In this paper, we address part of the above challenges with
improved framework-level design, self-compensating mechanisms, extensive use of local feedback and novel hybrid
digital/analog techniques.

Abstract
We propose a new method for solving Initial Value Problems
(IVPs). Our method is based on analog computing and has
the potential to almost eliminate traditional switching time in
digital computing. The approach can be used to simulate large
systems longer, faster, and with higher accuracy.
Many algorithms for Model-Based Diagnosis use numerical
integration to simulate physical systems. The numerical integration process is often either computationally expensive
or imprecise. We propose a new method, based on FieldProgrammable Analog Arrays (FPAAs) that has the potential
to overcome many practical problems. We envision a software/hardware framework for solving systems of simultaneous Ordinary Differential Equations (ODEs) in fraction of the
time of traditional numerical algorithms.
In this paper we describe the solving of an IVP with the help
of an Analog Computing Unit (ACU). To do this we build
a special calculus based on operational ampliﬁers (op-amps)
with local feedback. We discuss the implementation of the
ACU on an Integrated Circuit (IC). We analyze the working if
the IC and simulate the dynamic Lotka-Volterra system with
the de-facto standard tool for electrical simulation: S PICE.

Introduction
Analog computers have been used extensively for solving
many problems. The differential analyzer (Bush 1931) is an
early example. In this paper we leverage the advancement
of microelectronics to propose a new implementation of a
reconﬁgurable analog computer.
We propose an Integrated Circuit (IC) design that can dramatically improve simulation of physical systems. Our idea
bridges the worlds of hybrid analog and digital electronic
design, numerical methods and simulation of dynamic systems, and diagnostic and prognostic reasoning.
Traditional methods for solving systems of Ordinary
Differential Equations (ODEs) involve numerical integration methods such as the classical Runge-Kutta algorithm
(Butcher 1987). Many algorithms for solving ODEs are implemented in the S UNDIALS (Hindmarsh et al. 2005) library,
the industrial and scientiﬁc standard for numerical integration. Depending on properties of the ODEs such as stiffness,

Problem Deﬁnition
Our goal is to develop a method that solves a system of simultaneous Ordinary Differential Equations (ODEs):


y(n) = (F ) x, y, y , y , . . . , y(n−1)
(1)
where the initial values are given.
This paper uses a water clock model for illustration purposes. The water clock is a single vessel ﬁlled with liquid

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13261

