The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

On the Role of Weight Sharing During Deep Option Learning
Matthew Riemer,1 Ignacio Cases,2 Clemens Rosenbaum,3 Miao Liu,1 Gerald Tesauro1
1

IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY
Linguistics Department and Stanford NLP Group, AI Lab, Stanford University
3
College of Information and Computer Sciences, University of Massachusetts Amherst
2

(Riemer, Liu, and Tesauro 2018), which allows networks
to learn an arbitrary depth hierarchy of high level (longer)
options and low level (shorter) options.

Abstract
The options framework is a popular approach for building
temporally extended actions in reinforcement learning. In particular, the option-critic architecture provides general purpose
policy gradient theorems for learning actions from scratch
that are extended in time. However, past work makes the key
assumption that each of the components of option-critic has independent parameters. In this work we note that while this key
assumption of the policy gradient theorems of option-critic
holds in the tabular case, it is always violated in practice for the
deep function approximation setting. We thus reconsider this
assumption and consider more general extensions of optioncritic and hierarchical option-critic training that optimize for
the full architecture with each update. It turns out that not
assuming parameter independence challenges a belief in prior
work that training the policy over options can be disentangled
from the dynamics of the underlying options. In fact, learning
can be sped up by focusing the policy over options on states
where options are actually likely to terminate. We put our new
algorithms to the test in application to sample efﬁcient learning of Atari games, and demonstrate signiﬁcantly improved
stability and faster convergence when learning long options. 1

With the recent successes of Deep Learning based function
approximation applied to RL, a major point of interest has become the derivation of theoretically justiﬁed policy gradient
theorems. Policy gradient theorems (originally developed for
learning with primitive actions by Sutton et al. (2000)) are
critical to the success of Deep RL as they deﬁne the gradient
steps that update the parameters of deep neural networks to
maximize the expected reward with gradient descent style
learning rules. The option-critic framework (Bacon, Harb,
and Precup 2017) has garnered signiﬁcant interest largely
because it deﬁned the ﬁrst policy gradient theorems that
can be used to update a neural network architecture that is
endowed with options that are learned from scratch along
with the network. The high level role of options as a temporally extended form of actions is clear. However, how these
abstract actions should be composed with respect to the parameters of a neural network is far less clear and has not
been closely studied. In fact, the default architecture framework for learning options (Bacon, Harb, and Precup 2017;
Riemer, Liu, and Tesauro 2018) functions in a setting where
the underlying assumptions of existing algorithms for optimizing these architectures do not hold.

Introduction
Developing systems that can autonomously create temporal
abstractions is a major problem in scaling deep reinforcement
learning (RL). Options (Sutton, Precup, and Singh 1999;
Precup 2000) provide a general purpose framework for deﬁning temporally abstract courses of action for learning and
planning in RL. This is a very promising direction with the potential to allow for more coherent exploration and improved
long term credit assignment by effectively pruning the number of decision nodes. The popular option-critic (Bacon, Harb,
and Precup 2017) learning framework blurs the line between
option discovery and option learning. These approaches have
achieved success when applied to Q-learning on Atari (Bacon, Harb, and Precup 2017), but also with continuous action
spaces (Klissarov et al. 2017) and asynchronous parallelization (Harb et al. 2017). Additionally, this framework was
recently extended to the hierarchical option-critic framework

Past work on deriving policy gradient theorems for option
models (Bacon, Harb, and Precup 2017) has assumed that the
parameters of the option policies π, the policy over options
πΩ and the termination functions β are independent of each
other (i.e. θπ ∩ θπΩ ∩ θβ = ∅). This assumption gets even
more strict for work on hierarchical option models where
policies and termination functions are assumed to have independent parameters at each level of the hierarchy as well
(Riemer, Liu, and Tesauro 2018). In practice, while this may
hold for tabular problems, this has never been true in application to deep neural networks. In contrast, most parameters
have been totally shared using a shared feature extraction
network common across all model components and a private
output layer for each component. This setup closely follows
conventions from multi-task learning (Caruana 1997) with
neural networks in the supervised setting. Nonetheless, the
policy gradient theorems used to optimize these architectures

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
See our arxiv version for the appendix and additional details.
5519

