The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Explaining Propagators for String Edit Distance Constraints
Felix Winter,1 Nysret Musliu,1 Peter J. Stuckey2
1

Christian Doppler Laboratory for Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Optimization for Planning and Scheduling
DBAI, TU Wien, Vienna, Austria
{winter,musliu}@dbai.tuwien.ac.at
2
Monash University, Melbourne, Australia
peter.stuckey@monash.edu
lems has been proposed by Kruskal (1983), such an approach has a run-time complexity which is exponential to the
instance size in the worst case. Therefore, several other techniques have been proposed in the literature to tackle practically sized instances e.g. (Hayashida and Koyano 2016;
Jiang et al. 2003; Olivares-Rodrı́guez and Oncina 2008). Although, most of these algorithms rely on approximations or
heuristic techniques (Jiang et al. 2003; Olivares-Rodrı́guez
and Oncina 2008) an exact approach using integer linear
programming has been recently proposed by Hayashida and
Koyano (2016). An important open research question is if
methods using constraint programming can improve the results of existing approaches.
In this paper, we propose a novel global constraint propagator that can be used to efﬁciently solve subproblems
of constraint satisfaction and combinatorial optimization
problems that aim to minimize the string edit distance between arrays of decision variables. Furthermore, we investigate the incorporation of this constraint into a lazy
clause generation based solver (Ohrimenko, Stuckey, and
Codish 2009) and study how constraint propagation can be
explained. To show the practical applicability of the proposed propagator, we solve two problems from the literature
that make use of edit distance constraints (Kohonen 1985;
Winter et al. 2019) using lazy clause generation and our
novel propagator. We evaluate the performance of the proposed method by performing a large number of experiments
for these two problems and compare the outcomes with results produced by state of the art exact methods from the
literature.

Abstract
The computation of string similarity measures has been thoroughly studied in the scientiﬁc literature and has applications
in a wide variety of different areas. One of the most widely
used measures is the so called string edit distance which captures the number of required edit operations to transform a
string into another given string. Although polynomial time algorithms are known for calculating the edit distance between
two strings, there also exist NP-hard problems from practical applications like scheduling or computational biology that
constrain the minimum edit distance between arrays of decision variables. In this work, we propose a novel global constraint to formulate restrictions on the minimum edit distance
for such problems. Furthermore, we describe a propagation
algorithm and investigate an explanation strategy for an edit
distance constraint propagator that can be incorporated into
state of the art lazy clause generation solvers. Experimental
results show that the proposed propagator is able to significantly improve the performance of existing exact methods
regarding solution quality and computation speed for benchmark problems from the literature.

Introduction
String comparison and matching are well studied topics in
computer science which have spawned a large number of
publications in the past e.g. (Wagner and Fischer 1974;
Ukkonen 1985; Navarro 2001). One of the most widely used
methods to quantify the similarity of two given strings is the
so called string edit distance (Wagner and Fischer 1974), that
counts the number of required edit operations to transform a
string into another given string.
Algorithms that can compute the edit distance between
two given strings have been thoroughly studied, and several methods that use dynamic programming have been suggested to efﬁciently calculate the minimum edit distance in
polynomial time e.g. (Ukkonen 1985). However, there also
exist NP-hard combinatorial optimization problems that aim
to minimize the edit distance between strings in the literature (Nicolas and Rivals 2003; Winter and Musliu 2019).
Solving such problems requires the repeated computation
of the string edit distance, and although an exact algorithm using dynamic programming for one of these prob-

Preliminaries
In this section we brieﬂy provide background on the string
edit distance and lazy clause generation, as we will later assume that the reader is familiar with these topics.

String Edit Distance
The notion of edit distance was ﬁrst introduced by Wagner
and Fischer (1974) and has been thoroughly studied in the
literature ever since e.g. (Ukkonen 1985; Navarro 2001). In
the following we give a short review of the deﬁnition as well
as the traditional dynamic programming routine to calculate
the edit distance.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1676

