The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Cognitive Compliance: Assessing Regulatory Risk in Financial Advice Documents
Wanita Sherchan, Sue Ann Chen, Simon Harris, Nebula Alam,
Khoi-Nguyen Tran, Christopher J. Butler
IBM Research Australia
{wanita.sherchan, sachen, siharris, anebula, khndtran, chris.butler}@au1.ibm.com

tractual documents. Rubik3 provides a ﬁnancial planning
software platform for generating advice documents. Advice
RegTech4 provides software for assisting licensees in interpreting best interest duty and related obligations and for assessing potential risk in their licensed advisors. In contrast,
our solution focuses on assessing regulatory risk in advice
documents and provides a trafﬁc light summary of various
key risk indicators in an SoA. Moreover, our solution supports and beneﬁts clients, advisors and auditors alike.

Abstract
This paper describes Cognitive Compliance - a solution that
automates the complex manual process of assessing regulatory compliance of personal ﬁnancial advice. The solution
uses natural language processing (NLP), machine learning
and deep learning to characterise the regulatory risk status
of personal ﬁnancial advice documents with trafﬁc light rating for various risk factors. This enables comprehensive coverage of the review and rapid identiﬁcation of documents at
high risk of non-compliance with government regulations.

1

2

Introduction

Risk Factors Modeling

We identiﬁed a set of key risk indicators (KRIs) affecting
the compliance status of SoA documents in a study with an
Australian government regulatory agency and Promontory,
a global consulting ﬁrm specialising in regulatory and risk
management advice to ﬁnancial institutions (Sherchan et al.
2019). We then developed a number of machine learning,
deep learning and rules-based models to extract, score and
validate these risk indicators on a diverse collection of 400
anonymised SoA documents from various ﬁnancial institutions. We brieﬂy describe our approach for extracting and
scoring each of the KRIs below.
1. Goal-advice mapping: We employ a Long Short-Term
Memory (LSTM) model to extract sentences that describe
a client’s goals, and the advisor’s recommendations in the
SoA. We then use a textual entailment method to assess the
appropriateness of the advice to the goals (Chen et al. 2019).
2. Investment asset classes: We apply a random forest (RF)
classiﬁer to identify tables within the SoA that relate to asset
classes, projections and cash ﬂow analysis. This risk factor
is satisﬁed if the SoA contains asset class tables.
3. Client’s position after advice: We apply a Bag of Embeddings (BoE) model to extract sentences in the SoA that discuss the client’s capital position. We then augment this with
the projections table identiﬁed using the above-mentioned
RF table classiﬁer to determine the risk rating.
4. Cash ﬂow analysis: To determine whether the SoA contains an analysis of the client’s post-advice cash ﬂow, we use
the RF table classiﬁer mentioned above. Following this, we

In response to the increasing demand for ﬁnancial advisory
services, recent years have seen the introduction of tighter
government regulations to ensure that ﬁnancial advisors act
in the “best interests” of the client (FOF 2012). In Australia, approximately 5 to 15% of the ﬁnancial advice documents (Statement of Advice, or SoA) produced are audited
by the government (ASI 2018a). These manual and protracted audits found that 75% of the SoAs reviewed were
non-compliant (ASI 2018b). In addition, the retrospective
nature of the audits fail to protect customers from ﬁnancial
losses which may result from poor advice.
Addressing these issues, we have developed Cognitive
Compliance - a solution that leverages natural language processing, machine learning and deep learning methods to assess the compliance status of SoA documents characterised
by trafﬁc light ratings for various risk factors. The solution
enables rapid review of all SoAs with respect to risk of noncompliance in several aspects. Advisors can perform the reviews before the SoA is formalised/executed to ensure they
are compliant with the regulatory requirements; and consequently clients are protected from harmful advice. Further,
the auditors are able to efﬁciently review a large number
of advice documents to focus on those at high risk of noncompliance.
Existing commercial solutions such as Logical Construct1 and ThoughtRiver2 focus on assessing risk in conCopyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
1
Logical
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2
Construct: https://www.logicalconstruct.com/
Thought River:
https://thoughtriver.com

3
Rubik: http://rubik.redc.me/products/coin
https://adviceregtech.com/

13636

4

Advice RegTech:

