The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A General Approach to Fairness with Optimal Transport
Silvia Chiappa,1∗ Ray Jiang,1∗ Tom Stepleton,1∗ Aldo Pacchiano,2 Heinrich Jiang,3 John Aslanides1
1
DeepMind London, 2 UC Berkeley, 3 Google Research
{csilvia, rayjiang, stepleton, heinrichj, jaslanides}@google.com, pacchiano@berkeley.edu

work to nonlinear models and to regression, and to transporting either in the input or output space to be able to achieve
different fairness criteria. The proposed approach has three
main properties: it accounts for the full shapes of the distributions, it achieves fairness through minimal deviation from
the unfair model, and it is applicable to different fairness
criteria. We evaluate its performance on several benchmark
fairness datasets.

Abstract
We propose a general approach to fairness based on transporting distributions corresponding to different sensitive attributes to a common distribution. We use optimal transport
theory to derive target distributions and methods that allow us
to achieve fairness with minimal changes to the unfair model.
Our approach is applicable to both classiﬁcation and regression problems, can enforce different notions of fairness, and
enable us to achieve a Pareto-optimal trade-off between accuracy and fairness. We demonstrate that it outperforms previous approaches in several benchmark fairness datasets.

Related Work
There has been an increasing interest in the use of optimal
transport for fairness (Black, Yeom, and Fredrikson 2019;
Del Barrio et al. 2019; Jiang et al. 2019; Johndrow and
Lum 2019; Risser et al. 2019; Wang, Ustun, and Calmon
2019). With the exception of Jiang et al. (2019) and Risser
et al. (2019), optimal transport has been used to transport
model inputs and, with the exception of Wang, Ustun, and
Calmon (2019) and Black, Yeom, and Fredrikson (2019), in
order to achieve strong demographic parity. More speciﬁcally, Del Barrio et al. (2019) consider a binary classiﬁcation/binary sensitive attribute setting, and provide an upper
bound to the difference between the minimal risks obtained
by the best classiﬁer with original and transported model inputs. The work in Johndrow and Lum (2019) suggests using the Wasserstein distance to transport model inputs to a
common distribution, whose choice is left to the user. Wang,
Ustun, and Calmon (2019) show how to design target distributions to achieve different fairness criteria, and use optimal
transport as a way to match to the target distribution. Instead,
our target distribution is always chosen to achieve statistical independence, but in a way that allows as little model
deviation as possible through optimal transport. Risser et
al. (2019) uses the formulation of the Wasserstein-2 distance in terms of cumulative distribution functions (as in our
geodesic method) to propose an efﬁcient penalty method for
non-linear classiﬁers in the binary sensitive attribute setting.
Our penalty method is more general, as it applies to both
classiﬁcations and regression, to general cost functions, and
to non-binary sensitive attributes. Finally, Black, Yeom, and
Fredrikson (2019) uses optimal transport to create a blackbox technique for uncovering discrimination in classiﬁers
using the Wasserstein-1 distance.

Introduction
Data used to train machine learning systems often contain
human and societal biases that can lead to treat individuals unfavorably (unfairly) on the basis of characteristics
such as race, gender, disabilities, etc. (referred to as sensitive attributes). This has motivated researchers to investigate techniques for ensuring that learned models satisfy
fairness properties (Dwork et al. 2012; Feldman et al. 2015;
Goh et al. 2016; Chouldechova 2017; Corbett-Davies et al.
2017; Gajane and Pechenizkiy 2017; Kusner et al. 2017;
Cotter et al. 2018; Mitchell, Potash, and Barocas 2018;
Verma and Rubin 2018; Zhang and Bareinboim 2018; Chiappa and Isaac 2019; Narasimhan et al. 2020). Most often, fairness desiderata are expressed as constraints on the
lower order moments or other functions of distributions corresponding to different sensitive attributes. Whilst facilitating model evaluation and design, not accounting for the full
shapes of the relevant distributions can be restrictive and
problematic (Simoiu, Corbett-Davies, and Goel 2017).
In Jiang et al. (2019), we introduced an approach to fair
classiﬁcation that uses optimal transport theory to match the
distributions of the model outputs corresponding to different sensitive attributes to a common distribution. We demonstrated that using the Wasserstein-1 barycenter as common
distribution incurs in minimal changes to the predictions obtained by the unfair model. In this paper, we generalize this
∗

Equal contribution.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3633

