The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Gromov-Wasserstein Factorization Models for Graph Clustering
Hongteng Xu1,2
1

2

Inﬁnia ML Inc. Department of ECE, Duke Univeristy
hongteng.xu@duke.edu

Abstract

2
min d2gw (B({U k }K
k=1 , λ; dgw ), C)

We propose a new nonlinear factorization model for graphs
that are with topological structures, and optionally, node
attributes. This model is based on a pseudometric called
Gromov-Wasserstein (GW) discrepancy, which compares
graphs in a relational way. It estimates observed graphs as
GW barycenters constructed by a set of atoms with different weights. By minimizing the GW discrepancy between
each observed graph and its GW barycenter-based estimation, we learn the atoms and their weights associated with
the observed graphs. The model achieves a novel and ﬂexible factorization mechanism under GW discrepancy, in which
both the observed graphs and the learnable atoms can be unaligned and with different sizes. We design an effective approximate algorithm for learning this Gromov-Wasserstein
factorization (GWF) model, unrolling loopy computations as
stacked modules and computing gradients with backpropagation. The stacked modules can be with two different architectures, which correspond to the proximal point algorithm
(PPA) and Bregman alternating direction method of multipliers (BADMM), respectively. Experiments show that our
model obtains encouraging results on clustering graphs.

Figure 1: An illustration of our Gromov-Wasserstein factorization model. Each star indicates a graph. For each graph,
the black curves show its edges, and the dots with different
colors are its nodes with different attributes.

2006), and dictionary learning (Aharon, Elad, and Bruckstein 2006), are designed for vectorized samples with the
same dimension. They are inapplicable to structural data,
e.g., graphs and point clouds. For example, in the task of
graph clustering, the observed graphs are often with different numbers of nodes, and the correspondences between
their nodes are often unknown, i.e., the graphs are unaligned. These unaligned graphs cannot be represented as
vectors directly. Although many graph embedding methods
have been proposed for these years with the help of graph
neural networks (Kipf and Welling 2016; Ying et al. 2018),
they often require side information like node attributes and
labels, which may not be available in practice. Moreover,
without explicit factorization mechanisms, these methods
cannot ﬁnd the atoms that can reconstruct observed graphs,
and thus, the graph embeddings derived by them are not so
interpretable as the latent representation derived by factorization models. Therefore, it is urgent to build a ﬂexible factorization model applicable to structural data.
To overcome the challenges above, we propose a novel
Gromov-Wasserstein factorization (GWF) model based on
Gromov-Wasserstein (GW) discrepancy (Mémoli 2011;
Chowdhury and Mémoli 2018) and barycenters (Peyré, Cuturi, and Solomon 2016). As illustrated in Fig. 1, for each
observed graph (i.e., the red star), our GWF model reconstructs it based on a set of atoms (i.e., the orange stars corresponding to four graphs). The reconstruction (i.e., the blue
star) is the GW barycenter of the atoms that minimizes the
GW discrepancy to the observed graph. The weights of the
atoms (i.e., the blue arrows with different widths) formu-

Introduction
As an important methodology for machine learning, factorization models explore intrinsic structures of highdimensional observations explicitly, which have been widely
used in many learning tasks, e.g., data clustering (Ng, Jordan, and Weiss 2002), dimensionality reduction (Candès et
al. 2011), recommendation systems (Wang and Blei 2011),
etc. In particular, factorization models decompose highdimensional observations into a set of atoms under speciﬁc
criteria and achieve their latent representations accordingly.
For each observation, its latent representation corresponds
to the coefﬁcients associated with the atoms.1
However, most of the existing factorization models, such
as principal component analysis (PCA) (Pearson 1901),
nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF) (Sra and Dhillon
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
In this paper, we borrow the terms “atoms” and “coefﬁcients” from a kind of factorization model called dictionary learning (Aharon, Elad, and Bruckstein 2006).
6478

