The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Reﬁning Tournament Solutions via Margin of Victory
Markus Brill

Ulrike Schmidt-Kraepelin

Warut Suksompong

Technische Universität Berlin
Chair of Efﬁcient Algorithms
brill@tu-berlin.de

Technische Universität Berlin
Chair of Efﬁcient Algorithms
u.schmidt-kraepelin@tu-berlin.de

University of Oxford
Department of Computer Science
warut.suksompong@cs.ox.ac.uk

various criteria, they often exhibit low discriminative power
because the chosen winner sets tend to be large. Indeed, previous work has shown that common tournament solutions
such as the top cycle, the uncovered set, the Banks set, and
the minimal covering set almost never exclude any alternative in a random tournament (Fey 2008; Scott and Fey 2012),
while the bipartisan set includes on average half of the alternatives in the winner set (Fisher and Ryan 1995).1 This naturally raises the question of how tournament solutions can
be reﬁned in order to differentiate among the winners of a
given tournament.
In this paper, we propose a general framework for reﬁning tournament solutions and for distinguishing among the
winners—as well as among the non-winners—of a tournament. We introduce the concept of margin of victory (MoV)
for tournaments, which captures how close a winner is to
dropping out of the winner set, and by symmetry how close
a non-winner is to entering the winner set. For a given tournament and weights on the tournament edges, the MoV of
a winner is deﬁned as the minimum total weight of edges
whose reversals take it out of the winner set. Analogously,
the MoV of a non-winner is deﬁned as the negative of the
minimum total weight of edges whose reversals bring it into
the winner set. An important special case is when the edges
are unweighted: in this case, the problem reduces to ﬁnding
the minimum number of edges to be reversed.
The edge weights in our MoV framework can be interpreted in a number of different ways. Generally speaking,
they represent the strength of the edges or the cost that one
incurs by reversing them. In an election, a weight may reﬂect the proportion of voters who agree with the corresponding pairwise comparison, while in a sports competition, it
may indicate the gap between the two teams in the match
result. Alternatively, our reﬁnements can also be viewed
through the lens of bribery and manipulation. In this context,
the weights express the amount of bribe that a manipulator
needs to pay in order to reverse a pairwise comparison; the
recipients of the bribe are voters in the case of an election
and teams or referees in the case of a sports competition.

Abstract
Tournament solutions are frequently used to select winners
from a set of alternatives based on pairwise comparisons between alternatives. Prior work has shown that several common tournament solutions tend to select large winner sets
and therefore have low discriminative power. In this paper,
we propose a general framework for reﬁning tournament solutions. In order to distinguish between winning alternatives,
and also between non-winning ones, we introduce the notion
of margin of victory (MoV) for tournament solutions. MoV
is a robustness measure for individual alternatives: For winners, the MoV captures the distance from dropping out of
the winner set, and for non-winners, the distance from entering the set. In each case, distance is measured in terms
of which pairwise comparisons would have to be reversed
in order to achieve the desired outcome. For common tournament solutions, including the top cycle, the uncovered set,
and the Banks set, we determine the complexity of computing the MoV and provide worst-case bounds on the MoV for
both winners and non-winners. Our results can also be viewed
from the perspective of bribery and manipulation.

1

Introduction

A number of practical choice scenarios involving pairwise
comparisons of alternatives can be modeled using tournaments. For instance, the pairwise comparisons could represent match outcomes when alternatives are teams in a roundrobin sports competition, or the results of pairwise majority
comparisons when the alternatives are candidates in an election. In order to select the set of “winners” from a tournament, several methods, known in the literature as tournament solutions, have been proposed. Over the past decades,
many of these tournament solutions have been extensively
studied from both the axiomatic and the computational point
of view (Laslier 1997; Brandt, Brill, and Harrenstein 2016).
Due to their generality and wide range of applications, the
study of tournament solutions and their properties has attracted considerable attention from the multiagent systems
research community in recent years (e.g., Brandt, Brill, and
Harrenstein, 2018; Aziz et al., 2015; Mnich, Shrestha, and
Yang, 2015)
Although tournament solutions provide a rich supply of
procedures for choosing tournament winners according to

1

These results assume that tournaments are chosen from the
uniform distribution. Brandt and Seedig (2016) and Saile and Suksompong (2018) relax this assumption and study the discriminative
power of tournament solutions when tournaments are generated according to different stochastic models.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1862

