The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Joint Adversarial Learning for
Domain Adaptation in Semantic Segmentation
Yixin Zhang, Zilei Wang
Department of Automation, University of Science and Technology of China
zhyx12@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zlwang@ustc.edu.cn

the domain shift between the source (synthetic) and target
(real-world) domains (Hoffman et al. 2016). Domain adaptation (Ben-David et al. 2007) is exactly proposed to reduce
the domain shift. In this paper, we focus on unsupervised domain adaptation in semantic segmentation, where none of
image annotation in the target domain is required. A common practice for domain adaptation is to build invariance
across domains by minimizing the measure of domain shift
such as correlation distances (Ganin and Lempitsky 2014;
Tzeng et al. 2017; Long et al. 2016; 2015). In recent works
for semantic segmentation, the distribution consistency between the source and target domains is usually enforced via
adversarial learning in the pixel space (Hoffman et al. 2018;
Wu et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2018), feature space (Hoffman
et al. 2016; Chen et al. 2017; Sankaranarayanan et al. 2018;
Zhu et al. 2018) or output space (Tsai et al. 2018; 2019;
Luo et al. 2019b). As output space contains richer structured
information shared by two domains, it is proven to be more
appropriate for semantic segmentation (Tsai et al. 2018).
However, how to effectively cooperate adversarial learning
to mitigate the domain shift is still an open question.

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation in semantic segmentation is
to exploit the pixel-level annotated samples in the source domain to aid the segmentation of unlabeled samples in the target domain. For such a task, the key point is to learn domaininvariant representations and adversarial learning is usually
used, in which the discriminator is to distinguish which domain the input comes from, and the segmentation model targets to deceive the domain discriminator. In this work, we
ﬁrst propose a novel joint adversarial learning (JAL) to boost
the domain discriminator in output space by introducing the
information of domain discriminator from low-level features.
Consequently, the training of the high-level decoder would be
enhanced. Then we propose a weight transfer module (WTM)
to alleviate the inherent bias of the trained decoder towards
source domain. Speciﬁcally, WTM changes the original decoder into a new decoder, which is learned only under the
supervision of adversarial loss and thus mainly focuses on
reducing domain divergence. The extensive experiments on
two widely used benchmarks show that our method can bring
considerable performance improvement over different baseline methods, which well demonstrates the effectiveness of
our method in the output space adaptation.

In this work, we develop a novel framework for domain
adaptation in semantic segmentation, which performs adversarial learning in a different way. Figure 1 shows the illustration of our method. Dotted line represents low-level domain
discriminator which makes the distribution of two domains
closer. Arrow represents weight transfer module which can
reﬁne the class boundary, thus the segmentation model generalizes well on the target domain.

Introduction
Recently, deep convolutional neural network (DCNN) has
innovated the ﬁeld of computer vision (Simonyan and Zisserman 2015; Ren et al. 2015; Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell
2015). Its success is largely due to the availability of largescale and high-quality datasets such as ImageNet (Deng et
al. 2009), Pascal VOC (Everingham et al. 2010), COCO (Lin
et al. 2014) and Cityscapes (Cordts et al. 2016). Nevertheless, data annotation, especially pixel-level labeling, is
labor-intensive and time-consuming, e.g., the average time
to annotate a ground-truth image for semantic segmentation
in Cityscapes is up to 1 hour (Cordts et al. 2016; Richter et
al. 2016). An appealing approach to the issue is to utilize
the synthetic data that can be automatically generated and
annotated by rendering engine (Richter et al. 2016; Ros et
al. 2016). However, the model trained on synthetic data can
not generalize well to real-world images, which is caused by

We analyze the predicted probabilities of domain discriminator in output space adversarial training, and ﬁnd that for
a trained model, the segmentation performance is related to
the prediction of domain discriminator which takes segmentation map as input and produces a domain label for each
pixel. For a target segmentation map, the more easily the domain discriminator classiﬁes it as source domain, the better
performance the segmentation model will achieve. As the
segmentation model should deceive domain discriminator,
the misclassiﬁcation indicates the target segmentation map
is more similar to source ones. This motivates us to ﬁnd a
more proper way to guide the adversarial training and we
propose joint adversarial learning. Speciﬁcally, the segmen-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6877

