The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Query Answering with Guarded Existential Rules under Stable Model Semantics
Hai Wan,1 Guohui Xiao,2∗ Chenglin Wang,1 Xianqiao Liu,1 Junhong Chen,1 Zhe Wang3
1

School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510006, P.R.China
KRDB Research Centre, Free University of Bozen-Bolzano, Piazza Domenicani 3, 39100 Bolzano, Italy
3
School of Information and Communication Technology, Grifﬁth University, Brisbane, QLD 4111, Australia
wanhai@mail.sysu.edu.cn, xiao@inf.unibz.it, {wangchlin, liuxq35, chenjh46}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, zhe.wang@grifﬁth.edu.au
2

into disjunctive rules with stratiﬁed negation. Other significant decidable fragments of NTGDs under SMS include
Magka, Krötzsch, and Horrocks (2013), Zhang, Zhang, and
You (2015), and Alviano, Morak, and Pieris (2017).
Due to the availability of efﬁcient ASP solvers, such as
clingo (Gebser et al. 2012) and DLV (Leone et al. 2002),
it is natural to consider reusing ASP solvers for query answering with GNTGDs, which correspond to ASP programs
with function symbols. However, only a restricted subset
of ASP programs, e.g. ﬁnitely-ground ones (Calimeri et al.
2008), can be handled by existing ASP solvers. Unfortunately, as shown in the next motivating example, a logic program translated from GNTGDs can be inﬁnitely-ground.
Example 1. (Gottlob et al. 2014, Example 1) Let D =
{P erson(mary)} be a database and Σ be GNTGDs expressing that each person has at least one parent, each person belongs to either an odd generation or an even, and odd
and even alternate between one generation and the next:

Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of query answering with
guarded existential rules (also called GNTGDs) under stable
model semantics. Our goal is to use existing answer set programming (ASP) solvers. However, ASP solvers handle only
ﬁnitely-ground logic programs while the program translated
from GNTGDs by Skolemization is not in general. To address this challenge, we introduce two novel notions of (1)
guarded instantiation forest to describe the instantiation of
GNTGDs and (2) prime block to characterize the repeated
inﬁnitely-ground program translated from GNTGDs. Using
these notions, we prove that the ground termination problem
for GNTGDs is decidable. We also devise an algorithm for
query answering with GNTGDs using ASP solvers. We have
implemented our approach in a prototype system. The evaluation over a set of benchmarks shows encouraging results.

Introduction
Existential rules (Calı̀, Gottlob, and Pieris 2010;
Calı̀, Gottlob, and Lukasiewicz 2012), also well-known as
tuple-generating dependencies (TGDs) (Beeri and Vardi
1984), is a powerful rule-based logic formalism for query
answering. Since query answering with TGDs is undecidable in general (Beeri and Vardi 1981), one important
research direction is to identify decidable fragments of
TGDs. A major decidable class of TGDs is guarded TGDs
(GTGDs) whose body contains an atom that covers all body
variables (Calı̀, Gottlob, and Lukasiewicz 2012). Guardedness is a well-accepted paradigm because it captures
important databases constraints such as inclusion dependencies, and lightweight description logics such as DL-Lite.
Adding non-monotonic negation in TGDs under the
stable model semantics (SMS) (Gelfond and Lifschitz
1988), as in answer set programming (ASP), called normal
TGDs (NTGDs), has drawn much attention. The most
notable work is by Gottlob et al. (2014), who showed the
decidability and complexity of query answering under SMS
for GNTGDs and extended the QCHECK algorithm (Calı̀,
Gottlob, and Kifer 2013) to answer covered queries (i.e.
queries in which the variables in each negative atom is
covered by a positive atom) by transforming the GNTGDs

P erson(x) → ∃y P arent(x, y),
P arent(x, y) → P erson(y),
P erson(x), not Even(x) → Odd(x),
P erson(x), not Odd(x) → Even(x),
P arent(x, y), Odd(x) → Even(y),
P arent(x, y), Even(x) → Odd(y).

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

The Skolemization of rule (1) is
P erson(x) → P arent(x, f (x)).

(7)

Let Σ0 =Σ\{(1)}∪{(7)}. Since program Σ0 ∪D is inﬁnitelyground, ASP solvers are not able to handle it. Moreover, consider a boolean conjunctive query Q= ∃x1 x2 x3
Parent(x1 , x2 )∧Parent(x2 , x3 )∧¬Parent(x1 , x3 ). Since
Q is not covered, the technique in Gottlob et al. (2014) does
not help either. To the best of knowledge, no existing method
can handle such queries over GNTGDs.
To address this challenge, we rely on two techniques: the
ﬁrst one is guarded chase forest (GCF) (Calı̀, Gottlob, and
Lukasiewicz 2012; Calı̀, Gottlob, and Kifer 2013), in which
the nodes are derived atoms, and the edges encode the application of GTGDs. The second is intelligent instantiation
(Calimeri et al. 2008), which has been used for characterizing ﬁnitely-grounded logic programs. In order to tame the

∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3017

