The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

W INO G RANDE: An Adversarial Winograd Schema Challenge at Scale
Keisuke Sakaguchi,∗ Ronan Le Bras,∗ Chandra Bhagavatula,∗ Yejin Choi∗†
∗

Allen Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, † University of Washington
{keisukes, ronanlb, chandrab, yejinc}@allenai.org

be pronoun resolution problems (see examples in Figure 1)
that are trivial for humans but hard for machines that merely
rely on statistical patterns without true capabilities of commonsense reasoning. However, recent advances in neural
language models have already reported around 90% accuracy on a variant of WSC dataset.1 This raises an important
question:

Abstract
The Winograd Schema Challenge (WSC) (Levesque, Davis,
and Morgenstern 2011), a benchmark for commonsense reasoning, is a set of 273 expert-crafted pronoun resolution problems originally designed to be unsolvable for statistical models
that rely on selectional preferences or word associations. However, recent advances in neural language models have already
reached around 90% accuracy on variants of WSC. This raises
an important question whether these models have truly acquired robust commonsense capabilities or whether they rely
on spurious biases in the datasets that lead to an overestimation
of the true capabilities of machine commonsense.
To investigate this question, we introduce W INO G RANDE,
a large-scale dataset of 44k problems, inspired by the original WSC design, but adjusted to improve both the scale and
the hardness of the dataset. The key steps of the dataset construction consist of (1) a carefully designed crowdsourcing
procedure, followed by (2) systematic bias reduction using a
novel A F L ITE algorithm that generalizes human-detectable
word associations to machine-detectable embedding associations. The best state-of-the-art methods on W INO G RANDE
achieve 59.4 – 79.1%, which are ∼15-35% (absolute) below
human performance of 94.0%, depending on the amount of
the training data allowed (2% – 100% respectively).
Furthermore, we establish new state-of-the-art results on ﬁve
related benchmarks — WSC (→ 90.1%), DPR (→ 93.1%),
COPA(→ 90.6%), KnowRef (→ 85.6%), and Winogender
(→ 97.1%). These results have dual implications: on one hand,
they demonstrate the effectiveness of W INO G RANDE when
used as a resource for transfer learning. On the other hand,
they raise a concern that we are likely to be overestimating
the true capabilities of machine commonsense across all these
benchmarks. We emphasize the importance of algorithmic bias
reduction in existing and future benchmarks to mitigate such
overestimation.

1

Have neural language models successfully acquired commonsense or are we overestimating the true capabilities of
machine commonsense?
This question about the potential overestimation leads to another crucial question regarding potential unwanted biases
that the large-scale neural language models might be exploiting, essentially solving the problems right, but for wrong reasons. While WSC questions are expert-crafted, recent studies
have shown that they are nevertheless prone to incidental biases. Trichelair et al. (2018) have reported word-association
(13.5% of the cases, see Figure 1 for examples) as well as
other types of dataset-speciﬁc biases. While such biases and
annotation artifacts are not apparent for individual instances,
they get introduced in the dataset as problem authors subconsciously repeat similar problem-crafting strategies.
To investigate this question about the true estimation of
the machine commonsense capabilities, we introduce W INO G RANDE, a new dataset with 44k problems that are inspired
by the original design of WSC, but modiﬁed to improve both
the scale and hardness of the problems. The key steps in
W INO G RANDE construction consist of (1) a carefully designed crowdsourcing procedure, followed by (2) a novel
algorithm A F L ITE that generalizes human-detectable biases
based on word occurrences to machine-detectable biases
based on embedding occurrences. The key motivation of our
approach is that it is difﬁcult for humans to write problems
without accidentally inserting unwanted biases.
While humans ﬁnd W INO G RANDE problems trivial with
94% accuracy, best state-of-the-art results, including those
from RoBERTa (Liu et al. 2019) are considerably lower,

Introduction

The Winograd Schema Challenge (WSC) (Levesque, Davis,
and Morgenstern 2011), proposed as an alternative to the
Turing Test (Turing 1950), has been used as a benchmark for
evaluating commonsense reasoning. WSC are designed to

1
https://github.com/pytorch/fairseq/tree/master/examples/
roberta. We note that this variant aggregates the original WSC,
PDP (Morgenstern, Davis, and Ortiz 2016) and additional PDP-style
examples, and recasts them into True/False binary problems.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8732

