The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Arena: A General Evaluation Platform and
Building Toolkit for Multi-Agent Intelligence
Yuhang Song,1 Andrzej Wojcicki,3 Thomas Lukasiewicz,1 Jianyi Wang,4 Abi Aryan,5
Zhenghua Xu,1,2∗ Mai Xu,4 Zihan Ding,6 Lianlong Wu1
1

2

Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, United Kingdom
State Key Laboratory of Reliability and Intelligence of Electrical Equipment, Hebei University of Technology, China
3
Lighthouse, 4 School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Beihang University, China
5
University of California, Los Angeles, United States, 6 Imperial College London, United Kingdom
{yuhang.song, thomas.lukasiewicz}@cs.ox.ac.uk, andrzej@wojcicki.xyz, zhenghua.xu@hebut.edu.cn
strategies are invented while a population of human players/artiﬁcial agents evolves by improving themselves over
the others, i.e., each agent is acting as an environment for
the others and improving itself means proposing new problems for the others.
To study a new class of intelligence, general evaluation
platforms with diverse games are milestones that push forward the research to the next levels. For example, ALE
(Bellemare et al. 2013), Mujoco (Todorov, Erez, and Tassa
2012), and DM-Suite (Tassa et al. 2018) are the most
spread general evaluation platforms that greatly accelerate the research in general reinforcement learning. However, there is no such general evaluation platform for multiagent intelligence. Although some platforms support multiagent settings (Wydmuch, Kempka, and Jaśkowski 2018;
Vinyals et al. 2017), they are not general evaluation platforms, i.e., built for speciﬁc games. Thus, in this paper, we
propose the ﬁrst general evaluation platform for multi-agent
intelligence, called Arena, containing 35 multi-agent games
in total, with diverse logics and representations; see Fig. 1.
Apart from training and evaluation, multi-agent intelligence research is still at a stage where many problems remain undiscovered or unexplored. Thus, the second contribution of Arena is a building toolkit for multi-agent intelligence, enabling the easy creation of different multi-agent
scenarios. For example, in the sample game in Fig. 2 (a), after deﬁning the basic behavior of the agent (i.e., moving and
turning) and the “alive” state of the agent (i.e., it stays on
the playground), it can be extended to different multi-agent
scenarios with minimal effort. For example, (1) ﬁve players
ﬁght each other until only one agent is left alive (see Fig. 2
(b)), or (2) 5 ˆ 2 players form 2 teams, and each agent ﬁghts
for its own team until all players in a team are dead (see Fig.
2 (c)), or (3) multiple players form multiple teams in hierarchies, where the collaboration and competition relationships
between the teams are customized (see Fig. 3).
Thus, Arena is not just a research platform for the evaluation with a ﬁxed set of games, but also a building toolkit for
researchers to invent and build novel multi-agent problems.
To achieve the above vision of building a toolkit for multiagent intelligence, (1) we provide a GUI-conﬁgurable tree
that deﬁnes the social structure of agents, called social tree;

Abstract
Learning agents that are not only capable of taking tests,
but also innovating is becoming a hot topic in AI. One of
the most promising paths towards this vision is multi-agent
learning, where agents act as the environment for each other,
and improving each agent means proposing new problems for
others. However, existing evaluation platforms are either not
compatible with multi-agent settings, or limited to a speciﬁc
game. That is, there is not yet a general evaluation platform
for research on multi-agent intelligence. To this end, we introduce Arena, a general evaluation platform for multi-agent
intelligence with 35 games of diverse logics and representations. Furthermore, multi-agent intelligence is still at the
stage where many problems remain unexplored. Therefore,
we provide a building toolkit for researchers to easily invent and build novel multi-agent problems from the provided
game set based on a GUI-conﬁgurable social tree and ﬁve basic multi-agent reward schemes. Finally, we provide Python
implementations of ﬁve state-of-the-art deep multi-agent reinforcement learning baselines. Along with the baseline implementations, we release a set of 100 best agents/teams that
we can train with different training schemes for each game, as
the base for evaluating agents with population performance.
As such, the research community can perform comparisons
under a stable and uniform standard. All the implementations
and accompanied tutorials have been open-sourced for the
community at https://sites.google.com/view/arena-unity/.

Introduction
Modern learning algorithms are more of outstanding testtakers, but less of innovators, i.e., the ceiling of an agent’s
intelligence may be limited by the complexity of its environment (Leibo et al. 2019). Thus, the emergence of innovation
is becoming a hot topic for AI. One of the most promising
paths towards such a vision is learning via social interaction,
i.e., multi-agent learning. In multi-agent learning, how the
agents should beat the opponents or collaborate with each
other is not deﬁned or limited by the creator of the environment, e.g., the inventor of the ancient Go never deﬁnes what
strategies are good. However, enormous and sophisticated
∗

Corresponding author: Zhenghua Xu.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7253

