The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

An Attentional Recurrent Neural Network
for Personalized Next Location Recommendation
Qing Guo,1 Zhu Sun,2 Jie Zhang,3 Yin-Leng Theng4
1,2,3,4
1,2,3,4

Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{qguo006, zhu.sun, zhangj, tyltheng}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Most existing studies on next location recommendation propose to model the sequential regularity of check-in sequences, but suffer from the severe data sparsity issue where
most locations have fewer than ﬁve following locations. To
this end, we propose an Attentional Recurrent Neural Network (ARNN) to jointly model both the sequential regularity
and transition regularities of similar locations (neighbors). In
particular, we ﬁrst design a meta-path based random walk
over a novel knowledge graph to discover location neighbors based on heterogeneous factors. A recurrent neural network is then adopted to model the sequential regularity by
capturing various contexts that govern user mobility. Meanwhile, the transition regularities of the discovered neighbors
are integrated via the attention mechanism, which seamlessly
cooperates with the sequential regularity as a uniﬁed recurrent framework. Experimental results on multiple real-world
datasets demonstrate that ARNN outperforms state-of-the-art
methods.

Figure 1: A running example

that they share similar transitional patterns. Fig. 1 presents
a running example to illustrate our intuition. l1 is an Italian
restaurant followed by only a few locations, so it is challenging to predict the next location that a user might visit after
l1 by only capturing the sequential regularity. In fact, the
transitional information of l1 ’s neighbors can help ease such
sparsity issue. For instance, if users often watch a ﬁlm at a
cinema l3 after having dinner at l2 (l1 ’s neighbor which is a
nearby Sushi restaurant), then l3 can also be recommended
as the next location for l1 . In other words, the transition regularities of neighbors serve as complementary information
for locations with insufﬁcient following check-ins. Finally,
the transition regularities of neighbors at each time step can
cooperate with the sequential regularity of previous check-in
sequence to jointly predict users’ next movement.
Due to the heterogeneous nature of LBSNs, multiple factors make connections between two locations including geographical distance, semantics (POI categories and tags)
and user preference (Xie et al. 2016; Guo et al. 2017;
Yin et al. 2017). We expand similar locations by assuming
two locations are similar if they are: 1) geographically close;
2) described by the same semantics; 3) preferred by the same
user. Our idea can be considered as a neighborhood-based
strategy, i.e., aggregating useful features of neighbors for
recommendation. To our best knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to
solve such data sparsity issue by coherently modeling the se-

Introduction
With the advancement of mobile technologies, locationbased social network (LBSN) services (e.g., Foursquare,
Facebook place and Yelp) have become increasingly more
popular in recent years. Next location recommendation in
LBSNs is an important function as it enables users to explore more interesting locations and better plan their trips
(Cheng et al. 2013; Liu et al. 2016; Feng et al. 2018). Existing approaches mostly focus on capturing the sequential
regularity for modeling human mobility (Liu et al. 2016;
Feng et al. 2018; Tang and Wang 2018), i.e., users’ next
movement highly relates to previously visited locations. Yet
next location recommendation in LBSNs is still very difﬁcult due to the extreme sparsity issue (Yao et al. 2017;
Feng et al. 2018; Sun et al. 2019) – our data analysis shows
that most locations are only followed by fewer than 5 locations consecutively. Such data sparsity issue makes it hard
to learn effective sequential patterns among locations.
To solve the sparsity problem, we leverage the transition
regularities of similar locations (neighbors) by assuming
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
83

