The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Background Suppression Network
for Weakly-Supervised Temporal Action Localization
Pilhyeon Lee

Youngjung Uh

Hyeran Byun∗

Yonsei University
lph1114@yonsei.ac.kr

Clova AI Research, NAVER Corp.
youngjung.uh@navercorp.com

Yonsei University
hrbyun@yonsei.ac.kr

commonly used weak supervision where each video is
treated as a positive sample for action classes if it contains corresponding action frames. We note that a video can
have multiple action classes as its label. In order to disseminate the video-level label to individual frames, some
previous methods formulate WTAL as multiple instance
learning (MIL) which employs labels for bags of instances
rather than those for individual instances (Wang et al. 2017;
Paul, Roy, and Roy-Chowdhury 2018; Xu et al. 2019). As a
video can be deﬁned as a set of multiple frames, they ﬁrst
classify individual frames into action classes and then aggregate the frame-level scores to predict the video’s action
classes so that classiﬁcation loss from video-level can guide
frame-level predictions.
In this paper, we argue that previous MIL-based approaches do not fully model the problem in that background
frames have not been regarded as a separate class although
they do not belong to any action class. As a result, background frames are trained to be classiﬁed as action classes
of the video to minimize loss from video-level even though
they do not have certain features of actions. This inconsistency pushes background frames towards action classes,
which causes false positives and performance degradation.
To tackle this problem, we introduce an auxiliary class
for background frames. Since all untrimmed videos contain
background frames, they are positive samples for their original action classes and the background class at the same time.
The aforementioned inconsistency is resolved as all frames
in a video now have their own categories to target. We note
that our approach is in line with fully-supervised methods
for object detection (Ren et al. 2015; Redmon et al. 2016;
Liu et al. 2016) and TAL (Shou, Wang, and Chang 2016;
Zhao et al. 2017) in employing the background class. However, in weakly-supervised setting, introducing background
class alone does not lead to improvement because we have
no negative sample for background class to train. This means
the network will eventually learn to produce high scores for
background class regardless of input videos.
Hence, to better exploit background class, we design
Background Suppression Network (BaS-Net) containing
two branches: Base branch and Suppression branch. Base
branch has the usual MIL architecture which takes frame-

Abstract
Weakly-supervised temporal action localization is a very
challenging problem because frame-wise labels are not given
in the training stage while the only hint is video-level labels:
whether each video contains action frames of interest. Previous methods aggregate frame-level class scores to produce
video-level prediction and learn from video-level action labels. This formulation does not fully model the problem in
that background frames are forced to be misclassiﬁed as action classes to predict video-level labels accurately. In this
paper, we design Background Suppression Network (BaSNet) which introduces an auxiliary class for background and
has a two-branch weight-sharing architecture with an asymmetrical training strategy. This enables BaS-Net to suppress
activations from background frames to improve localization
performance. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of BaS-Net and its superiority over the state-of-theart methods on the most popular benchmarks – THUMOS’14
and ActivityNet. Our code and the trained model are available
at https://github.com/Pilhyeon/BaSNet-pytorch.

1

Introduction

As the number of videos grows tremendously, extracting
frames with actions from untrimmed videos is becoming
more important so that humans can exploit them more efﬁciently. Furthermore, such frames are also useful data for
machines to learn action representations. Accordingly, temporal action localization (TAL) has been developed to ﬁnd
frames containing actions in untrimmed videos, usually by
training deep networks with full supervision, i.e., individual
frames are labeled as action classes or background. However, training with full supervision has several pitfalls: they
are (1) expensive (2) subjective (especially on action boundaries) (3) error-prone. Consequently, the research community has been interested in weakly-supervised temporal action localization (WTAL).
WTAL also aims to predict frame-wise labels but with
weak supervision (e.g., video-level label, frequency of action instances in videos, or temporal ordering of action instances). Among them, the video-level label is the most
∗

Corresponding Author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11320

