The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Multiple Positional Self-Attention Network for Text Classiﬁcation
Biyun Dai, Jinlong Li, Ruoyi Xu
School of Data Science
University of Science and Technology of China
Hefei, Anhui, China
{byd, xuruoyi}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, jlli@ustc.edu.cn

Context representation provides critical information in Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks. For different tasks
and data, there are two commonly used architectures: Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) (Kim 2014) and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) (Chung et al. 2014). RNN
captures long-range dependencies through sequential architecture while CNN captures phrase features by encoding
n-grams. More recently, attention mechanisms have been
widely used in NLP tasks, such as neural machine translation (Luong, Pham, and Manning 2015) and sentiment
analysis (Kokkinos and Potamianos 2017) etc. In contrast
to RNN and CNN, attention mechanisms (Bahdanau, Cho,
and Bengio 2015) allow modeling of dependencies without
regard to the distances of the words in the input or output
sequences (Kim et al. 2017).
As a variant of attention mechanism, self-attention has
been used successfully in a variety of tasks including reading comprehension (Cheng, Dong, and Lapata 2016) and abstractive summarization (Parikh et al. 2016) etc. Recently,

self-attention was used to replace RNN in context-aware encoding for learning long-range dependencies (Vaswani et al.
2017). The ability to learn long-range dependencies is affected by the length of the paths along which the forward and
backward signals propagate in the network. The shorter path
between tokens is, the easier it is to learn long-range dependency (Hochreiter et al. 2001), and self-attention works well
in learning long-range dependencies (Vaswani et al. 2017).
However, there are two issues of self-attention mechanism
to be addressed. One is that contrast to RNN, self-attention
treats all input tokens as identical individuals and loses the
temporal order information (Shen et al. 2018a), which might
be important to the NLP tasks. Another is that the positional information is lost, i.e. self-attention does not take
into account different importance to the tokens of different
distances. For instance, adjacent words contribute more semantically to current phrase than distant ones (Guo, Zhang,
and Liu 2019).
To address the ﬁrst issue, there is a way of adding directional masks to furnish temporal order information (Shen
et al. 2018a), but it didn’t consider positional information.
About the second issue, we roughly classify several methods
into two categories: adaptive positional information method
(Gehring et al. 2017) and pre-tuned positional information
method (Guo, Zhang, and Liu 2019). Compared to adaptive positional information method, the pre-tuned method
can’t extract different positional information for different
sentences. While compared to pre-tuned method, adaptive
method lacks scalability. And all these pre-tuned methods
and adaptive methods only explore positional information
and overlook the temporal order information.
Therefore, we combined the adaptive and the pre-tuned
positional information methods, temporal order information
and positional information into a single model to beneﬁt
each other and to overcoming their inherent disadvantages.
In our MPSAN, we designed two new masks that focus on
distance information. And to integrate different masks containing different temporal order and positional information,
we proposed a new Position-Fusion Layer with 3.24million
fewer parameters than the Fusion Gate in DISAN (Shen et
al. 2018a).
In general, our contributions are four-fold:

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We proposed two new positional masks: Faraway Mask
which focuses only on the (2m + 1)-gram words and ig-

Abstract
Self-attention mechanisms have recently caused many concerns on Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks. Relative
positional information is important to self-attention mechanisms. We propose Faraway Mask focusing on the (2m + 1)gram words and Scaled-Distance Mask putting the logarithmic distance punishment to avoid and weaken the selfattention of distant words respectively. To exploit different masks, we present Positional Self-Attention Layer for
generating different Masked-Self-Attentions and a following
Position-Fusion Layer in which fused positional information
multiplies the Masked-Self-Attentions for generating sentence
embeddings. To evaluate our sentence embeddings approach
Multiple Positional Self-Attention Network (MPSAN), we
perform the comparison experiments on sentiment analysis,
semantic relatedness and sentence classiﬁcation tasks. The
result shows that our MPSAN outperforms state-of-the-art
methods on ﬁve datasets and the test accuracy is improved
by 0.81%, 0.6% on SST, CR datasets, respectively. In addition, we reduce training parameters and improve the time
efﬁciency of MPSAN by lowering the dimension number of
self-attention and simplifying fusion mechanism.

Introduction

7610

