The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

DIANet: Dense-and-Implicit Attention Network
Zhongzhan Huang,1∗ Senwei Liang,2∗ Mingfu Liang,3 Haizhao Yang2,4†

1

Tsinghua University, 2 Purdue University, 3 Northwestern University, 4 National University of Singapore‡
hzz dedekinds@foxmail.com, {liang339, haizhao}@purdue.edu,
mingfuliang2020@u.northwestern.edu

Abstract
Attention networks have successfully boosted the performance in various vision problems. Previous works lay emphasis on designing a new attention module and individually
plug them into the networks. Our paper proposes a novel-andsimple framework that shares an attention module throughout different network layers to encourage the integration of
layer-wise information and this parameter-sharing module is
referred to as Dense-and-Implicit-Attention (DIA) unit. Many
choices of modules can be used in the DIA unit. Since Long
Short Term Memory (LSTM) has a capacity of capturing
long-distance dependency, we focus on the case when the
DIA unit is the modiﬁed LSTM (called DIA-LSTM). Experiments on benchmark datasets show that the DIA-LSTM unit
is capable of emphasizing layer-wise feature interrelation and
leads to signiﬁcant improvement of image classiﬁcation accuracy. We further empirically show that the DIA-LSTM has
a strong regularization ability on stabilizing the training of
deep networks by the experiments with the removal of skip
connections (He et al. 2016a) or Batch Normalization (Ioffe
and Szegedy 2015) in the whole residual network.

DIA unit
(shared)

DIA unit
(shared)

h1

h2

DIA unit
(shared)

hT
....

Layer-1

Layer-2

Layer-T

DIA unit
(shared)

h1

h2

hT
....

Layer-1

Layer-2

Layer-T

Figure 1: Left. Explicit structure of the network with DIA
unit. Right. Implicit connection caused by DIA unit.

Previous works lay emphasis on designing a new attention module and individually plug them into networks. Generally, the attention module can be divided into three parts:
extraction, processing and recalibration. First, the plug-in
module extracts internal features of a network which can
be squeezed channel-wise information (Hu, Shen, and Sun
2018; Li et al. 2019) or spatial information (Wang et al.
2018; Woo et al. 2018; Park et al. 2018). Next, the module
processes the extraction and generates a mask to measure the
importance of the features via a fully connected layer (Hu,
Shen, and Sun 2018), convolution layer (Wang et al. 2018).
Last, the mask is applied to recalibrate the features. Previous works focus on designing effective ways to process the
extracted features. There is one obvious common ground
where the attention modules are individually plugged into
each layer throughout DNNs (Hu, Shen, and Sun 2018;
Woo et al. 2018; Park et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2018).
Our Framework. Differently, we propose a novel-andsimple framework that shares an attention module throughout different network layers to encourage the integration of
layer-wise information and this parameter-sharing module is
referred to as Dense-and-Implicit-Attention (DIA) unit. The
structure and computation ﬂow of a DIA unit is visualized
), proin Figure 2. There are also three parts: extraction ( 1
) and recalibration ( 3
) in the DIA unit. The 2
 is
cessing ( 2
the main module in the DIA unit to model network attention
and is the key innovation of the proposed method where the
parameters of the attention module are shared.
Characteristics and Advantages. (1) As shown in Figure 2, the DIA unit is placed parallel to the network backbone, and it is shared with all the layers in the same

Introduction
Attention, a cognitive process that selectively focuses on a
small part of information while neglects other perceivable
information (Anderson 2005), has been used to effectively
ease neural networks from learning large information contexts from sentences (Vaswani et al. 2017; Britz et al. 2017;
Cheng, Dong, and Lapata 2016), images (Xu et al. 2015;
Luong, Pham, and Manning 2015) and videos (Miech,
Laptev, and Sivic 2017). Especially in computer vision, deep
neural networks (DNNs) incorporated with special operators
that mimic the attention mechanism can process informative
regions in an image efﬁciently. These operators are modularized and plugged into networks as attention modules (Hu,
Shen, and Sun 2018; Woo et al. 2018; Park et al. 2018;
Wang et al. 2018; Hu et al. 2018; Cao et al. 2019).
∗

Equal contribution
Corresponding author
‡
Part of the work was done in Singapore
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

4206

