The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Filtration and Distillation: Enhancing Region
Attention for Fine-Grained Visual Categorization
Chuanbin Liu, Hongtao Xie,∗ Zheng-Jun Zha, Lingfeng Ma, Lingyun Yu, Yongdong Zhang
School of Information Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
{lcb592, mlf123, yuly}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {htxie, zhazj, zhyd73}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Delicate attention of the discriminative regions plays a critical role in Fine-Grained Visual Categorization (FGVC). Unfortunately, most of the existing attention models perform
poorly in FGVC, due to the pivotal limitations in discriminative regions proposing and region-based feature learning. 1)
The discriminative regions are predominantly located based
on the ﬁlter responses over the images, which can not be
directly optimized with a performance metric. 2) Existing
methods train the region-based feature extractor as a one-hot
classiﬁcation task individually, while neglecting the knowledge from the entire object. To address the above issues, in
this paper, we propose a novel “Filtration and Distillation
Learning” (FDL) model to enhance the region attention of
discriminate parts for FGVC. Firstly, a Filtration Learning
(FL) method is put forward for discriminative part regions
proposing based on the matchability between proposing and
predicting. Speciﬁcally, we utilize the proposing-predicting
matchability as the performance metric of Region Proposal
Network (RPN), thus enable a direct optimization of RPN to
ﬁltrate most discriminative regions. Go in detail, the objectbased feature learning and region-based feature learning are
formulated as “teacher” and “student”, which can furnish
better supervision for region-based feature learning. Accordingly, our FDL can enhance the region attention effectively,
and the overall framework can be trained end-to-end without
neither object nor parts annotations. Extensive experiments
verify that FDL yields state-of-the-art performance under the
same backbone with the most competitive approaches on several FGVC tasks.

Figure 1: Illustrations of our proposed Filtration and Distillation Learning framework. Our FDL model creates effective supervision for discriminative regions proposing and
region-based feature learning, thus enhance region attention
for FGVC. [Best viewed in color with zoom-in]

tle and local regions. Therefore, the delicate attention of the
discriminative regions plays a critical role in FGVC. Correspondingly, it brings challenges in discriminative regions
proposing and region-based feature learning (Figure 1).
The delicate region attention ﬁrst relays on accurate discriminative regions proposing. Over the past few years,
a variety of regions proposing methods have been proposed relying on human-annotated bounding box/part annotations(Zhang et al. 2014)(Wang et al. 2016)(Krause et
al. 2015)(Lin et al. 2015). However, it requires specialized
knowledge and a large amount of annotation time during
labeling, making those methods less applicable in practice.
To overcome these problems, researchers begin focusing on
weakly supervised regions proposing without human bounding box/part annotations. These methods usually utilize ﬁlter response to detect the corresponding discriminative region (Zhang et al. 2016)(Fu, Zheng, and Mei 2017)(Zheng et
al. 2017)(Zheng et al. 2019). Therefore, the regions proposing can only get indirect optimization accompanied by the
improvement of feature extractor. Although promising results have been reported, the performance metric of region
proposing is still a blank area in researches. And the absence

Introduction
Fine-grained visual categorization (FGVC) attracts extensive research attention in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (He and
Peng 2017)(Liu et al. 2017), which aims to distinguish objects from different subordinate-level categories within a
general category, such as bird species (Wah et al. 2011), dog
breeds (Khosla et al. 2011), car models (Krause et al. 2013),
air-craft models (Maji et al. 2013), ﬂowers categories, etc.
Due to the visual similarity in object appearances, the categorization highly relies on the differences hidden in sub∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11555

