The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Communication Learning via
Backpropagation in Discrete Channels with Unknown Noise
Benjamin Freed

Guillaume Sartoretti

Carnegie Mellon University National University of Singapore
5000 Forbes Ave
21 Lower Kent Ridge Rd
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
Singapore 119077

Howie Choset
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Ave
Pittsburgh, PA 15213

from all other agents, conditioned only on information available to that particular agent (Bernstein et al. 2002; Gupta,
Egorov, and Kochenderfer 2017; Sartoretti et al. 2019; Foerster et al. 2017). Such decentralized approaches offer major
scalability and parallelizability advantages over centralized
planning approaches. Computational complexity of decentralized approaches scales linearly with the team size (as opposed to exponentially, as for typical centralized planners),
and action selection for each agent can occur completely in
parallel (Busoniu, Babuška, and De Schutter 2010). However, decentralized approaches pay for these beneﬁts with
potentially sub-optimal policies or lower degrees of agent
coordination. Particularly in partially-observable environments, a decentralized approach in which agents make decisions based solely on their own limited observations, cannot
make as informed decisions as a centralized planner, which
conditions all actions on all available information.

Abstract
This work focuses on multi-agent reinforcement learning
(RL) with inter-agent communication, in which communication is differentiable and optimized through backpropagation. Such differentiable approaches tend to converge more
quickly to higher-quality policies compared to techniques that
treat communication as actions in a traditional RL framework. However, modern communication networks (e.g., WiFi or Bluetooth) rely on discrete communication channels, for
which existing differentiable approaches that consider realvalued messages cannot be directly applied, or require biased gradient estimators. Some works have overcome this
problem by treating the message space as an extension of
the action space, and use standard RL to optimize message
selection, but these methods tend to converge slower and
to inferior policies. In this paper, we propose a stochastic
message encoding/decoding procedure that makes a discrete
communication channel mathematically equivalent to an analog channel with additive noise, through which gradients can
be backpropagated. Additionally, we introduce an encryption
step for use in noisy channels that forces channel noise to
be message-independent, allowing us to compute unbiased
derivative estimates even in the presence of unknown channel noise. To the best of our knowledge, this work presents
the ﬁrst differentiable communication learning approach that
can compute unbiased derivatives through channels with unknown noise. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in two example multi-robot tasks: a path ﬁnding and
a collaborative search problem. There, we show that our approach achieves learning speed and performance similar to
differentiable communication learning with real-valued messages (i.e., unlimited communication bandwidth), while naturally handling more realistic real-world communication constraints. Content Areas: Multi-Agent Communication, Reinforcement Learning.

1

Jiaheng Hu
Columbia University
116th St and Broadway
New York, NY 10027

We consider MARL problems in which agents have the
ability to communicate with each other. This communication ability offers agents a way to selectively exchange information, potentially allowing them to make more informed
decisions, while still achieving the same scalability and parallelizability advantages of a purely decentralized approach.
However, the addition of communication abilities also increases the difﬁculty of the learning problem, as agents now
have to make decisions not only about what actions to select, but also what information to send, how to encode it,
and how to interpret messages received from other agents.
This paper focuses on multi-agent RL with communication
that are readily applicable to real-world robotics problems.
In this paper, we present a novel approach to differentiable communication learning that utilizes a randomized
message encoding scheme to make discrete (and therefore
non-differentiable) communication channels behave mathematically like a differentiable, analog communication channel. We can use this technique to obtain unbiased, low variance gradient estimates through a discrete communication
channel. Additionally, we show how our approach can be
generalized to communication channels with arbitrary unknown noise, which existing approaches to differentiable
communication learning have not been able to deal with.

Introduction

Reinforcement learning has recently been successfully applied to complex multi-agent control problems such as
DOTA, Starcraft II, and virtual capture the ﬂag (Jaderberg et
al. 2019; OpenAI 2018). Many multi-agent reinforcementlearning (MARL) approaches seek to learn decentralized
policies, meaning each agent selects actions independently
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7160

