The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Unpaired Image Enhancement
Featuring Reinforcement-Learning-Controlled Image Editing Software
Satoshi Kosugi, Toshihiko Yamasaki
Department of Information and Communication Engineering, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
{kosugi, yamasaki}@hal.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

CycleGAN (Zhu et al. 2017), where generators which have
an encoder-decoder architecture are trained with cycle consistency. However, when using CNNs as decoders in realworld tasks, there are three problems. First, images generated by a CNN-based decoder have artifacts that can be attributed to CNN architecture. Because artifacts can seriously
degrade the quality of images, they can have fatal defects
when used in practical applications. Second, CNN-based decoders can only generate images with limited resolution in
practice (e.g., 512×512px in the CycleGAN paper). Recent
high-resolution displays need 2000px or larger images, but
generating images with a high resolution makes the training
unstable and time-consuming. Third, image-to-image translation with CNN-based decoders is not interpretable. Because the procedure is black-box, users cannot understand
and manually adjust it.
To achieve unpaired image enhancement that is without
artifacts, is scale-invariant, and is interpretable, we use image editing software which edits the input image based on
input parameters, such as Adobe Photoshop. Using image
editing software in the processing ﬂow has the following
three beneﬁts: edited images have no artifacts because the
software is carefully designed for professional use, the same
editing can be applied to large sized images using the scaleinvariant image editing ﬁlters provided by the software, and
the editing is interpretable allowing users to easily adjust it
manually. By using image editing software, we can achieve
high-quality and highly practical image enhancement. To
utilize image editing software in a GAN, we propose a reinforcement learning (RL) framework where the generator
works as the agent controlling the software. While a generator in a general GAN generates images directly, the generator in our framework selects the software’s parameters and
is rewarded when the edited result fools the discriminator.
By training the framework with RL, we can use high-quality
non-differentiable image editing software.
To evaluate the performance of the proposed method, we
apply it to two unpaired image enhancement tasks: photo enhancement and face beautiﬁcation. The experimental results
show that the proposed method achieves better performance
than previous approaches.
This paper makes the following contributions:

Abstract
This paper tackles unpaired image enhancement, a task of
learning a mapping function which transforms input images
into enhanced images in the absence of input-output image
pairs. Our method is based on generative adversarial networks
(GANs), but instead of simply generating images with a neural network, we enhance images utilizing image editing softR

ware such as Adobe R
for the following three
Photoshop
beneﬁts: enhanced images have no artifacts, the same enhancement can be applied to larger images, and the enhancement is interpretable. To incorporate image editing software
into a GAN, we propose a reinforcement learning framework
where the generator works as the agent that selects the software’s parameters and is rewarded when it fools the discriminator. Our framework can use high-quality non-differentiable
ﬁlters present in image editing software, which enables image
enhancement with high performance. We apply the proposed
method to two unpaired image enhancement tasks: photo enhancement and face beautiﬁcation. Our experimental results
demonstrate that the proposed method achieves better performance, compared to the performances of the state-of-the-art
methods based on unpaired learning.

Introduction
Image enhancement is a task of learning a mapping function
which transforms input images into enhanced images. If we
have a large number of original and enhanced image pairs,
the task can be solved by image-to-image translation methods, which have made signiﬁcant progress (Isola et al. 2017;
Wang et al. 2018) owing to the recent development of convolutional neural networks (CNNs). However, in many cases, it
is difﬁcult to collect a large number of such image pairs. To
avoid this problem, we address an image enhancement task
that does not require paired image datasets; that is, unpaired
image enhancement. In this paper, we propose an unpaired
image enhancement method which can be applied to realworld tasks.
A simple approach for unpaired image enhancement can
be to use unpaired image-to-image translation methods,
which are mainly based on generative adversarial networks
(GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014). One of such methods is
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11296

