The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Adversarial Deep Network
Embedding for Cross-Network Node Classification
Xiao Shen

Quanyu Dai

Fu-lai Chung

The Hong Kong Polytechnic
University
xiao.shen@connect.polyu.hk

The Hong Kong Polytechnic
University
quanyu.dai@connect.polyu.hk

The Hong Kong Polytechnic
University
cskchung@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Wei Lu

Kup-Sze Choi

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
luwei@uestc.edu.cn

The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
thomasks.choi@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract

network, can benefit a wide variety of applications. For
example, in online social networks, given a mature source
network with plenty of users having annotated labels indicating their interests, and a newly formed target network
short of labels, it would be beneficial to transfer useful
knowledge from the source network to make appropriate
recommendations to unlabeled users in the target network.
In addition, in protein-protein interaction networks, one
can leverage the abundant functional information from a
source network to help predict the functionalities of proteins in a newly formed target network.
In recent years, domain adaptation has received a lot of
attentions. Given a target domain short of labels, domain
adaptation aims to leverage the abundant labeled data from
a source domain to help target domain learning (Pan and
Yang 2010). A popular type of domain adaptation algorithms is feature-based (Long et al. 2013; Long et al. 2015;
Ganin et al. 2016; Tzeng et al. 2017; Shen et al. 2018),
which aims to learn domain-invariant feature representations to mitigate domain discrepancy. In these domain adaptation algorithms, each data sample is considered as independent and identically distributed during representation
learning. This is appropriate for image or text data in computer vision (CV) and natural language processing (NLP).
However, in network structural data, each instance (i.e.
node) naturally has complicated interactions or relations
(i.e. edges) w.r.t. other instances (i.e. its neighbors). It
should be rather important and necessary to consider the
complex network relationships between nodes for various
graph mining tasks. Thus, the existing domain adaptation
algorithms which fail to model the network structural information would yield unsatisfactory performance in crossnetwork node classification.

In this paper, the task of cross-network node classification,
which leverages the abundant labeled nodes from a source
network to help classify unlabeled nodes in a target network, is studied. The existing domain adaptation algorithms
generally fail to model the network structural information,
and the current network embedding models mainly focus on
single-network applications. Thus, both of them cannot be
directly applied to solve the cross-network node classification problem. This motivates us to propose an adversarial
cross-network deep network embedding (ACDNE) model to
integrate adversarial domain adaptation with deep network
embedding so as to learn network-invariant node representations that can also well preserve the network structural information. In ACDNE, the deep network embedding module utilizes two feature extractors to jointly preserve attributed affinity and topological proximities between nodes.
In addition, a node classifier is incorporated to make node
representations label-discriminative. Moreover, an adversarial domain adaptation technique is employed to make node
representations network-invariant. Extensive experimental
results demonstrate that the proposed ACDNE model
achieves the state-of-the-art performance in cross-network
node classification.

Introduction
Networks, a powerful means to represent complex interactions and relations between entities, are ubiquitous in the
real world, such as social networks, citation networks, and
protein-protein interaction networks. Cross-network node
classification, which transfers the knowledge learned from
a source network to help predict node labels in a target

Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2991

