The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Active Ordinal Querying for Tuplewise Similarity Learning
Gregory Canal,∗1 Stefano Fenu,∗2 Christopher Rozell1
1

School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
2
School of Interactive Computing
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA
{gregory.canal, sfenu3, crozell}@gatech.edu

Abstract
Many machine learning tasks such as clustering, classiﬁcation,
and dataset search beneﬁt from embedding data points in a
space where distances reﬂect notions of relative similarity as
perceived by humans. A common way to construct such an
embedding is to request triplet similarity queries to an oracle, comparing two objects with respect to a reference. This
work generalizes triplet queries to tuple queries of arbitrary
size that ask an oracle to rank multiple objects against a reference, and introduces an efﬁcient and robust adaptive selection
method called InfoTuple that uses a novel approach to mutual
information maximization. We show that the performance of
InfoTuple at various tuple sizes exceeds that of the state-ofthe-art adaptive triplet selection method on synthetic tests and
new human response datasets, and empirically demonstrate the
signiﬁcant gains in efﬁciency and query consistency achieved
by querying larger tuples instead of triplets.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: In 1(a) it is ambiguous which item should be chosen
as more similar to the head object, since both comparison
items are similar in distinct ways. In 1(b), adding one more
comparison item can add context to disambiguate this choice.

an oracle comparing objects with respect to a “head” (i.e., reference) object. Relative similarity queries are useful because
they gather object similarity information using only object
identiﬁers rather than predetermined features or attributes,
allowing similarity learning methods to be applied to any
collection of uniquely identiﬁable objects. In contrast, if a
head object were not speciﬁed, an oracle would need to use a
feature-based criterion for ranking the object set, which is not
viable in many applications of interest (e.g., learning human
preferences).
Such relative similarity queries typically come in the form
of triplet comparisons (i.e., “is object a more similar to object
b or c?”) (Tamuz et al. 2011; Van Der Maaten and Weinberger
2012; Hoffer and Ailon 2015). In our ﬁrst main contribution,
we extend these queries to larger rank orderings of tuples of
k objects to gather more information at once for similarity
learning. This query type takes the form “rank objects b1
through bk−1 according to their similarity to object a.” To
the best of our knowledge, this study is the ﬁrst attempt to
leverage this generalized query type in similarity learning.
The use of this query type is motivated by the fact that comparing multiple objects simultaneously provides increased
context for a human expert (Fernando et al. 2015), which can
increase labeling consistency without a signiﬁcant increase
in human effort per query (Liang and Grauman 2014) and
has demonstrated beneﬁts in settings such as rank learning
(Cao et al. 2007). In technical terms, tuplewise queries capture joint dependence between objects that isn’t captured in

Introduction
Similarity learning is the process of assigning point coordinates to objects in a dataset such that distances between
objects in the learned space are consistent with notions of
similarity as perceived by humans. While these objects usually exist in some high-dimensional space (e.g., images, audio), very often the semantic information humans attribute
to these objects lies in a low-dimensional space (e.g., items,
words). Once this low-dimensional embedding is learned,
existing intelligent algorithms (Jamieson and Nowak 2011a;
Canal et al. 2019) can be used to search the dataset with
query complexity scaling in the embedding dimension, allowing large datasets to be searched quickly in applications
such as task selection for robot learning from demonstration
(Argall et al. 2009), object recognition (Ferrari, Tuytelaars,
and Van Gool 2004), or image retrieval (Yang et al. 2010).
To construct such an embedding for a given set of objects,
queries that capture the similarity statistics between the objects in question must be made to human experts. While there
exist several types of similarity queries that can be made
(e.g., relative attributes between objects (Parikh and Grauman 2011)), we focus on relative similarity queries posed to
∗

Equal contribution.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3332

