The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Collective Information
Ulle Endriss
Institute for Logic, Language and Computation
University of Amsterdam
The Netherlands

So what is this general pattern? We always start out with a
set of agents, such as the students taking part in a MOOC. In
fact, these agents need not be people. Rather, we may think
of them simply as distinct sources of information. These
agents are autonomous entities, so we have an obligation
to treat them fairly. Every agent provides us with a piece
of information—expressed in some formal language—and
we need to aggregate these individual pieces of information
into a single piece of collective information, expressed in the
same language. The formal language in question is determined by the domain of application. It could be a language
to encode expert judgments, restaurant appraisals, student
evaluations, budget allocations, or ontologies.
This abstract perspective raises a number of questions:
What are the best methods to implement such a process
of aggregation? What general principles should guide our
choice of method? But also: How should the particular features of the type of information at hand (i.e., of the formal
language used) affect our choice of method? Is it possible to
formulate general principles that are parametric in the type
of information at hand? Answering the latter question, in
particular, would allow us to generalise beyond speciﬁc solutions for speciﬁc applications and transfer insights about
designing good aggregation methods across applications.
A speciﬁc domain where principles of aggregation have
been investigated in depth is that of preference aggregation,
which is the main object of study in social choice theory (Arrow, Sen, and Suzumura 2002). The methodology of classical social choice theory encompasses conceptual analysis
informed by Philosophy, Political Science, and Economics
(to determine what makes for a good method of aggregation), a variety of mathematical tools (to formalise desiderata and explore their logical consequences), and empirical
studies (to better understand how different methods fare in
practice). Modern computational social choice, which has
advanced the idea of thinking of methods of aggregation as
algorithms, extends this toolbox with a variety of techniques
from Computer Science and AI (Brandt et al. 2016). This
makes computational social choice a natural starting point
for investigating the phenomenon of collective information.
The remainder of this position paper is organised as follows. I ﬁrst discuss the phenomenon of collective informa-

Abstract
Many challenging problems of scientiﬁc, technological, and
societal signiﬁcance require us to aggregate information supplied by multiple agents into a single piece of information
of the same type—the collective information representing the
stance of the group as a whole. Examples include expressive
forms of voting and democratic decision making (where citizens supply information regarding their preferences), peer
evaluation (where participants supply information in the form
of assessments of their peers), and crowdsourcing (where volunteers supply information by annotating data). In this position paper, I outline the challenge of modelling, handling, and
analysing all of these diverse instances of collective information using a common methodology. Addressing this challenge
will facilitate a transfer of knowledge between different application domains, thereby enabling progress in all of them.

Introduction
When attempting to summarise the views of a committee of
experts, when trying to recommend a restaurant based on online reviews, or when hoping to compute a meaningful grade
for a student in a massively open online course (MOOC)
that uses peer assessment, we always face the same daunting task: to aggregate multiple pieces of information of a
speciﬁc type, each contributed by a different agent, into a
single piece of information of the same type that accurately
reﬂects the position taken by the group as a whole. Indeed, a
wide range of challenging practical problems, originating in
the most diverse corners of science, technology, and society,
all ﬁt this general pattern. Other examples include participatory budgeting (Cabannes 2004), collective argumentation (Bodanza, Tohmé, and Auday 2017), and even ontology
merging (Flouris et al. 2008). While all of these application
scenarios have been (and continue to be) addressed by dedicated research communities, to date there has been only relatively little effort directed towards understanding the general pattern they all have in common. In this position paper,
I argue that closing this gap has the potential to facilitate a
much-needed transfer of knowledge between research areas,
thereby enabling progress on all of these applications.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13520

