The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Multi-Component Graph Convolutional Collaborative Filtering
Xiao Wang,1 Ruijia Wang,1 Chuan Shi,1∗ Guojie Song,2 Qingyong Li3
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, 2 Peking University, 3 Beijing Jiaotong University
{xiaowang, wangruijia, shichuan}@bupt.edu.cn, gjsong@pku.edu.cn, qingyongli@gmail.com

Abstract

U1

The interactions of users and items in recommender system
could be naturally modeled as a user-item bipartite graph. In
recent years, we have witnessed an emerging research effort
in exploring user-item graph for collaborative ﬁltering methods. Nevertheless, the formation of user-item interactions typically arises from highly complex latent purchasing motivations, such as high cost performance or eye-catching appearance, which are indistinguishably represented by the edges.
The existing approaches still remain the differences between
various purchasing motivations unexplored, rendering the inability to capture ﬁne-grained user preference. Therefore, in
this paper we propose a novel Multi-Component graph convolutional Collaborative Filtering (MCCF) approach to distinguish the latent purchasing motivations underneath the observed explicit user-item interactions. Speciﬁcally, there are
two elaborately designed modules, decomposer and combiner, inside MCCF. The former ﬁrst decomposes the edges
in user-item graph to identify the latent components that may
cause the purchasing relationship; the latter then recombines
these latent components automatically to obtain uniﬁed embeddings for prediction. Furthermore, the sparse regularizer
and weighted random sample strategy are utilized to alleviate
the overﬁtting problem and accelerate the optimization. Empirical results on three real datasets and a synthetic dataset
not only show the signiﬁcant performance gains of MCCF,
but also well demonstrate the necessity of considering multiple components.

1

U2

U3

U4

cost-effective
appearance

I1

I2

I3

I4

Figure 1: A toy example of purchasing relationships records
with different purchasing motivations.

For many modern recommender systems, a de facto solution is the Collaborative Filtering (CF) technique, whose
basic assumption is that people who share similar purchase
in the past tend to have similar choice in the future (Koren,
Bell, and Volinsky 2009). Essentially, the user-item interactions can be naturally modeled as a graph (Kalofolias et al.
2014), as exempliﬁed by heterogeneous graph based recommendation (Shi et al. 2016). Therefore, graph convolutional
networks (Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst 2016;
Kipf and Welling 2016), which have demonstrated their remarkable ability in graph representation learning, are introduced to recommender systems and achieve promising performance (Berg, Kipf, and Welling 2017; Zheng et al. 2018).
Typically, stacked graph convolutional layers are used on
user-item graph to aggregate user and item features. In this
way, these convolution operations can spread the information and fully take advantage of high-order relationship,
thereby effectively alleviating the data sparsity problem in
collaborative ﬁltering.
Despite their enormous success, they all presume that user
purchases items with uniform motivation, and ignore the
fact that the formation of a real recommender system typically follows a complex and heterogeneous process, driven
by the interactions of multiple latent components. That is to
say, although user-item interactions are all uniformly repre-

Introduction

Currently the overloaded online information overwhelms
users. In order to tackle the information overload problem,
Recommender Systems (RS) are widely employed to guide
users in a personalized way of discovering products or services they might be interested in from a large number of possible alternatives. Due to its importance in practice, recommender systems have been attracting remarkable attention
in both industry and academic research community (Berg,
Kipf, and Welling 2017).
∗

Corresponding author: Chuan Shi (shichuan@bupt.edu.cn)
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6267

