The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Meta-CoTGAN: A Meta Cooperative Training
Paradigm for Improving Adversarial Text Generation
Haiyan Yin, Dingcheng Li, Xu Li, Ping Li
Cognitive Computing Lab
Baidu Research
No.10 Xibeiwang East Road, Beijing, 10085, China
10900 NE 8th ST. Bellevue, WA 98004, USA
{haiyanyin18, pingli98}@gmail.com, {lidingcheng, lixu13}@baidu.com
Li, and Li 2018), etc. In this paper, we tackle the emerging task of text generation, which is typically modeled as
a sequential discrete data generation process (Lamb et al.
2016). Such tasks play a pivot role in many real world applications, such as machine translation (Sutskever, Vinyals,
and Le 2014), text summarization (Li et al. 2017; Liu,
Zhong, and Li 2012), and dialogue systems (Wen et al. 2015;
Li et al. 2016).

Abstract
Training generative models that can generate high-quality
text with sufﬁcient diversity is an important open problem for
Natural Language Generation (NLG) community. Recently,
generative adversarial models have been applied extensively
on text generation tasks, where the adversarially trained generators alleviate the exposure bias experienced by conventional maximum likelihood approaches and result in promising generation quality. However, due to the notorious defect of mode collapse for adversarial training, the adversarially trained generators face a quality-diversity trade-off, i.e.,
the generator models tend to sacriﬁce generation diversity
severely for increasing generation quality. In this paper, we
propose a novel approach which aims to improve the performance of adversarial text generation via efﬁciently decelerating mode collapse of the adversarial training. To this end,
we introduce a cooperative training paradigm, where a language model is cooperatively trained with the generator and
we utilize the language model to efﬁciently shape the data distribution of the generator against mode collapse. Moreover,
instead of engaging the cooperative update for the generator
in a principled way, we formulate a meta learning mechanism, where the cooperative update to the generator serves as
a high level meta task, with an intuition of ensuring the parameters of the generator after the adversarial update would
stay resistant against mode collapse. In the experiment, we
demonstrate our proposed approach can efﬁciently slow down
the pace of mode collapse for the adversarial text generators.
Overall, our proposed method is able to outperform the baseline approaches with signiﬁcant margins in terms of both generation quality and diversity in the testiﬁed domains.

The training of sequential text generation models has been
greatly relying on applying teacher forcing over autoregressive models, i.e., optimizing with maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) (Che et al. 2017). However, training the generative models with teacher forcing would suffer from exposure bias (Rajeswar et al. 2017), i.e., the models are fed to
their predicted data rather than the ground-truth data at inference time and thus result in generating poor samples due
to the accumulated error. To address the exposure bias issue, a major on-going research for text generation centers on
utilizing adversarial training techniques to derive better text
generation models. Generally, such attempts could be classiﬁed into the following two strands (Chen et al. 2018): the
ﬁrst line of approaches combine generative adversarial network (GAN) (Goodfellow et al. 2014) with reinforcement
learning (RL), denoted as RL-based; the second line of approaches solely play the two-player adversarial game without using RL, denoted as RL-free.
Both RL-based and RL-free text generation approaches
suffer from mode collapse, a notoriously known challenge
for training GAN-based models (Arjovsky, Chintala, and
Bottou 2017). That is, as the adversarial training progresses,
the generated distribution tends to contrast towards generating subset of modes for the data. As a result, the generator
outputs repeated sentences and thus no longer expressively
represents the data generating distribution. Such effect has
been quantitatively evaluated in a recent study, which shows
that the entropy of the generator’s output distribution would
experience a clear drop when moving from MLE training to
adversarial training phase (Caccia et al. 2018). To derive better text generation models with GAN-based techniques, one
critical thing is to achieve a better quality-diversity trade-off
by efﬁciently slowing down the mode collapse of the adversarial generator, i.e., to let the generator get abundant gradi-

Introduction
Generative models are trained to learn the true data distribution from the training set and are capable of generating new
data points when the training is completed. In recent years,
they have been successfully applied to a wide range of applications, including image generation (Arjovsky, Chintala,
and Bottou 2017), stylization (Ulyanov, Vedaldi, and Lempitsky 2016), semi-supervised classiﬁcation (Radford, Metz,
and Chintala 2015), and natural language generation (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015; Li, Sun, and Li 2019; Sun,
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9466

