The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning Signed Network Embedding via Graph Attention
Yu Li,1,5 Yuan Tian,2,4∗ Jiawei Zhang,3 Yi Chang2,5
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, China
2
School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Jilin University, China
3
IFM Lab, Department of Computer Science, Florida State University, USA
4
Key Laboratory of Bionic Engineering, Ministry of Education, China
5
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education, China
liyu18@mails.jlu.edu.cn, yuantian@jlu.edu.cn, jiawei@ifmlab.org, yichang@jlu.edu.cn

preservation, and employ linear modeling approaches to obtain the node embeddings (Yang et al. 2017; Lian et al. 2018;
Qiu et al. 2018). Recent research, however, has pivoted to
learn the node embeddings using graph convolution networks (GCNs) (Kipf and Welling 2017; Chen, Ma, and Xiao
2018; Abu-El-Haija et al. 2018; Derr, Ma, and Tang 2018;
Abu-El-Haija et al. 2019), which aim to aggregate information from the neighbors for node embeddings. These GCNbased network embedding methods have revolutionized the
ﬁeld of network embedding and achieved the state-of-the-art
performance in network analysis tasks. Nevertheless, most
of the GCN-based network embedding methods are only
proposed for unsigned networks (consisting of only positive links). However, in the real word, some networks are
signed with the links are annotated with different polarities,
i.e., positive vs. negative. Such different link polarities can
convey very different physical meanings and information
(Kunegis, Preusse, and Schwagereit 2013), which should be
effectively incorporated in network representation learning.
Since the methods proposed for unsigned networks can not
distinguish the different properties of positive and negative
links, and fail to exploit additional information from negative links, therefore they cannot be directly applied on signed
networks.

Abstract
Learning the low-dimensional representations of graphs (i.e.,
network embedding) plays a critical role in network analysis
and facilitates many downstream tasks. Recently graph convolutional networks (GCNs) have revolutionized the ﬁeld of
network embedding, and led to state-of-the-art performance
in network analysis tasks such as link prediction and node
classiﬁcation. Nevertheless, most of the existing GCN-based
network embedding methods are proposed for unsigned networks. However, in the real world, some of the networks are
signed, where the links are annotated with different polarities, e.g., positive vs. negative. Since negative links may have
different properties from the positive ones and can also signiﬁcantly affect the quality of network embedding. Thus in
this paper, we propose a novel network embedding framework SNEA to learn Signed Network Embedding via graph
Attention. In particular, we propose a masked self-attentional
layer, which leverages self-attention mechanism to estimate
the importance coefﬁcient for pair of nodes connected by different type of links during the embedding aggregation process. Then SNEA utilizes the masked self-attentional layers
to aggregate more important information from neighboring
nodes to generate the node embeddings based on balance theory. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed framework through signed link prediction task on
several real-world signed network datasets.

Some signed network embedding methods have been proposed in recent years (Kunegis et al. 2010; Hsieh, Chiang, and Dhillon 2012; Chiang, Whang, and Dhillon 2012;
Zheng and Skillicorn 2015; Yuan, Wu, and Xiang 2017;
Wang et al. 2017; Kim et al. 2018; Derr, Ma, and Tang
2018). Some of these methods employ linear modeling approaches to learn the node embedding by spectral analysis or matrix factorization, while the other methods treat
neighboring nodes equally without considering the different contributions of different nodes when aggregating and
propagating information in networks. Recently, for the target nodes, many works have demonstrated that impacts of
different neighbors can be different, and quantifying such
different impacts can signiﬁcantly improve the performance
of unsigned network analysis tasks with deep learning models (Zhao et al. 2017; Vaswani et al. 2017; Veličković et al.
2018). However, in signed networks, negative links have different properties from positive links, therefore signed net-

Introduction
Network embedding, aiming to learn low-dimensional embedding of nodes in networks, plays a critical role in network
analysis and has received much attention from data mining
and machine learning communities. Since graphs have been
a popular way to model structured data, network embedding
enables many downstream network analysis tasks such as
link prediction, node classiﬁcation and community detection
(Tian et al. 2014; Zhang et al. 2018; Zhang and Chen 2018;
Shao et al. 2019) (Please note that the terms graph and network are used interchangeably in this paper). Traditional
network embedding methods predominantly focus on the
high-order proximity approximation and network properties
∗

Corresponding author: yuantian@jlu.edu.cn
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4772

