The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Variational Pathway Reasoning for EEG Emotion Recognition
Tong Zhang,1 Zhen Cui,1∗ Chunyan Xu,1 Wenming Zheng,2 Jian Yang1
1

Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education,
Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security,
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China.
2
Research Center for Learning Science, School of Biological Science and Medical Engineering,
Southeast University, Nanjing, China.
{tong.zhang, zhen.cui, cyx}@njust.edu.cn, wenming zheng@seu.edu.cn, csjyang@njust.edu.cn
Numerous algorithms (Zheng et al. 2014; Shi, Jiao, and
Lu 2013; Li et al. 2016; Zheng and Lu 2015; Li et al. 2018a;
2018b; Song et al. 2018) have been proposed to tackle
with EEG emotion recognition. In early time, these methods (Zheng et al. 2014; Shi, Jiao, and Lu 2013) mostly focus on the sophisticated signal processing techniques of frequency band ﬁltering. To boost recognition performance,
recently, discriminative representation learning techniques
are used to extract more effective emotion features. For instances, Zheng (Zheng 2016) formulated EEG signals as
sparse channel selection to suppress those electrodes with
negative effects to emotion analysis. More recently, deep
networks, such as deep belif network (DBN) (Zheng and
Lu 2015) and recurrent neural network (RNN) (Zhang et
al. 2018; Song et al. 2019), are adopted to encode highlevel features. Furthermore, in view of the non-gridded layout of EEG signals, graph convolutional neural network
(GCNN) (Song et al. 2018) was introduced to model EEG
signals, and achieved the state-of-the-art performance. All
these methods are mostly inspired from the algorithms of
machine learning, but emotion mechanisms or principles are
seldom introduced in EEG emotion task.

Abstract
Research on human emotion cognition revealed that connections and pathways exist between spatially-adjacent and
functional-related areas during emotion expression (Adolphs
2002a; Bullmore and Sporns 2009). Deeply inspired by
this mechanism, we propose a heuristic Variational Pathway Reasoning (VPR) method to deal with EEG-based emotion recognition. We introduce random walk to generate a
large number of candidate pathways along electrodes. To encode each pathway, the dynamic sequence model is further
used to learn between-electrode dependencies. The encoded
pathways around each electrode are aggregated to produce
a pseudo maximum-energy pathway, which consists of the
most important pair-wise connections. To ﬁnd those most
salient connections, we propose a sparse variational scaling
(SVS) module to learn scaling factors of pseudo pathways
by using the Bayesian probabilistic process and sparsity constraint, where the former endows good generalization ability
while the latter favors adaptive pathway selection. Finally, the
salient pathways from those candidates are jointly decided
by the pseudo pathways and scaling factors. Extensive experiments on EEG emotion recognition demonstrate that the
proposed VPR is superior to those state-of-the-art methods,
and could ﬁnd some interesting pathways w.r.t. different emotions.

Psychology study (Adolphs 2002a; Bullmore and Sporns
2009) on human emotion perception revealed that connections and pathways exist between spatially-adjacent and
functional-related areas during emotion expression. This
discovery is great interesting to encourage us to design
some new-type algorithms that use pathways to boost performance. Conversely, those pathways are expected to be
detected for emotion variation explanation. To this end, we
need to solve two critical problems: i) how to model this
perception mechanism of existing pathways into emotion
recognition algorithms; ii) how to detect those salient interesting pathways w.r.t. different emotions.

Introduction
Emotion recognition has become an active topic of affective
computing in recent years and drawn wide attention due to
its huge potential applications including humanoid robots,
driver monitoring, etc. Externally, human emotion is usually expressed as non-physiological signals including facial
expressions, body actions, speeches, etc. In contrast, bioelectrical signals, e.g., electroencephalograph (EEG) and
galvanic skin response (GSR), internally reﬂect the intrinsic
emotion states. Speciﬁcally, EEG signals of electrodes attached on scalps are rather reliable to capture brain-emotion
variations with high temporal resolution. Therefore, EEG
signals have become increasingly important in analysing human emotion.

To address the two problems above, here we propose
a heuristic Variational Pathway Reasoning (VPR) method
for EEG emotion recognition. We specially introduce random walk to generate a large number of candidate pathways along electrodes. Considering spatial adjacency and
functional region, we assign possible connections to spatially adjacent electrodes and constrain pathways in local
functional regions, which may largely decrease the explo-

∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2709

