The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Improved Filtering for the Euclidean Traveling Salesperson Problem in CLP(FD)
Alessandro Bertagnon, Marco Gavanelli
Department of Engineering, University of Ferrara
Via Saragat 1, 44122 Ferrara, Italy
{alessandro.bertagnon, marco.gavanelli}@unife.it

The TSP was also addressed in the CP literature (Caseau
and Laburthe 1997; Kaya and Hooker 2006; Benchimol et
al. 2012; Fages and Lorca 2012; Fages, Lorca, and Rousseau
2016; Deudon et al. 2018), but Concorde is still the state of
the art, in particular for large instances. Nevertheless, also
efﬁciently solving small or medium size instances is important in various applications (Caseau and Laburthe 1997).
CP approaches are also more ﬂexible: while Concorde can
address only pure TSPs, i.e., no further side constraints are
allowed, in CP many variants can be easily cast, such as the
TSP with Time Windows (TSPTW) (Caseau and Koppstein
1993; Pesant et al. 1998; Focacci, Lodi, and Milano 2002b;
2002a), in which cities must be visited within given temporal
intervals. Finally, improving the performance of CP models
is an important target per se.
Some signiﬁcant sub-classes of the general TSP are the
Metric TSP, in which the distance function between cities
satisﬁes the triangle inequality, and the Euclidean TSP,
in which the nodes of the graph represent points in the
plane and the distance function is the Euclidean distance.
These are reasonable assumptions in many cases, and various instances in the TSPLIB (Reinelt 1991) fall into these
classes. From the computational complexity point of view,
both the Metric and the Euclidean TSP are NP-hard (Garey,
Graham, and Johnson 1976); nonetheless, differently from
the general TSP, the Euclidean TSP admits a Polynomial Time Approximation Scheme (PTAS) (Arora 1996;
Mitchell 1999). Notwithstanding these theoretically important results, solvers that address the general TSP (e.g., Concorde) are faster in practice.
In CP, no specialized pruning algorithms tailored to the
Euclidean TSP have been proposed, and the usual way to
tackle Euclidean TSPs is to compute the distance matrix and
address the problem as a general TSP. It is worth noting
that in the Euclidean TSP more information is available than
in the general TSP: the coordinates of the points to be visited are known, and geometrical concepts (straight line segments, angles, etc.) can be deﬁned in the Euclidean plane.
Such knowledge has been exploited to improve the search
effectiveness: Deudon et al. (2018) train a Deep Neural Network with points coordinates to learn efﬁcient heuristics to
explore the search space.

Abstract
The Traveling Salesperson Problem (TSP) is one of the bestknown problems in computer science. The Euclidean TSP is
a special case in which each node is identiﬁed by its coordinates on the plane and the Euclidean distance is used as cost
function.
Many works in the Constraint Programming (CP) literature
addressed the TSP, and use as benchmark Euclidean instances; however the usual approach is to build a distance matrix from the points coordinates, and then address the problem
as a TSP, disregarding the information carried by the points
coordinates for constraint propagation.
In this work, we propose to use geometric information,
present in Euclidean TSP instances, to improve the ﬁltering
power. In order to have a declarative approach, we implemented the ﬁltering algorithms in Constraint Logic Programming on Finite Domains (CLP(FD)).

1

Introduction

The Traveling Salesperson Problem (TSP) is one of the best
known problems in computer science: given a graph with
a set of nodes, the objective is to ﬁnd a path that visits all
the nodes exactly once and minimizes the traveled distance.
Currently, the best solver for the TSP is the mathematical
programming solver Concorde (Applegate et al. 2001), exploiting several techniques amongst which Integer Linear
Programming and Local Search.
The TSP is a Constraint Optimization Problem (COP); an
important technique developed in Artiﬁcial Intelligence to
solve such problems is constraint propagation (Mackworth
1977). The idea was so successful that new languages were
embedding it as part of their operational semantics; for example the Constraint Logic Programming (CLP) (Jaffar and
Maher 1994) class of languages was deﬁned to declaratively
address constraint problems, and many languages of this
class exploited constraint propagation to solve efﬁciently
constraint problems. The CLP research area was later extended to include also imperative and object-oriented programming languages, generating the Constraint Programming (CP) research area.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1412

