The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Recursively Binary Modiﬁcation Model for Nested Named Entity Recognition∗
Bing Li,1 Shifeng Liu,1 Yifang Sun,1 Wei Wang,1,2 Xiang Zhao3
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of New South Wales, Australia
2
Dongguan University of Technology, China
3
National University of Defence Technology, China
1
{bing.li, shifeng.liu, yifang.sun, weiw}@unsw.edu.au, 3 xiangzhao@nudt.edu.cn

tities), where an entity is embedded within other entities, as
illustrated in Fig. 1.

Abstract
Recently, there has been an increasing interest in identifying
named entities with nested structures. Existing models only
make independent typing decisions on the entire entity span
while ignoring strong modiﬁcation relations between subentity types. In this paper, we present a novel Recursively
Binary Modiﬁcation model for nested named entity recognition. Our model utilizes the modiﬁcation relations among
sub-entities types to infer the head component on top of a
Bayesian framework and uses entity head as a strong evidence to determine the type of the entity span. The process is
recursive, allowing lower-level entities to help better model
those on the outer-level. To the best of our knowledge, our
work is the ﬁrst effort that uses modiﬁcation relation in nested
NER task. Extensive experiments on four benchmark datasets
demonstrate that our model outperforms state-of-the-art models in nested NER tasks, and delivers competitive results with
state-of-the-art models in ﬂat NER task, without relying on
any extra annotations or NLP tools.

E1 ... their conference hosted by [The University of
[Texas]L OC]O RG ...
E2 Activation of the [[[[IL-2]P ROTEIN receptor]P ROTEIN (IL-2R)
alpha chain]P ROTEIN gene]D NA, and cell proliferation.

Figure 1: Two excerpts containing nested entities.
In Fig. 1, entity The University of Texas of
type O RG contains another entity Texas of type L OC. Excerpt 2 shows a D NA entity IL-2 receptor (IL-2R)
alpha chain gene is embedded with three P ROTEIN
entities. Being a common linguistic phenomenon, and containing ﬁner-grained semantic information (Katiyar and
Cardie 2018), taking nested entities into consideration has
been proven successful in facilitating the performance improvement of many downstream NLP applications such as
relation extraction (Miwa and Bansal 2016; Liu et al. 2017),
entity linking (Gupta, Singh, and Roth 2017; Miao, Qin, and
Wang 2017), event extraction (Riedel and McCallum 2011;
Li, Ji, and Huang 2013) and co-reference resolution (Chang,
Samdani, and Roth 2013). However, traditional sequence labeling models used in ﬂat-NER only generate one tokenlevel label per word, which inherently do not allow nested
structure, making them incapable to handle nested entities.
Existing research efforts to identify nested entities can be
broadly classiﬁed into two categories: (1) transformationbased models, and (2) span-based model. Inspired by the
great success of sequence labeling in detecting ﬂat entity,
transformation-based models try to transform the nested
structures into ﬂat linear structures, which can be readily
solved by the sequence labeling framework. There are various transform operations, such as hyper-graph (Lu and Roth
2015; Muis and Lu 2017; Katiyar and Cardie 2018), constituency parser (Finkel and Manning 2009), shift-reduce
operations (Wang et al. 2018), and stacking multiple ﬂatNER layers (Ju, Miwa, and Ananiadou 2018). However, they
all need complex transformations and extra decoding steps,
which will inevitably entail biases and errors, making the
pipeline error-prone and recognition results inaccurate.

Introduction
Named entity recognition (or more generally entity mention recognition1 ) aims at identifying text spans with regards to speciﬁc entity types such as person, organization,
etc. Named entity recognition (NER) is a fundamental component of information extraction systems and an essential
step towards many downstream NLP applications (Li et al.
2018). Signiﬁcant progress has been made on NER task in
the NLP community, the vast majority of which model NER
task as a sequence labeling problem and employ probabilistic models (e.g., CRF (Finkel, Grenager, and Manning 2005;
McDonald, Crammer, and Pereira 2005; Liu et al. 2018) or
Semi-CRF (Sarawagi and Cohen 2005)) on top of handcrafted (Finkel, Grenager, and Manning 2005) or neuralbased features (Lample et al. 2016).
Recently, there has been an increasing interest in identifying named entities with nested structures (i.e., nested en∗

B. Li and W. Wang are the co-corresponding authors.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The text spans of entity mention could be named, nominal and
pronominal (Florian et al. 2004).
8164

