The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Least General Generalizations in Description Logic: Veriﬁcation and Existence
Jean Christoph Jung,1 Carsten Lutz,1 Frank Wolter2
1

University of Bremen, Germany
University of Liverpool, United Kingdom
{jeanjung, clu}@uni-bremen.de, wolter@liverpool.ac.uk
2

Hirsh 1992; Küsters and Borgida 2001), and creative discovery of novel concepts through conceptual blending (Fauconnier and Turner 2008; Eppe et al. 2018). We focus on the two
fundamental DLs EL and ELI, fragments of ﬁrst-order Horn
logic that can express positive conjunctive existential properties, ELI extending EL with inverse roles. Both DLs are
natural choices for generalization as their limited expressive
power helps to avoid overﬁtting, that is, we cannot generalize by disjunctively combining descriptions of each single
example, but are forced to ﬁnd a true generalization. In fact,
least general generalizations in EL have received signiﬁcant
attention (Baader, Küsters, and Molitor 1999; Baader 2003;
Zarrieß and Turhan 2013) while, somewhat surprisingly,
there appears to be no prior work on DLs with inverse roles.
There are two established notions of least general generalization in the DL context. When the examples are given in
the form of concepts, the desired generalization is the least
common subsumer (LCS), the least general concept that subsumes all examples (Cohen, Borgida, and Hirsh 1992). A
natural alternative is to give examples using relational data,
which in DLs are represented as an ABox. Traditionally, one
uses only a single example, which takes the form of an individual in the data, and then asks for the most speciﬁc concept (MSC), that is, the least general concept that the individual is an instance of (Nebel 1990). However, there seems
to be no good reason to restrict the MSC to a single example and thus we deﬁne it based on multiple examples. In
this way, the LCS becomes a special form of MSC in which
the data consists of a collection of trees. We remark that EL
and ELI concepts can be viewed as natural tree query languages for graph databases and knowledge graphs and thus
the MSC is useful for data exploration and comprehension,
see e.g. (Colucci et al. 2016). It is also related to generating
referring expressions (Borgida, Toman, and Weddell 2016).
For both the LCS and the MSC, we study the two decision
problems existence and veriﬁcation. In fact, both the LCS
and the MSC need not exist because there can be an inﬁnite
sequence of less and less general generalizations. In veriﬁcation, one is given a candidate concept and the question is
whether the candidate is the LCS or MSC. Veriﬁcation is relevant, for example, in approaches that try to ﬁnd the LCS or
MSC by reﬁnement operators that move towards less general
generalizations in a step-wise fashion (Badea and NienhuysCheng 2000; Lehmann and Hitzler 2010; Lehmann and

Abstract
We study two forms of least general generalizations in description logic, the least common subsumer (LCS) and most
speciﬁc concept (MSC). While the LCS generalizes from examples that take the form of concepts, the MSC generalizes
from individuals in data. Our focus is on the complexity of existence and veriﬁcation, the latter meaning to decide whether
a candidate concept is the LCS or MSC. We consider cases
with and without a background TBox and a target signature.
Our results range from CO NP-complete for LCS and MSC
veriﬁcation in the description logic EL without TBoxes to
undecidability of LCS and MSC veriﬁcation and existence
in ELI with TBoxes. To obtain results in the presence of a
TBox, we establish a close link between the problems studied
in this paper and concept learning from positive and negative
examples. We also give a way to regain decidability in ELI
with TBoxes and study single example MSC as a special case.

1

Introduction

Generalization is a fundamental method in relational learning and inductive logic programming (Plotkin 1970; Muggleton 1991). Given a ﬁnite number of positive examples,
one seeks a description in a logical language that encompasses all examples and in this sense provides a generalization. To ensure that the description is as informative as possible, one aims at obtaining least general generalizations, that
is, generalizations that cannot be made more speciﬁc without losing at least one example. Note that computing least
general generalizations is a form of supervised learning in
which only positive, but no negative examples are given.
In this paper, we study least general generalizations in the
context of description logics (DLs), a widely known family
of ontology languages that underpin the web ontology language OWL 2 (Baader et al. 2017). In DLs, concepts are
the building blocks of an ontology and thus a prime target
for being learned through generalization. There are in fact
several applications in which this is useful, including ontology design by domain experts that are not sufﬁciently
proﬁcient in logical modeling (Baader and Küsters 1998;
Baader, Küsters, and Molitor 1999; Baader, Sertkaya, and
Turhan 2007; Donini et al. 2009), supporting the improvement and restructuring of an ontology (Cohen, Borgida, and
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2854

