The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Meta-Learning for Generalized Zero-Shot Learning
Vinay Kumar Verma, Dhanajit Brahma, Piyush Rai
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Kanpur, India
{vkverma, dhanajit, piyush}@cse.iitk.ac.in

Romera and Torr 2015a; Xian et al. 2018b; Verma et al.
2018; Liu et al. 2018; Romera and Torr 2015b; Chen et al.
2018). ZSL algorithms typically rely on class-descriptions
(e.g., human-provided class attribute vectors, textual description, or word2vec embedding of class name). These
class-description/class-attributes are leveraged to transfer
the knowledge from seen classes (i.e., classes that were
present at training-time) to unseen classes (i.e., classes only
encountered in test data).
Driven by the recent advances in generative modeling
(Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou 2017; Kingma and Welling
2014), there is a growing interest in generative models for
ZSL. Broadly, these models learn to generate/synthesize “artiﬁcial” examples from unseen classes (Felix et al. 2018;
Verma et al. 2018; Xian et al. 2018b), conditioning on their
class attributes, and learn a classiﬁer using these synthesized
examples. Despite the recent progress on such approaches,
these still have some key limitations. Firstly, while the goal
of these approaches is to generate unseen/novel class examples given the respective class attributes, these models are
trained using data (inputs and the respective class attributes)
from the seen classes (Verma et al. 2018; Xian et al. 2018b;
Felix et al. 2018) and do not explicitly learn to generate the
unseen class samples during training. Consequently, these
generative ZSL models show a large quality gap between the
synthesized unseen class inputs and actual unseen class input. To mimic the ZSL setting explicitly, we propose a novel
variant of the standard meta-learning based approach (Finn,
Abbeel, and Levine 2017). Notably, in our variant, the metatrain and meta-validation classes are disjoint.
The second limitation of existing ZSL/GZSL models is
that they do not learn an optimal parameter which can
easily generalize to the seen/unseen class generation. Our
meta-learning framework learns such an optimal parameter that can quickly adapt to the novel classes (meta-test)
with few gradient steps. (Snell, Swersky, and Zemel 2017;
Vinyals et al. 2016) show that even with the zero-gradient
step (without ﬁne-tuning), meta-learning learns to generalize novel class samples/task. We build on this idea to train a
class-conditioned WGAN for sample generation.
The third key limitation is that all the existing ZSL methods rely on the availability of a signiﬁcant number of labeled

Abstract
Learning to classify unseen class samples at test time is popularly referred to as zero-shot learning (ZSL). If test samples
can be from training (seen) as well as unseen classes, it is
a more challenging problem due to the existence of strong
bias towards seen classes. This problem is generally known as
generalized zero-shot learning (GZSL). Thanks to the recent
advances in generative models such as VAEs and GANs, sample synthesis based approaches have gained considerable attention for solving this problem. These approaches are able to
handle the problem of class bias by synthesizing unseen class
samples. However, these ZSL/GZSL models suffer due to the
following key limitations: (i) Their training stage learns a
class-conditioned generator using only seen class data and
the training stage does not explicitly learn to generate the unseen class samples; (ii) They do not learn a generic optimal
parameter which can easily generalize for both seen and unseen class generation; and (iii) If we only have access to a
very few samples per seen class, these models tend to perform poorly. In this paper, we propose a meta-learning based
generative model that naturally handles these limitations. The
proposed model is based on integrating model-agnostic meta
learning with a Wasserstein GAN (WGAN) to handle (i) and
(iii), and uses a novel task distribution to handle (ii). Our
proposed model yields signiﬁcant improvements on standard
ZSL as well as more challenging GZSL setting. In ZSL setting, our model yields 4.5%, 6.0%, 9.8%, and 27.9% relative improvements over the current state-of-the-art on CUB,
AWA1, AWA2, and aPY datasets, respectively.

Introduction
With the ever-growing quantities, diversity, and complexity of real-world data, machine learning algorithms are increasingly faced with challenges that are not adequately addressed by traditional learning paradigms. For classiﬁcation
problems, one such challenging setting is where test-time requires correctly labeling objects that could be from classes
that were not present at training time. This setting is popularly known as Zero-Shot Learning (ZSL), and has drawn a
considerable interest recently (Socher et al. 2013; Norouzi
et al. 2013; Verma and Rai 2017; Changpinyo et al. 2016;
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6062

