The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Tensor-SVD Based Graph Learning for Multi-View Subspace Clustering
Quanxue Gao,1 Wei Xia,1∗ Zhizhen Wan,1 Deyan Xie,1 Pu Zhang1
1

State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China.
qxgao@xidian.edu.cn, xd.weixia@gmail.com, {949414159, 287784562, 845037828}@qq.com

widely used techniques to learn graph for subspace clustering (Guangcan et al. 2013). Inspired by the impressive results of LRR for subspace clustering, Zhang et al. (Zhang
et al. 2015) adaptively learned graph, which is shared by
different views, by minimizing the nuclear norm of tensorunfolding matrices that are constructed by afﬁnity matrices, and developed low-rank tensor constrained multi-view
subspace clustering (LT-MSC) method. Compared with the
aforementioned nuclear norm, tensor nuclear norm based on
t-SVD has been proven to be an effective convex relaxation
of 1 -norm (Zhang et al. 2014) and achieved impressive performance for image denoising, video completion, and multiview subspace clustering (Lu et al. 2016; Yuan et al. 2018;
Wu, Lin, and Zha 2019; Hu et al. 2017).

Abstract
Low-rank representation based on tensor-Singular Value Decomposition (t-SVD) has achieved impressive results for
multi-view subspace clustering, but it does not well deal with
noise and illumination changes embedded in multi-view data.
The major reason is that all the singular values have the same
contribution in tensor-nuclear norm based on t-SVD, which
does not make sense in the existence of noise and illumination change. To improve the robustness and clustering performance, we study the weighted tensor-nuclear norm based
on t-SVD and develop an efﬁcient algorithm to optimize
the weighted tensor-nuclear norm minimization (WTNNM)
problem. We further apply the WTNNM algorithm to multiview subspace clustering by exploiting the high order correlations embedded in different views. Extensive experimental
results reveal that our WTNNM method is superior to several state-of-the-art multi-view subspace clustering methods
in terms of performance.

Although t-SVD based tensor nuclear norm has the
promising preliminary results for multi-view clustering, it
still has some limitations to learn graph. First, it regularizes each singular value equally and employs the softthresholding function to shrink all singular values with the
same parameter. This, however, ignores the prior knowledge
of singular values of the matrix. For example, given an arbitrary image, there is a large difference between its non-zero
singular values, especially between the ﬁrst several large singular values and the last several small singular values, and
the larger singular values are generally associated with some
salient parts (main information) in the image. Thus, to preserve the salient parts, we should make the large singular
values shrink less, which was unfortunately not taken into
account in the existing tensor nuclear norm minimization.
Second, the existing TNNM tends to preserve some large
singular values but discard small singular values. Doing so
implies that the larger singular values are considered to be
important while the smaller singular values are unimportant.
However, such an assumption may not always be true in reality and the larger singular values may carry undesirable
information. For example, given an image having large illumination variation in contents, the ﬁrst a few large singular values contain somewhat illumination information (Belhumeur, Hespanha, and Kriegman 1997), which actually has
nothing to do with the content of the image.

Introduction
Multi-view learning has been an active topic in artiﬁcial
intelligence and data analysis due to the facts that multiview data are ubiquitous in real applications and help provide more complementary and discriminative information,
compared with single view data (Liu and Tsang 2017; Liu,
Tsang, and Müller 2017). Multi-view learning, mainly including multi-view clustering and classiﬁcation, aims to ﬁnd
meaningful groups of data, are of great importance to various real-world applications (Wang, Nie, and Huang 2013;
Cao et al. 2015b; Wang et al. 2018). For a comprehensive review of multi-view learning, please refer to (Yang and Wang
2018). We herein focus on multi-view subspace clustering
which achieves impressive results by exploiting the high order correlation embedded in different views.
Multi-view subspace clustering learns afﬁnity matrix or
coefﬁcient representation, which is used to adaptively construct graph, by exploiting high order information embedded
in data, and then performs spectral clustering on the learned
graph. Low-rank representation (LRR) is one of the most
∗

Corresponding author: Wei Xia (xd.weixia@gmail.com)
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

The aforementioned facts motivate us to investigate how
to leverage the prior information of singular values when us3930

