The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Latent Opinions Transfer Network for
Target-Oriented Opinion Words Extraction
Zhen Wu,∗ Fei Zhao,∗ Xin-Yu Dai,† Shujian Huang, Jiajun Chen
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210023, China
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization, Nanjing, 210023, China
{wuz, zhaof}@smail.nju.edu.cn, {daixinyu, huangsj, chenjj}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Waiters are very friendly and the pasta is out of this world .

Target-oriented opinion words extraction (TOWE) is a new
subtask of ABSA, which aims to extract the corresponding
opinion words for a given opinion target in a sentence. Recently, neural network methods have been applied to this
task and achieve promising results. However, the difﬁculty
of annotation causes the datasets of TOWE to be insufﬁcient,
which heavily limits the performance of neural models. By
contrast, abundant review sentiment classiﬁcation data are
easily available at online review sites. These reviews contain
substantial latent opinions information and semantic patterns.
In this paper, we propose a novel model to transfer these opinions knowledge from resource-rich review sentiment classiﬁcation datasets to low-resource task TOWE. To address the
challenges in the transfer process, we design an effective
transformation method to obtain latent opinions, then integrate them into TOWE. Extensive experimental results show
that our model achieves better performance compared to other
state-of-the-art methods and signiﬁcantly outperforms the
base model without transferring opinions knowledge. Further
analysis validates the effectiveness of our model.

Given opinion target: waiters Corresponding opinion words: friendly
Given opinion target: pasta
Corresponding opinion words: out of this world

Figure 1: An example of TOWE. The words highlighted in
red are two given opinion targets. TOWE task aims to extract
the spans in blue as opinion words for the given targets. The
arrows indicate the correspondence between opinion targets
and opinion words. Note that opinion targets are given beforehand in the TOWE task.

Many downstream sentiment analysis tasks, e.g., targetoriented sentiment classiﬁcation (Tang et al. 2016; Wang et
al. 2016b; Xue and Li 2018) and pair-wise opinion summarization (Hu and Liu 2004; Zhuang, Jing, and Zhu 2006;
Li et al. 2010), can beneﬁt from TOWE as it provides explicit opinion pairs information. To study this task, Fan
et al. (2019) released a benchmark corpus including four
datasets and formalized TOWE as a problem of sequence labeling for given targets. Furthermore, they proposed a targetfused neural sequence labeling model and achieved state-ofthe-art performance.
Despite the promising results of neural network methods,
the lack of annotated data still heavily restricts the performance of TOWE. In practical scenarios, users usually refer
to a considerable number of opinion targets in a review. It
is extremely labor-intensive and time-consuming for annotators to identify all targets of a sentence and locate their
corresponding opinion words. The difﬁculty of annotation
causes the datasets of TOWE to be relatively scarce, which
ﬁnally limits the effectiveness of neural models. In contrast,
abundant labeled data of review sentiment classiﬁcation are
easily accessible at online review sites such as Amazon, Yelp
and IMDB. Substantial opinions information and semantic
patterns are naturally embodied in these reviews. Thus we
propose to transfer them from large-scale sentiment classiﬁcation datasets to the low-resource task TOWE. Although
latent opinion knowledge is beneﬁcial for TOWE, there are
still two challenges remaining:

Introduction
Target-oriented opinion words extraction (TOWE) (Fan et
al. 2019) is a new subtask of aspect-level sentiment analysis
(ABSA) (Pang and Lee 2008; Liu 2012; Pontiki et al. 2014),
which aims to extract the corresponding opinion words for
a given opinion target from a review sentence. Opinion targets, also known as aspect terms, are the words or phrases in
the sentence representing features or entities toward which
users show attitudes. Opinion words refer to those terms of a
sentence used to express attitudes or opinions explicitly. Figure 1 shows an example of TOWE. In the sentence “waiters
are very friendly and the pasta is out of this world.”, the
terms “waiters” and “pasta” are two given opinion targets.
TOWE needs to extract the word “friendly” as the opinion
word of the opinion target “waiters” and the opinion words
span “out of this world” for the target “pasta”.
∗

Authors contributed equally.
Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

9298

