The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Temporal Planning with Intermediate Conditions and Effects
Alessandro Valentini, Andrea Micheli, Alessandro Cimatti
Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Trento, Italy
{alvalentini, amicheli, cimatti}@fbk.eu

Relaxing this limitation means allowing Intermediate
Conditions and Effects (ICE): hence permitting the deﬁnition of actions with conditions being checked at arbitrary
(possibly punctual) sub-intervals within the action duration
and with effects happening at arbitrary points within the action interval. Notably, the ANML (Smith, Frank, and Cushing 2008) planning formalism offers this feature, but few
planners support this. Our goal in this paper is to natively
offer effective support for planning in domains with ICE.
The contributions of this paper are twofold. First, we
present a heuristic-search planning technique able to solve
temporal planning problems with ICE. Planners based on
heuristic search techniques are currently the state of the art
in several areas of planning; however, none is supporting
ICE. We ﬁll this gap by deﬁning a suitable search space,
generalizing the lifted-time approach of POPF (Coles et al.
2010) and providing a powerful relaxation of the problem
for automatic heuristic computation. Second, we present an
automated code-generation technique that produces a quasidomain-dependent planner from a given model of the system. In particular, we deﬁne a method that maintains the
generality of a model-based, domain independent technique,
while providing some of the computational advantages of
domain-dependent implementations. We read a planning instance with ICE and generate an executable embedding our
search technique, specialized for the characteristics of the
instance. The resulting executable is time-efﬁcient and can
solve a range of different problems without recompilation.
We experimentally evaluate the proposed technique by
implementing it in a planner called TAMER and comparing
against state of the art tools. The comparison comprises domains from the literature and domains inspired by industrial
projects where time and temporal constraints are key aspects
and the use of ICE facilitates the modeling. Our results show
that our technique, thanks to the native support for ICE, is
signiﬁcantly faster and is able to solve many more problems
than the state of the art tools on the industrially-inspired domains. We also experimentally evaluated the quasi-domaindependent planner generation: our analysis shows that the
approach scales even better than TAMER.

Abstract
Automated temporal planning is the technology of choice
when controlling systems that can execute more actions in
parallel and when temporal constraints, such as deadlines, are
needed in the model. One limitation of several action-based
planning systems is that actions are modeled as intervals having conditions and effects only at the extremes and as invariants, but no conditions nor effects can be speciﬁed at arbitrary
points or sub-intervals.
In this paper, we address this limitation by providing an effective heuristic-search technique for temporal planning, allowing the deﬁnition of actions with conditions and effects at
any arbitrary time within the action duration. We experimentally demonstrate that our approach is far better than standard encodings in PDDL 2.1 and is competitive with other
approaches that can (directly or indirectly) represent intermediate action conditions or effects.

1

Introduction

Automated temporal planning concerns the synthesis of
strategies to reach a desired goal with a system that is formally speciﬁed by providing an initial condition together
with the possible actions that can drive it in presence of temporal constraints. In this context, actions become intervals
(instead of being instantaneous as in classical planning) that
have a duration (possibly subject to metric constraints). Similarly, plans are no longer simple sequences of actions, but
they are schedules. Automated temporal planning received
considerable attention in the literature, and the deﬁnition
of the standard PDDL 2.1 language (Fox and Long 2003)
fueled the research of effective search-based techniques to
solve the problem (Coles et al. 2010; Eyerich, Mattmüller,
and Röger 2012; Rankooh and Ghassem-Sani 2015).
One limitation of many approaches encountered in several practical applications is that conditions and effects of
each action can be only deﬁned when the action starts or
terminates, or as an invariant condition over all the action
duration. This has been recognized (Smith 2003; Cimatti et
al. 2018) as one of the major limitations of the PDDL 2.1
language, even if some compilation-based approaches are
known. For example, this is crucial for the modeling of deadlines that are introduced as a consequence of an action.

2

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Problem Deﬁnition

Syntactically, we deﬁne a planning problem with ICE analogously to usual action-based temporal planning problems –
9975

