The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Restraining Bolts for Reinforcement Learning Agents
Giuseppe De Giacomo, Luca Iocchi, Marco Favorito, Fabio Patrizi
DIAG - Università di Roma “La Sapienza”, Italy
degiacomo@diag.uniroma1.it

Sutton and Barto 1998), which is currently of great interest to develop components with forms of decision making,
possibly coupled with deep learning techniques (Mnih et al.
2015; Silver et al. 2017).
Speciﬁcally, we consider an agent and a restraining bolt
of different nature. The agent is a reinforcement learning
agent whose “model” of the world is a hidden, factorized,
Markov Decision Processes (MDP) over a certain set of
low-level (possibly subsymbolic) world features. That is, the
state is factorized in a set of features observable to the agent,
while transition function and reward function are hidden.
The restraining bolt consists in a high-level logical speciﬁcation of traces that are considered desirable. Such speciﬁcations are expressed in temporal logics over ﬁnite traces,
LTLf and its extension LDL f (De Giacomo and Vardi 2013;
De Giacomo and Rubin 2018; Brafman, De Giacomo, and
Patrizi 2018).
The connection between the agent and the restraining bolt
is loose: the bolt provides additional reward to the agent.
In addition, we provide to the agent additional features to
allow the agent itself distinguish the various stages of the
satisfaction of temporal formulas. Without these additional
features, the agent would not be able to act differently at
different stages to get the rewards according to the temporal
speciﬁcations.
We show that, in spite of the loose connection between
the two models, under general circumstances, the agent can
learn to act so as to conform as much as possible to the
LTLf / LDL f speciﬁcations. Observe that we deal with two
separate representations (i.e., two distinct sets of features),
one for the agent and one for the bolt, which are apparently unrelated, but in reality, correlated by the world itself
(Brooks 1991). The crucial point is that, in order to perform
RL effectively in presence of a restraining bolt such a correlation does not need to be formalized.
For example, consider a service robot serving drinks and
snacks at a party. The robot knows the locations where it
can grasp drink and snack items and the locations of people
that can receive such items. The robot can execute actions
to move in the environment, to grasp objects and to deliver
them to people. With rewards associated to effective deliver,
the robot can learn how to serve something to people. Now,
suppose we want to impose the following restraining bolt
speciﬁcation: do not serve alcoholic drinks to minors. To

Abstract
In this work we have investigated the concept of “restraining bolt”, inspired by Science Fiction. We have two distinct
sets of features extracted from the world, one by the agent
and one by the authority imposing some restraining speciﬁcations on the behaviour of the agent (the “restraining bolt”).
The two sets of features and, hence the model of the world
attainable from them, are apparently unrelated since of interest to independent parties. However they both account for
(aspects of) the same world. We have considered the case in
which the agent is a reinforcement learning agent on a set of
low-level (subsymbolic) features, while the restraining bolt
is speciﬁed logically using linear time logic on ﬁnite traces
LTLf / LDL f over a set of high-level symbolic features. We
show formally, and illustrate with examples, that, under general circumstances, the agent can learn while shaping its goals
to suitably conform (as much as possible) to the restraining
bolt speciﬁcations. 1

Introduction
A restraining bolt is a “device that restricts a droid’s
[agent’s] actions when connected to its systems. Droid owners install restraining bolts to limit actions to a set of desired
behaviors.”2
We have two distinct representations of the world, one
by the agent and one by the authority imposing restraining speciﬁcations, i.e., the bolt. Such representations are apparently unrelated as developed by independent parties, but
both model (aspects of) the same world. We want the agent
to conform (as much as possible) to the restraining speciﬁcations, even if these are not expressed in terms of the agent’s
world representation.
Studying this problem from a classical Knowledge Representation perspective (Reiter 2001) would require to establish some sort of “glue” between the representation by the
agent and that by the restraining bolt. Instead, we bypass
dealing with such a “glue” by studying this problem in the
context of Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Puterman 1994;
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
This paper reports a research originally presented at ICAPS
2019 (De Giacomo et al. 2019b)
2
https://www.starwars.com/databank/restraining-bolt
13659

