The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Unsupervised Detection of Sub-Events in Large Scale Disasters
Chidubem Arachie,∗,1 Manas Gaur,∗,2 Sam Anzaroot,3 William Groves,3
Ke Zhang,3 Alejandro Jaimes3
1

2

Department of Computer Science, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA achid17@vt.edu
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Institute, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC, USA mgaur@email.sc.edu
3
Dataminr Inc., NY, USA
{sanzaroot, wgroves, kzhang, ajaimes}@dataminr.com

uational awareness (e.g., shelter needs, ﬁrst aid, or roads
blocked), whereas policymakers require coarse-grained information (e.g., public health awareness, economic breakdowns, or political issues).
In the context of our current study, we deﬁne an event as
a large scale disaster that causes massive devastation (e.g., a
Hurricane). Such large scale emergencies include many important sub-events (e.g., a bridge collapses, power outages,
drug shortages, etc.). We detect such events in social media
posts (more speciﬁcally, on Twitter), and group them into
collections called sub-event clusters. These clusters provide a high-level understanding of the crisis and help discover important sub-events. For example, during Hurricane
Harvey, a Tweet stated: “power outage in west kingman due
to ﬂooding”. “Flooding,” and “power outage” are sub-events
of Hurricane Harvey.
Our method expands on recent work that models subevents exclusively as noun-verb pairs (Rudra et al. 2018).
Nouns are entities, names, or places, while verbs describe
actions related to the entity. Noun-verb pairs can represent
many, but not all sub-events1 . Tweets such as we need to
be prepared for infectious diseases that may spread when
water recedes #chennaiﬂoods and contaminated water still
pose health risks to residents in harvey affected area #harvey #texas describes infectious diseases and contaminated
water as highly relevant sub-events but do not conform to
the noun-verb pair structure. To extract these kinds of subevents, we use a two-word phrase detection model that captures frequent phrases. Our approach combines noun-verb
pairs and phrases as a more comprehensive approach for
sub-event detection. On large datasets, the number of automatically identiﬁed noun-verb pairs and phrases is large and
requires pruning. Our method identiﬁes the most important
sub-events by ranking candidate sub-events using the Management of Crisis (MOAC) ontology2 and discarding nounverb pairs and phrases that do not occur more than once in

Abstract
Social media plays a major role during and after major natural disasters (e.g., hurricanes, large-scale ﬁres, etc.), as people
“on the ground” post useful information on what is actually
happening. Given the large amounts of posts, a major challenge is identifying the information that is useful and actionable. Emergency responders are largely interested in ﬁnding
out what events are taking place so they can properly plan
and deploy resources. In this paper we address the problem
of automatically identifying important sub-events (within a
large-scale emergency “event”, such as a hurricane). In particular, we present a novel, unsupervised learning framework
to detect sub-events in Tweets for retrospective crisis analysis. We ﬁrst extract noun-verb pairs and phrases from raw
tweets as sub-event candidates. Then, we learn a semantic
embedding of extracted noun-verb pairs and phrases, and
rank them against a crisis-speciﬁc ontology. We ﬁlter out
noisy and irrelevant information then cluster the noun-verb
pairs and phrases so that the top-ranked ones describe the
most important sub-events. Through quantitative experiments
on two large crisis data sets (Hurricane Harvey and the 2015
Nepal Earthquake), we demonstrate the effectiveness of our
approach over the state-of-the-art. Our qualitative evaluation
shows better performance compared to our baseline.

Introduction
Social media has become an essential tool for emergency
response during crisis events (Cheng and Wicks 2014). As
a crisis unfolds, people at the scene of the crisis post critical information about the event on social media in realtime. The data is used by authorities and relief organizations
for response planning and relief coordination. However, the
massive inﬂux of tweets often prevents humanitarian organizations from being able to make timely judgments. Additionally, the unstructured and informal nature of social media prevents the effective extraction of useful information.
Furthermore, the information requirements vary as different stakeholders have different information needs. For example, ﬁrst emergency responders require ﬁne-grained sit-

1

Although one could argue that strictly speaking, events can
only be described by verbs, in practice, emergency planners and
ﬁrst responders are interested in what’s covered by a wider deﬁnition that could include topics or themes. For simplicity, we use
“sub-events” to refer to events and topics or themes of interest.
2
http://observedchange.com/moac/ns/

∗
Equal contribution. Research work was done while authors
were interning at Dataminr Inc.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

354

