The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Show, Recall, and Tell: Image Captioning with Recall Mechanism
Li Wang,1,3 Zechen Bai,2,3 Yonghua Zhang,3 Hongtao Lu1∗
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
2
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
3
AI-Lab Visual Search Team, Bytedance
{liwang.sjtu, ustbbzch}@gmail.com, mpeg21@hotmail.com, htlu@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

corpus

Generating natural and accurate descriptions in image captioning has always been a challenge. In this paper, we propose a novel recall mechanism to imitate the way human conduct captioning. There are three parts in our recall mechanism : recall unit, semantic guide (SG) and recalled-word
slot (RWS). Recall unit is a text-retrieval module designed
to retrieve recalled words for images. SG and RWS are designed for the best use of recalled words. SG branch can
generate a recalled context, which can guide the process of
generating caption. RWS branch is responsible for copying
recalled words to the caption. Inspired by pointing mechanism in text summarization, we adopt a soft switch to balance
the generated-word probabilities between SG and RWS. In
the CIDEr optimization step, we also introduce an individual
recalled-word reward (WR) to boost training. Our proposed
methods (SG+RWS+WR) achieve BLEU-4 / CIDEr / SPICE
scores of 36.6 / 116.9 / 21.3 with cross-entropy loss and 38.7 /
129.1 / 22.4 with CIDEr optimization on MSCOCO Karpathy
test split, which surpass the results of other state-of-the-art
methods.

airplane, tamac, runway, airport, etc
Recall
unit

RW-Attention

R-CNN

RNN

RWS
SG

a large
airplane
parked on the
runwayat an
airport

Figure 1: An overview of our proposed methods. Recall unit
is a text-retrieval module. RW-Attention denotes recalledwords attention. RWS represents recalled-words slot. SG is
semantic guide. In short, we introduce a recall unit to the
traditional captioning model, employing recalled words to
boost the performance of captioning.

On one hand, visual attention methods (Xu et al. 2015;
Lu et al. 2017) have brought signiﬁcant improvement in captioning on the most evaluation metrics like BLEU (Papineni
et al. 2002), METEOR (Denkowski and Lavie 2014) and
CIDEr (Vedantam, Lawrence Zitnick, and Parikh 2015). In
the process of generating caption, visual attention methods
can allocate different weights to different regions of an image, which prompt model only focus on the crucial parts of
the image.
On the other hand, semantic methods have also improved
captioning performance remarkably. Numerous methods
(You et al. 2016; Lu et al. 2018) employ detection technique
to obtain words of objects and attributes, then take those
words as known objects to generate caption, but these methods are highly dependent on the performance of detection
model. (Mun, Cho, and Han 2016) have retrieved relevant
guide texts according to the visual similarity between images, but they fail to construct a direct relationship between
the guide texts and the generated caption.
Looking back the above methods of captioning, all information to generate caption is extracted from only one given
image, but when a human describes an image, is all the information used only from this image? Usually not. When
people are intend to do something, they will ﬁrst recall past
experiences, imitate them appropriately, and then do it. This
is human instinct with no exception in captioning. People

Introduction
Image captioning is deﬁned as automatically generating a
descriptive statement from an image. This task needs to exploit image information and then to generate a natural caption. Image captioning can be applied to a wide range of
domains, for example, automatically adding subtitles to images or videos, which can do great help in search task.
In the last few years, encoder-decoder models have been
designed to accomplish the captioning task in many methods (Socher et al. 2014; Vinyals et al. 2015; Qin et al. 2019).
The role of encoder in captioning is to extract sufﬁcient and
useful visuqinal features from the image, and image has
been mostly encoded by using Convolutional Neural Network (CNNs) such as ResNet (He et al. 2016). Meanwhile,
the role of decoder is to exploit semantic part from encoded
visual information and then decode it word by word. Recurrent neural network (RNNs) is the most commonly used
method of decoder in captioning.
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12176

