The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Adversarial Localized Energy Network for Structured Prediction
Pingbo Pan,1,2∗ Ping Liu,2 Yan Yan,3 Tianbao Yang,3 Yi Yang2
1

Baidu Research, 2 The ReLER Lab, University of Technology Sydney, 3 University of Iowa
pingbo.pan@student.uts.edu.au, pino.pingliu@gmail.com,
{yan-yan-2, tianbao-yang}@uiowa.edu, yi.yang@uts.edu.au

To solve the aforementioned problem, LeCun (LeCun et
al. 2006) suggest to deﬁne a prediction function that associates energy values to different conﬁgurations of output
structures and name it as Energy-Based Method (EBM).
Speciﬁcally, EBM suggests to solve the structured interrelation between input x and ground-truth labels y∗ by
learning parameters w for an energy function v(.), i.e.,
y∗ = argmaxy v(x, y). Comparing to feed-forward methods, the energy based method is able to achieve more accurate results since it can substantially handle complicated
non-convex energies, which has been experimentally proved
in previous work (Belanger, Yang, and McCallum 2017).
As indicated in the previous work (Belanger and McCallum 2016), the critical component in the learning of a deep
energy-based model for structured prediction is how to ﬁnd
“the most offending incorrect answer” at each training step.
The most offending answer ỹ is deﬁned as an answer with
the highest energy but with an incorrect label, i.e., different
from the ground truth y∗ :

Abstract
This paper focuses on energy model based structured output prediction. Though inheriting the beneﬁts from energybased models to handle the sophisticated cases, previous deep
energy-based methods suffered from the substantial computation cost introduced by the enormous amounts of gradient
steps in the inference process. To boost the efﬁciency and
accuracy of the energy-based models on structured output
prediction, we propose a novel method analogous to the adversarial learning framework. Speciﬁcally, in our proposed
framework, the generator consists of an inference network
while the discriminator is comprised of an energy network.
The two sub-modules, i.e., the inference network and the
energy network, can beneﬁt each other mutually during the
whole computation process. On the one hand, our modiﬁed
inference network can boost the efﬁciency by predicting good
initializations and reducing the searching space for the inference process; On the other hand, inheriting the beneﬁts of the
energy network, the energy module in our network can evaluate the quality of the generated output from the inference
network and correspondingly provides a resourceful guide to
the training of the inference network. In the ideal case, the
adversarial learning strategy makes sure the two sub-modules
can achieve an equilibrium state after steps. We conduct extensive experiments to verify the effectiveness and efﬁciency
of our proposed method.

ỹ = arg max∗ v(x, y).
y=y

(1)

Some methods (Belanger and McCallum 2016; Gygli,
Norouzi, and Angelova 2017) utilize gradient-based inference with zero initialization to ﬁnd ỹ. The inference process convergences slowly, especially when the energy-based
models are extremely complex, e.g., deep neural networks,
and y is high-dimensional. Other methods (Tu and Gimpel
2018) propose to learn an inference network to approximate
ỹ. However, learning an optimal inference network at each
training step is still computationally expensive.
To improve the process of ﬁnding the most offending ỹ,
we propose a novel adversarial learning framework. Under
the designed framework, the generator network is in the
form of an inference network, while the discriminator network is in the form of an energy network. The inference
network is learned to approximate ỹ and updated for several (usually one) gradient steps at each training step. To
eliminate the discrepancy between the inference network approximation y = g(x) and the true ỹ, we further apply a
gradient-based inference to reﬁne y . The reﬁned y is used
to train the energy network, i.e., the discriminator.
Thanks to the adversarial learning strategy, our frame-

Introduction
Structured output prediction, which aims to learn a mapping
from an input x to a complex multivariate output structure
y, has been receiving signiﬁcant attention due to its wide
applications. For example, given an image, we predict a set
of semantic labels with inter-relations for it, or output a semantic segmentation map for it. Not surprisingly, predicting
structured output for a given input is challenging because input data, output structures, and their internal relations all live
in a high-dimensional space. To learn the sophisticated relationships between the input and output, a prediction model
with excellent expressivity capability as well as computational tractability needs to be learned.
∗
Part of this work was done when Pingbo Pan was a research
intern with baidu research.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5347

