The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Discontinuous Constituent Parsing with Pointer Networks
Daniel Fernández-González, Carlos Gómez-Rodrı́guez
Universidade da Coruña, CITIC
FASTPARSE Lab, LyS Group
Depto. de Ciencias de la Computación y Tecnologı́as de la Información
Elviña, 15071 A Coruña, Spain
{d.fgonzalez, carlos.gomez}@udc.es

information, they extend regular or continuous constituent
trees by allowing the representation of crossing branches
and constituents with gaps in the middle, crucial for describing grammatical structures left out in the standard phrasestructure formalism, such as the free-word-order phenomena
that can be found in languages such as German (see (Müller
2004) and references therein).
Unlike for regular constituent trees (Klein and Manning
2003), context-free grammars are not enough for deriving
discontinuous structures and representing complex linguistic phenomena and, therefore, more expressive formalisms,
such as Linear Context-Free Rewriting Systems (LCFRS)
(Vijay-Shanker, Weir, and Joshi 1987), are required. However, due to the high complexity behind the generation
of discontinuous phrase-structure representations, parsers
based on probabilistic LCFRS, such as (Kallmeyer and
Maier 2010), are not practical in terms of accuracy and
speed. In the last decade, alternatives to tackle discontinuous constituent parsing with complex grammar-based approaches were presented.
On the one hand, one line of research proposes to extend transition-based parsers, which have been successfully
applied for efﬁciently building continuous constituent trees
(Zhu et al. 2013; Dyer et al. 2016), with transitions and data
structures that are able to deal with discontinuity (Maier
2015; Stanojević and G. Alhama 2017; Coavoux, Crabbé,
and Cohen 2019; Coavoux and Cohen 2019). This research
branch currently yields the state of the art in discontinuous
phrase-structure parsing.
In parallel, another stream led by (Hall and Nivre
2008; Versley 2014; Fernández-González and Martins 2015;
Corro, Le Roux, and Lacroix 2017) proposes to represent
discontinuous formalisms as dependencies with augmented
information. This makes it possible to use efﬁcient dependency parsers to perform the analysis and, after a recovery process, return a well-formed constituent tree. While
they offer a similar efﬁciency as transition-based constituent
parsers, they are currently slightly behind them in terms
of accuracy. The main drawback of this approach is the
large amount of complex labels necessary to encode the
wide variety of syntactic structures into labelled dependency
arcs, growing unbounded with the treebank size. This forces

Abstract
One of the most complex syntactic representations used in
computational linguistics and NLP are discontinuous constituent trees, crucial for representing all grammatical phenomena of languages such as German. Recent advances in dependency parsing have shown that Pointer Networks excel in
efﬁciently parsing syntactic relations between words in a sentence. This kind of sequence-to-sequence models achieve outstanding accuracies in building non-projective dependency
trees, but its potential has not been proved yet on a more
difﬁcult task. We propose a novel neural network architecture that, by means of Pointer Networks, is able to generate
the most accurate discontinuous constituent representations
to date, even without the need of Part-of-Speech tagging information. To do so, we internally model discontinuous constituent structures as augmented non-projective dependency
structures. The proposed approach achieves state-of-the-art
results on the two widely-used NEGRA and TIGER benchmarks, outperforming previous work by a wide margin.

Introduction
Syntactic representations are increasingly being demanded
by a wide range of artiﬁcial intelligence applications that
process and understand natural language text or speech. This
encourages the Natural Language Processing (NLP) community to develop more accurate and efﬁcient parsers that
are able to represent all complex grammatical phenomena
present in human languages.
One of the most widely-used syntactic formalism is a constituent (or phrase-structure) representation. This describes
the syntax of a sentence in terms of constituents or phrases
and the hierarchical order between them, as shown in the
constituent tree in Figure 1(a). As a simpler alternative, a
dependency representation is also available. This straightforwardly connects each word of a sentence as a dependent
of another, which acts as its head word. The resulting structure is a dependency tree like the one depicted in Figure 1(c).
Among constituent trees we can ﬁnd the most informative syntactic representation currently available: discontinuous constituent trees. Apart from providing phrase-structure
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7724

