The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Layerwise Sparse Coding for Pruned Deep
Neural Networks with Extreme Compression Ratio
Xiao Liu,1 Wenbin Li,1 Jing Huo,1 Lili Yao,1 Yang Gao1∗
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
liuxiao730@outlook.com, liwenbin.nju@gmail.com, yaolili93@163.com, {huojing, gaoy}@nju.edu.cn

post-Moore era slows down the hardware replacement cycle (Hu 2018). Speciﬁcally, there are two main bottlenecks
of the current DNNs:
• Conﬂict with energy-constrained application platforms,
such as autonomous drones, mobile phones, mobile
robots and augmented reality (AR) in the daily life
(Krajnı́k et al. 2011; Floreano and Wood 2015; Kamilaris and Prenafeta-Boldú 2018). These application platforms are very sensitive to the energy consumption and
computational workload of the DNN models. Therefore,
DNN models with low energy consumption but good performance are urgently needed.
• Conﬂict with new accelerators, such as FPGA, custom
ASIC and AI dedicated chips (Chen et al. 2014; Zhang et
al. 2015; Han et al. 2016). They are powerful computing
accelerators for DNNs, but are also sensitive to hardware
storage, memory bandwidth, and parallelism. Obviously,
DNNs are expected to be able to reduce the usage of hardware storage and memory while enjoying the ability of
parallelism.
To tackle the above bottlenecks, a lot of compression
methods have been proposed, such as pruning (Han et
al. 2015; Anwar, Hwang, and Sung 2017) and quantization (Han, Mao, and Dally 2016; Park, Ahn, and Yoo
2017). Adopting these efﬁcient compression methods, we
can easily reduce the number of weights of a trained DNN
model. For instance, using the classic magnitude-based
pruning (Han et al. 2015), we can make the weight matrices
of the target network very sparse. To store and migrate these
sparse weights, we usually decompose them into two types
of data, i.e., non-zero weights and meta-data. Particularly,
these non-zero weights are the effective path of the original
network that have high impact to the ﬁnal prediction, while
the meta-data (expressing index information) is adopted to
encode and decode these non-zero weights. It seems that we
can achieve a high compression ratio by reducing the number of the non-zero weights as much as possible, when guaranteeing an acceptable ﬁnal performance. Unfortunately, we
will still suffer from a high amount of meta-data, which may
be several times larger than the non-zero weights. In fact, the
large amount of meta-data is a roadblock for pruned DNNs
to compress, store and migrate.

Abstract
Deep neural network compression is important and increasingly developed especially in resource-constrained environments, such as autonomous drones and wearable devices.
Basically, we can easily and largely reduce the number of
weights of a trained deep model by adopting a widely used
model compression technique, e.g., pruning. In this way,
two kinds of data are usually preserved for this compressed
model, i.e., non-zero weights and meta-data, where metadata is employed to help encode and decode these non-zero
weights. Although we can obtain an ideally small number
of non-zero weights through pruning, existing sparse matrix
coding methods still need a much larger amount of meta-data
(may several times larger than non-zero weights), which will
be a severe bottleneck of the deploying of very deep models. To tackle this issue, we propose a layerwise sparse coding (LSC) method to maximize the compression ratio by extremely reducing the amount of meta-data. We ﬁrst divide
a sparse matrix into multiple small blocks and remove zero
blocks, and then propose a novel signed relative index (SRI)
algorithm to encode the remaining non-zero blocks (with
much less meta-data). In addition, the proposed LSC performs parallel matrix multiplication without full decoding,
while traditional methods cannot. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that LSC achieves substantial gains
in pruned DNN compression (e.g., 51.03x compression ratio on ADMM-Lenet) and inference computation (i.e., time
reduction and extremely less memory bandwidth), over stateof-the-art baselines.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs), especially the very deep networks, have evolved to be the state-of-the-art techniques
in many ﬁelds, particularly in computer vision, natural
language processing, and audio processing (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le
2014; Abdel-Hamid et al. 2014). However, the huge growth
numbers of hidden layers and neurons, which consume considerable hardware storage and memory bandwidth, posing
signiﬁcant challenges to many resource-constrained scenarios in real-world applications. In particular, the arrival of the
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4900

