The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Improving Context-Aware Neural Machine
Translation Using Self-Attentive Sentence Embedding
Hyeongu Yun,1∗ Yongkeun Hwang,1∗ Kyomin Jung1,2
2

1
Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
Automation and Systems Research Institute, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
{youaredead, wangcho2k, kjung}@snu.ac.kr

not take account of contextual sentences, hence they record
lower performances in spoken languages compared to those
in written and formal language documents.
A few studies have addressed this issue by introducing a secondary context encoder to represent contextual
sentences then combining them with the source sentence
prior to passing them onto the decoder (Voita et al. 2018;
Zhang et al. 2018; Miculicich et al. 2018). They proposed
context encoders that encode contextual information in the
sentence level vectors and use that information in translating
input words. These context encoders handle multiple sentences as long word vectors by concatenating them and do
not involve the contextual level information.
Such approaches cause critical drawbacks in handling a
larger span of contextual sentences. First, the computational
complexity of context encoder scales quadratically both with
the number of tokens in each contextual sentence and the
number of contextual sentences. Second, (Tang et al. 2018;
Tran, Bisazza, and Monz 2018) have empirically shown
that FAN is limited at capturing long-range dependencies in
translation tasks. Hence, concatenating multiple contextual
sentences as a long single sentence is not only computationally expensive, but it also weakens the context-awareness of
the model for large contexts.
In this work, we propose a Hierarchical Context Encoder
(HCE) to resolve this issue by hierarchically encoding multiple sentences into a contextual level tensor. HCE ﬁrst encodes each sentence to a tensor with the FAN encoder, then
it converts the encoded tensors into a sentence embedding
vector by the attentive weighted summation. Since each sentence embedding vector contains the contextual information
of each contextual sentence, we are able to build a contextlevel tensor by listing all the sentence embedding vectors.
Then the context-level tensor is fed into another FAN encoder in order to get a tensor with correlative information
between contextual sentences, and the obtained tensor is ﬁnally combined with the source encoder to form the ﬁnal
encoder output. Our HCE processes each context sentence
separately instead of a long concatenated sentence, hence it
shows efﬁciency in computational complexity. The computational complexity of HCE increases linearly as the number of context sentences increase and HCE shows the fastest

Abstract
Fully Attentional Networks (FAN) like Transformer
(Vaswani et al. 2017) has shown superior results in Neural Machine Translation (NMT) tasks and has become a
solid baseline for translation tasks. More recent studies
also have reported experimental results that additional
contextual sentences improve translation qualities of
NMT models (Voita et al. 2018; Müller et al. 2018;
Zhang et al. 2018). However, those studies have exploited
multiple context sentences as a single long concatenated
sentence, that may cause the models to suffer from inefﬁcient
computational complexities and long-range dependencies. In
this paper, we propose Hierarchical Context Encoder (HCE)
that is able to exploit multiple context sentences separately
using the hierarchical FAN structure. Our proposed encoder
ﬁrst abstracts sentence-level information from preceding
sentences in a self-attentive way, and then hierarchically
encodes context-level information. Through extensive
experiments, we observe that our HCE records the best
performance measured in BLEU score on English-German,
English-Turkish, and English-Korean corpus. In addition,
we observe that our HCE records the best performance in
a crowd-sourced test set which is designed to evaluate how
well an encoder can exploit contextual information. Finally,
evaluation on English-Korean pronoun resolution test suite
also shows that our HCE can properly exploit contextual
information.

1

Introduction

Recently, interests on context-awareness in Neural Machine
Translation (NMT) tasks have been increasing since additional contextual information is often crucial to produce
adequate translations. For example, especially in spoken
languages, duplicated information tends to be omitted frequently if the same information is mentioned in the preceding sentences. That omitted information often cause inaccurate, incomplete or ambiguous translations of spoken
languages such as movie subtitles. However, current translation models including Fully Attentional Networks (FAN)
(Vaswani et al. 2017) operate on a single sentence level do
∗

Equal contribution
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9498

