The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

SSAH: Semi-Supervised Adversarial Deep
Hashing with Self-Paced Hard Sample Generation
Sheng Jin,∗1,2 Shangchen Zhou,3 Yao Liu,2 Chao Chen,2
Xiaoshuai Sun,4 Hongxun Yao,†1 Xian-Sheng Hua2
1

The Harbin Institute of Technology, 2 Alibaba DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
3
Nanyang Technological University, 4 Xiamen University
jsh.hit.doc@gmail.com, h.yao@hit.edu.cn.

Abstract
Deep hashing methods have been proved to be effective and
efﬁcient for large-scale Web media search. The success of
these data-driven methods largely depends on collecting sufﬁcient labeled data, which is usually a crucial limitation in
practical cases. The current solutions to this issue utilize Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) to augment data in semisupervised learning. However, existing GAN-based methods
treat image generations and hashing learning as two isolated processes, leading to generation ineffectiveness. Besides, most works fail to exploit the semantic information
in unlabeled data. In this paper, we propose a novel Semisupervised Self-pace Adversarial Hashing method, named
SSAH to solve the above problems in a uniﬁed framework.
The SSAH method consists of an adversarial network (ANet) and a hashing network (H-Net). To improve the quality of generative images, ﬁrst, the A-Net learns hard samples
with multi-scale occlusions and multi-angle rotated deformations which compete against the learning of accurate hashing
codes. Second, we design a novel self-paced hard generation
policy to gradually increase the hashing difﬁculty of generated samples. To make use of the semantic information in unlabeled ones, we propose a semi-supervised consistent loss.
The experimental results show that our method can significantly improve state-of-the-art models on both the widelyused hashing datasets and ﬁne-grained datasets.

Which boundary
is optimal ?

(a) w/o Hard Sample Generation
Class A
Image Pairs

Hard A

Class B

Boundary of class A

(b) w Hard Sample Generation
Hard B

Class C

Boundary

Hard C
Optimal Boundary

Figure 1: To obtain the optimal boundary for points with
similar hashing codes, we propose a novel self-paced deep
adversarial hashing to generate hard samples, as shown in
(b). Intuitively, these samples can help the network learn
more optimal classiﬁcation boundaries.

trieval performance due to its powerful ability of feature representation and nonlinear mapping.
Although great efforts have been devoted to deep
learning-based algorithms, the label-hungry property makes
it intractable in practice. Contrarily, for some retrieval tasks,
unlabeled data is always enough. To make use of unlabeled
data, several semi-supervised methods are proposed, include
graph-based methods like SSDH (Zhang and Peng 2017)
and BGDH (Yan, Zhang, and Li 2017), and generation methods like DSH-GANs (Qiu et al. 2017), HashGAN (Cao et al.
2018a) and SSGAH (Wang et al. 2018). Graph-based works
like SSDH and BGDH use graph structure to mine unlabeled
data. However, constructing the graph model of large-scale
data is expensive computation and time-consuming, and using batch data instead may lead to a suboptimal result. Currently, GAN (Goodfellow et al. 2014) is proved to be effective in generation tasks and then this novel technical are
introduced into hashing. Existing GAN-based methods restricted by two crucial problems, i.e., generation ineffectiveness and unlabeled-data underutilization.
In terms of generation ineffectiveness, the existing GANbased methods train the generation network solely based on
label information. This setting leads to ineffective genera-

Introduction
In the big data era, large-scale image retrieval is widely
used in many practical applications, yet it remains a challenge because of the large computational cost and high accuracy requirement. To address the efﬁciency and effectiveness issues, hashing methods have become a hot research
topic. A great number of hashing methods are proposed to
map images into a hamming space, including traditional
hashing methods (Andoni and Indyk 2006; Lin et al. 2018;
2019) and deep hashing methods (Cao et al. 2017; 2018b;
Liu et al. 2018; Sheng et al. 2018). Compared with traditional ones, deep hashing methods usually achieve better re∗

This work was done as a research intern in Alibaba Group.
Correspondence Author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

11157

