The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Towards Certiﬁcated Model Robustness Against Weight Perturbations
Tsui-Wei Weng,∗1 Pu Zhao,∗2 Sijia Liu,3 Pin-Yu Chen,3 Xue Lin,2 Luca Daniel1
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139
2
Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115
3
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598
{twweng, dluca}@mit.edu, zhao.pu@husky.neu.edu, {sijia.liu, pin-yu.chen}@ibm.com,
xue.lin@northeastern.edu

work on studying the problem of robustness against input
perturbations, this work aims to evaluate the sensitivity of
DNNs to weight perturbations.
Weight perturbations of DNNs are of realistic signiﬁcance.
First, a new threat model of weight perturbations was proposed by (Liu et al. 2017; Zhao et al. 2019b), which showed
that the so-called fault sneaking/injection attack can enforce
DNN to misclassify some natural input images into target
labels by slightly modifying weights at a single layer, while
maintaining the classiﬁcation of unspeciﬁed input images intact. This implies that the outputs of DNNs are also sensitive
to weight perturbations. Moreover, there also exist weight
perturbations in the non-adversarial setting. For example,
weight quantization (Zhou et al. 2017; Leng et al. 2018;
Ren et al. 2019), a major DNN model compression technique commonly utilized by industry for DNN acceleration/implementation, induces weight perturbations by replacing full ﬂoating-point precision weights with ﬁxed-point
lower precision weights. It is even well supported in GPUs
and mobile devices, e.g., PyTorch (Paszke et al. 2017) in
NVIDIA GPUs and TensorFlow Lite (Abadi et al. 2016) for
mobile devices. However, such direct mapping from full precision weights of DNNs into quantized weights could result
in signiﬁcant generalization error (Sheng et al. 2018).
Different from the robustness issue caused by input perturbations, weight perturbations focus on DNN models for
natural (unperturbed) examples rather than adversarial examples. If training and testing samples stem from the same
distribution, evaluating the model robustness against weight
perturbations in the training dataset (namely, sensitivity of
training accuracy to weight perturbations) is able to provide
informative guidelines on the generalization ability of the
weight-perturbed network (e.g., weight-quantized network).
Thus, both fault injection attack and weight quantization motivate us to study the problem of model robustness against
weight perturbations.

Abstract
This work studies the sensitivity of neural networks to weight
perturbations, ﬁrstly corresponding to a newly developed
threat model that perturbs the neural network parameters. We
propose an efﬁcient approach to compute a certiﬁed robustness bound of weight perturbations, within which neural networks will not make erroneous outputs as desired by the adversary. In addition, we identify a useful connection between
our developed certiﬁcation method and the problem of weight
quantization, a popular model compression technique in deep
neural networks (DNNs) and a ‘must-try’ step in the design
of DNN inference engines on resource constrained computing
platforms, such as mobiles, FPGA, and ASIC. Speciﬁcally,
we study the problem of weight quantization – weight perturbations in the non-adversarial setting – through the lens
of certiﬁcated robustness, and we demonstrate signiﬁcant improvements on the generalization ability of quantized networks
through our robustness-aware quantization scheme.

Introduction
Although deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved
human-level performance in many learning tasks, intricate adversarial examples have been shown to exist in
DNNs (Szegedy et al. 2014; Moosavi-Dezfooli, Fawzi, and
Frossard 2016; Chen et al. 2018; Zhao et al. 2019a). An everincreasing amount of research effort has been devoted to implementing adversarial attacks in various applications (Athalye, Carlini, and Wagner 2018; Carlini and Wagner 2017;
Papernot et al. 2016a; Song et al. 2018; Carlini and Wagner 2018), developing defense methods ranging from heuristic methods to provable defenses (Papernot et al. 2016b;
Liu et al. 2018; Madry et al. 2018; Kolter and Wong 2018;
Liu et al. 2019), as well as efﬁcient veriﬁcation of neural networks against adversarial examples (Hein and Andriushchenko 2017; Weng et al. 2018b; 2018a; Gehr et al.
2018; Boopathy et al. 2019) and random noises (Weng et
al. 2019) in image classiﬁcation as well as in natural language processing (Ko et al. 2019) and reinforcement learning (Wang, Weng, and Daniel 2019). Different from above

Contributions. First, we formulate the certiﬁcate problem
of model robustness against weight perturbations. The solution to this problem provides the certiﬁed weight perturbation
region such that DNNs will maintain the accuracy if weight
perturbations are within that region.
Second, we ﬁnd provable non-trivial lower bounds on the

∗

Equal contribution in alphabetical order
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6356

