The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Lifted Fact-Alternating Mutex Groups and
Pruned Grounding of Classical Planning Problems
Daniel Fišer
Czech Technical University in Prague,
Faculty of Electrical Engineering,
Prague, Czech Republic
danﬁs@danﬁs.cz

heuristics (Helmert et al. 2014; Sievers, Wehrle, and Helmert
2014), pattern databases (Culberson and Schaeffer 1996;
Edelkamp 2001), SAT-based planning (Rintanen, Heljanko,
and Niemelä 2006), or computing upper bounds on plan
lengths (Abdulaziz, Gretton, and Norrish 2017).
It was shown that the inference of the maximum-sized
mutex group is PSPACE-Complete, but there also exists
a subclass of mutex groups, called fact-alternating mutex
groups (fam-groups), deﬁned over the input problem rather
than over the whole reachable state space, of which inference is NP-Complete (Fišer and Komenda 2018).
In this paper, we focus on the inference of schematic mutex groups in the lifted representation. We show that the
lifted mutex groups described by Helmert (2009) are always
fam-groups after grounding because of the constraints posed
on their structure and not because of the proposed inference
algorithm. We propose an improvement of the Helmert’s inference algorithm that produces a richer set of lifted famgroups. Based on the previous results on operator pruning
using fam-groups in STRIPS (Fišer and Komenda 2018), we
introduce an operator pruning technique utilized during the
grounding phase that uses the inferred lifted fam-groups.

Abstract
In this paper, we focus on the inference of mutex groups in
the lifted (PDDL) representation. We formalize the inference
and prove that the most commonly used translator from the
Fast Downward (FD) planning system infers a certain subclass of mutex groups, called fact-alternating mutex groups
(fam-groups). Based on that, we show that the previously proposed fam-groups-based pruning techniques for the STRIPS
representation can be utilized during the grounding process
with lifted fam-groups, i.e., before the full STRIPS representation is known. Furthermore, we propose an improved inference algorithm for lifted fam-groups that produces a richer
set of fam-groups than the FD translator and we demonstrate
a positive impact on the number of pruned operators and overall coverage.

Introduction
Although classical planning problems are often described
in the (schematic) Planning Domain Deﬁnition Language
(PDDL) (McDermott 2000), i.e., in the lifted representation,
most planners operate with a (non-schematic) ground representation such as STRIPS (Fikes and Nilsson 1971) or the
ﬁnite domain representation (FDR or SAS+ ) (Bäckström
and Nebel 1995). These planners need to employ a translation process, called grounding, that transforms the lifted
representation (PDDL) into STRIPS. The subsequent transformation from STRIPS, where states are described as sets
of facts, into FDR, where states are assignments to a ﬁnite
set of variables, requires an additional step of inference of
mutex groups.
Mutex groups are sets of facts of which at most one is
present in every reachable state. They are state invariants
needed for the construction of a concise FDR representation, because they allow us to group sets of (STRIPS) facts
into (FDR) variables so we do not need to encode each fact
as a binary variable. This, however, is not the only application of mutex groups, because they provide a more general information about the structure of the planning task that
can be used in pruning (Alcázar et al. 2013; Alcázar and
Torralba 2015; Fišer and Komenda 2018), merge&shrink

PDDL and STRIPS
We consider the normalized non-numeric, non-temporal
PDDL tasks without conditional effects and negative preconditions, and with all formulas being conjunctions of
atoms (represented as sets of atoms). Since we will ground
PDDL into STRIPS, we also split effects of PDDL actions
into add effects (positive literals) and delete effects (negative literals) directly in the deﬁnition below to simplify the
presentation.
In contrast to the normalization of PDDL tasks described
by Helmert (2009), we do not support axioms (derived predicates) and we keep and utilize PDDL types. We also disregard conditional effects, but our implementation supports
the full fragment of PDDL that is used in deterministic
tracks of International Planning Competitions (IPCs).
Deﬁnition 1. A normalized PDDL task is a tuple P =
B, T , V, P, A, ψI , ψG  where B is a non-empty set of objects, T is a non-empty set of types containing a default
type denoted by t0 ∈ T , objects and types are associated by

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9835

