The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Improving Knowledge-Aware Dialogue
Generation via Knowledge Base Question Answering
Jian Wang,1 Junhao Liu,2 Wei Bi,3 Xiaojiang Liu,3 Kejing He,1∗ Ruifeng Xu,4 Min Yang2∗
1

South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, China
3
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
4
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), China
cs wangjian@mail.scut.edu.cn, {jh.liu, min.yang}@siat.ac.cn, {victoriabi, kieranliu}@tencent.com,
kjhe@scut.edu.cn, xuruifeng@hit.edu.cn
2

Abstract
lyric
demo

1

ost

IsA

song

InstanceOf

album

RelatedTo

Neural network models usually suffer from the challenge
of incorporating commonsense knowledge into the opendomain dialogue systems. In this paper, we propose a
novel knowledge-aware dialogue generation model (called
TransDG), which transfers question representation and
knowledge matching abilities from knowledge base question answering (KBQA) task to facilitate the utterance understanding and factual knowledge selection for dialogue generation. In addition, we propose a response guiding attention and a multi-step decoding strategy to steer our model
to focus on relevant features for response generation. Experiments on two benchmark datasets demonstrate that our model
has robust superiority over compared methods in generating informative and ﬂuent dialogues. Our code is available
at https://github.com/siat-nlp/TransDG.

serena

sing

happy

sang
…

KBQA:
Dialogue
Generation:

show
…

what is the ost covered in this album?

ost, IsA, song

this is just my guess but the best album that
they are going to release said that there ’s
going to be more than the endings they sing.
maybe they will include the ost maybe not.

i really hope they will
include the ost. i like
this song, it ’s so happy.

Figure 1: Examples from a real-life dataset show that KBQA
can facilitate the utterance understanding and factual knowledge selection for generating informative dialogue, e.g., locating the KB fact ost, IsA, song.

Introduction

Building a dialogue system that is capable of providing informative responses is a long-term goal of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI). Recent advances on dialogue systems are overwhelmingly contributed by deep learning techniques (i.e.,
sequence-to-sequence model) (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le
2014), which have taken the state-of-the-art of dialogue systems to a new level. However, fully data-driven neural models (Serban et al. 2016; Li et al. 2016b; 2016c) tend to generate responses that are conversationally appropriate but seldom include factual content. Previous studies (Ghazvininejad et al. 2018; Zhou et al. 2018) revealed that infusing commonsense knowledge into dialogue systems could enhance
user satisfaction and contribute to highly versatile and applicable open-domain dialogue systems.
Several studies have been proposed to integrate external knowledge into dialogue generation (Zhu et al. 2017;
Liu et al. 2018). Despite the effectiveness of previous studies, there are still several challenges for generating informative and appropriate conversation, which are not addressed

well in prior works. First, prior methods (Zhou et al. 2018)
extract knowledge from KB by using each word in the post
as query to retrieve related facts in an explicit manner. However, in dialogue systems, matching posts to exact facts in
KB is much harder than explicit factoid inquiries answering.
For some posts, the subjects and relations are elusive, e.g.,
the related entities are far from each other in the post (see
Figure 1), which leads to trouble in matching relational facts
from KB. Second, the generation-based methods generate
the response word by word and lack a global perspective.
As a result, the knowledge connection between the post and
potential response (entity diffusion) is ignored, making the
generated knowledge (entities) in responses not appropriate
and reasonable with respect to the post. Third, most previous
studies focus on enriching entities or triples for generation
by merely incorporating information from KB. However, it
is difﬁcult to retrieve related facts and generate meaningful
responses relying on solely the insufﬁcient input posts, especially when the input posts are really short.
To deal with the aforementioned challenges, we propose

∗

Kejing He and Min Yang are corresponding authors. This work
was conducted when Jian Wang was interning at SIAT, Chinese
Academy of Sciences.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9169

