The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

FD-GAN: Generative Adversarial Networks
with Fusion-Discriminator for Single Image Dehazing
Yu Dong,1,2∗ Yihao Liu,1,2∗ He Zhang,3 Shifeng Chen,1† Yu Qiao1
1

ShenZhen Key Lab of Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 3 Adobe Inc.
{yu.dong, shifeng.chen, yu.qiao}@siat.ac.cn,
liuyihao14@mails.ucas.ac.cn, hezhan@Adobe.com
Abstract
Recently, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
achieved great improvements in single image dehazing and
attained much attention in research. Most existing learningbased dehazing methods are not fully end-to-end, which still
follow the traditional dehazing procedure: ﬁrst estimate the
medium transmission and the atmospheric light, then recover the haze-free image based on the atmospheric scattering model. However, in practice, due to lack of priors and
constraints, it is hard to precisely estimate these intermediate
parameters. Inaccurate estimation further degrades the performance of dehazing, resulting in artifacts, color distortion and
insufﬁcient haze removal. To address this, we propose a fully
end-to-end Generative Adversarial Networks with Fusiondiscriminator (FD-GAN) for image dehazing. With the proposed Fusion-discriminator which takes frequency information as additional priors, our model can generator more natural and realistic dehazed images with less color distortion and
fewer artifacts. Moreover, we synthesize a large-scale training
dataset including various indoor and outdoor hazy images to
boost the performance and we reveal that for learning-based
dehazing methods, the performance is strictly inﬂuenced by
the training data. Experiments have shown that our method
reaches state-of-the-art performance on both public synthetic
datasets and real-world images with more visually pleasing
dehazed results.

1

(a) Hazy Input

(b) DCP (He et al.)

(c) EPDN (Qu et al.)

(d) FD-GAN (ours)

Figure 1: Dehazing example on a real-world hazy image.
Comparing with existing methods, our model can remove
haze effect more thoroughly and generate more natural and
visually pleasing dehazed results with less color distortion.
widely used to describe the formation of a hazy image:
I(x) = J(x)t(x) + A(1 − t(x)),

Introduction

(1)

where I(x) is the observed hazy image, J(x) is the real
scene radiance to be recovered, t(x) is the medium transmission map and x indicates the pixel coordinate. A is the global
atmospheric light. If the global atmosphere is homogenous,
the transmission map t(x) can be modeled by

Haze is a common atmospheric phenomenon where dust,
smoke or other ﬂoating particles greatly absorb and scatter
the light, resulting in degradations in image quality. Hazy
images usually lose contrast, color ﬁdelity and edge information, which can reduce the visibility of scenes and further
do harm to plenty of computer vision tasks and relevant applications such as classiﬁcation, localization and self-driving
system. Hence, haze removal is highly desired. There is
a classical atmospheric scattering model (Mccartney 1977)

t(x) = e−βd(x) ,

(2)

where d(x) represents the scene depth and β is the scattering
coefﬁcient of the atmosphere. As only I(x) is given, recovering the haze-free scene J(x) is an ill-posed problem.
In recent years, numerous methods have been proposed
to tackle this challenging problem. These methods can be
divided into two trends: prior-based methods and learningbased methods. In prior-based methods, the global atmospheric light A and the medium transmission map t(x) are

∗
The ﬁrst two authors contributed equally and should be regarded as co-ﬁrst authors.
†
Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10729

