The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Deep Domain-Adversarial Image Generation for Domain Generalisation
Kaiyang Zhou,1 Yongxin Yang,1 Timothy Hospedales,2,3 Tao Xiang1,3
1

University of Surrey, 2 University of Edinburgh, 3 Samsung AI Center, Cambridge
{k.zhou, yongxin.yang, t.xiang}@surrey.ac.uk, t.hospedales@ed.ac.uk

  

Abstract

 



 

 






Machine learning models typically suffer from the domain
shift problem when trained on a source dataset and evaluated
on a target dataset of different distribution. To overcome this
problem, domain generalisation (DG) methods aim to leverage data from multiple source domains so that a trained model
can generalise to unseen domains. In this paper, we propose a
novel DG approach based on Deep Domain-Adversarial Image Generation (DDAIG). Speciﬁcally, DDAIG consists of
three components, namely a label classiﬁer, a domain classiﬁer and a domain transformation network (DoTNet). The goal
for DoTNet is to map the source training data to unseen domains. This is achieved by having a learning objective formulated to ensure that the generated data can be correctly classiﬁed by the label classiﬁer while fooling the domain classiﬁer.
By augmenting the source training data with the generated
unseen domain data, we can make the label classiﬁer more
robust to unknown domain changes. Extensive experiments
on four DG datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach.

 
 

 

 
 





    

Figure 1: Given multiple source domains, e.g. Cartoon,
Photo and Sketch, we learn a domain transformation network (DoTNet) to transform images to unseen domains,
which maintain the class labels but change domain-related
properties. Both original and transformed images are used
to train a label classiﬁer, which is applied to an unseen target domain, e.g. Art.
get data and perform supervised model ﬁne-tuning. However, large-scale data collection and annotation for every
new target domain is prohibitively expensive and timeconsuming, which make the ﬁne-tuning strategy infeasible.
A more economical solution is to use unsupervised domain
adaptation (UDA) methods (Long et al. 2015; Ganin and
Lempitsky 2015; Hoffman et al. 2018; Gong et al. 2019;
Chen et al. 2019), which only use unlabelled target data.
Although the data annotation step is avoided, UDA still requires a data collection step followed by a model adaptation
step for each new domain, which hinders its applicability.
As a result, domain generalisation (DG) (Muandet, Balduzzi, and Scholkopf 2013) has received an increasing interest lately. The goal of DG is to train a model using
data from multiple source domains and deploy the model
to an arbitrary unseen target domain without any adaption.
Many existing DG methods adopt a core idea from the domain adaption (DA) research, which is to align source domain distributions at feature-level, assuming that a source
domain invariant model can be learned (Li et al. 2018b;
2018c). However, without access to any target domain data,
the model learned with domain alignment can still overﬁt the
source domains. Alternatively, meta learning based methods
have been recently employed to address DG where heldout source domains are used to simulate unseen target domains (Li et al. 2018a; Balaji, Sankaranarayanan, and Chel-

Introduction
Most existing deep learning models assume that the training (source) and testing (target) data come from the same
domain/dataset and thus follow the same distribution. However, in practice this assumption is often invalid. For example, a module for recognising pedestrians and trafﬁc signs
in an autonomous driving car may be deployed anywhere
in the world under any weather condition. Considering each
city and weather combination as a domain, it is impossible
to collect training data of every domain for model training. Other domain changes can correspond to the change
of image style/modality such as those shown in Figure 1
where a classiﬁer trained on images of cartoon, photo and
sketch is applied to art images. Unfortunately, it is well
known that existing deep learning models are sensitive to
domain changes/shifts (Li et al. 2017; Shankar et al. 2018;
Balaji, Sankaranarayanan, and Chellappa 2018) in that they
tend to overﬁt the source domains, resulting in poor generalisation.
A straightforward way to deal with the domain gap between source and target domains is to acquire labelled tarc 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13025

