The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Progressive Bi-C3D Pose Grammar for Human Pose Estimation
Lu Zhou,1,2 Yingying Chen,1,2 Jinqiao Wang,1,2 Hanqing Lu1,2
1

National Lab of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{lu.zhou, yingying.chen, jqwang, luhq}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a progressive pose grammar network learned with Bi-C3D (Bidirectional Convolutional 3D)
for human pose estimation. Exploiting the dependencies
among the human body parts proves effective in solving the
problems such as complex articulation, occlusion and so on.
Therefore, we propose two articulated grammars learned with
Bi-C3D to build the relationships of the human joints and
exploit the contextual information of human body structure.
Firstly, a local multi-scale Bi-C3D kinematics grammar is
proposed to promote the message passing process among
the locally related joints. The multi-scale kinematics grammar excavates different levels human context learned by the
network. Moreover, a global sequential grammar is put forward to capture the long-range dependencies among the human body joints. The whole procedure can be regarded as
a local-global progressive reﬁnement process. Without bells
and whistles, our method achieves competitive performance
on both MPII and LSP benchmarks compared with previous
methods, which conﬁrms the feasibility and effectiveness of
C3D in information interactions.

1

Introduction

Human pose estimation serves as one of the fundamental
research directions in computer vision, which aims at locating the joints (head, shoulders, elbows, writsts, knees, ankles, etc.) positions given images that contain various human
poses. Human pose estimation has become a signiﬁcant basis for many other vision tasks. However, human pose estimation still has difﬁculty in accurate location due to the occlusion, complex human pose gesture, scale variation, and
foreshortening.
Human pose estimation has achieved signiﬁcant progress
due to the development of the deep convolutional networks.
(Wei et al. 2016) reﬁned the estimated pose stage by stage
by enlarging the receptive ﬁeld of the model. The repeated
conv-deconv process proposed in (Newell, Yang, and Deng
2016) captured various scale features and boosted the performance by a large margin. Although considerable enhancements have been made by the techniques proposed, it still

Figure 1: Visualization of the estimated results on the LSP
dataset. Our method achieves promising estimation results
on the images which cover various pose changes.
remains difﬁcult for the network to obtain more precise predictions. Previous works seldom take consideration of prior
knowledge, which results in pool performance under the circumstances of the severe occlusion and complex gesture as
shown in Figure 1.
High-level semantic information ﬂow among human
joints, which can also be regarded as a message passing
process, enriches the context of individual features. The
wrongly predicted joints can be easily rectiﬁed under the
assistance of correct predictions and problems mentioned
above can be settled thereof. To achieve this goal, we take
advantage of the pose grammar mechanism to propagate the

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13033

