The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Symbiotic Attention with Privileged
Information for Egocentric Action Recognition
Xiaohan Wang,1,2 Yu Wu,1,2 Linchao Zhu,1 Yi Yang1∗
1

ReLER, University of Technology Sydney, 2 Baidu Research
{xiaohan.wang-3, yu.wu-3}@student.uts.edu.au, {linchao.zhu, yi.yang}@uts.edu.au

Abstract
Egocentric video recognition is a natural testbed for diverse
interaction reasoning. Due to the large action vocabulary in
egocentric video datasets, recent studies usually utilize a twobranch structure for action recognition, i.e., one branch for
verb classiﬁcation and the other branch for noun classiﬁcation. However, correlation study between the verb and the
noun branches have been largely ignored. Besides, the two
branches fail to exploit local features due to the absence of
position-aware attention mechanism. In this paper, we propose a novel Symbiotic Attention framework leveraging Privileged information (SAP) for egocentric video recognition.
Finer position-aware object detection features can facilitate
the understanding of actor’s interaction with the object. We
introduce these features in action recognition and regard them
as privileged information. Our framework enables mutual
communication among the verb branch, the noun branch, and
the privileged information. This communication process not
only injects local details into global features, but also exploits implicit guidance about the spatio-temporal position of
an on-going action. We introduce a novel symbiotic attention
(SA) to enable effective communication. It ﬁrst normalizes
the detection guided features on one branch to underline the
action-relevant information from the other branch. SA adaptively enhances the interactions among the three sources. To
further catalyze this communication, spatial relations are uncovered for the selection of most action-relevant information.
It identiﬁes the most valuable and discriminative feature for
classiﬁcation. We validate the effectiveness of our SAP quantitatively and qualitatively. Notably, it achieves the state-ofthe-art on two large-scale egocentric video datasets.

VerbNet
Background noise exists
in verb classification

NounNet
Distracting objects interfere
with noun classification

Object Detection
Video Clip

Privileged Information offers
position-aware features

Figure 1: Three sources of information are leveraged. The
VerbNet extracts motion information from raw videos, while
background noise possibly degrades the recognition of target action. The NounNet recognizes the object in the scene.
However, distracting objects interfere with accurate noun
classiﬁcation. Local position-aware object detection features
serves as privileged information to enhance the communication between two branches.
deep convolutional neural networks and large-scale datasets,
the action recognition performance has been prominently
boosted (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; Tran et al. 2015;
Zhu et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2016; Xie et al. 2018; Wu et al.
2019b). In typical action recognition datasets (Carreira and
Zisserman 2017; Goyal et al. 2017), the video duration is
usually less than 10 seconds. These trimmed videos contain
a single action that dominates the whole clip. As the background environment is not distracting, it is often not necessary to identify the interacting object. However, in many
real-world applications, e.g., a robot navigates in the mall,
the surroundings are noisy with multiple actors and objects.
Human action recognition in videos has evolved from

Introduction
We have witnessed a signiﬁcant progress in tackling
many computer vision problems, e.g., image classiﬁcation (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; He et al.
2016; Huang et al. 2017), detection (Girshick et al. 2014;
Girshick 2015; Ren et al. 2015; He et al. 2017), segmentation (Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015; Chen et al. 2017;
He et al. 2017). In video analysis, with the emerging of
∗
This work was done when Xiaohan Wang and Yu Wu interned
at Baidu Research. Yi Yang is the corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12249

