The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Latent Emotion Memory for Multi-Label Emotion Classiﬁcation
Hao Fei,1 Yue Zhang,2 Yafeng Ren,3∗ Donghong Ji1∗
1

Key Laboratory of Aerospace Information Security and Trusted Computing,
Ministry of Education, School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
2
School of Engineering, Westlake University, Hangzhou, China
3
Guangdong Collaborative Innovation Center for Language Research & Services,
Guangdong University of Foreign Studies, Guangzhou, China
{hao.fei, renyafeng, dhji}@whu.edu.cn
yue.zhang@wias.org.cn
Abstract
Identifying multiple emotions in a sentence is an important
research topic. Existing methods usually model the problem
as multi-label classiﬁcation task. However, previous methods
have two issues, limiting the performance of the task. First,
these models do not consider prior emotion distribution in a
sentence. Second, they fail to effectively capture the context
information closely related to the corresponding emotion. In
this paper, we propose a Latent Emotion Memory network
(LEM) for multi-label emotion classiﬁcation. The proposed
model can learn the latent emotion distribution without external knowledge, and can effectively leverage it into the classiﬁcation network. Experimental results on two benchmark
datasets show that the proposed model outperforms strong
baselines, achieving the state-of-the-art performance.

Figure 1: Multiple emotions with different intensities.

Introduction
Emotion classiﬁcation is an important task in natural language processing (NLP). Automatically inferencing the
emotions is the initial step for downstream applications such
as emotional chatbots (Zhou et al. 2018), stock market prediction (Nguyen, Shirai, and Velcin 2015), policy studies
(Bermingham and Smeaton 2011), etc. However, it is common that there exist more than one emotion in a piece of text.
Intuitively, people tend to express multiple emotions in one
piece of text. Taking the following sentences as example:
(S1) How’s the new Batman Telltale Series? Looks good
but I’m growing weary of this gaming style.
(S2) It really is amazing in the worst ways. It was very
hard to stiﬂe my laughter after I overheard this comment.
In sentence S1, multiple emotions are conveyed, including anticipation, disgust, love and pessimism. Sentence S2
contains two emotions: joy and sadness. How to identify the
multiple co-existing emotions in a sentence remains a challenging task.
There has been work considering multi-label emotion
classiﬁcation (He and Xia 2018; Almeida et al. 2018; Yu et
al. 2018). However, there still are two limitations. 1) They
assume each emotion occurs with equal prior probability,

and fail to consider prior emotion distribution in a sentence.
Intuitively, different emotion in a sentence has different intensity. Figure 1 illustrates the emotion distribution of sentence S1, where there are four different emotions with different intensities. In particular, the emotions anticipation and
pessimism receive higher intensities than disgust and love.
Emotion labels with higher intensity should deserve higher
probabilities at the ﬁnal prediction for the model. 2) Previous work does not effectively capture the context information closely related to the corresponding emotion, which is
crucial for the prediction. In sentence S2, the clues indicating the sadness emotion, ‘worst’, are scattered broadly, and
surrounded by the words ‘laughter’ and ‘amazing’ that support the joy emotion. Correct predictions can be made only
when these features can be sufﬁciently mined and properly
selected. If we can sufﬁciently capture effective features for
each emotion, the ﬁnal prediction will be relatively easy.
This requires a strong ability of the model on features extraction.
To address these issues, we propose a Latent Emotion
Memory network (LEM) for multi-label emotion classiﬁcation. LEM consists of two main components: a latent emotion module and a memory module, which are shown in
Figure 2. First, the latent emotion module learns emotions
distribution by reconstructing the input via variational au-

∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7692

