The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Manipulating Districts to Win Elections: Fine-Grained Complexity
Eduard Eiben,1 Fedor V. Fomin,2 Fahad Panolan,3 Kirill Simonov2
1

Department of Computer Science, Royal Holloway, University of London, UK
2
Department of Informatics, University of Bergen, Norway
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Hyderabad, India
eduard.eiben@rhul.ac.uk, {fedor.fomin, kirill.simonov}@uib.no, fahad.panolan@gmail.com

problem in which the agent in charge of the design of voting
districts has to follow a clear rule: all voters vote in the ballot box nearest to them. As it was shown by Lewenberg, Lev,
and Rosenschein (2017), even with clear and rational rules,
manipulation is possible. This brought Lewenberg et al. to
the following natural question. Is there an efﬁcient algorithmic procedure that would allow an agent, who is obliged to
follow the rules, to optimize division for his personal preferred outcome? The good news here is that the existence of
such a procedure is highly unlikely, because as it was shown
in (Lewenberg, Lev, and Rosenschein 2017), the problem is
NP-complete already for 4 political parties.
On the other hand, when the number of districts k is small,
the problem is trivially solvable in time mk nO(1) , where m
is the number of all possible locations of ballot boxes and
n is the number of voters, by a brute-force enumerating all
possible locations for k boxes. Thus in the situation when
the number of districts is small, there is an efﬁcient procedure for ﬁnding an optimal manipulation. This immediately
brings us to the following question which serves as the departure point of our work.

Abstract
Gerrymandering is a practice of manipulating district boundaries and locations in order to achieve a political advantage for a particular party. Lewenberg, Lev, and Rosenschein [AAMAS 2017] initiated the algorithmic study of
a geographically-based manipulation problem, where voters
must vote at the ballot box closest to them. In this variant of
gerrymandering, for a given set of possible locations of ballot
boxes and known political preferences of n voters, the task is
to identify locations for k boxes out of m possible locations
to guarantee victory of a certain party in at least  districts.
Here integers k and  are some selected parameter.
It is known that the problem is NP-complete already for 4
political parties and prior to our work only heuristic algorithms for this problem were developed. We initiate the rigorous study of the gerrymandering problem from the perspectives of parameterized and ﬁne-grained complexity and
provide asymptotically matching lower and upper bounds on
its computational complexity. We prove that the problem is
W[1]-hard parameterized
by k + n and that it does not ad√
mit an f (n, k) · mo( k) algorithm for any function f of k
and n only, unless the Exponential Time Hypothesis (ETH)
fails. Our lower bounds hold already for 2 parties. On the
other hand, we give an algorithm that solves the√problem for
a constant number of parties in time (m + n)O( k) .

Question 1. Is it possible to solve the gerrymandering problem faster than the brute-force?
To answer this question, we study G ERRYMANDERING
through the lens of Parameterized Complexity, which is a
multivariate paradigm of algorithm analysis introduced by
Downey and Fellows (1999). In Parameterized Complexity, one measures the performance of algorithms not merely
in terms of the size of the input, but also with respect to
certain properties of the input or the output (captured by
one or several numerical parameters, k). This gives rise
to two notions of tractability, both of which correspond to
polynomial-time tractability in the classical setting, when
the parameter is constant. First is the class FPT that contains all problems that can be solved in time f (k) · nO(1)
(for some computable function f ), while the (asymptotically less efﬁcient) class XP contains all problems that
can be solved in time nf (k) . Aside from these complexity
classes, we will make use of the complexity class W[1],
the class of parameterized problems that can be in time
f (k) · nO(1) reduced to I NDEPENDENT S ET parameterized
by the solution size. FPT=W[1] is the working hypothesis of Parameterized Complexity and it is widely believed

Introduction
In 1812, Massachusetts governor Elbridge Gerry immortalized his name by signing a bill that created a mythological salamander shaped district in the Boston area to the
beneﬁt of his political party. Since then the term gerrymandering has been used for the practice of establishing a
political advantage by manipulating voting district boundaries. Wikipedia article Gerrymandering contains a lot of notable gerrymandering examples in electoral systems of many
countries. One of possible responses of such manipulations
is a more “rational” deﬁnition of voting districts, for example the system where voters should always go to a ballot box
(or central area) that is closest to them (Terbush 2013).
However, even in the “rational” geographical settings manipulations are still possible. Lewenberg, Lev, and Rosenschein (2017) considered the variant of the gerrymandering
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1902

