The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

LearnIt: On-Demand Rapid Customization for Event-Event Relation Extraction
Bonan Min, Manaj Srivastava, Haoling Qiu, Prasannakumar Muthukumar, Joshua Fasching
Raytheon BBN Technologies, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138

tomization for entities or relations between entities. None
of them is designed for event-event relation extraction.

Abstract
We present a system which allows a user to create eventevent relation extractors on-demand with a small amount
of effort. The system provides a suite of algorithms, ﬂexible workﬂows, and a user interface (UI), to allow rapid
customization of event-event relation extractors for new
types and domains of interest. Experiments show that it
enables users to create extractors for 6 types of causal
and temporal relations, with less than 20 minutes of effort per type. Our system (source code, UI) is available at
https://github.com/BBN-E/LearnIt. A demonstration video is
available at https://vimeo.com/329950144.

System Description
LearnIt aims at learning patterns that can be applied to
text for extracting event-event relations. A pattern is 1) a
lexical pattern, which is a sequence of words between a
pair of events, e.g., “0 leads to 1” 2 , or 2) a proposition
pattern, which is the (possibly nested) predicate-argument
structure that connects the pair of events. For example,
“verb:cause[subject=0] [object=1]” is the proposition pattern counterpart of “0 causes 1”.
For development purpose, LearnIt uses a large, unannotated corpus, processed by SERIF NLP toolkit (Boschee,
Weischedel, and Zamanian 2005) to generate propositions
and events. Following Richer Event Description 3 , we
adopted a broad deﬁnition for event: an event can be any occurrence, action, process or event state. Therefore, we tag all
predicate-like verbs and nominalizations as event triggers.
As shown in Figure 1, the LearnIt system incorporates
two workﬂows, bootstrapping and iterative pattern/pair set
expansion, in its iterative learning process. Learnit also allows ﬂexible compositions of these two workﬂows, mediated by the user, to allow more effective use of users’ effort.
The learning process will be guided with a small amount of
user effort provided via a UI 4 .
Workﬂow 1: Bootstrapping: LearnIt incorporates bootstrapping (Agichtein and Gravano 2000) for relation extraction. It works as follows: Given a handful of initial event
pairs that are known to express the target relation, LearnIt
searches in a development corpus to ﬁnd instances (sentences mentioning the event pair). From these instances,
LearnIt extracts relational patterns, ranks and presents them
to the user. The user then selects patterns that express the target relation. These patterns are added into the known pattern
set. Similarly, given a set of known patterns, LearnIt again
searches in the corpus to ﬁnd matched instances, from which

Extracting relations (e.g., a ﬂood caused migration) between real-world events from natural language text is very
useful for situation awareness and decision making. However, creating an event-event relation extractor often requires
a signiﬁcant amount of time and effort. For example, a developer may need to write a large set of extraction rules by
hand, or curate a large labeled data set to train a classiﬁer.
Such approach will not be applicable for new relation types
nor new genres of text different from the training data.
We developed LearnIt 1 , a system for on-demand rapid
customization of event-event relation extractors with a user
in the loop. It has the following key features:
First, it incorporates bootstrapping to iteratively learn
event pairs from patterns, and patterns from pairs, by leveraging an unannotated development corpus.
Second, it incorporates iterative expansion of its relational pattern/event-pair set through iteratively adding patterns/pairs that are similar to the set.
Third, it involves a human in the loop to prevent semantic drift in the bootstrapping and iterative expansion processes. We develop a UI to allow the user to review/select
examples and steer the customization process, with a small
amount of effort.

Related Work
There are several systems, e.g., (He and Grishman 2015;
Li et al. 2012; Gupta and Manning 2014) for rapid cus-

2

The left and right arguments of an relation are numbered 0 and
1 respectively. We focus on binary relations.
3
https://github.com/timjogorman/RicherEventDescription
4
LearnIt’s web-based UI is shown in the demo video.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Learning extractors Iteratively.
13630

