The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Online Second Price Auction with
Semi-Bandit Feedback under the Non-Stationary Setting
Haoyu Zhao,1 Wei Chen2
1

IIIS, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
zhaohy16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, weic@microsoft.com

private values v (t) on the item from a joint value distribution, which is unknown to the seller. For each bidder i, if
(t)
its private value v i is at least the reserve price r(t) , she
(t)
will submit her bid v i to the seller; otherwise she will not
submit her bid since she would not win if her value is less
than the announced reserve price. After the seller collects
the bids in this round (if any), she will give the item to the
highest bidder, and collect from this winner the payment
equal to the value of the second-highest bid or the reserve
price, whichever is higher. If no bidder submits bids in this
round, that means the reserve price the seller announced is
too high, and the seller receives no payment. Such repeated
auctions are common in online advertising applications on
search engine or social network platforms. The seller’s objective is to maximize her cumulative revenue, which is the
total payment she collects from the bidders over T rounds.
Since the seller does not know the private value distribution
of the bidders, the seller has to adjust the reserve price over
time, hoping to learn the optimal reserve price.
The above setting falls under the multi-armed bandit
framework, where reserve prices can be treated as arms and
payments as rewards. As in the multi-armed bandit framework, the performance of an online auction algorithm is
measured by its regret, which is the difference between
the optimal reward that always chooses the best reserve
price and the expected cumulative reward of the algorithm.
When the distribution of private values does not change over
time, results from (Cesa-Bianchi et al. 2017; Zhao and Chen
2019b) can be applied to solve the above problem, whereas
the work in (Cesa-Bianchi, Gentile, and Mansour 2015) considers a somewhat different setting where the seller only gets
the reward as the feedback but does not see the bids (fullbandit feedback) and the private value distribution of each
bidder is i.i.d.
In real-world applications, however, the private value
distribution of the bidders may likely change over time,
e.g., some important events happen, which greatly inﬂuence
the market perception. When the private value distribution
changes over time, the optimal reserve price will also change
and there is no single optimal reserve value. None of the
above studies would work under this realistic setting, except resetting the algorithms by human intervention. Since

Abstract
In this paper, we study the non-stationary online second price
auction problem. We assume that the seller is selling the same
type of items in T rounds by the second price auction, and
she can set the reserve price in each round. In each round,
the bidders draw their private values from a joint distribution unknown to the seller. Then, the seller announced the
reserve price in this round. Next, bidders with private values higher than the announced reserve price in that round
will report their values to the seller as their bids. The bidder with the highest bid larger than the reserved price would
win the item and she will pay to the seller the price equal
to the second-highest bid or the reserve price, whichever is
larger. The seller wants to maximize her total revenue during
the time horizon T while learning the distribution of private
values over time. The problem is more challenging than the
standard online learning scenario since the private value distribution is non-stationary, meaning that the distribution of
bidders’ private values may change over time, and we need
to use the non-stationary regret to measure the performance
of our algorithm. To our knowledge, this paper is the ﬁrst to
study the repeated auction in the non-stationary setting theoretically. Our algorithm achieves the non-stationary regret
√
1
2
upper bound Õ(min{ ST , V̄ 3 T 3 }), where S is the number of switches in the distribution, and V̄ is the sum of total
variation, and S and V̄ are not needed to be known
√ by the algorithm. We also prove regret lower bounds Ω( ST ) in the
1
2
switching case and Ω(V̄ 3 T 3 ) in the dynamic case, showing
that our algorithm has nearly optimal non-stationary regret.

1

Introduction

As the Internet is rapidly developing, there are more and
more online repeated auctions in our daily life, such as the
auctions on the e-Bay website and the online advertisement
auctions on Google and Facebook. Perhaps the most studied and applied auction mechanism is the online repeated
second price auctions with a reserve price. In this auction
format, a seller repeatedly sells the same type of items to
a group of bidders. In each round t, the seller selects and
announces a reserve price r(t) while the bidders draw their
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6893

