The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

An Adversarial Perturbation Oriented Domain
Adaptation Approach for Semantic Segmentation
Jihan Yang,1,2 Ruijia Xu,1 Ruiyu Li,2 Xiaojuan Qi,3 Xiaoyong Shen,2 Guanbin Li,1∗ Liang Lin1,4
1

School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
Tencent YouTu Lab, 3 University of Oxford
4
DarkMatter AI Research
{jihanyang13, ruijiaxu.cs}@gmail.com, {royryli, dylanshen}@tencent.com, xiaojuan.qi@eng.ox.ac.uk,
liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn, linliang@ieee.org
Abstract
We focus on Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) for the
task of semantic segmentation. Recently, adversarial alignment has been widely adopted to match the marginal distribution of feature representations across two domains globally. However, this strategy fails in adapting the representations of the tail classes or small objects for semantic segmentation since the alignment objective is dominated by head categories or large objects. In contrast to adversarial alignment,
we propose to explicitly train a domain-invariant classiﬁer by
generating and defensing against pointwise feature space adversarial perturbations. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrstly perturb the intermediate feature maps with several attack objectives (i.e.,
discriminator and classiﬁer) on each individual position for
both domains, and then the classiﬁer is trained to be invariant
to the perturbations. By perturbing each position individually,
our model treats each location evenly regardless of the category or object size and thus circumvents the aforementioned
issue. Moreover, the domain gap in feature space is reduced
by extrapolating source and target perturbed features towards
each other with attack on the domain discriminator. Our approach achieves the state-of-the-art performance on two challenging domain adaptation tasks for semantic segmentation:
GTA5 → Cityscapes and SYNTHIA → Cityscapes.

(a) RGB image

(b) Without adaptation

(c) ASN (Tsai et al. 2018)

(d) Ours

Figure 1: Comparison of semantic segmentation output. This
example shows our method can evenly capture information
of different categories, while classical adversarial alignment
method such as ASN (Tsai et al. 2018) might collapse into
head (i.e., background) classes or large objects.
datasets may not generalize well to novel scenes (see Figure 1(b)) due to the inevitable visual domain gap between
training and testing datasets. This seriously limits the applicability of the model in diversiﬁed real-world scenarios. For
instance, an autonomous vehicle might not be able to sense
its surroundings in a new city or a changing weather condition. To this end, learning domain-invariant representations
for semantic segmentation has drawn increasing attentions.
Towards the above goal, Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) has shown promising results (Vu et al. 2019;
Luo et al. 2019). UDA aims to close the gap between the
annotated source domain and unlabeled target domain by
learning domain-invariant while task-discriminative representations. Recently, adversarial alignment has been recognized as an effective way to obtain such representations (Hoffman et al. 2016; 2018). Typically, in adversarial
alignment, a discriminator is trained to distinguish features
or images from different domains, while the deep learner
tries to generate features to confuse the discriminator. Recent representative approach ASN (Tsai et al. 2018) is proposed to match the source and target domains in the output
space and has achieved promising results.

Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a fundamental problem in computer vision with many applications in robotics, autonomous
driving, medical diagnosis, image editing, etc. The goal is
to assign each pixel with a semantic category. Recently,
this ﬁeld has gained remarkable progress via training deep
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (Long, Shelhamer,
and Darrell 2015) on large scale human annotated datasets
(Cordts et al. 2016). However, models trained on speciﬁc
∗

Corresponding author is Guanbin Li. This work was supported in part by the State Key Development Program under Grant
No.2016YFB1001004, in part by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant No.61976250 and No.U1811463,
in part by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under Grant No.18lgpy63. This work was also supported by
SenseTime Research Fund.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12613

