The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Image Enhanced Event Detection in News Articles
Meihan Tong,∗1 Shuai Wang,∗1
Yixin Cao, Bin Xu,†1 Juaizi Li,1 Lei Hou,1 Tat-Seng Chua2
2

1

Tsinghua University, 2 National University of Singapore
{tongmeihan, caoyixin2011, greener2009}@gmail.com, 18813129752@163.com,
{xubin, lijuanzi}@tsinghua.edu.cn, dcscts@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Event detection is a crucial and challenging sub-task of event
extraction, which suffers from a severe ambiguity issue of
trigger words. Existing works mainly focus on using textual
context information, while there naturally exist many images
accompanied by news articles that are yet to be explored. We
believe that images not only reﬂect the core events of the text,
but are also helpful for the disambiguation of trigger words.
In this paper, we ﬁrst contribute an image dataset supplement
to ED benchmarks (i.e., ACE2005) for training and evaluation. We then propose a novel Dual Recurrent Multimodal
Model, DRMM, to conduct deep interactions between images
and sentences for modality features aggregation. DRMM utilizes pre-trained BERT and ResNet to encode sentences and
images, and employs an alternating dual attention to select
informative features for mutual enhancements. Our superior
performance compared to six state-of-art baselines as well as
further ablation studies demonstrate the signiﬁcance of image
modality and effectiveness of the proposed architecture. The
code and image dataset are avaliable at https://github.com/
shuaiwa16/image-enhanced-event-extraction.

Meet

Ford was in his rush to confront
members in Toronto's council chamber.

Attack

Police confronted
protesters hurling stones

Figure 1: An example of ED. The word confront, noted in
bold, is the event trigger, which triggers Meet and Attack
event respectively. Images play a vital role in disambiguating the event trigger.

expresses distinct meanings. Existing methods cope with
this problem by introducing global contexts in the whole
passage (Duan, He, and Zhao 2017; Chen et al. 2018), or
incorporating some extra linguistic resources (Liu et al.
2018b; Lu and Nguyen 2018).
Actually, the source data of ED task, such as news articles,
are naturally accompanied by images on the web, but they
are completely neglected by most existing methods. Images
have been proved to be very effective to handle textual ambiguity (Zhang et al. 2018; Moon, Neves, and Carvalho 2018;
Elliott, Frank, and Hasler 2015), and images are very suitable in ED scenario from two aspects. (1) The accompanied
images usually reﬂect the core events of the texts. As shown
in Figure 1, the ﬁrst example contains two candidate verbs of
the event trigger: was and confront, where confront is more
representative in texts and is also the main content of the image. (2) Images are helpful for the disambiguation of trigger
words as they provide complementary information, which is
difﬁcult to be depicted by words, such as dressing styles, facial expressions or motions. Zhang et al. (2017) also show
the effect of images in ED, and by utilizing images on the
disambiguation of entities, they obviously improve the performance on ED.
In this paper, we incorporate the original images of news
articles into ED. It is a non-trivial task due to the following challenges. First, there is no image available in the ex-

Introduction
In Automatic Content Extraction (ACE), Event Detection
(ED) aims to identify event triggers from sentences. Event
trigger is the word that most clearly expresses the occurrence of an event (Doddington et al. 2004). In the left example in Figure 1, since confront indicates the occurrence of
event Meet, it should be labeled as the event trigger of Meet.
Detecting events in natural languages is signiﬁcant for a variety of NLP tasks, such as information retrieval and question answering.
ED is a challenging task because the trigger words must
be representative, which unfortunately usually are ambiguous. A single word can trigger different events, and the surrounding contexts are often not informative enough to disambiguate them. For example, in Figure 1, the trigger word
confront evokes different events: Meet and Attack, as they
∗
Authors contributed equally to this work, ordered alphabetically by surname.
†
Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9040

