The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Inducing Relational Knowledge from BERT
Zied Bouraoui

Jose Camacho-Collados

Steven Schockaert

CRIL - CNRS & Univ Artois, France
zied.bouraoui@cril.fr

Cardiff University, UK
camachocolladosj@cardiff.ac.uk

Cardiff University, UK
schockaerts1@cardiff.ac.uk

embeddings has also been studied (Vylomova et al. 2016;
Drozd, Gladkova, and Matsuoka 2016; Bouraoui, Jameel,
and Schockaert 2018; Vulić and Mrkšić 2018; CamachoCollados, Espinosa-Anke, and Schockaert 2019). In this
case, new instances of the relation are predicted based only
on pre-trained word vectors. Compared to relation extraction methods, the use of word vectors has the advantage that
word pairs may be predicted even if they never co-occur in
the same sentence, intuitively because they are sufﬁciently
similar to the example pairs. Moreover, models that directly
make predictions based on word vectors are much faster,
among others because they do not have to retrieve relevant
sentences from the corpus. On the other hand, relation induction methods based on word embeddings can be more
noisy than those that rely on relation extraction.
Recently, the use of pre-trained language models such as
BERT (Devlin et al. 2019), GPT-2 (Radford et al. 2019),
and XLNet (Yang et al. 2019) has led to substantial performance increases in a variety of Natural Language Processing
(NLP) tasks. A natural question is thus whether such language models capture more relational knowledge than standard word embeddings, and in particular whether they can
lead to improved performance on the relation induction task.
In particular, language models such as BERT and XLNet are
trained to complete sentences containing blanks. By choosing sentences that express a relational property, we may thus
be able to extract relational knowledge from these models.
To explore this strategy, Table 1 contains some predictions
made by BERT for a number of different sentences1 . As can
be seen, the performance is rather mixed. For example, this
model does not seem to capture color properties, predicting either yellow or white for all examples, whereas it seems
to have learned the capital-of relation well (notwithstanding
the incorrect prediction for Brazil). The most important insight from Table 1 comes from the two sentences about the
cause of recessions, where the addition of the word often
makes a difference between a sensible prediction (inﬂation)
and a meaningless one (stress). This suggests that even if
language models capture relational knowledge, it is impor-

Abstract
One of the most remarkable properties of word embeddings is
the fact that they capture certain types of semantic and syntactic relationships. Recently, pre-trained language models such
as BERT have achieved groundbreaking results across a wide
range of Natural Language Processing tasks. However, it is
unclear to what extent such models capture relational knowledge beyond what is already captured by standard word embeddings. To explore this question, we propose a methodology for distilling relational knowledge from a pre-trained language model. Starting from a few seed instances of a given
relation, we ﬁrst use a large text corpus to ﬁnd sentences that
are likely to express this relation. We then use a subset of
these extracted sentences as templates. Finally, we ﬁne-tune a
language model to predict whether a given word pair is likely
to be an instance of some relation, when given an instantiated
template for that relation as input.

1

Introduction

Relation induction is the problem of predicting likely instances of a given relation based on some example instances
of that relation. For instance, given the example pairs (paris,
france), (tokyo, japan), (canberra, australia), a relation induction system should predict other instances of the capitalof relation (without explicitly being told that the relation of
interest is the capital-of relation). By far the most common
strategy is to treat this problem as a relation extraction problem. In such a case, sentences mentioning the example pairs
are extracted from a large corpus and some neural network
model is trained on these sentences. To predict new instances
of the relation, the resulting model can then be applied to
other sentences from the given corpus.
One of the most surprising aspects of word embeddings,
such as those learned using Skip-gram (Mikolov et al. 2013)
and GloVe (Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014), is the
fact that they capture relational knowledge, despite essentially being trained to capture word similarity. This is most
clearly illustrated in the fact that predicting analogical word
pairs is a commonly used benchmark for evaluating word
embeddings. The problem of relation induction using word

1

We experimented with XLNet as well, but its predictions were
less accurate than those of BERT, possibly due to the short length
of these test sentences.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7456

