The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Modeling Dialogues with Hashcode Representations: A Nonparametric Approach
Sahil Garg,1 Irina Rish,2 Guillermo Cecchi2

sahil.garg.cs@gmail.com, {rish, gcecchi}@us.ibm.com

Palash Goyal,1 Sarik Ghazarian,1 Shuyang Gao,1 Greg Ver Steeg,1 Aram Galstyan1
{palashgo, sarikgha, gaos}@usc.edu, {galstyan, gregv}@isi.edu
1

USC Information Sciences Institute
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center

2

Mooney and Bunescu 2005; Scholkopf and Smola 2001),
for modeling and generation of dialogues.
Moreover, different applications may possess speciﬁc
properties which suit some approaches better than others.
In this work, one of the motivating applications is a fastgrowing area of (semi-)automated psychotherapy: easily accessible, round-the-clock psychotherapeutic services provided by a conversational agent. The importance of this
area cannot be underestimated: according to recent statistics,
mental health disorders affect one in four adult Americans,
one in six adolescents, and one in eight children; predicted
by the World Health Organization, by 2030 the amount of
worldwide disability and life loss attributable to depression
may become greater than for any other condition, including
cancer, stroke, heart disease, accidents, and war.
However, many people do not receive an adequate treatment. One of the major factors here is limited availability of
mental health care professionals, as compared to the number
of potential patients; thus, automating at least some aspects
of the treatment is a promising direction.
One of the domain-speciﬁc challenges in automated therapy is difﬁculty obtaining large training datasets which
are often necessary for neural dialogue models; this limitation may require developing alternative approaches. Another domain-speciﬁc property of therapeutic dialogues,
which can potentially simplify dialogue generation, is the
classical pattern of relatively long patient’s utterances (up
to thousands of words) followed by much shorter therapist’s responses. Therapist’s responses are often high-level,
generic statements, conﬁrming and/or summarizing patient’s
responses; they can be viewed as semantic “labels” to be
predicted from patient’s “input samples”.
Furthermore, a therapy session is typically an example
of a collaborative dialogue, unlike debates, political arguments, and so on. Indeed, a fundamental concept in psychotherapy is the working alliance between the therapist and
the patient (Bordin 1979). The alliance involves the agreement on the goals to be achieved and the tasks to be carried
out, and the bond, trust and respect to be established over
the course of the therapy. While an encompassing formalization of working alliance is a challenging task, we propose
maximizing mutual information between the patient’s and

Abstract
We propose a novel dialogue modeling framework, the ﬁrstever nonparametric kernel functions based approach for dialogue modeling, which learns hashcodes as text representations; unlike traditional deep learning models, it handles well
relatively small datasets, while also scaling to large ones. We
also derive a novel lower bound on mutual information, used
as a model-selection criterion favoring representations with
better alignment between the utterances of participants in a
collaborative dialogue setting, as well as higher predictability
of the generated responses. As demonstrated on three real-life
datasets, including prominently psychotherapy sessions, the
proposed approach signiﬁcantly outperforms several state-ofart neural network based dialogue systems, both in terms of
computational efﬁciency, reducing training time from days or
weeks to hours, and the response quality, achieving an order
of magnitude improvement over competitors in frequency of
being chosen as the best model by human evaluators.

1

Introduction

1

Dialogue modeling and generation is an active research
area of great practical importance as it provides a solid basis
for building successful conversational agents in a wide range
of applications. However, despite recent successes of deep
neural dialogue models, the open dialog generation problem
is far from being solved (Li et al. 2017; Zhao, Lee, and
Eskenazi 2018; Wu et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2018; Pandey et
al. 2018; Tao et al. 2018; Xing et al. 2018; Li et al. 2019).
Therefore, it is important to continue exploring novel
types of models and model-selection criteria, beyond today’s
deep neural dialogue systems, in order to better capture the
structure of different types of dialogues and to overcome
certain limitations of neural models, including dependence
on large training datasets, long training times, and difﬁculties incorporating non-standard objective functions, among
others. Along those lines, in this paper, we propose a ﬁrstever nonparametric approach (Wasserman 2006), i.e. based
on convolution kernel similarity functions (Haussler 1999;
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
See an extended version of the paper here: arxiv.org/abs/1804.
10188
3970

