The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Unsupervised Interlingual Semantic Representations
from Sentence Embeddings for Zero-Shot Cross-Lingual Transfer
Channy Hong,1,2∗ Jaeyeon Lee,2 Jung Kwon Lee2
1

Harvard University, 2 Superb AI Inc.
channyhong@college.harvard.edu, {jylee, jklee}@superb-ai.com

translate the test data into English at evaluation time and rely
on an already trained English-based model (translate-test).
However, both of these approaches would require a separate neural machine translation (NMT) system, which is not
highly applicable to low-resource languages in that training
these NMT systems typically require massive amounts of
parallel corpora to begin with, although there has been efforts made recently to train NMT systems in an unsupervised
manner (Artetxe et al. 2017; Yang et al. 2018).

Abstract
As numerous modern NLP models demonstrate highperformance in various tasks when trained with resource-rich
language data sets such as those of English, there has been a
shift in attention to the idea of applying such learning to lowresource languages via zero-shot or few-shot cross-lingual
transfer. While the most prominent efforts made previously
on achieving this feat entails the use of parallel corpora for
sentence alignment training, we seek to generalize further by
assuming plausible scenarios in which such parallel data sets
are unavailable. In this work, we present a novel architecture
for training interlingual semantic representations on top of
sentence embeddings in a completely unsupervised manner,
and demonstrate its effectiveness in zero-shot cross-lingual
transfer in natural language inference task. Furthermore, we
showcase a method of leveraging this framework in a fewshot scenario, and ﬁnally analyze the distributional and permutational alignment across languages of these interlingual
semantic representations.

Interlingual Semantic Representations. In the last approach discussed above (translate-test), English was used as
the lingua franca for solving NLI tasks. Now, we take this
idea of a ‘medium-language’ one step further. If we reduce
the function of a language as merely a method of encoding
semantics in the form of strings of text, we can then surmise that there exist language-agnostic semantic representations (whatever its form, or syntax, may be) that can serve as
an interlingual medium. For instance, international auxiliary
languages such as Esperanto, Ido, and Interlingua have been
developed to serve this exact purpose.
While we are not interested in developing an actual language as such, we may be interested in training interlingual semantic representations (ISR) that can serve as a suitable medium of semantic embedding on top of which taskspeciﬁc models can be trained. In fact, as the common practice within NLP is to train models on top of embeddings
(Mikolov et al. 2013; Gong et al. 2018), there would not be
a need for ISR to be reduced all the way back to the text
level as ordinary language is usually presented to humans.
The idea here is that the ISR for the English sentence “I am
hungry” and French sentence “J’ai faim” would both map to
proximal embedding spaces that represent the general concept of a ﬁrst person singular subject expressing hunger.
With ISR as an effective embedding space for representing semantic information and assuming that an effective conversion — or translation — mechanism for encoding sentence embeddings of any language (high- and lowresource) into ISR exists, we can then easily leverage training data in whatever available language to develop models
for under-resourced languages. For instance, we can train a
NLI solver using the widely available English NLI training
data converted to ISR. Then, this same classiﬁer can be used

Introduction
One of the greatest imbalances in the ﬁeld of natural language processing (NLP) is the uneven availability of training
data between high-resource and low-resource languages. For
instance, while one can easily train a model for an English
natural language inference (NLI) task using the widely available English NLI training data (Williams, Nangia, and Bowman 2018; Bowman et al. 2015), it is difﬁcult to train an effective counterpart in languages such as German or Arabic,
simply because there does not exist suitable labeled dataset
in these languages that can be used for training. As a result,
there exists substantial untapped potential for applications
of NLP models in these low-resource languages, leading to
increased efforts within the research community to explore
cross-lingual transfer techniques (Conneau et al. 2018).
The logical ﬁrst step in overcoming this imbalance is
translating the training data from English to the languageof-interest, and then training a language-speciﬁc model on
top of it (translate-train). On the other hand, one could also
∗

Work done during an internship at Superb AI.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7944

