The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Dual Adversarial Co-Learning for Multi-Domain Text Classiﬁcation
Yuan Wu, Yuhong Guo
School of Computer Science, Carleton University, Ottawa, Canada
YuanWu3@cmail.carleton.ca, yuhong.guo@carleton.ca

camera runs fast”. Thus, a model trained on a speciﬁc domain may fail to perform well on another domain. A simple
solution to this problem is to train domain-speciﬁc text classiﬁers for each domain (Blitzer, Dredze, and Pereira 2007).
Unfortunately, annotating sufﬁcient amount of data in each
domain is always expensive and time consuming, sometimes
even impossible.

Abstract
With the advent of deep learning, the performance of text
classiﬁcation models have been improved signiﬁcantly. Nevertheless, the successful training of a good classiﬁcation
model requires a sufﬁcient amount of labeled data, while it is
always expensive and time consuming to annotate data. With
the rapid growth of digital data, similar classiﬁcation tasks
can typically occur in multiple domains, while the availability of labeled data can largely vary across domains. Some domains may have abundant labeled data, while in some other
domains there may only exist a limited amount (or none) of
labeled data. Meanwhile text classiﬁcation tasks are highly
domain-dependent — a text classiﬁer trained in one domain
may not perform well in another domain. In order to address
these issues, in this paper we propose a novel dual adversarial co-learning approach for multi-domain text classiﬁcation (MDTC). The approach learns shared-private networks
for feature extraction and deploys dual adversarial regularizations to align features across different domains and between
labeled and unlabeled data simultaneously under a discrepancy based co-learning framework, aiming to improve the
classiﬁers’ generalization capacity with the learned features.
We conduct experiments on multi-domain sentiment classiﬁcation datasets. The results show the proposed approach
achieves the state-of-the-art MDTC performance.

Multi-domain text classiﬁcation (MDTC) (Li and Zong
2008) aims to address the problems above by simultaneously utilizing all available data across multiple domains to
improve the classiﬁcation accuracy and improving the classiﬁers trained on each speciﬁc domain with the help of other
related domains. Recently, deep neural network based models have been used for multi-domain learning problem in
both computer vision (Mansour, Mohri, and Rostamizadeh
2009; Duan, Xu, and Tsang 2012) and natural language processing ﬁelds (Wu and Huang 2015; Chen and Cardie 2018).
Some previous work tackles MDTC by training a shared feature extractor across different domains for useful information sharing (Liu, Qiu, and Huang 2016). However, focusing only on a shared feature subspace across different domains may ignore the domain-dependent characteristics of
each domain. One way to address this problem is to learn
both shared feature extractor and domain-speciﬁc feature
extractor through a shared-private scheme (Bousmalis et al.
2016). However, the traditional shared-private models suffer
from problems such like domain-dependant features creep
into the shared latent subspace (Liu, Qiu, and Huang 2017),
which consequently can result in performance degradation.
Moreover with the reality of lacking sufﬁcient labeled data,
the features extracted in such models may overﬁt the labeled
training data and fail to generalize well.

Introduction
Text classiﬁcation is a widely existing problem in various
real-world applications, such as spam, fraud, and sentiment
analysis (Jindal and Liu 2007; Ngai et al. 2011; Medhat,
Hassan, and Korashy 2014). Many similar text classiﬁcation tasks can typically occur in multiple domains, while the
availability of labeled data can largely vary across domains.
However, many text classiﬁcation tasks are highly domaindependent, as the same word in different domains may convey different meanings (Glorot, Bordes, and Bengio 2011;
Pang, Lee, and others 2008). For example, in the domain of
sports news, the word “fast” is usually positive: “This athlete
runs really fast”. However, “fast” is frequently used as a negative word in the domain of electronics product review; e.g.,
in the following review sentence: “the battery of this digital

To address these problems, in this paper we propose
a novel dual adversarial co-learning approach for MDTC.
The approach extracts both domain-invariant and domainspeciﬁc features through shared-private networks and learns
two classiﬁers on the extracted features. The classiﬁers and
feature extractors are co-learned in an adversarial manner based on the prediction discrepancy on unlabeled data.
Meanwhile, a multinomial multi-domain adversarial discriminator is deployed to enhance the effective extraction of
domain-invariant features, while separating them from the

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6438

