The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

F3 Net: Fusion, Feedback and Focus for Salient Object Detection
Jun Wei,1,2 Shuhui Wang,1∗ Qingming Huang1,2
1

Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
jun.wei@vipl.ict.ac.cn, wangshuhui@ict.ac.cn, qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
Most of existing salient object detection models have
achieved great progress by aggregating multi-level features
extracted from convolutional neural networks. However, because of the different receptive ﬁelds of different convolutional layers, there exists big differences between features
generated by these layers. Common feature fusion strategies (addition or concatenation) ignore these differences and
may cause suboptimal solutions. In this paper, we propose
the F3 Net to solve above problem, which mainly consists of
cross feature module (CFM) and cascaded feedback decoder
(CFD) trained by minimizing a new pixel position aware loss
(PPA). Speciﬁcally, CFM aims to selectively aggregate multilevel features. Different from addition and concatenation,
CFM adaptively selects complementary components from input features before fusion, which can effectively avoid introducing too much redundant information that may destroy the
original features. Besides, CFD adopts a multi-stage feedback mechanism, where features closed to supervision will
be introduced to the output of previous layers to supplement
them and eliminate the differences between features. These
reﬁned features will go through multiple similar iterations before generating the ﬁnal saliency maps. Furthermore, different from binary cross entropy, the proposed PPA loss doesn’t
treat pixels equally, which can synthesize the local structure
information of a pixel to guide the network to focus more on
local details. Hard pixels from boundaries or error-prone parts
will be given more attention to emphasize their importance.
F3 Net is able to segment salient object regions accurately
and provide clear local details. Comprehensive experiments
on ﬁve benchmark datasets demonstrate that F3 Net outperforms state-of-the-art approaches on six evaluation metrics.
Code will be released at https://github.com/weijun88/F3Net.

D LPDJH

E ODEHO

F ORZOHYHO

G KLJKOHYHO

H IXVLRQ

Figure 1: Fusing features of different levels. (c) represents
the low level features. (d) means the high level features. (e)
is the fused features by F3 Net. Clearly, the fused features
have clear boundaries as well as few background noises.

can hardly capture high-level semantic relations and context information, thus they are not robust enough to complex
scenarios. Recently, convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
have demonstrated its powerful feature extraction capability in visual feature representation (Zhang et al. 2018c;
Szegedy et al. 2015; Huang et al. 2017; Hu, Shen, and
Sun 2018). Many CNNs-based models (Hou et al. 2019;
Qin et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2018; Wu, Su, and Huang 2019;
Li et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2018b; Feng, Lu, and Ding 2019;
Wang et al. 2017b; Zhang et al. 2017) have achieved remarkable progress and pushed the performance of SOD to
a new level. These models adopt the encoder-decoder architecture, which is simple in structure and computationally efﬁcient. The encoder usually is made up of a pretrained classiﬁcation model (e.g. ResNet (He et al. 2016)
and VGG (Simonyan and Zisserman 2015)), which can extract multiple features of different semantic levels and resolutions. In the decoder, extracted features are combined to
generate saliency maps.
However, there still remains two big challenges in accurate SOD. First, features of different levels have different
distribution characteristics. High level features have rich se-

Introduction
Salient object detection (SOD) aims to estimate the visual
signiﬁcant regions of images or videos and often serves
as the pre-processing step for many downstream vision
tasks (Wang et al. 2019a). Earlier SOD algorithms mainly
rely on heuristic priors (e.g., color, texture and contrast) to
generate saliency maps. However, these hand-craft features
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12321

