The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Real-Time Scene Text Detection with Differentiable Binarization
Minghui Liao,1∗ Zhaoyi Wan,2∗ Cong Yao,2 Kai Chen,3,4 Xiang Bai1†
1

Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 2 Megvii, 3 Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 4 Onlyou Tech.
{mhliao, xbai}@hust.edu.cn, i@wanzy.me, yaocong2010@gmail.com, kchen@sjtu.edu.cn

85

Abstract
Recently, segmentation-based methods are quite popular in
scene text detection, as the segmentation results can more accurately describe scene text of various shapes such as curve
text. However, the post-processing of binarization is essential for segmentation-based detection, which converts probability maps produced by a segmentation method into bounding boxes/regions of text. In this paper, we propose a module named Differentiable Binarization (DB), which can perform the binarization process in a segmentation network. Optimized along with a DB module, a segmentation network can
adaptively set the thresholds for binarization, which not only
simpliﬁes the post-processing but also enhances the performance of text detection. Based on a simple segmentation network, we validate the performance improvements of DB on
ﬁve benchmark datasets, which consistently achieves stateof-the-art results, in terms of both detection accuracy and
speed. In particular, with a light-weight backbone, the performance improvements by DB are signiﬁcant so that we
can look for an ideal tradeoff between detection accuracy
and efﬁciency. Speciﬁcally, with a backbone of ResNet-18,
our detector achieves an F-measure of 82.8, running at 62
FPS, on the MSRA-TD500 dataset. Code is available at:
https://github.com/MhLiao/DB.

DB-ResNet-50

DB (ours)

F-measure (%)

DB-ResNet-18

CRAFT (2019)
TextSnake (2018)
Corner (2018)

80

RRD (2018)
PixelLink (2018)
SegLink (2017)
Speed (FPS)

75
0

20

40

60

80

Figure 1: The comparisons of several recent scene text detection methods on the MSRA-TD500 dataset, in terms of both
accuracy and speed. Our method achieves the ideal tradeoff
between effectiveness and efﬁciency.

post-processing for grouping the pixel-level prediction results into detected text instances, resulting in a considerable
time cost in the inference procedure. Take two recent stateof-the-art methods for scene text detection as examples:
PSENet (Wang et al. 2019a) proposed the post-processing
of progressive scale expansion for improving the detection
accuracies; Pixel embedding in (Tian et al. 2019) is used
for clustering the pixels based on the segmentation results,
which has to calculate the feature distances among pixels.
Most existing detection methods use the similar postprocessing pipeline as shown in Fig. 2 (following the blue
arrows): Firstly, they set a ﬁxed threshold for converting
the probability map produced by a segmentation network
into a binary image; Then, some heuristic techniques like
pixel clustering are used for grouping pixels into text instances. Alternatively, our pipeline (following the red arrows
in Fig. 2) aims to insert the binarization operation into a
segmentation network for joint optimization. In this manner,
the threshold value at every place of an image can be adaptively predicted, which can fully distinguish the pixels from
the foreground and background. However, the standard binarization function is not differentiable, we instead present an
approximate function for binarization called Differentiable
Binarization (DB), which is fully differentiable when train-

Introduction
In recent years, reading text in scene images has become
an active research area, due to its wide practical applications
such as image/video understanding, visual search, automatic
driving, and blind auxiliary.
As a key component of scene text reading, scene text
detection that aims to localize the bounding box or region of each text instance is still a challenging task, since
scene text is often with various scales and shapes, including
horizontal, multi-oriented and curved text. Segmentationbased scene text detection has attracted a lot of attention
recently, as it can describe the text of various shapes, beneﬁting from its prediction results at the pixel-level. However, most segmentation-based methods require complex
∗

Authors contribute equally.
Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

11474

