The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning Hierarchy-Aware Knowledge Graph Embeddings for Link Prediction
Zhanqiu Zhang,∗ Jianyu Cai,∗ Yongdong Zhang, Jie Wang†
University of Science and Technology of China
{zzq96, jycai}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
{zhyd73, jiewangx}@ustc.edu.cn

diction aims to automatically predict missing links between
entities based on known links. It is a challenging task as we
not only need to predict whether there is a relation between
two entities, but also need to determine which relation it is.
Inspired by word embeddings (Mikolov et al. 2013) that
can well capture semantic meaning of words, researchers
turn to distributed representations of knowledge graphs (aka,
knowledge graph embeddings) to deal with the link prediction problem. Knowledge graph embeddings regard entities
and relations as low dimensional vectors (or matrices, tensors), which can be stored and computed efﬁciently. Moreover, like in the case of word embeddings, knowledge graph
embeddings can preserve the semantics and inherent structures of entities and relations. Therefore, other than the link
prediction task, knowledge graph embeddings can also be
used in various downstream tasks, such as triple classiﬁcation (Lin et al. 2015), relation inference (Guo, Sun, and Hu
2019), and search personalization (Nguyen et al. 2019).
The success of existing knowledge graph embedding
models heavily relies on their ability to model connectivity
patterns of the relations, such as symmetry/antisymmetry,
inversion, and composition (Sun et al. 2019). For example,
TransE (Bordes et al. 2013), which represent relations as
translations, can model the inversion and composition patterns. DistMult (Yang et al. 2015), which models the threeway interactions between head entities, relations, and tail
entities, can model the symmetry pattern. RotatE (Sun et
al. 2019), which represents entities as points in a complex
space and relations as rotations, can model relation patterns
including symmetry/antisymmetry, inversion, and composition. However, many existing models fail to model semantic
hierarchies in knowledge graphs.
Semantic hierarchy is a ubiquitous property in knowledge graphs. For instance, WordNet (Miller 1995) contains the triple [arbor/cassia/palm, hypernym, tree], where
“tree” is at a higher level than “arbor/cassia/palm” in
the hierarchy. Freebase (Bollacker et al. 2008) contains the triple [England, /location/location/contains, Pontefract/Lancaster], where “Pontefract/Lancaster” is at a lower
level than “England” in the hierarchy. Although there exists
some work that takes the hierarchy structures into account
(Xie, Liu, and Sun 2016; Zhang et al. 2018), they usually re-

Abstract
Knowledge graph embedding, which aims to represent entities and relations as low dimensional vectors (or matrices,
tensors, etc.), has been shown to be a powerful technique
for predicting missing links in knowledge graphs. Existing
knowledge graph embedding models mainly focus on modeling relation patterns such as symmetry/antisymmetry, inversion, and composition. However, many existing approaches
fail to model semantic hierarchies, which are common in
real-world applications. To address this challenge, we propose a novel knowledge graph embedding model—namely,
Hierarchy-Aware Knowledge Graph Embedding (HAKE)—
which maps entities into the polar coordinate system. HAKE
is inspired by the fact that concentric circles in the polar coordinate system can naturally reﬂect the hierarchy. Speciﬁcally,
the radial coordinate aims to model entities at different levels
of the hierarchy, and entities with smaller radii are expected
to be at higher levels; the angular coordinate aims to distinguish entities at the same level of the hierarchy, and these entities are expected to have roughly the same radii but different angles. Experiments demonstrate that HAKE can effectively model the semantic hierarchies in knowledge graphs,
and signiﬁcantly outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods on benchmark datasets for the link prediction task.

1

Introduction

Knowledge graphs are usually collections of factual
triples—(head entity, relation, tail entity), which represent
human knowledge in a structured way. In the past few years,
we have witnessed the great achievement of knowledge
graphs in many areas, such as natural language processing
(Zhang et al. 2019), question answering (Huang et al. 2019),
and recommendation systems (Wang et al. 2018).
Although commonly used knowledge graphs contain billions of triples, they still suffer from the incompleteness
problem that a lot of valid triples are missing, as it is impractical to ﬁnd all valid triples manually. Therefore, knowledge
graph completion, also known as link prediction in knowledge graphs, has attracted much attention recently. Link pre∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

3065

