The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Ladder Loss for Coherent Visual-Semantic Embedding
Mo Zhou,1 Zhenxing Niu,2 Le Wang,3∗ Zhanning Gao,2,3 Qilin Zhang,4 Gang Hua5
1

Xidian University, 2 Alibaba Group, 3 Xi’an Jiaotong University, 4 HERE Technologies, 5 Wormpex AI Research
{cdluminate, zhenxingniu, zhanninggao, samqzhang, ganghua}@gmail.com, lewang@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

a A herd of elephants standing on the side of a grass covered hill.
b An elephant stands near water and a stone wall.

For visual-semantic embedding, the existing methods normally treat the relevance between queries and candidates in a
bipolar way – relevant or irrelevant, and all “irrelevant” candidates are uniformly pushed away from the query by an equal
margin in the embedding space, regardless of their various
proximity to the query. This practice disregards relatively discriminative information and could lead to suboptimal ranking in the retrieval results and poorer user experience, especially in the long-tail query scenario where a matching candidate may not necessarily exist. In this paper, we introduce
a continuous variable to model the relevance degree between
queries and multiple candidates, and propose to learn a coherent embedding space, where candidates with higher relevance
degrees are mapped closer to the query than those with lower
relevance degrees. In particular, the new ladder loss is proposed by extending the triplet loss inequality to a more general inequality chain, which implements variable push-away
margins according to respective relevance degrees. In addition, a proper Coherent Score metric is proposed to better
measure the ranking results including those “irrelevant” candidates. Extensive experiments on multiple datasets validate
the efﬁcacy of our proposed method, which achieves signiﬁcant improvement over existing state-of-the-art methods.

c A pair of elephants with their trunks entwined.
d A group of four skiers posing for a picture.
Relevant

a

a

d

b

c

c

b

Retrieval Result: (a)(d)(c)(b)
Query

d

Retrieval Result: (a)(b)(c)(d)

...

Irrelevant

Candidates

Figure 1: Comparison between the incoherent (left) and coherent (right) visual-semantic embedding space. Existing
methods (left) pull the totally-relevant sentence (a) close to
the query image, while pushing away all other sentences (b,
c, and d) equally. Therefore, the relative proximity of (b, c,
and d) are not necessarily consistent with their relevance degrees to the query (solid black dot). On contrary, our approach (right) explicitly preserves the proper relevance order
in the retrieval results.

Introduction
Visual-semantic embedding aims to map images and their
descriptive sentences into a common space, so that we can
retrieve sentences given query images or vice versa, which is
namely cross-modal retrieval (Ji et al. 2017). Recently, the
advances in deep learning have made signiﬁcant progress
on visual-semantic embedding (Kiros, Salakhutdinov, and
Zemel 2014; Karpathy and Fei-Fei 2015; Karpathy, Joulin,
and Fei-Fei 2014; Faghri et al. 2018). Generally, images are
represented by the Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN),
and sentences are represented by the Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN). A triplet ranking loss is subsequently optimized to make the corresponding representations as close
as possible in the embedding space (Schroff, Kalenichenko,
and Philbin 2015; Sohn 2016).

For visual-semantic embedding, previous methods (Hadsell, Chopra, and LeCun 2006; Schroff, Kalenichenko, and
Philbin 2015) tend to treat the relevance between queries
and candidates in a bipolar way: for a query image, only
the corresponding ground-truth sentence is regarded as relevant, and other sentences are equally regarded as irrelevant. Therefore, with the triplet ranking loss, only the relevant sentence is pulled close to the query image, while all the
irrelevant sentences are pushed away equally, i.e., be pushed
from the query by an equal margin. However, among those
so-called irrelevant sentences, some are more relevant to
the query than others, thus should be treated accordingly.
Similarly, it is arguably a disadvantage in recent retrieval
evaluation metrics which disregard the ordering/ranking of
retrieved “irrelevant” results. For example, the most popular Recall@K (i.e., R@K) (Kiros, Salakhutdinov, and Zemel
2014; Karpathy and Fei-Fei 2015; Faghri et al. 2018) is

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
*
Corresponding author.
13050

