The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Attention-over-Attention Field-Aware Factorization Machine
Zhibo Wang,1 Jinxin Ma,1 Yongquan Zhang,1 Qian Wang,1,4,∗ Ju Ren,2 Peng Sun3
1

Key Lab of Aerospace Information Security and Trusted Computing,
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University
2
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
3
State Key Laboratory of Industrial Control Technology, Zhejiang University
4
Key Laboratory of Computer Network Technology of Jiangsu Province, Southeast University
{zbwang, jiaoma, dellenzhang, qianwang}@whu.edu.cn, renju@csu.edu.cn, sunpengzju@zju.edu.cn
optimized in linear time. However, there are still some drawbacks that limit the performance of FM.

Abstract
Factorization Machine (FM) has been a popular approach in
supervised predictive tasks, such as click-through rate prediction and recommender systems, due to its great performance and efﬁciency. Recently, several variants of FM have
been proposed to improve its performance. However, most of
the state-of-the-art prediction algorithms neglected the ﬁeld
information of features, and they also failed to discriminate
the importance of feature interactions due to the problem of
redundant features. In this paper, we present a novel algorithm called Attention-over-Attention Field-aware Factorization Machine (AoAFFM) for better capturing the characteristics of feature interactions. Speciﬁcally, we propose the ﬁeldaware embedding layer to exploit the ﬁeld information of features, and combine it with the attention-over-attention mechanism to learn both feature-level and interaction-level attention
to estimate the weight of feature interactions. Experimental
results show that the proposed AoAFFM improves FM and
FFM with large margin, and outperforms state-of-the-art algorithms on three public benchmark datasets.

First, different from continuous features in FM, features
in web applications are mostly discrete and categorical. In
practice, categorical features will usually be converted into
a set of binary features according to their feature values
(Cheng et al. 2016)(He and Chua 2017)(Shan et al. 2016).
However, this results in the loss of ﬁeld information, thus
failing to fully capture the characteristics of features. Second, in real-world datasets, there are many homogeneous
features or redundant features that describe similar meanings in the feature sets of the data. Using FM to learn the
feature interaction will cause that embedding vectors learned
for these features become similar, and thus wrongly assigns more weights to these feature interactions. For example, in the public context-aware application recommendation dataset Frappe, there are features “weekday=sunday”
and ”isweekend=weekend” to show the detailed information
of the date. Since these two features co-occur often in the
dataset, their embedding vectors will be similar, and thereafter will affect the weight of feature interactions. (Xiao et
al. 2017) utilized the attention mechanism to discriminate
the importance of feature interactions, however, we argue
that since they only utilized the element wise product of embedding vectors as the input of their attention network, interactions that include features of similar meanings may have
similar attention.

Introduction
Predictive analytics is a popular topic in both industry and
academics. There are companies, such as Alibaba, Microsoft
and Google, who tried to predict users’ preferences for
click-through rate prediction (Zhou et al. 2017)(Shan et al.
2016)(Cheng et al. 2016), and academic researchers like
GroupLens1 , who built the Movielens dataset for rating prediction in recommender systems research. Typically, a predictive task is formulated as estimating a function that maps
features to some target, for example real-valued target for
regression and categorical target for classiﬁcation (He and
Chua 2017).
Among plenty of prediction algorithms, factorization machine (FM) is one of the most popular ones due to its great
performance and efﬁciency. The key of FM is that it enhances linear regression with feature interactions and estimates the weight of feature interaction with factorization
models, which has better generalization ability and can be

To address these limitations, we propose our Attentionover-Attention
Field-aware
Factorization
Machine
(AoAFFM) to better capture the characteristics of features and feature interactions. Speciﬁcally, we propose the
ﬁeld-aware embedding layer to exploit the ﬁeld information
of features and combine it with the attention-over-attention
mechanism to learn both feature-level and interaction-level
attention to estimate the weights of feature interactions.
More importantly, AoAFFM characterizes more detailed
embedding vectors of features according to their ﬁeld
information, it also learns a feature-level attention to
capture more accurate weights of feature interactions from
embedding vectors and an interaction-level attention to
discriminate the difference between redundant feature
interactions. We conduct extensive experiments on three

∗
Qian Wang is the corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://grouplens.org/

6323

