The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Relation-Guided Spatial Attention and Temporal
Reﬁnement for Video-Based Person Re-Identiﬁcation
Xingze Li, Wengang Zhou, Yun Zhou, Houqiang Li
CAS Key Laboratory of Technology in GIPAS, EEIS Department, University of Science and Technology of China
lixingze@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zhwg, zhouyun, lihq}@ustc.edu.cn

limited context, a video sequence captures abundant context
information in a long span of time. In addition, it is more
likely to ﬁnd clean and informative content in a video, alleviating the noise sensitivity issue in image-based person
re-identiﬁcation. Therefore, how to explore this spatial and
temporal information is the key to the video-based person
re-identiﬁcation.
To leverage such information, some state-of-the-art methods (Liu, Yan, and Ouyang 2017; Song et al. 2018; Fu et
al. 2019a) estimate the qualities of global or local regions
and use the qualities as weights to fuse features. Typically,
these methods merely consider the per-region quality individually, which ignores the quality variance within a region
and the context information. Intuitively, in the spatial domain, the operations within a local neighborhood fail to include enough positional information, while the global comparison is qualiﬁed to identify the valuable foreground and
noisy background. Moreover, in the temporal domain, such
a relation modeling can be naturally extended to multiple
frames for frame-level complementation, which is beneﬁcial for enhancing the frame-level representations. However,
such global relation information is rarely explored by the existing video-based person re-identiﬁcation methods.
In this paper, we propose two relation-guided modules to
exploit the global relation information in both the spatial and
the temporal domain. First, to capture the correspondence
between two features, a relation module (RM) is designed
to compute the relation vector. Then, to simultaneously localize the informative regions and depress the background
globally, a relation-guided spatial attention (RGSA) module
is developed. The attention at each position is determined
by its feature and the relation vectors with all the positions,
which is able to capture the local and global information.
Finally, to further reﬁne and enhance frame-level features, a
relation-guided temporal reﬁnement (RGTR) module is proposed. The relation information within all frames enables
the individual frames to complement each other, contributing to reinforced frame-level representations, and so are the
video-level representations. These two relation-guided modules cooperate in the spatial and temporal domain, leading to
robust representations for person re-identiﬁcation.
We conduct extensive experiments on four benchmarks,

Abstract
Video-based person re-identiﬁcation has received considerable attention in recent years due to its signiﬁcant application
in video surveillance. Compared with image-based person reidentiﬁcation, video-based person re-identiﬁcation is characterized by a much richer context, which raises the signiﬁcance
of identifying informative regions and fusing the temporal
information across frames. In this paper, we propose two
relation-guided modules to learn reinforced feature representations for effective re-identiﬁcation. First, a relation-guided
spatial attention (RGSA) module is designed to explore the
discriminative regions globally. The weight at each position
is determined by its feature as well as the relation features
from other positions, revealing the dependence between local and global contents. Based on the adaptively weighted
frame-level feature, then, a relation-guided temporal reﬁnement (RGTR) module is proposed to further reﬁne the feature
representations across frames. The learned relation information via the RGTR module enables the individual frames to
complement each other in an aggregation manner, leading to
robust video-level feature representations. Extensive experiments on four prevalent benchmarks verify the state-of-theart performance of the proposed method.

1

Introduction

Person re-identiﬁcation aims at matching the images of a
person captured by multiple cameras, and in most cases the
ﬁelds of view of these cameras are non-overlapping. It has
a signiﬁcant application in video surveillance and public security. This task is very challenging due to the variations
of viewpoint, illumination and pedestrian’s pose, as well as
blur, occlusion and background clutter.
Depending on whether the data type is image or video,
person re-identiﬁcation is further divided into two subtasks,
image-based person re-identiﬁcation, and video-based person re-identiﬁcation. In recent years, image-based person reidentiﬁcation has achieved impressive progress (Sun et al.
2018; Fu et al. 2019b; Wang et al. 2018a; Hou et al. 2019a;
Zhang et al. 2019; Zheng et al. 2019). However, this subtask
is heavily inﬂuenced by the corrupted images where target
blur or occlusion occurs. Compared with a single image with
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11434

