The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Specifying Weight Priors in Bayesian Deep Neural Networks with Empirical Bayes
Ranganath Krishnan∗

Mahesh Subedar∗

Omesh Tickoo

Intel Labs
ranganath.krishnan@intel.com

Intel Labs
mahesh.subedar@intel.com

Intel Labs
omesh.tickoo@intel.com

scalability of VI in Bayesian DNNs to practical applications involving deep models and large-scale datasets is an
open problem. Hybrid Bayesian DNN architectures (Subedar et al. 2019; Krishnan, Subedar, and Tickoo 2018) are
used for complex computer vision tasks to balance complexity of the model while providing beneﬁts of Bayesian inference. DNNs are shown to have structural beneﬁts (Bengio,
Courville, and Vincent 2013) which helps them in learning
complex models on larger datasets. The convergence speed
and performance (Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville 2016)
of DNN models heavily depend on the initialization of model
weights and other hyper parameters. The transfer learning
approaches (Shin et al. 2016) demonstrate the beneﬁt of ﬁne
tuning the pretrained DNN models from adjacent domains in
order to achieve faster convergence and better accuracies.
Variational inference for Bayesian DNN involves choosing prior distributions and approximate posterior distributions over neural network weights. In a pure Bayesian approach, prior distribution is speciﬁed before any data is observed. Specifying meaningful priors in large Bayesian DNN
models with high dimensional weight space is an active
area of research (Wu et al. 2019; Nalisnick, HernándezLobato, and Smyth 2019; Sun et al. 2019; Atanov et al.
2019), as it is practically difﬁcult to have prior belief on
millions of parameters. Empirical Bayes (Robbins 1956;
Casella 1992) methods estimates prior distribution from the
data. Based on Empirical Bayes and transfer learning approaches, we propose MOdel Priors with Empirical Bayes
using DNN (MOPED) method to initialize the weight priors
in Bayesian DNNs, which in our experiments have shown to
achieve better training convergence for larger models.
Our main contributions include:

Abstract
Stochastic variational inference for Bayesian deep neural network (DNN) requires specifying priors and approximate posterior distributions over neural network weights. Specifying
meaningful weight priors is a challenging problem, particularly for scaling variational inference to deeper architectures
involving high dimensional weight space. We propose MOdel
Priors with Empirical Bayes using DNN (MOPED) method to
choose informed weight priors in Bayesian neural networks.
We formulate a two-stage hierarchical modeling, ﬁrst ﬁnd the
maximum likelihood estimates of weights with DNN, and
then set the weight priors using empirical Bayes approach to
infer the posterior with variational inference. We empirically
evaluate the proposed approach on real-world tasks including
image classiﬁcation, video activity recognition and audio classiﬁcation with varying complex neural network architectures.
We also evaluate our proposed approach on diabetic retinopathy diagnosis task and benchmark with the state-of-the-art
Bayesian deep learning techniques. We demonstrate MOPED
method enables scalable variational inference and provides
reliable uncertainty quantiﬁcation.

1

Introduction

Uncertainty estimation in deep neural network (DNN) predictions is essential for designing reliable and robust AI systems.
Bayesian deep neural networks (Neal 1995; Gal 2016) has allowed bridging deep learning and probabilistic Bayesian theory to quantify uncertainty by borrowing the strengths of both
methodologies. Variational inference (VI) (Blei, Kucukelbir,
and McAuliffe 2017) is an analytical approximation technique to infer the posterior distribution of model parameters.
VI methods formulate the Bayesian inference problem as an
optimization-based approach which lends itself to the stochastic gradient descent based optimization used in training DNN
models. VI with generalized formulations (Graves 2011;
Blundell et al. 2015) has renewed interest in Bayesian neural
networks.
The recent research in Bayesian Deep Learning (BDL) is
focused on scaling the VI to more complex models. The

• We propose MOPED method to specify informed weight
priors in Bayesian neural networks using Empirical Bayes
framework. MOPED advances the current state-of-the-art
by enabling scalable variational inference for large models
applied to real-world tasks.
• We demonstrate with thorough empirical experiments on
multiple real-world tasks that the MOPED method helps
training convergence and provides better model performance, along with reliable uncertainty estimates. We also
evaluate MOPED on diabetic retinopathy diagnosis task

∗

Equal Contribution
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4477

