The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Region Focus Network for Joint Optic Disc and Cup Segmentation
Ge Li,1∗ Changsheng Li,2† Chan Zeng,1∗ Peng Gao,1 Guotong Xie,1†
1

2

Ping An Technology (Shenzhen) Co. Ltd., Shenzhen, China
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology
{lige676, zengchan517, gaopeng712, xieguotong}@pingan.com.cn
changsheng li 507@hotmail.com

Abstract
Glaucoma is one of the three leading causes of blindness in
the world and is predicted to affect around 80 million people
by 2020. The optic cup (OC) to optic disc (OD) ratio (CDR)
in fundus images plays a pivotal role in the screening and diagnosis of glaucoma. Existing methods usually crop the optic
disc region ﬁrst, and subsequently perform segmentation in
this region. However, these approaches come up with high
complexities due to the separate operations. To remedy this
issue, we propose a Region Focus Network (RF-Net) that
innovatively integrates detection and multi-class segmentation into a uniﬁed architecture for end-to-end joint optic disc
and cup segmentation with global optimization. The key idea
of our method is designing a novel multi-class mask branch
which generates a high-quality segmentation in the detected
region for both disc and cup. To bridge the connection between the backbone and multi-class mask branch, a Fusion
Feature Pooling (FFP) structure is presented to extract features from each level of the pyramid network and fuse them
into a ﬁnal feature representation for segmentation. Extensive
experimental results on the REFUGE-2018 challenge dataset
and the Drishti-GS dataset show that the proposed method
achieves the best performance, compared with competitive
approaches reported in the literature and the ofﬁcial leaderboard. Our code will be released soon.

VDD

(a) Normal Fundus Image

VCD

(b) Normal CDR

VCD

(c) Glaucoma Fundus Image

VDD

(d) Glaucoma CDR

Figure 1: Comparisons of normal CDR and glaucoma CDR
in fundus images. Figure 1(a) is a normal fundus image and
(c) is glaucoma. The Figure 1(b) and (d) are the partially
enlarged images for (a) and (c) respectively, in which the
region enclosed by the yellow circle is optic disc (OD) and
the central bright zone enclosed by the blue circle is optic
cup (OC). The VCD is vertical cup diameter, and the VDD is
vertical disc diameter. The vertical cup to disc ratio (CDR) is
calculated by the VCD to VDD. The OC region in (d) which
has a higher CDR is relatively bigger than that in (b).

1. Introduction
Glaucoma is a chronic disease that damages the optic nerves
and leads to irreversible vision loss (Tham et al. 2014). Early
screening and detection methods are essential to preserve
vision. To detect glaucoma, the ratio of vertical cup diameter (VCD) to vertical disc diameter (VDD) is an important
factor in clinical, which is called CDR for measurements.
Normal CDR is 0.3 to 0.4 and the larger may indicate glaucoma or other diseases such as neuro-ophthalmic diseases
(Jonas et al. 2000). Figure 1 gives an intuitive illustration. It
is extremely time-consuming for acquiring those measurements manually, hence developing accurate algorithms to
automatically segment optic disc (OD) and optic cup (OC)

from fundus images is pretty meaningful for prompting the
large-scale glaucoma screening.
As illustrated in Figure 1(a) and (c), the optic disc occupies only about 10% of the total area of the fundus image.
For the low area proportion and heterogeneous appearance,
the segmentation of OD and OC is an extremely challenging task. Thus, it is an important pre-processing to locate
the optic disc for segmentation, since correct optic disc location can not only reduce the computational complexity
of subsequent optic disc segmentation, but also reduce the
noise interference caused by non-optic disc areas in fundus images. Early works in OD and OC segmentation are

∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

751

