The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

TapNet: Multivariate Time Series
Classiﬁcation with Attentional Prototypical Network
Xuchao Zhang,∗1 Yifeng Gao,∗2 Jessica Lin,2 Chang-Tien Lu1
1

2

Discovery Analytics Center, Virginia Tech, Falls Church, VA
Department of Computer Science, George Mason University, Fairfax, VA
1
{xuczhang, ctlu}@vt.edu, 2 {ygao12, jessica}@gmu.edu

Abstract

Table 1: Characteristics of Existing Models

With the advance of sensor technologies, the Multivariate
Time Series classiﬁcation (MTSC) problem, perhaps one of
the most essential problems in the time series data mining
domain, has continuously received a signiﬁcant amount of
attention in recent decades. Traditional time series classiﬁcation approaches based on Bag-of-Patterns or Time Series
Shapelet have difﬁculty dealing with the huge amounts of
feature candidates generated in high-dimensional multivariate data but have promising performance even when the training set is small. In contrast, deep learning based methods can
learn low-dimensional features efﬁciently but suffer from a
shortage of labelled data. In this paper, we propose a novel
MTSC model with an attentional prototype network to take
the strengths of both traditional and deep learning based approaches. Speciﬁcally, we design a random group permutation method combined with multi-layer convolutional networks to learn the low-dimensional features from multivariate
time series data. To handle the issue of limited training labels,
we propose a novel attentional prototype network to train the
feature representation based on their distance to class prototypes with inadequate data labels. In addition, we extend our
model into its semi-supervised setting by utilizing the unlabeled data. Extensive experiments on 18 datasets in a public
UEA Multivariate time series archive with eight state-of-theart baseline methods exhibit the effectiveness of the proposed
model.

1

Method
DTW
Shapelet
Bag-of-Patterns
Traditional DL
TapNet (Ours)

Little
Domain
Knowledge

Small
Feature
Space

√
√

√
√

Shortage
of Labels
√
√
√

Unlabeled
Data
√

√

√

2015) and Motion Recognition (Rakthanmanon and Keogh
2013).
Most existing general time series classiﬁcation approaches such as bag of patterns (Senin and Malinchik 2013)
or time series shapelet (Ye and Keogh 2009) require a parsing step to convert the time series into an extensive set of
subsequences or patterns as feature candidates. The large
feature space generated makes the feature selection step difﬁcult and may result in low accuracy in the multivariate case
(Schäfer and Leser 2017). Recently, deep learning based
methods (Karim et al. 2018)(Zheng et al. 2014) achieve
promising performance in the time series classiﬁcation task.
These approaches can perfectly handle the issue concerning a huge feature space by learning a low-dimensional feature representation via convolutional or recurrent networks
directly from raw time series data. Moreover, neural network solutions require less domain knowledge in time series
data than traditional methods. But these approaches require
a large amount of labeled data to train the massive model
parameters. Different from the computer vision and natural language processing domains, the availability of labeled
data is limited in most of the time series datasets (Bagnall et
al. 2018)(Bagnall et al. 2017). For instance, the “MotorImagery” dataset (Lal et al. 2005) provided by the University
of Tubingen for brain activity detection contains only 378
labeled data samples, which is arduous to train a deep learning model with thousands of model parameters (Neyshabur,
Tomioka, and Srebro 2014). However, the issue of limited
training labels can be handled by the traditional time series
classiﬁcation approach using distance-based methods such
as DTW-1NN (Shokoohi-Yekta, Wang, and Keogh 2015).
Table 1 presents the characteristics of existing MTSC methods. We can see that traditional time series approaches can
work with limited training samples, but they usually gen-

Introduction

A time series is a set of real value observations sequentially
ordered by time. A multivariate time series is a set of coevolving time series that is typically recorded by a set of
sensors simultaneously over time. With the advance of sensor technologies, The Multivariate Time Series Classiﬁcation (MTSC) problem, identifying the labels for multivariate time series records, has received a great amount of attention in recent decades. Since time series data is a popular data type that exists in a wide range of research domains
and applications, multivariate time series classiﬁcation models have been used in many different real-world applications
such as Human Activity Recognition (Minnen et al. 2006),
EEG/ECG data analysis, (Bagnall et al. 2018)(Wang et al.
∗

These two authors contributed equally.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6845

