The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Repeated Multimarket Contact with Private Monitoring: A Belief-Free Approach∗
Atsushi Iwasaki,∗,§ Tadashi Sekiguchi,†,§ Shun Yamamoto,‡ Makoto Yokoo‡,§

∗University of Electro-Communications, †Kyoto University, ‡Kyushu University, §RIKEN AIP
a2c.iwasaki@gmail.com, sekiguchi@kier.kyoto-u.ac.jp, syamamoto@agent.inf.kyushu-u.ac.jp, yokoo@inf.kyushu-u.ac.jp

ponent’s actions (perfect monitoring), which is an assumption often used in computer science literature. Bernheim and
Whinston (1990) show that multimarket contact does not improve the most collusive per-market equilibrium proﬁt under
perfect monitoring, though some of the vast empirical studies rather suggest the opposite (Evans and Kessides 1994).
To resolve this discrepancy, this paper assumes private monitoring where each player may observe a different signal. For
example, although a ﬁrm cannot directly observe its rival’s
action, e.g., prices, it can observe a noisy private signal, e.g.,
its own sales amounts

Abstract
This paper studies repeated games where two players play
multiple duopolistic games simultaneously (multimarket contact). A key assumption is that each player receives a noisy
and private signal about the other’s actions (private monitoring or observation errors). There has been no game-theoretic
support that multimarket contact facilitates collusion or not,
in the sense that more collusive equilibria in terms of permarket proﬁts exist than those under a benchmark case of
one market. An equilibrium candidate under the benchmark
case is belief-free strategies. We are the ﬁrst to construct a
non-trivial class of strategies that exhibits the effect of multimarket contact from the perspectives of simplicity and mild
punishment. Strategies must be simple because ﬁrms in a cartel must coordinate each other with no communication. Punishment must be mild to an extent that it does not hurt even
the minimum required proﬁts in the cartel. We thus focus on
two-state automaton strategies such that the players are cooperative in at least one market even when he or she punishes a traitor. Furthermore, we identify an additional condition (partial indifference), under which the collusive equilibrium yields the optimal payoff.

Analytical studies on this class of games have not been
very successful (Mailath and Samuelson 2006). This is because characterizing all equilibria or identifying optimal
equilibria in games with private monitoring is extremely
hard. Indeed, equilibrium candidates may be so complicated
as to be represented only by automaton strategies with a
very large state space, and the complexity, together with privacy of the other player’s signals, would require very involved statistical inferences to estimate the other player’s
history at any period and to check optimality of the continuation strategy (Kandori 2010). Notably, a belief-free approach has successfully established a general characterization where an equilibrium strategy is constructed so that the
statistical inferences do not matter (Ely and Välimäki 2002;
Ely, Horner, and Olszewski 2005). However, it is not obvious whether the belief-free approach is helpful in examining
the effects of multimarket contact. This is because we want
to deal with any number of markets, which causes the number of available actions to exponentially increase and may
diminish its tractability.

Introduction
This paper investigates a simple but fundamental question:
Can two players cooperate better when they confront in multiple repeated games than in a single repeated game? A typical context we concentrate on is multimarket contact. For
example, global enterprises, such as Uber or Lyft, provide
their services in multiple distinct markets. In each area, they
face an oligopolistic competition, which is often modeled
as a prisoners’ dilemma (PD). When they repeatedly confront in a long run (repeated games), more cooperative or
collusive behavior can be an equilibrium. They may be more
likely to collude, and a regulatory agency wants to estimate
the extent (Chellappaw, Sambamurthy, and Saraf 2010).
However, the answer to the above question is negative
if we assume that each player can directly observe his op-

The main goal of this paper is to construct, under multimarket contact with private monitoring, a non-trivial class
of strategies which can sustain a better per-market outcome
than an equilibrium strategy for a single market. The secondary concern is twofold. First, strategies must be simple.
Firms do not communicate with each other after they form
a cartel so that their cartel could be escaped from monitoring by a regulatory agency. If they employ a complicated
strategy, it will be hard to detect one’s deviation and to restore its collusion after punishment. We thus concentrate on
simple two-state automaton strategies, which are still difﬁ-

∗

A full version can be found at http://arxiv.org/abs/1607.03583.
Supported in part by KAKENHI 17H01787, 16KK0003, and
17H00761.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2038

