The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning Higher-Order Programs through Predicate Invention
Andrew Cropper

Rolf Morel

Stephen H. Muggleton

University of Oxford
andrew.cropper@cs.ox.ac.uk

University of Oxford
rolf.morel@cs.ox.ac.uk

Imperial College London
s.muggleton@imperial.ac.uk

f(A,B):-empty(A),empty(B).
f(A,B):-head(A,C),tail(A,G),head(B,F),tail(B,H),
int_to_chr(E,F),chr_to_int(C,D),succ(E,D),f(G,H).

Abstract
A key feature of inductive logic programming (ILP) is its
ability to learn ﬁrst-order programs, which are intrinsically
more expressive than propositional programs. In this paper,
we introduce ILP techniques to learn higher-order programs.
We implement our idea in Metagolho , an ILP system which
can learn higher-order programs with higher-order predicate
invention. Our experiments show that, compared to ﬁrst-order
programs, learning higher-order programs can signiﬁcantly
improve predictive accuracies and reduce learning times.

1

Figure 2: A ﬁrst-order decryption program.
f(A,B):-map(A,B,f1).
f1(A,B):-chr_to_int(A,C),succ(D,C),int_to_chr(D,B).

Figure 3: A higher-order decryption program.

Introduction

We implement our idea in Metagolho , which extends Metagol
(Cropper and Muggleton 2016), a MIL implementation based
on a Prolog meta-interpreter, to support learning higher-order
programs. The key novelty of Metagolho is the combination
of abstraction (learning higher-order programs) and invention
(predicate invention), allowing for higher-order arguments to
be invented, such as the predicate f1/2 in Figure 3. Our main
contributions are:

Suppose we want to learn a decryption program from encrypted/decrypted messages. Figure 1 shows such a scenario,
where the encryption algorithm is a +1 Caesar cipher. Given
these examples and suitable background knowledge (BK),
most inductive logic programming (ILP) approaches would
learn a recursive ﬁrst-order program, such as the one shown
in Figure 2. Although correct, this program is overly complex
and most of the program manipulates the input and output list.
In this paper1 , we introduce techniques to learn higher-order
programs that abstract away this boilerplate code. Speciﬁcally, we extend meta-interpretive learning (MIL) (Muggleton, Lin, and Tamaddoni-Nezhad 2015) to support learning
higher-order programs. Using this new approach, we can
learn an equivalent2 yet smaller program, such as the one
shown in Figure 3, which uses map/3 to abstract away the
recursion and list manipulation.
Encrypted
joevdujwf
mphjd
qsphsbnnjoh

• We show that learning higher-order programs can reduce
the size of the hypothesis space and sample complexity in
MIL.
• We introduce Metagolho , which extends Metagol to support learning higher-order programs.
• We experimentally show that, compared to learning ﬁrstorder programs, learning higher-order programs can substantially improve predictive accuracies and reduce learning times.

Decrypted
inductive
logic
programming

2

Related Work

The goal of program induction is to learn a program from
an incomplete speciﬁcation, typically input/output examples.
ILP is a form of program induction which learns logic programs. MIL is a powerful form of ILP that supports predicate
invention, the ability to introduce new predicate symbols to
improve learning performance.
Most ILP systems, including the popular system Progol
(Muggleton 1995), learn ﬁrst-order programs. Given appropriate mode declarations (Muggleton 1995) for higher-order
predicates such as map/3, Progol could learn higher-order

Figure 1: Example encrypted and decrypted messages.
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
This is a shortened version of a MLJ paper presented at ILP19
(Cropper, Morel, and Muggleton 2019)
2
Success set equivalent when restricted to the predicate f/2.
13655

