The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Interactive Fiction Games: A Colossal Adventure
Matthew Hausknecht Prithviraj Ammanabrolu Marc-Alexandre Côté
Microsoft Research AI

Georgia Institute of Technology Microsoft Research Montréal

Abstract

Observation: This bedroom is extremely spare, with
dirty laundry scattered haphazardly all over the ﬂoor.
Cleaner clothing can be found in the dresser. A bathroom lies to the south, while a door to the east leads
to the living room. On the end table are a telephone,
a wallet and some keys.
The phone rings.

A hallmark of human intelligence is the ability to understand
and communicate with language. Interactive Fiction games
are fully text-based simulation environments where a player
issues text commands to effect change in the environment
and progress through the story. We argue that IF games are
an excellent testbed for studying language-based autonomous
agents. In particular, IF games combine challenges of combinatorial action spaces, language understanding, and commonsense reasoning. To facilitate rapid development of languagebased agents, we introduce Jericho, a learning environment
for man-made IF games and conduct a comprehensive study
of text-agents across a rich set of games, highlighting directions in which agents can improve.

1

Xingdi Yuan
Microsoft Research Montréal

Action: Answer phone
Observation: You pick up the phone. ”Hadley!” a
shrill voice cries. ”Hadley, haven’t you even left
yet?? You knew that our presentation was at nine
o’clock sharp! First the thing with the printers, now
this - there won’t even be enough left of you for Bowman to ﬁre once he’s done with you. Now get the hell
down here!!”

Introduction

Interactive ﬁction (IF) games are software environments in
which players observe textual descriptions of the simulated
world, issue text actions, and receive score progress through
the story. As illustrated by Figure 1, humans bring competencies in natural language understanding, commonsense
reasoning, and deduction to bear in order to infer the context
and objectives of a game. We believe IF environments will
provide a good testbed for studying artiﬁcial development
of these capabilities. Beyond games, real-world applications
such as voice-activated personal assistants also exist at the
intersection of natural language understanding, natural language generation, and sequential decision making.
From a machine learning perspective, Interactive Fiction
games exist at the intersection of natural language processing and sequential decision making. Like many NLP tasks,
they require natural language understanding, but unlike most
NLP tasks, IF games are sequential decision making problems in which actions change the subsequent world states
of the game and choices made early in a game may have
long term effects on the eventual endings. Reinforcement
Learning (Sutton and Barto 1998) studies sequential decision making problems and has shown promise in visionbased (Jaderberg et al. 2016) and control-based (OpenAI et

Action: Examine me
Observation: You’re covered with mud and dried
sweat. It was an exhausting night - no wonder you
overslept! Even making it to the bed before conking
out was a heroic accomplishment.
Figure 1: Excerpt from Adam Cadre’s 9:05.

al. 2018) environments, but has less commonly been applied
in the context of language-based tasks.
Why study environments that feature ungrounded natural
language instead of multimodal environments that provide
visual grounding for language? We believe that ungrounded
natural language is inescapable in certain real world tasks
such as voice-activated personal assistants.
The contributions of this paper are as follows: First, we introduce Jericho, a learning environment for human-made IF
games. Second, we introduce a template-based action space
and that we argue is appropriate for language generation.
Third, we conduct an empirical evaluation of learning agents
across a set of human-made games.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7903

