The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Meta-Learning PAC-Bayes Priors in Model Averaging
Yimin Huang, Weiran Huang, Liang Li, Zhenguo Li
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{yimin.huang, weiran.huang, liliang103, Li.Zhenguo}@huawei.com

conclusions based on the whole universe of candidate models. In particular, researchers estimate all the candidate models and then compute a weighted average of all the estimates. There are two different approaches to model averaging in the literature, including Frequentist Model Averaging
(FMA) and Bayesian Model Averaging (BMA). Frequentist
approaches focus on improving prediction and use weighted
mean of estimates from different models while Bayesian approaches focus on the probability that a model is true and
consider priors and posteriors for different models.
The FMA approach does not consider priors, so the corresponding estimators depend solely on data. For its simplicity, the FMA approach has received some attention over
last decade. See Yang (2001), Leung and Barron (2006),
Hansen (2007) and a detailed review Wang, Zhang, and
Zou (2009) for reference.
Leamer (1978) suggested to use Bayesian inference to
reduce the model uncertainty as a framework and pointed
out the importance of the fragility of regression analysis to arbitrary decisions about the choice of control variables. Bayesian Model Averaging considers model uncertainty through the prior distribution. The model posteriors
are obtained by Bayes’ theorem, and therefore allow for
combined estimation and prediction. Compared with the
FMA approaches, there are a huge literature on the use of
BMA in statistics.
Inﬂuenced by Leamer (1978), most works were concentrated on the linear models only. Raftery (1996) extended
in generalized linear models by providing a straightforward
approximation. For more details, refer to a landmark review
Moral-Benito (2015) on BMA.
The Bayesian approaches have the advantage of using
arbitrary domain knowledge through a proper prior. However, as commented by Hjort and Claeskens (2003), how
to set prior probabilities and how to deal with the priors when they are in conﬂict with each other are still
problems. The PAC-Bayes framework, ﬁrst formulated by
Mcallester (1999), was proposed to take the priors into
account. In the beginning, most researches assumed that
loss functions were bounded. For detailed information, see
Catoni (2007). For unbounded loss, Catoni (2004) provided
a result under exponential moment assumptions. In last

Abstract
Nowadays model uncertainty has become one of the most important problems in both academia and industry. In this paper,
we mainly consider the scenario in which we have a common
model set used for model averaging instead of selecting a single ﬁnal model via a model selection procedure to account for
this model’s uncertainty in order to improve reliability and accuracy of inferences. Here one main challenge is to learn the
prior over the model set. To tackle this problem, we propose
two data-based algorithms to get proper priors for model averaging. One is for meta-learner, the analysts should use historical similar tasks to extract the information about the prior.
The other one is for base-learner, a subsampling method is
used to deal with the data step by step. Theoretically, an upper
bound of risk for our algorithm is presented to guarantee the
performance of the worst situation. In practice, both methods
perform well in simulations and real data studies, especially
with poor quality data.

1

Introduction

It is very common in practice that the distributions generating the observed data are described more adequately by
multiple models. A standard procedure to make the inference is that, according to some criteria, such as model predictive ability, model ﬁtting ability and many different information criteria a best model is chosen and assumed as the
true model. After selection, all the inferences and conclusions are made based on the assumption.
However, the drawbacks of this approach exist. The selection of one particular model may lead to riskier decisions
since it ignores the model uncertainty. In other words, if we
choose a wrong model, the consequence will be disastrous.
Moral-Benito (2015) already pointed out the concern, “From
a pure empirical viewpoint, model uncertainty represents a
concern because estimates may well depend on the particular model considered.” Therefore, combining multiple models to reduce the model uncertainty is very desirable.
As an alternative strategy, combining multiple models
which is called model averaging enables researchers to draw
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4198

