The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

An Implicit Form of Krasulina’s k-PCA
Update without the Orthonormality Constraint
Ehsan Amid, Manfred K. Warmuth
University of California, Santa Cruz
Google Brain, Mountain View
{eamid, manfred}@ucsc.edu
The optimum projection matrix can be decomposed3 as
P = C (C C)−1 C := CC† , where C is a d×k matrix that
spans thespace of top-k eigenvectors of the data covariance
matrix E y y . For a given C, we denote by x := C† y ∈
Rk , the (pseudo) projection of y onto the column space of
C. The reconstruction of y from the projection x can be
calculated as C x ∈ Rd . In practice, (1) is approximated
using a ﬁnite number of samples {yn }N
n=1 resulting in the
following objective:



yn yn
ˆcomp (P) = 1/N tr (Id − P)
n
(2)



1
= /N tr (Id − P) Y Y .

Abstract

∗

We shed new insights on the two commonly used updates
for the online k-PCA problem, namely, Krasulina’s and Oja’s
updates. We show that Krasulina’s update corresponds to a
projected gradient descent step on the Stiefel manifold of orthonormal k-frames, while Oja’s update amounts to a gradient
descent step using the unprojected gradient. Following these
observations, we derive a more implicit form of Krasulina’s
k-PCA update, i.e. a version that uses the information of the
future gradient as much as possible. Most interestingly, our
implicit Krasulina update avoids the costly QR-decomposition
step by bypassing the orthonormality constraint. A related
update, called the Sanger’s rule, can be seen as an explicit
approximation of our implicit update. We show that the new
update in fact corresponds to an online EM step applied to
a probabilistic k-PCA model. The probabilistic view of the
update allows us to combine multiple models in a distributed
setting. We show experimentally that the implicit Krasulina
update yields superior convergence while being signiﬁcantly
faster. We also give strong evidence that the new update can
beneﬁt from parallelism and is more stable w.r.t. tuning of the
learning rate.

Here, Y denotes the d × N matrix of observations, i.e. the
n-th column is yn We also deﬁne X as the matrix of projected
samples. Note that the objective (2) is linear and thus convex
in P = CC† , but non-convex in C. Nevertheless, the solution
can be efﬁciently calculated using the eigen-decomposition
of the empirical data covariance matrix YY .
Although the original PCA problem concerns the fullbatch setting, in many cases the dataset might be too large
to be processed by a batch solver. In such scenarios, online PCA solvers that process a mini-batch (or a single observation) at a time are more desirable. In the online setting, two elegant solutions proposed by Krasulina (Krasulina
1969) and Oja (Oja 1982) for ﬁnding the top-1 direction
have received considerable attention and been studied extensively throughout the years (Chen, Hua, and Yan 1998;
Balsubramani, Dasgupta, and Freund 2013; Jain et al. 2016;
Allen-Zhu and Li 2017). In the next section, we review the
generalizations of these two algorithms to the k-PCA problem.
We show that both the Krasulina and Oja updates correspond to stochastic gradient descent steps on the compression
loss (and its reduced form) using the gradient of the loss at
the old parameter. Using the terminology introduced in (Kivinen, Warmuth, and Hassibi 2006), we call updates that are
based on the old gradient the explicit updates. In this paper,
we focus on deriving a more implicit form of Krasulina’s updates. Implicit here means that the updates are based on the

Introduction
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) (Pearson 1901) is
one of the most widely used techniques in data analysis (Hastie, Tibshirani, and Friedman 2009), dimensionality reduction (Van Der Maaten, Postma, and Van den Herik
2009), and machine learning (Jolliffe 2011). The problem
amounts to ﬁnding projections of the d-dimensional data
along k < d orthogonal directions such that the expected
variance of the reconstruction error is minimized. Formally,
let y ∈ Rd be a zero-mean random variable1 . In the vanilla
k-PCA problem we seek a d × d projection matrix2 P of
rank-k such that the compression loss induced by P,




comp (P) = E P y − y2 = tr (Id − P) E[y y ] , (1)
is minimized. Here Id denotes the d × d identity matrix.
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
We focus on the centered k-PCA problem since handling the
mean value of a random variable is rather simple.
2
Projection matrices are symmetric (P = P ) and idempotent
(P2 = P).

3

Note that this decomposition is not unique. However, there
exists a unique decomposition in terms of the orthonormal eigenvectors of P∗ .
3179

