The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Functionality Discovery and Prediction of Physical Objects
Lei Ji,1,2,3 Botian Shi,4 Xianglin Guo,4 Xilin Chen1,2
1

Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, China
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China
4
Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
leiji@microsoft.com, {botianshi, guoxianglin}@bit.edu.cn, xlchen@ict.ac.cn
2

(Serban et al. 2016; Young et al. 2018), chat with robots
has achieved signiﬁcant progress. Besides, in robotic community, interacting with robot to complete tasks is a longstanding research problem, which required both language
understanding and physical grounding. Generally, human
would like to give orders like cut cake without specifying
the tool e.g. cut the cake using knife. The robot should be
able to ﬁnd a tool autonomously, which can be potentially
used to cut cake.
According to our study, WikiHow1 contains sentences
of guiding human to perform physical actions. Within
7,800,973 sentences we have collected, around 4% sentences mention the actual tool explicitly. After the investigation on 20 commonly used actions which require tool
to perform, about 6% sentences explicitly mention the tool.
Human regards the object functionality as commonsense
knowledge and would like to not specify the tool. Without
explicitly mentioned, it is critical to empower robots the
functionality knowledge in discovering appropriate objects
for a task. We focus on two research problems:

Abstract
Functionality is a fundamental attribute of an object which indicates the capability to be used to perform speciﬁc actions. It
is critical to empower robots the functionality knowledge in
discovering appropriate objects for a task e.g. cut cake using
knife. Existing research works have focused on understanding
object functionality through human-object-interaction from
extensively annotated image or video data and are hard to
scale up. In this paper, we (1) mine object-functionality
knowledge through pattern-based and model-based methods
from text, (2) introduce a novel task on physical objectfunctionality prediction, which consumes an image and an
action query to predict whether the object in the image can
perform the action, and (3) propose a method to leverage the
mined functionality knowledge for the new task. Our experimental results show the effectiveness of our methods.

1

Introduction

Functionality indicates the capability of an object to be used
to perform speciﬁc actions. According to the study of psychologist (Gibson 2014; Oakes and Madole 2008), functionality is a fundamental attribute for an object to be perceived by human, which is as important as appearance for
object recognition. Learning object functionality is significantly important for robots to interact with environment,
which has been widely studied in robotic community.

1. What functionalities/actions an object has?
2. Whether the object can perform the action on another object?
Existing knowledge graph ConceptNet(Speer and Havasi
2012) has UsedFor relation, which were collected in a
crowdsourcing way and far from satisfying application
demands due to low coverage. Previous research works
have mainly focused on understanding object functionality
through human-object-interaction from extensive annotated
image or video data and are hard to scale up. According to
our study on Visual Genome(Krishna et al. 2017), which is
an extensive labeled scene graph of each image, most relations are spatial (e.g. on, near, etc.) relations and only a few
are physical (e.g. wear, hold, etc.) relations.
In this paper, we ﬁrst mine the object-functionality knowledge through pattern-based and model-based methods from
large amount of text data, which improve the coverage to
a great extent. The extracted object-functionality are represented as knowledge tuples <head, action, tail>, which indicates the head object performs an action on the tail object.

Query: Can cut cake?

Figure 1: Object-functionality prediction task. Given the
query <cut, cake>, whether the object in the image can be
used as tool to cut cake. The knife and spoon should output
yes, and others should output no.
With the recent advances in NLP tasks, including question
answering(Petrochuk and Zettlemoyer 2018) and dialogue
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

123

https://www.wikihow.com/Main-Page

