The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Automated Synthesis of Social Laws in STRIPS
Ronen Nir, Alexander Shleyfman, Erez Karpas
Technion — Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa, Israel
{ronenn, karpase}@technion.ac.il, shleyfman.alexander@gmail.com

not always feasible. To avoid this, we can, for instance, institute central control over the agents. This approach, being
useful in numerous domains, might, however, suffer from
limitations, such as bottlenecks at the central site or systemwide vulnerability to failure.
One way to avoid centralized planning or online negotiation between agents, allowing for each agent to plan independently, is an artiﬁcial social system that enacts a social
law which restricts the agents from performing some actions in certain circumstances. Social laws aim to prevent
agents from disrupting each other, while still allowing them
to achieve their personal goals. Intuitively, a social law is
an ofﬂine restriction on the actions legally available to the
agents, which should remove the online conﬂicts and the
need to negotiate. In the car example we mentioned earlier,
the social law enacted for the beneﬁt of society is the trafﬁc code, which allows agents efﬁcient travel while avoiding
substantial damages.
The artiﬁcial social systems approach became a canonical approach to achieve coordination between agents (Woolridge 2001; Shoham and Leyton-Brown 2009; Horling and
Lesser 2004; d’Inverno and Luck 2004; Klusch 1999).
In particular, one of the early works proposed a STRIPSlike representation of multi-agent environments to establish
the connection between social systems and modern planning techniques (Tennenholtz and Moses 1989). Recently,
Karpas, Shleyfman, and Tennenholtz (2017) followed in this
direction, proposing a formalism to represent and reason
over social laws using classical planning. This work proposed an algorithm for the veriﬁcation of the robustness of a
given social law. This has also been extended to robustness
veriﬁcation in the temporal planning setting (Nir and Karpas
2019). However, these assume a social law is given.
In this paper, we describe an approach for automatic synthesis of robust social laws. We treat the problem of social law synthesis as a search problem, with the abovementioned robustness veriﬁcation procedure as a goal test.
We formulate a search space whose transitions consists of
making small changes in the social law, and show that a
naive search approach does not scale well. We also provide
some techniques for guiding the search, which are based on
exploiting information from the robustness veriﬁcation procedure.
Although previous work (Morales et al. 2018) has ad-

Abstract
Agents operating in a multi-agent environment must consider
not just their actions, but also those of the other agents in
the system. Artiﬁcial social systems are a well-known means
for coordinating a set of agents, without requiring centralized
planning or online negotiation between agents. Artiﬁcial social systems enact a social law which restricts the agents from
performing some actions under some circumstances. A robust social law prevents the agents from interfering with each
other, but does not prevent them from achieving their goals.
Previous work has addressed how to check if a given social
law, formulated in a variant of MA - STRIPS, is robust, via compilation to planning. However, the social law was manually
speciﬁed. In this paper, we address the problem of automatically synthesizing a robust social law for a given multi-agent
environment. We treat the problem of social law synthesis as
a search through the space of possible social laws, relying on
the robustness veriﬁcation procedure as a goal test. We also
show how to exploit additional information produced by the
robustness veriﬁcation procedure to guide the search.

Introduction
When operating in a multi-agent environment one must take
into consideration not only their own goals and actions, but
also the possible actions of the other agents in the system,
and their possible effects. Often in multi-agent systems, a
plan that would have allowed an agent to reach its goals had
it operated in isolation, leads to some sort of failure due to
other agents’ actions. For example, an autonomous car that
drives from location A to location B without taking into consideration that there are other cars on the road will likely end
up crashing into another car.
The literature offers varying approaches for coordination
of multiple agents. One can, for example, design rules of encounter that will determine the behavior and the negotiation
protocol for these agents, if their activities are bound to interfere. Unfortunately, these rules might be inefﬁcient and lead
to repeated negotiations between the agents for conﬂict resolution. One other drawback of this approach is purely applicational – it requires the physical embodiment of the agents
to have means of communication and time to do it, which is
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9941

