The Tenth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (EAAI-20)

An Experimental Ethics Approach to Robot Ethics Education
Tom Williams

Qin Zhu

Daniel Grollman

Colorado School of Mines
Golden, CO 80402

Colorado School of Mines
Golden, CO 80402

Plus One Robotics
Boulder, CO 80301

those concepts to analyze applications of AI and Robotics.
But moreover, such courses may also cover computational
approaches to moral decision making; psychological theories of moral decision making and blame; and methods for
experimentally investigating ethical issues. This requires instructors with broad interdisciplinary backgrounds, and pedagogical methods that draw on these disparate disciplines.
In this work, we explore pedagogical techniques aimed at
improving students achievement of learning objectives that
sit at this conﬂuence of disciplines. Speciﬁcally, we present
and analyze the efﬁcacy of a Robot Ethics course module in
which students participate as experimenters in experimental robot ethics research, which requires them to simultaneously learn methodological approaches to the study of experimental robot ethics, and then use those methods to engage
with key theoretical concepts from robot ethics (in our case,
robots’ normative inﬂuence). Moreover, in this work we not
only analyze the efﬁcacy of this module, but additionally
interrogate how this efﬁcacy depends on the role that each
student played in the research process.
This educational research effort thus involves two nested
levels of experimentation: a randomized controlled experiment in which the research participants were undergraduate
students enrolled in a Robot Ethics class and the researchers
were the course staff, and a second randomized controlled
experiment in which the research participants were undergraduate students sampled from across the university, and
the researchers were both the Robot Ethics students and
their instructors. In this paper, we will focus on the ﬁrst of
these experiments (the AI Education research effort), leaving many of the details of the second experiment (the experimental Robot Ethics research effort) to publication elsewhere.
As described in this paper, our analysis yielded mixed results with respect to the efﬁcacy of this experimental course
module. While we did not ﬁnd any evidence that participating in experimental ethics research was any more effective
than merely listening to a traditional lecture about the research effort and its goals in general, we did ﬁnd that for participants that participated in the research effort, the role they
played in the research effort may indeed have affected their
learning of the concepts explored in that research. Moreover, as we will describe, the module provided additional
learning opportunities to the small number of graduate stu-

Abstract
We propose an experimental ethics-based curricular module
for an undergraduate course on Robot Ethics. The proposed
module aims to teach students how human subjects research
methods can be used to investigate potential ethical concerns
arising in human-robot interaction, by engaging those students in real experimental ethics research. In this paper we
describe the proposed curricular module, describe our implementation of that module within a Robot Ethics course offered at a medium-sized engineering university, and statistically evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed curricular
module in achieving desired learning objectives. While our
results do not provide clear evidence of a quantiﬁable beneﬁt to undergraduate achievement of the described learning
objectives, we note that the module did provide additional
learning opportunities for graduate students in the course, as
they helped to supervise, analyze, and write up the results of
this undergraduate-performed research experiment.

Introduction
Computer Science educators are increasingly acknowledging that it is insufﬁcient for the Computer Science curriculum to entirely focus on technical issues relating to computing and programming. Rather, for Computer Science students to be effective practitioners after graduation, their education must include key concepts from the arts, social sciences, and humanities, so that students not only have the
technical knowledge necessary to implement and analyze
computational systems, but also have the knowledge from
those other ﬁelds necessary to decide, on ethical grounds,
whether they should implement those systems, and if so,
how they should go about designing and evaluating the effectiveness of those systems. This is especially true in the
ﬁelds of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Human-Robot Interaction, in which myriad ethical concerns have captured the
public’s attention, and in which human interactivity necessitates design and evaluation techniques not otherwise taught
in the Computer Science curriculum.
Appropriate teaching of these skills is made especially
challenging due to the interdisciplinary nature of the subject matter. AI Ethics education must clearly cover key concepts from ethics and moral philosophy as well as the use of
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13485

