The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Clouseau: Generating Communication Protocols from Commitments
Munindar P. Singh

Amit K. Chopra

North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC 27695-8206, USA
singh@ncsu.edu

Lancaster University
Lancaster LA1 4WA, United Kingdom
amit.chopra@lancaster.ac.uk

Current MAS approaches separately specify meanings and
protocols, which (1) creates a burden of maintaining the
consistency of two speciﬁcations and (2) leads to inﬂexible
protocols because manually operationalizing meanings under decentralization is nontrivial.
Clouseau, our approach, provides a new way to operationalize commitments by compiling meanings into ﬂexible
protocols that can be enacted by agents using asynchronous
messaging over unordered channels. This is a signiﬁcant advance over existing approaches, which lack such a capability. In particular, Clouseau produces correct and ﬂexible protocols, thereby avoiding the above limitations.

Abstract
Engineering a decentralized multiagent system (MAS) requires realizing interactions modeled as a communication protocol between autonomous agents. We contribute
Clouseau, an approach that takes a commitment-based speciﬁcation of an interaction and generates a communication
protocol amenable to decentralized enactment. We show
that the generated protocol is (1) correct—realizes all and
only the computations that satisfy the input speciﬁcation;
(2) safe—ensures the agents’ local views remain consistent;
and (3) live—ensures the agents can proceed to completion.

1

Introduction

Contribution: Operationalizing Commitments How
can we automatically generate a communication protocol
based on commitments, thereby bridging the gap between
meanings and protocols that beneﬁt from asynchronous
messaging? A desirable protocol would (1) enable computing commitment states; (2) ensure alignment of the agents
with respect to the commitments; (3) be ﬂexible, i.e., allow
as many interactions as possible given the commitments and
the capabilities of the agents.
Accordingly, we contribute a speciﬁcation comprising (1)
a domain information model; (2) roles to be played by the
interacting agents; (3) commitments between these roles in
terms of the information model; (4) capabilities of the roles;
and (5) description of satisfactory completion (an event expression). This input provides the essential knowledge for
capturing meanings computationally. This language augments Cupid (Chopra and Singh 2015a) with agent capabilities, which help capture how an agent may enact a protocol.
Crucially, we reformulate the semantics of Cupid to a decentralized model.
We adopt as output information-based protocols (Singh
2011) that express causality and integrity properties in information. An output protocol captures all legitimate decentralized enactments, thereby offering ﬂexible agent interaction.
Our overarching contribution is a method to generate a
protocol from a commitment speciﬁcation. We show that a
generated protocol is (1) correct, that is, it supports exactly
the computations of the speciﬁcation, (2) safe, in the sense
that local views of agents remain consistent despite decentralization and asynchronous enactment, and (3) live, ensuring that agents can proceed to completion.

Any application where stakeholders collaborate or compete
while retaining their autonomy, such as in ﬁnance, healthcare, and the Internet of Things, may be naturally understood
as a decentralized multiagent system (MAS). Engineering a
MAS presupposes a means to ensure that the agents interoperate even though their internal representations and decision
making are hidden from each other.
This paper uniﬁes two core aspects of interoperation.
One, operational or how the agents realize their interactions. A communication protocol speciﬁes what messages
an agent may send or receive, and when (Bauer, Müller, and
Odell 2000). To reduce coupling, interactions must be asynchronous, i.e., no agent blocks for another except to receive
essential information. Recent MAS platforms (Boissier et
al. 2019) and protocol approaches (Ferrando et al. 2019;
Singh 2011) support asynchrony. Two, meanings or the social import of an interaction. We must represent the meanings formally and independently of agent construction, such
that the agents can reason about meanings of interactions
and agree on the outcomes upon observing the same events.
Social commitments (Singh 1991; 1999; Fornara and
Colombetti 2003; Marengo et al. 2011; Chesani et al. 2013)
provide high-level meanings to messages, providing an
operations-independent standard of correctness. For example, Alice (a merchant), may commit to Bob (a customer)
to send Bob some goods if he pays. Now if Bob pays, the
commitment is discharged only if Alice sends the goods.
Whereas a protocol offers a clear operational interface for
agents, commitments capture the meanings of interactions.
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7244

