The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Attention-Based Multi-Modal Fusion Network for Semantic Scene Completion
Siqi Li,1 Changqing Zou,2 Yipeng Li,3 Xibin Zhao,1 Yue Gao1∗
1

BNRist, KLISS, School of Software, Tsinghua University, China
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, 3 Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
lsq19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, aaronzou1125@gmail.com, {liep, zxb, gaoyue}@tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract
This paper presents an end-to-end 3D convolutional network named attention-based multi-modal fusion network
(AMFNet) for the semantic scene completion (SSC) task of
inferring the occupancy and semantic labels of a volumetric
3D scene from single-view RGB-D images. Compared with
previous methods which use only the semantic features extracted from RGB-D images, the proposed AMFNet learns to
perform effective 3D scene completion and semantic segmentation simultaneously via leveraging the experience of inferring 2D semantic segmentation from RGB-D images as well
as the reliable depth cues in spatial dimension. It is achieved
by employing a multi-modal fusion architecture boosted from
2D semantic segmentation and a 3D semantic completion network empowered by residual attention blocks. We validate
our method on both the synthetic SUNCG-RGBD dataset and
the real NYUv2 dataset and the results show that our method
respectively achieves the gains of 2.5% and 2.6% on the synthetic SUNCG-RGBD dataset and the real NYUv2 dataset
against the state-of-the-art method.

(a) RGB Image

(b) Depth (HHA) Image

(c) Ground Truth of SSC

(d) SSCNet

(e) Ours

(f) Ours (Seg-GT)

Figure 1: Given RGB-D images (a-b) as input, the proposed
AMFNet can produce more accurate scene completion and
scene segmentation result (e) than the previous methods
(e.g., SSCNet (Song et al. 2017) (d)). Directly boosting the
AMFNet from the 2D segmentation ground truth of the input RGB-D images can even produce a result closer to the
ground truth (c).

Introduction
Understanding and reconstructing a 3D scene from partial
observations is a very important technique which has received increasing research attention in recent years due to
its commercial potential in a large variety of robotics and
vision tasks such as robotic navigation (Gupta, Arbelaez,
and Malik 2013), autonomous driving (Laugier et al. 2011),
and scene reconstruction (Hays and Efros 2007; Han et al.
2019). Given a single depth image or RGB-D images of a
3D scene, many papers (Gupta, Arbelaez, and Malik 2013;
Ren, Bo, and Fox 2012; Firman et al. 2016) have been proposed to complete or segment the 3D scene with neural networks. More recently, a set of methods (Song et al. 2017;
Liu et al. 2018; Guo and Tong 2018; Zhang et al. 2018;
Li et al. 2019b) have been developed to automatically predict the semantic labels, together with completing the 3D
geometry, of the objects in a 3D scene from a single view of
the scene using convolutional neural networks.

This line of literature focusing on the task of semantic scene completion (SSC) was initiated by those methods (Song et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2018) which take as input only the depth information. Several later works (Liu et
al. 2018; Li et al. 2019b; Guedes, de Campos, and Hilton
2018) argue that the RGB color information, which is often
captured together with the depth information by an RGBD sensor, could be used to improve the performance of the
networks which take only the depth information. The experimental results from these works reveal that the RGB color
channels provide complementary information to the depth
information and higher accuracy of SSC can be achieved by
using the fused information.
In this work, we propose a novel approach for the task
of semantic scene completion, which makes use of not
only the information of RGB color channels and depth but
also the “experience” of deep network learning 2D semantic segmentation. Speciﬁcally, we train a model that leverages 2D semantic segmentation information to guide both
3D completion and semantic labeling (semantic segmenta-

∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11402

