The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Decoupled Attention Network for Text Recognition
Tianwei Wang,1 Yuanzhi Zhu,1 Lianwen Jin,1∗ Canjie Luo,1 Xiaoxue Chen,1
Yaqiang Wu,2 Qianying Wang,2 Mingxiang Cai2
1

School of Electronic and Information Engineering, South China University of Technology
2
Lenovo Research
{wangtw, z.yuanzhi, xxuechen}@foxmail.com, eelwjin@scut.edu.cn, canjie.luo@gmail.com,
{wuyqe, wangqya, caimx}@lenovo.com

Abstract
Text recognition has attracted considerable research interests because of its various applications. The cutting-edge
text recognition methods are based on attention mechanisms.
However, most of attention methods usually suffer from serious alignment problem due to its recurrency alignment operation, where the alignment relies on historical decoding results. To remedy this issue, we propose a decoupled attention
network (DAN), which decouples the alignment operation
from using historical decoding results. DAN is an effective,
ﬂexible and robust end-to-end text recognizer, which consists
of three components: 1) a feature encoder that extracts visual
features from the input image; 2) a convolutional alignment
module that performs the alignment operation based on visual features from the encoder; and 3) a decoupled text decoder that makes ﬁnal prediction by jointly using the feature map and attention maps. Experimental results show that
DAN achieves state-of-the-art performance on multiple text
recognition tasks, including ofﬂine handwritten text recognition and regular/irregular scene text recognition. Codes will
be released.1

Figure 1: (a) Traditional attentional text recognizer, where
the alignment operation is conducted using visual information and historical decoding information (red arrow). (b) Decoupled attention network, where the alignment operation is
conducted using only visual information.

Introduction

al. 2017; Cheng et al. 2017; Bai et al. 2018; Luo, Jin,
and Sun 2019; Li et al. 2019). The attention mechanism in
text recognition is used to align and recognize characters,
where the alignment operation has always been coupled with
the decoding operation in previous work (Shi et al. 2016;
Cheng et al. 2017; Bai et al. 2018; Li et al. 2019). As
shown in Figure 1 (a), the alignment operation of traditional attention mechanism is carried out using two types
of information. The ﬁrst is a feature map that can be regarded as visual information from the encoder, and the second is historical decoding information (in the form of a
recurrent hidden state (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015;
Luong, Pham, and Manning 2015) or the embedding vector
of previous decoding result (Gehring et al. 2017; Vaswani et
al. 2017)). The main idea underlying the attention mechanism is matching. Given a feature from the feature map, its
attention score is computed by scoring how well it matches
with the historical decoding information (Bahdanau, Cho,
and Bengio 2015).
Traditional attention mechanism often encounters serious alignment problem (Cheng et al. 2017; Bai et al. 2018;

Text recognition has drawn much research interest in recent
years. Beneﬁting from the development of deep learning
and sequence-to-sequence learning, many text recognition
methods have achieved notable success (Long, He, and Yao
2018). Connectionist temporal classiﬁcation (CTC) (Graves
et al. 2006) and attention mechanism (Bahdanau, Cho, and
Bengio 2015) are two most popular methods, among them
attention mechanism shows signiﬁcant better performance
and has been studied frequently in recent years (Long, He,
and Yao 2018).
The attention mechanism, proposed in (Bahdanau, Cho,
and Bengio 2015) to tackle machine translation problem,
was used to handle scene text recognition in (Lee and Osindero 2016; Shi et al. 2016), and since then it dominated
text recognition with the following developments (Yang et
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://github.com/Wang-Tianwei/Decoupled-attentionnetwork
12216

