The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Building Calibrated Deep Models via
Uncertainty Matching with Auxiliary Interval Predictors
Jayaraman J. Thiagarajan,†∗ Bindya Venkatesh,‡ Prasanna Sattigeri,+
Peer-Timo Bremer†

†

Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, ‡ Arizona State University, + IBM Research AI
{jjayaram, bremer5}@llnl.gov, bindya.venkatesh@asu.edu, psattig@us.ibm.com

Levasseur, Hezaveh, and Wechsler 2017). Furthermore, accurate uncertainty estimates are essential for solving a variety of practical machine learning challenges including
knowledge transfer (Wen et al. 2019), active learning (Wang
et al. 2016), and anomaly detection (Leibig et al. 2017b).
In recent years, several classes of uncertainty estimation techniques have been proposed (Gal and Ghahramani
2016; Gal, Hron, and Kendall 2017; Lakshminarayanan,
Pritzel, and Blundell 2017; Ghahramani 2015). An inherent limitation of these uncertainty quantiﬁcation (UQ) techniques is the lack of suitable validation strategies. A typical workaround is to evaluate prediction intervals (PIs)
via their calibration, without distinguishing the uncertainty
sources (Heskes 1997): A PI is well calibrated if the likelihood of true target falling in the interval is consistent with
the conﬁdence level of the interval. In the context of calibration, most existing UQ methods in deep learning are not
inherently calibrated (Kuleshov, Fenner, and Ermon 2018).
In this paper, we argue that producing well-calibrated prediction intervals requires the identiﬁcation of informative
and uninformative uncertainties. When a model is equally
conﬁdent in all parts of the data space, the uncertainties are
considered uninformative. In practice, it is typical to use an
additional recalibration dataset to reﬁne the uncertainty estimates. In contrast, we propose to effectively leverage the
informative uncertainties from a model through the use of
an auxiliary interval estimator that is exclusively optimized
for the calibration objective, and a novel uncertainty matching process. More speciﬁcally, we use a primary network for
producing mean estimates with prediction uncertainties and
an auxiliary network for obtaining calibrated PIs, and formulate a bi-level optimization approach for jointly training
the two networks. To this end, we develop two uncertainty
matching strategies to leverage the intervals during the mean
estimation process, namely Sigma Fit and IQR Fit. By incorporating the calibration step into the training process, our
method is able to produce predictive models with signiﬁcantly improved accuracy as well as better calibration.

Abstract
With rapid adoption of deep learning in critical applications,
the question of when and how much to trust these models often arises, which drives the need to quantify the inherent uncertainties. While identifying all sources that account for the
stochasticity of models is challenging, it is common to augment predictions with conﬁdence intervals to convey the expected variations in a model’s behavior. We require prediction
intervals to be well-calibrated, reﬂect the true uncertainties,
and to be sharp. However, existing techniques for obtaining
prediction intervals are known to produce unsatisfactory results in at least one of these criteria. To address this challenge,
we develop a novel approach for building calibrated estimators. More speciﬁcally, we use separate models for prediction and interval estimation, and pose a bi-level optimization
problem that allows the former to leverage estimates from the
latter through an uncertainty matching strategy. Using experiments in regression, time-series forecasting, and object localization, we show that our approach achieves signiﬁcant improvements over existing uncertainty quantiﬁcation methods,
both in terms of model ﬁdelity and calibration error.

Introduction
Data-driven learning methods, in particular deep learning,
have led to incredible advances in a wide variety of commercial AI applications, and are rapidly being adopted in high
impact applications such as healthcare, autonomous driving, and scientiﬁc discovery. Consequently, it has become
critical to enable deep models to reliably assess their conﬁdence in scenarios different from the training regime and
to verify that predictions arise from generalizable patterns
rather than artifacts in the training data. In practice, a variety
of sources including data sampling errors, model approximations and the inherent data uncertainties can contribute
to stochasticity in deep models (Gal 2016). Hence, capturing these uncertainties when making predictions can shed
light onto when and how much to trust the results (Leibig
et al. 2017a; Ching et al. 2018; Kendall and Gal 2017;
∗

This work was performed under the auspices of the U.S. Departmentof Energy by Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
under Contract DE-AC52-07NA27344.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Contributions:
• A novel framework to produce reliable prediction intervals in continuous-valued regression, that are sharp and
6005

