The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Uncertainty-Aware Deep Classiﬁers Using Generative Models
Murat Sensoy,1,2 Lance Kaplan,3 Federico Cerutti,4,5 Maryam Saleki2
1
Blue Prism AI Labs, London, UK
Department of Computer Science, Ozyegin University, Istanbul, Turkey
3
US Army Research Lab, Adelphi, MD 20783, USA
4
Department of Information Engineering, University of Brescia, 25123 Brescia, Italy
5
Cardiff University, Cardiff, CF10 3AT, UK
murat.sensoy@blueprism.com, lkaplan@ieee.org, federico.cerutti@unibs.it, maryam.saleki@ozu.edu.tr
2

Abstract
Deep neural networks are often ignorant about what they do
not know and overconﬁdent when they make uninformed predictions. Some recent approaches quantify classiﬁcation uncertainty directly by training the model to output high uncertainty for the data samples close to class boundaries or
from the outside of the training distribution. These approaches
use an auxiliary data set during training to represent out-ofdistribution samples. However, selection or creation of such
an auxiliary data set is non-trivial, especially for high dimensional data such as images. In this work we develop a novel
neural network model that is able to express both aleatoric and
epistemic uncertainty to distinguish decision boundary and
out-of-distribution regions of the feature space. To this end,
variational autoencoders and generative adversarial networks
are incorporated to automatically generate out-of-distribution
exemplars for training. Through extensive analysis, we demonstrate that the proposed approach provides better estimates
of uncertainty for in- and out-of-distribution samples, and
adversarial examples on well-known data sets against state-ofthe-art approaches including recent Bayesian approaches for
neural networks and anomaly detection methods.

(a) Standard Nets

(b) Evidential Nets

(c) Generated Points

(d) Proposed Model

Figure 1: Class boundaries for models on a simple 2D classiﬁcation problem (green vs red dots): prediction conﬁdence
depicts on a color scale from maroon (low conﬁdence) to
blue (high conﬁdence). The generated samples are shown as
blue dots in (c) along with the original data points.

seldom admit closed-form representations, hence requiring
expensive Monte Carlo sampling methods (Bishop 2006).
Aleatoric uncertainty, or data uncertainty, is the noise
inherent in the observations (e.g., label noise), or class overlap: unlike epistemic uncertainty, aleatoric uncertainty cannot
be reduced by observing more data samples. For instance,
having identical samples with different labels, e.g., on the
class boundary, is an example of aleatoric uncertainty. Approaches such as Evidential Neural Networks (EDL) and
Lightweight Probabilistic Deep Networks, are proposed recently to estimate aleatoric uncertainties in deep neural networks by directly estimating parameters of the predictive posterior as their output (Sensoy, Kaplan, and Kandemir 2018;
Gast and Roth 2018). These approaches do not require any
sampling and assume minimal changes to the architecture of
standard neural networks.
Aforementioned approaches may still make misleading
and overconﬁdent predictions for the samples out of the training distribution. Figures 1(a), (b), and (d) demonstrate predicted class boundaries for a simple 2D classiﬁcation problem
of green vs red dots. Standard deterministic neural networks
(Fig. 1(a)) do not decrease their prediction conﬁdence when
classifying samples around the class boundary, while EDL

Introduction
While deep learning models demonstrate remarkable generalization performance in light of the large number of parameters they exploit, they can be misleadingly overconﬁdent
when they do make mistakes. The false sense of trust these
models create may have serious consequences, especially
if they are used for high-risk tasks. A striking example is
the misclassiﬁcation of the white side of a trailer as bright
sky: this caused a car operating with automated vehicle control systems to crash against a tractor-semitrailer truck near
Williston, Florida, USA on 7th May 2016. The car driver died
due to the sustained injury (NHTSA 2016).
There are two categories of uncertainty (Matthies 2007).
Epistemic uncertainty, or model uncertainty, results from
limited knowledge and could in principle be reduced: uncertain predictions for out-of-distribution samples fall into this
category. Among other approaches, Bayesian deep learning
methods try to estimate epistemic uncertainty by modeling
the distributions for the parameters values, distributions that
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5620

