The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Faking Fairness via Stealthily Biased Sampling
Kazuto Fukuchi,∗1,3 Satoshi Hara,2 Takanori Maehara3
1

University of Tsukuba, 2 Osaka University, 3 RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project
3
{kazuto.fukuchi, takanori.maehara}@riken.jp, 2 satohara@ar.sanken.osaka-u.ac.jp

criminatory intent”. A similar statement also appeared in a
2016 White House Report (Munoz, Smith, and Patil 2016).
To respond to the above social request, several fairness auditing tools have been developed (Adebayo 2016;
Bellamy et al. 2018; Saleiro et al. 2018). These tools help the
decision-maker to investigate the fairness of their system by,
e.g., computing several fairness metrics (Saleiro et al. 2018),
measuring the signiﬁcance of the system inputs (Adebayo
2016), and identifying minority groups with unfair treatments (Bellamy et al. 2018). If the decision-maker found
unfairness in their systems, she/he can then ﬁx the systems
by inspecting the causes of unfairness.
These auditing tools are also useful for promoting fairness
of the decision-maker’s system to the social communities.
For promoting fairness of the system, the decision-maker
publishes the outputs of the auditing tools. If the outputs suggest no unfairness in the system, the fact can be seen as an
evidence of the system’s fairness. The decision-maker thus
can appeal fairness of their system by publishing the fact to
earn the trust of the social communities.

Abstract
Auditing fairness of decision-makers is now in high demand.
To respond to this social demand, several fairness auditing
tools have been developed. The focus of this study is to raise
an awareness of the risk of malicious decision-makers who
fake fairness by abusing the auditing tools and thereby deceiving the social communities. The question is whether such
a fraud of the decision-maker is detectable so that the society can avoid the risk of fake fairness. In this study, we answer this question negatively. We speciﬁcally put our focus
on a situation where the decision-maker publishes a benchmark dataset as the evidence of his/her fairness and attempts
to deceive a person who uses an auditing tool that computes a
fairness metric. To assess the (un)detectability of the fraud,
we explicitly construct an algorithm, the stealthily biased
sampling, that can deliberately construct an evil benchmark
dataset via subsampling. We show that the fraud made by the
stealthily based sampling is indeed difﬁcult to detect both theoretically and empirically.

1

Introduction

Background Machine learning models are being increasingly used in individuals’ consequential decisions such as
loan, insurance, and employment. In such applications, the
models are required to be fair in the sense that their outputs should be irrelevant to the individuals’ sensitive feature
such as gender, race, and religion (Pedreshi, Ruggieri, and
Turini 2008). Several efforts have been devoted to establishing mathematical formulation of fairness (Dwork et al. 2012;
Hardt et al. 2016; Dwork and Ilvento 2018) and to propose
algorithms that meet the fairness criteria (Bolukbasi et al.
2016; Feldman et al. 2015; Joseph et al. 2016).
With increasing attention to fairness, social communities
now require to audit systems that incorporate machine learning algorithms to prevent unfair decisions. For example, a
2014 White House Report (Podesta et al. 2014) mentioned
“[t]he increasing use of algorithms to make eligibility decisions must be carefully monitored for potential discriminatory outcomes for disadvantaged groups, even absent dis-

Risk of Fake Fairness The focus of this study is to raise
awareness of the potential risk of malicious decision-makers
who fake fairness. If the decision-maker is malicious, he
may control the auditing tools’ results so that his system
looks fair for the social communities even if the system is
indeed unfair. Such a risk is avoidable if the social communities can detect the decision-maker’s fraud. Therefore,
the question is whether such a fraud is detectable. In this
study, we answer this question negatively. That is, the fraud
is very difﬁcult to detect in practice, which indicates that
the society is now facing a potential risk of fake fairness. In
what follows, we refer to a person who attempts to detect the
decision-maker’s fraud as a detector.
If the decision-maker only publishes the auditing tools’
outputs, the detectability of the decision-maker’s fraud is
considerably low. That is, the malicious decision-maker may
modify the auditing tools’ outputs arbitrary, whereas the detector has no way to certify whether or not the outputs are
modiﬁed. This concludes that the decision-maker who only
publishes the auditing tools’ outputs might be untrustable.
The decision-maker should publish more information

∗

The authors are listed in alphabetical order
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
412

