The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Towards Interpretation of Pairwise Learning
Mengdi Huai,1 Di Wang,2 Chenglin Miao,2 Aidong Zhang1
1

2

Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, State University of New York at Buffalo
1
{mh6ck, aidong}@virginia.edu, 2 {dwang45, cmiao}@buffalo.edu

2018a). Additionally, many other learning tasks can also
be classiﬁed as pairwise learning, such as AUC maximization (Ying, Wen, and Lyu 2016; Natole, Ying, and Lyu
2018), metric learning (Huai et al. 2019; Suo et al. 2018;
Huai et al. 2018b), bipartite ranking (Tang and Wang 2018).
Despite its tremendous success in many real-world applications, pairwise learning still faces one challenging problem, i.e., the lack of transparency behind its behaviors,
which makes it difﬁcult for users to understand how particular decisions are made by the learned pairwise model.
For instance, in the patient similarity learning task, the similarity metric is usually learned from a large amount of high
dimensional and complex patient data. The learner can obtain the proximity between a pair of patients based on the
learned metric, but he/she has no idea why the metric reports such proximity. The “black box” nature of the learned
pairwise models may impede users from trusting the predicted results, especially when the model is used for making
critical decisions (e.g., medical diagnosis), because the consequences may be catastrophic if the predictions are acted
upon blind faith. The lack of transparency behind pairwise
learning models has hampered their further applications in
real world. Thus, it is essential to investigate how to enable
interpretaion in pairwise learning.
In this paper, we aim to study feature importance scoring as a speciﬁc approach to the problem of interpreting
the predictions of black-box pairwise models. Speciﬁcally,
given a learned pairwise model and a testing instance pair,
we hope to design an interpretation method that can generate a vector of importance scores associated with the underlying features of the testing instance pair, and enable
these importance scores to indicate which features make
key contributions to the ﬁnal predicted result. There is now
many interpretation methods that can score the importance
of the input features for traditional pointwise learning models (e.g., classiﬁcation models). Among them, the Shapleyvalue-based methods (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016;
Datta, Sen, and Zick 2016; Shrikumar, Greenside, and Kundaje 2017; Štrumbelj and Kononenko 2014; Lundberg and
Lee 2017; Chen et al. 2018; Ancona, Öztireli, and Gross
2019; Kononenko and others 2010) have drawn signiﬁcant
attention as they are the only methods that can provide theoretical guarantee. However, these methods cannot be directly
used for pairwise models. First of all, to score the impor-

Abstract
Recently, there are increasingly more attentions paid to an important family of learning problems called pairwise learning,
in which the associated loss functions depend on pairs of instances. Despite the tremendous success of pairwise learning
in many real-world applications, the lack of transparency behind the learned pairwise models makes it difﬁcult for users to
understand how particular decisions are made by these models, which further impedes users from trusting the predicted
results. To tackle this problem, in this paper, we study feature importance scoring as a speciﬁc approach to the problem
of interpreting the predictions of black-box pairwise models. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst propose a novel adaptive Shapleyvalue-based interpretation method, based on which a vector
of importance scores associated with the underlying features
of a testing instance pair can be adaptively calculated with the
consideration of feature correlations, and these scores can be
used to indicate which features make key contributions to the
ﬁnal prediction. Considering that Shapley-value-based methods are usually computationally challenging, we further propose a novel robust approximation interpretation method for
pairwise models. This method is not only much more efﬁcient
but also robust to data noise. To the best of our knowledge, we
are the ﬁrst to investigate how to enable interpretation in pairwise learning. Theoretical analysis and extensive experiments
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed methods.

Introduction
In recent years, there has been increasing interest in an important family of learning problems that is categorized as
pairwise learning (Boissier et al. 2016). Different from the
traditional pointwise learning (e.g., regression and classiﬁcation) (Yao et al. 2018) where the loss function takes only
individual instances as its input, pairwise learning involves
pairs of instances as the input of its loss function. Comparing to pointwise learning, pairwise learning is more capable of modeling the relative relationship between pairs
of instances, which has been demonstrated in many realworld applications. For example, in patient similarity learning, the learner (e.g., a doctor/hospital) can learn a clinically meaningful similarity metric to measure the proximity between a pair of patients through formulating the
learning task as a pairwise learning problem (Huai et al.
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4166

