The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Weak Supervision for Fake News
Detection via Reinforcement Learning
Yaqing Wang,1 Weifeng Yang,2 Fenglong Ma,3 Jin Xu,2∗ Bin Zhong,2 Qiang Deng,2 Jing Gao1*
1

State University of New York at Buffalo, New York, USA
2
Data Quality Team, WeChat, Tencent Inc., China
3
Pennsylvania State University, Pennsylvania, USA
1
{yaqingwa, jing}@buffalo.edu, 2 {curryyang, jinxxu, harryzhong, calvindeng}@tencent.com, 3 fenglong@psu.edu

social media platforms as people rarely verify the source of
the news when sharing a news article that sounds true. The
spread of fake news may bring many negative impacts, including social panic and ﬁnancial loss. Recent years have
witnessed a number of high-impact fake news spread regarding terrorist plots and attacks, presidential election, and various natural disasters. In many of these cases, even when correct information later disseminates, the rapid spread of fake
news can have devastating consequences. Therefore, there is
an urgent need for the development of automatic fake news
detection algorithms which can detect fake news as early as
possible and help stop the viral spread of such news.

Abstract
Today social media has become the primary source for news.
Via social media platforms, fake news travel at unprecedented
speeds, reach global audiences and put users and communities at great risk. Therefore, it is extremely important to
detect fake news as early as possible. Recently, deep learning based approaches have shown improved performance in
fake news detection. However, the training of such models
requires a large amount of labeled data, but manual annotation is time-consuming and expensive. Moreover, due to
the dynamic nature of news, annotated samples may become
outdated quickly and cannot represent the news articles on
newly emerged events. Therefore, how to obtain fresh and
high-quality labeled samples is the major challenge in employing deep learning models for fake news detection. In order to tackle this challenge, we propose a reinforced weaklysupervised fake news detection framework, i.e., WeFEND,
which can leverage users’ reports as weak supervision to enlarge the amount of training data for fake news detection. The
proposed framework consists of three main components: the
annotator, the reinforced selector and the fake news detector. The annotator can automatically assign weak labels for
unlabeled news based on users’ reports. The reinforced selector using reinforcement learning techniques chooses highquality samples from the weakly labeled data and ﬁlters out
those low-quality ones that may degrade the detector’s prediction performance. The fake news detector aims to identify
fake news based on the news content. We tested the proposed
framework on a large collection of news articles published via
WeChat ofﬁcial accounts and associated user reports. Extensive experiments on this dataset show that the proposed WeFEND model achieves the best performance compared with
the state-of-the-art methods.

Recently, many approaches are proposed to identify fake
news, which can be roughly divided into two categories, i.e.,
traditional learning (Conroy, Rubin, and Chen 2015; Tacchini et al. 2017) and deep learning based models (Ruchansky, Seo, and Liu 2017; Ma et al. 2016; Wang et al. 2018;
Popat et al. 2018). Traditional learning methods typically
extract features from news articles and train classiﬁers based
on the extracted features. Compared with traditional learning methods, deep learning models have achieved an improvement in the performance of fake news detection due to
their powerful abilities of learning informative representations automatically. However, training deep learning models
usually requires a large amount of hand-labeled data, i.e.,
news articles that are labeled as real or fake. The creation
of such data is expensive and time-consuming. Also, accurate labels can only be obtained when the annotators have
sufﬁcient knowledge about the events. Furthermore, the dynamic nature of news articles leads to decaying quality of
existing labeled samples. Some of these samples may become outdated quickly and cannot represent the news articles on newly emerged events. To maintain the quality of labeled samples, annotators have to continuously label newly
emerging news articles, which is infeasible. To fully unleash
the power of deep learning models in fake news detection, it
is essential to tackle the challenge of labeling fake news.

Introduction
The recent proliferation of social media has signiﬁcantly
changed the way in which people acquire information. According to the 2018 Pew Research Center survey, about twothirds of American adults (68%) get news on social media
at least occasionally. Fake news, which refer to intentionally and veriﬁably false news stories, can spread virally on

A possible solution is to leverage the feedback provided
by users who read the news. Nearly every social medial platform provides a way for users to report their comments about
the news, and some of these comments are highly relevant
to fake news detection. For example, for a news article pub-

∗

Corresponding authors.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
516

