The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Fatigue-Aware Bandits for Dependent Click Models
Junyu Cao,1∗ Wei Sun,2 Zuo-Jun (Max) Shen,1 Markus Ettl2
1

University of California, Berkeley, California 94720
IBM Research, Yorktown Height, New York 10591

2

a user, while being conscious that both the choices of content
and their placement could inﬂuence the experience. We propose a variant of the Dependent Click Model (DCM), where
a user can click on multiple items1 that she ﬁnds attractive.
For each piece of content, its attractiveness depends on its
intrinsic relevance and a discount factor that measures how
many similar recommendations have already been shown to
this user. The user may leave the platform at any time, and
the probability of exiting is higher when she does not like the
content, reﬂecting the presence of marketing fatigue. Meanwhile, showing too much relevant but similar content could
also reduce its attractiveness due to content fatigue and drive
bored users to abandon the platform. The platform whose
objective is to maximize the total number of clicks needs to
learn users’ latent preferences in order to determine the optimal sequence of recommendations, based on users’ feedback. We refer to this online learning task which the platform faces as fatigue-aware DCM bandits.
Our contribution of our work is fourfold. Firstly, we propose a novel model which captures the effects of marketing
fatigue and content fatigue on users’ behavior. In the original DCM model (Guo, Liu, and Wang 2009; Katariya et al.
2016b), users can only exit the platform upon clicking on
a recommendation. In reality, users may leave at any time,
and they are more likely to exit when they are not engaged
with the recommendations. We extend the DCM model to
capture marketing fatigue by incorporating exiting behavior after both non-clicks and clicks. To reﬂect content fatigue, we incorporate a discount factor into DCM such that
it penalizes repetitive content of similar types and promotes
diversity in its recommendations. Secondly, even in the ofﬂine setting where all the information is known, the optimization problem to select a sequence of recommendation
which is central to the learning task is combinatorial in nature without a straightforward efﬁcient algorithm. We propose a polynomial-time algorithm for this problem. Thirdly,
for the online setting, we ﬁrst consider a scenario where the
discount factor is known (e.g., when it can be estimated from
historical data). We propose a learning algorithm and quantify the regret bound. Lastly, we consider a more general scenario where both the discount factor and intrinsic relevance

Abstract
As recommender systems send a massive amount of content
to keep users engaged, users may experience fatigue which
is contributed by 1) an overexposure to irrelevant content, 2)
boredom from seeing too many similar recommendations. To
address this problem, we consider an online learning setting
where a platform learns a policy to recommend content that
takes user fatigue into account. We propose an extension of
the Dependent Click Model (DCM) to describe users’ behavior. We stipulate that for each piece of content, its attractiveness to a user depends on its intrinsic relevance and a discount factor which measures how many similar contents have
been shown. Users view the recommended content sequentially and click on the ones that they ﬁnd attractive. Users
may leave the platform at any time, and the probability of exiting is higher when they do not like the content. Based on
user’s feedback, the platform learns the relevance of the underlying content as well as the discounting effect due to content fatigue. We refer to this learning task as “fatigue-aware
DCM Bandit” problem. We consider two learning scenarios
depending on whether the discounting effect is known. For
each scenario, we propose a learning algorithm which simultaneously explores and exploits, and characterize its regret
bound.

1

Introduction

Recommender systems increasingly inﬂuence how users
discover content. Some well-known examples include Facebook’s News Feed, movie recommendations on Netﬂix,
Spotify’s Discover Weekly playlists, etc. To compete for
users’ attention and time, platforms push out a vast amount
of content when users browse their websites or mobile apps.
While a user sifts through the proliferation of content, her
experience could be adversely inﬂuenced by: 1) marketing
fatigue which occurs due to an overexposure to irrelevant
content, and 2) content fatigue which refers to the boredom
from seeing too many similar recommendations.
Motivated by this phenomenon, we consider an online
learning setting with a “fatigue-aware” platform, i.e., it
learns a policy to select a sequence of recommendations for
∗

Correspondence to: Junyu Cao (jycao@berkeley.edu)
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

3341

We use “content” and “items” interchangeably in this work.

