The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Group-Wise Dynamic Dropout Based on Latent Semantic Variations
Zhiwei Ke,1,2∗ Zhiwei Wen,1∗ Weicheng Xie,1,4† Yi Wang,2† Linlin Shen1,3,4
1 Computer Vision Institute, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
2 Dongguan University of Technology, Dongguan, China
3 Shenzhen Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Robotics for Society, PR China
4 Guangdong Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Shenzhen University, PR China

{kezhiwei2018, wenzhiwei2018}@email.szu.edu.cn, wangyi@dgut.edu.cn, {wcxie, llshen}@szu.edu.cn

ous studies showed that these dropout-inspired regularization often outperformed the original dropout on several visual recognition datasets. We use both the original dropout
and spatial dropout as baselines in our experiments.
In conventional dropouts, every hidden unit is treated the
same and independently with a constant dropout probability
p. Following Binomial distribution, the expected number of
dropped units in a layer of n units is n · p despite of different layers and samples. This causes deﬁciency of dropouts
(Wang, Zhou, and Bilmes 2019). To improve performance,
dropout variants were explored in mainly two aspects (Keshari, Singh, and Vatsa 2019): 1) sampling dropout masks
from different distributions other than Bernoulli, and 2)
adapting the dropout probability. In particular, it was shown
that the generalization ability can be improved by dropping
nodes selectively based on some prior knowledge of the network. For instance, (Keshari, Singh, and Vatsa 2019) learns
a strength parameter by stochastic gradient descent (SGD) of
the network for guiding dropout regularization of each node.
(Wang, Zhou, and Bilmes 2019) adapts the dropout probability by normalizing it at each layer and every training batch
such that the effective dropping rate on those activated units
is kept the same during the training.
Most of existing dropout regularization methods remove
individual activations in each unit independently with a ﬁxed
or adaptive probability. We note that for object recognition,
visual structures in the input image activate the corresponding regions in the convolution feature maps (He et al. 2015).
In other words, feature maps with similar activation patterns
tend to have close semantic implications. Intuitively, these
feature maps should be stochastically dropped to reduce coadaptations. However, they also encode information about
the intra-class variation of latent semantic features (Kim et
al. 2017). This motivates us to propose a group-wise dropout
that can adapt to the latent semantic variations while simulating dynamic sparseness in the network to improve the
object recognition performance.
In this paper, we make the following contributions:

Abstract
Dropout regularization has been widely used in various deep
neural networks to combat overﬁtting. It works by training
a network to be more robust on information-degraded data
points for better generalization. Conventional dropout and
variants are often applied to individual hidden units in a layer
to break up co-adaptations of feature detectors. In this paper,
we propose an adaptive dropout to reduce the co-adaptations
in a group-wise manner by coarse semantic information to
improve feature discriminability. In particular, we showed
that adjusting the dropout probability based on local feature
densities can not only improve the classiﬁcation performance
signiﬁcantly but also enhance the network robustness against
adversarial examples in some cases. The proposed approach
was evaluated in comparison with the baseline and several
state-of-the-art adaptive dropouts over four public datasets of
Fashion-MNIST, CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 and SVHN.

Introduction
Dropout is a stochastic regularization technique commonly
used in deep neural networks (DNN) (Hinton et al. 2012).
Conventionally, it works in fully-connected (FC) layers by
randomly “dropping” out the activation of a neuron with a
certain probability p for each training case. The process has
the effect of model averaging by simulating a large number of networks with different network structures, which, in
turn, making node activations in the network more robust to
the inputs.
Inspired by the original dropout, other stochastic model
averaging methods were proposed to simulate dynamic
sparsity within the network. For example, spatial dropout
(Tompson et al. 2015) removes the feature map activations
in a convolution layer to account for strong spatial correlation of nearby pixels in natural images. In (Wan et al. 2013),
drop connection transfers the FC layer into a sparsely connected layer in which the connections speciﬁed in weight
matrices are chosen at random during the training. Previ∗ Both Z. Ke and Z. Wen contribute equally to this work.

• We propose to represent latent semantic variations with
densities of linearly uncorrelated features from the convolution layer. This is done by applying PCA projections
to vectorized feature maps and then bin gridding them

† Corresponding authors: W. Xie (OrcID: 0000-0001-89467472) and Y. Wang (OrcID: 0000-0002-8448-8570)
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11229

