The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Meta-Amortized Variational Inference and Learning
Mike Wu,∗† Kristy Choi,∗,† Noah Goodman,†‡ Stefano Ermon†
Department of Computer Science† and Psychology‡
Stanford University
{wumike, kechoi, ngoodman, ermon}@stanford.edu

objects in the scene. However, we would expect the true generative model, such as those of humans (Yildirim 2014), to
be invariant to these slight modiﬁcations. Therefore, we aim
to address: how do we design an amortized inference algorithm that generalizes across related distributions to learn
transferable representations? Such features would capture
the salient characteristics necessary to allow for better generalization to related, but unseen distributions at test time.
To address this question, we propose a doubly-amortized
inference procedure that amortizes computation across not
only a set of query inputs, but also a set of different, related
target probabilistic models. More precisely, we derive a new
objective called the MetaELBO which serves as a variational
lower bound across multiple distributions, while also incorporating a prior regularization term encouraging each generative model to match its respective data marginal. We note
that this inference model is not intended to be universal, but
rather tailored to a speciﬁc family where each probabilistic
model is similar in structure. Inspired by meta-learning, we
denote this ”doubly-amortized” inference problem as metainference and let a meta-distribution refer to the probability
distribution over the family of probabilistic models.
As an instantiation of our method, we introduce the
MetaVAE, a VAE trained with the MetaELBO. Empirically,
we ﬁrst show three demonstrations to build intuition for
meta-inference: 1) clustering, 2) compiled inference, and 3)
learning sufﬁcient statistics on exponential families. Then,
we study image transformations (e.g. rotations, shearing)
on MNIST digits where the MetaVAE learns representations that transfer to unseen transformations, outperforming
baselines by 10-50%. Finally, we showcase similar improvements of 10-35% on real-world images (NORB). While
the representations learned from other generative models
quickly decay in quality under more severe transformations,
those of the MetaVAE preserve relevant information about
the image while abstracting away unnecessary differences
induced by visual manipulation.

Abstract
Despite the recent success in probabilistic modeling and their
applications, generative models trained using traditional inference techniques struggle to adapt to new distributions,
even when the target distribution may be closely related to the
ones seen during training. In this work, we present a doublyamortized variational inference procedure as a way to address
this challenge. By sharing computation across not only a set
of query inputs, but also a set of different, related probabilistic
models, we learn transferable latent representations that generalize across several related distributions. In particular, given
a set of distributions over images, we ﬁnd the learned representations to transfer to different data transformations. We
empirically demonstrate the effectiveness of our method by
introducing the MetaVAE, and show that it signiﬁcantly outperforms baselines on downstream image classiﬁcation tasks
on MNIST (10-50%) and NORB (10-35%).

Introduction
A wide variety of problems in machine learning (ML) can
be framed as probabilistic inference in generative models.
In particular, latent variable models learn representations of
data that capture salient characteristics of its underlying distribution, which can then be used for downstream tasks such
as classiﬁcation (Klingler et al. 2017). While traditional inference techniques can be slow or even computationally intractable, the advent of amortized (variational) inference
allowed such methods to scale to large datasets, bringing
about signiﬁcant progress in generative modeling applications such as image and audio synthesis (Brock, Donahue,
and Simonyan 2018; Oord et al. 2016), molecule generation
(Segler et al. 2017), and more.
However, as the problem domains we face become increasingly more complex and multimodal, a technical challenge arises: generative models trained using traditional inference techniques struggle to adapt to new data distributions, even when these new distributions may be closely
related to distributions seen during training. For example,
variational autoencoders (VAEs) trained on the original image distributions have difﬁculty generalizing to small visual
transformations such as changing the position or quantity of

Preliminaries
Exact and Approximate Inference
Let p(x, z) be a joint distribution over a set of latent variables z ∈ Z and observed variables x ∈ X . An inference
query involves computing posterior beliefs after incorporat-

∗

Denotes equal contribution.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6404

