The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Adversarial Learning of Privacy-Preserving and Task-Oriented Representations
∗

Taihong Xiao,1 Yi-Hsuan Tsai,2 Kihyuk Sohn,2 Manmohan Chandraker,2,3 Ming-Hsuan Yang1
1

University of California, Merced
2
NEC Laboratories America
3
University of California, San Diego

Abstract
Data privacy has emerged as an important issue as data-driven
deep learning has been an essential component of modern machine learning systems. For instance, there could be a potential privacy risk of machine learning systems via the model
inversion attack, whose goal is to reconstruct the input data
from the latent representation of deep networks. Our work
aims at learning a privacy-preserving and task-oriented representation to defend against such model inversion attacks.
Speciﬁcally, we propose an adversarial reconstruction learning framework that prevents the latent representations decoded into original input data. By simulating the expected behavior of adversary, our framework is realized by minimizing
the negative pixel reconstruction loss or the negative feature
reconstruction (i.e., perceptual distance) loss. We validate the
proposed method on face attribute prediction, showing that
our method allows protecting visual privacy with a small decrease in utility performance. In addition, we show the utilityprivacy trade-off with different choices of hyperparameter for
negative perceptual distance loss at training, allowing service
providers to determine the right level of privacy-protection
with a certain utility performance. Moreover, we provide an
extensive study with different selections of features, tasks,
and the data to further analyze their inﬂuence on privacy protection.

Representations by
Conventional Learning
Methods

w/o privacy protection
Public Data

Private Images
Representations by
Privacy-preserving
Learning Methods

Adversary
ours (privacy-preserving)

Figure 1: Representations of conventional deep learning algorithms are vulnerable to adversary’s model inversion attack (Fredrikson, Jha, and Ristenpart 2015), which raise serious issues on data privacy. Our method learns task-oriented
features while preventing private information being decoded
into an input space by simulating the adversary’s behavior at
training phase via negative reconstruction loss.

to upload photos. Unfortunately, these processes are exposed
to serious privacy risks. Data containing the conﬁdential information shared from the customers can be misused by the
CSPs or acquired by the adversary. The damage is critical if
the raw data is shared with no encryption strategy.
An alternative solution to protect privacy is to encode
data using deep features. While these approaches are generally more secure than raw data, recent advances in model
inversion (MI) techniques (Mahendran and Vedaldi 2015;
Dosovitskiy and Brox 2016b; Zhang, Lee, and Lee 2016;
Dosovitskiy and Brox 2016a) call the security of deep features into question. For example, (Dosovitskiy and Brox
2016a) shows that adding deep image prior (e.g., perceptual similarity) allows inversion from low-, mid-, as well as
high-level features.
In this work, we study how to learn a privacy-preserving
and task-oriented deep representation. We focus on the defense against a black-box model inversion attack, where the
adversary is allowed to make unlimited inferences1 of their

Introduction
As machine learning (ML) algorithms powered by deep neural networks and large data have demonstrated an impressive
performance in many areas across natural language (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015; Wu et al. 2016), speech (Oord
et al. 2016) and computer vision (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and
Hinton 2012; He et al. 2016), there have been increased interests in ML-as-a-service cloud services. These systems demand frequent data transmissions between service providers
and their customers to train ML models, or users to evaluate
their data. For example, customers who want to develop face
recognition system may share the set of images containing
people of interest with cloud service providers (CSPs). Facial expression based recommendation system may ask users
∗

1

While our assumption is the most favorable scenario to adversary, in practice, the CSPs can limit the number of inferences. MI
attack with limited inference is beyond the scope of this work.

Now at Google.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12434

