The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Representing Closed Transformation Paths in Encoded Network Latent Space
Marissa C. Connor, Christopher J. Rozell
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332
(marissa.connor, crozell)@gatech.edu

networks encourage the latent space to ﬁt a prior distribution, like a Gaussian, and often the latent space is described
as a data manifold in which natural data transformations are
deﬁned by linear paths (Radford, Metz, and Chintala 2015).
The assumption that transformations are represented by linear paths severely limits the complexity of transformation
paths that can be continuously represented by the model.
An example scenario where existing methods are insufﬁcient is an application in which the data has closed transformation paths that extend from a starting point, z0 , and return
to nearly the same point zN ≈ z0 after N steps. There are
many examples of applications that ﬁt this setting including 3D rotating objects, temporal action sequences, and natural systems governed by underlying dynamical processes.
These transformations cannot be represented by linear paths
in the neural network latent space but instead require a more
complex representational model for latent data variations.
There are two general approaches that can incorporate natural data structure into latent spaces of generative networks to
represent more complex transformations. The ﬁrst approach
encourages geometric priors in the latent space that may
better accommodate natural data variations. The second approach deﬁnes transformations using geodesic paths in the
latent space rather than linear paths.
We combine both of these approaches by explicitly incorporating a learned generative manifold model into the latent
space of an autoencoder. This manifold model will allow us
to both learn structure associated with natural variations in
the data and deﬁne nonlinear paths necessary for representing closed transformation paths. In this work, we consider
data with closed transformations paths and propose an approach to learn and represent this natural manifold structure
in a neural network, with the following speciﬁc contributions:

Abstract
Deep generative networks have been widely used for learning mappings from a low-dimensional latent space to a highdimensional data space. In many cases, data transformations
are deﬁned by linear paths in this latent space. However, the
Euclidean structure of the latent space may be a poor match
for the underlying latent structure in the data. In this work,
we incorporate a generative manifold model into the latent
space of an autoencoder in order to learn the low-dimensional
manifold structure from the data and adapt the latent space to
accommodate this structure. In particular, we focus on applications in which the data has closed transformation paths
which extend from a starting point and return to nearly the
same point. Through experiments on data with natural closed
transformation paths, we show that this model introduces the
ability to learn the latent dynamics of complex systems, generate transformation paths, and classify samples that belong
on the same transformation path.

1

Introduction

In many applications of interest, intelligent algorithms must
classify, generate, or understand natural, high-dimensional
data. The manifold hypothesis states that high-dimensional
data can be modeled as lying on a low-dimensional, nonlinear manifold (Fefferman, Mitter, and Narayanan 2016). A
variety of techniques have been introduced in the machine
learning literature to discover various aspects of manifold
structure from data, often estimating the low-dimensional
nonlinear structure of high-dimensional data using neighboring points to deﬁne local geometric structure (Tenenbaum, De Silva, and Langford 2000; Roweis and Saul 2000;
Dollár, Rabaud, and Belongie 2007; Bengio and Monperrus 2005; Rao and Ruderman 1999; Miao and Rao 2007;
Culpepper and Olshausen 2009).
Recently, deep generative models have been used to
learn generator functions f : Z → X that map points
from a low-dimensional latent space, Z ⊆ Rd , to a highdimensional data space, X ⊆ RD . These generative models,
which include variational autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma
and Welling 2013) and generative adversarial networks
(GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014), can generate high-ﬁdelity
output samples that resemble real-world data. Generative

• We develop a model for learning generative, nonlinear
manifold operators between pairs of points in the latent
space that represent natural transformations in the data.
We show that this model can interpolate paths between
points and extrapolate closed paths from a single starting
point.
• We create a network architecture that incorporates the
manifold transformation operators into an autoencoder latent space. This enables us to deﬁne a latent space struc-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3666

