The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Effective AER Object Classiﬁcation Using Segmented
Probability-Maximization Learning in Spiking Neural Networks
Qianhui Liu,1 Haibo Ruan,1 Dong Xing,1 Huajin Tang,1,2 Gang Pan1,2∗
1

College of Computer Science and Techology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
Zhejiang Lab, Hangzhou, China
{qianhuiliu, hbruan, dongxing, htang, gpan}@zju.edu.cn

sub-microsecond levels under optimal conditions (Orchard
et al. 2015b). Commonly used AER cameras include the
asynchronous time-based image sensor (ATIS) (Posch, Matolin, and Wohlgenannt 2011), dynamic vision sensor (DVS)
(Lichtsteiner, Posch, and Delbruck 2008; Leñero-Bardallo,
Serrano-Gotarredona, and Linares-Barranco 2011), dynamic
and active pixel vision sensor (DAVIS) (Brandli et al. 2014).
This event-based representation is inherently suitable to
coordinate with the spiking neural network (SNN) since
SNN also has the event-based property. SNN is generally
more solid on biological plausibility and more powerful on
processing both spatial and temporal information. It may
also very help to build cyborg intelligent systems (Wu, Pan,
and Zheng 2013; Wu et al. 2014). Moreover, SNN has the
advantage of energy efﬁciency, for example, current implementations of SNN on neuromorphic hardware use only a
few nJ or even pJ for transmitting a spike (Diehl and Cook
2015).
However, the novelty of this representation also poses
several challenges to AER object classiﬁcation using SNN.
Firstly, the event streams from AER cameras are not stable, compared with the video streams from tradition cameras. AER cameras are sensitive to the dynamic information
within the visual receptive ﬁeld. Along with the events relevant to the objects, factors like camera shaking and subtle
changes of environmental light will generate a large quantity
of noisy events, which will impact the reliability of neuron
responses and the learning performance of SNN. Secondly,
the event stream from AER camera records massive information of a period of time, and a mechanism is required
to make full use of the information for training and reach
a competitive level of accuracy despite the testing information is not complete. We will make steps towards improving
the effectiveness of classiﬁcation using SNN.
We propose an AER object classiﬁcation model, which
consists of an event-based spatio-temporal feature extraction and a new segmented probability-maximization (SPA)
learning algorithm of SNN. Firstly, the feature extraction obtains the representative features of the output of AER cameras, reducing the effect of noisy events to some extent and
maintaining the precise timing of the output events. Feature
extraction employs the spiking neurons to utilize the pre-

Abstract
Address event representation (AER) cameras have recently
attracted more attention due to the advantages of high temporal resolution and low power consumption, compared with
traditional frame-based cameras. Since AER cameras record
the visual input as asynchronous discrete events, they are inherently suitable to coordinate with the spiking neural network (SNN), which is biologically plausible and energyefﬁcient on neuromorphic hardware. However, using SNN
to perform the AER object classiﬁcation is still challenging,
due to the lack of effective learning algorithms for this new
representation. To tackle this issue, we propose an AER object classiﬁcation model using a novel segmented probabilitymaximization (SPA) learning algorithm. Technically, 1) the
SPA learning algorithm iteratively maximizes the probability
of the classes that samples belong to, in order to improve the
reliability of neuron responses and effectiveness of learning;
2) a peak detection (PD) mechanism is introduced in SPA
to locate informative time points segment by segment, based
on which information within the whole event stream can be
fully utilized by the learning. Extensive experimental results
show that, compared to state-of-the-art methods, not only our
model is more effective, but also it requires less information
to reach a certain level of accuracy.

Introduction
Address event representation (AER) cameras are neuromorphic devices imitating the mechanism of human retina. Contrary to traditional frame-based cameras, which record the
visual input from all pixels as images at a ﬁx rate, with AER
cameras, each pixel individually emits events when it monitors sufﬁcient changes of light intensity in its receptive ﬁeld.
The ﬁnal output of the camera is a stream of events collected
from each pixel, forming an asynchronous and sparse representation of the scene. AER cameras naturally respond to
moving objects and ignore static redundant information, resulting in signiﬁcant reduction of memory usage and energy
consumption. Moreover, AER cameras capture visual information at a signiﬁcantly higher temporal resolution than traditional frame-based cameras, achieving accuracy down to
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1308

