The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Efﬁcient Heterogeneous Collaborative Filtering
without Negative Sampling for Recommendation
Chong Chen,1 Min Zhang,1 Yongfeng Zhang,2 Weizhi Ma,1 Yiqun Liu,1 Shaoping Ma1
1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
2
Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University
cc17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, z-m@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent studies on recommendation have largely focused on
exploring state-of-the-art neural networks to improve the expressiveness of models, while typically apply the Negative
Sampling (NS) strategy for efﬁcient learning. Despite effectiveness, two important issues have not been well-considered
in existing methods: 1) NS suffers from dramatic ﬂuctuation,
making sampling-based methods difﬁcult to achieve the optimal ranking performance in practical applications; 2) although heterogeneous feedback (e.g., view, click, and purchase) is widespread in many online systems, most existing
methods leverage only one primary type of user feedback
such as purchase. In this work, we propose a novel nonsampling transfer learning solution, named Efﬁcient Heterogeneous Collaborative Filtering (EHCF) for Top-N recommendation. It can not only model ﬁne-grained user-item relations, but also efﬁciently learn model parameters from the
whole heterogeneous data (including all unlabeled data) with
a rather low time complexity. Extensive experiments on three
real-world datasets show that EHCF signiﬁcantly outperforms state-of-the-art recommendation methods in both traditional (single-behavior) and heterogeneous scenarios. Moreover, EHCF shows signiﬁcant improvements in training efﬁciency, making it more applicable to real-world large-scale
systems. Our implementation has been released 1 to facilitate further developments on efﬁcient whole-data based neural methods.

 



 
   

Figure 1: An example of multiple types of user feedback
(not limited to these behaviors). Generally there are strong
transfer relations among different behaviors (dotted lines).
In recent years, many recommendation models have been
proposed and shown to be effective. However, two important issues have not been well-considered in existing models.
First, most state-of-the-art methods, especially deep learning
models, rely on Negative Sampling (NS) to increase computational efﬁciency (Chen et al. 2019a; Gao et al. 2019;
He et al. 2017). While previous studies (He et al. 2017;
Wang et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2019b) have shown that the
performance of NS is not robust as it is highly sensitive to
the sampling distribution and the number of negative samples. Essentially, sampling is biased, making it difﬁcult to
converge to the optimal ranking performance regardless of
how many update steps have been taken (Xin et al. 2018).
Besides, to leverage heterogeneous user behavior, NS strategy needs to sample a negative instance for every observed
interaction (regardless of the behavior type), which produces
a very large randomness in total (about K times than singlebehavior scenario where K is the number of behavior types).
As such, it is more difﬁcult for sampling-based methods to
achieve the optimal performance due to the explosive growth
of sampling randomness.
Second, in previous work, there is a lack of in-depth investigation of relationships between user behavior types.
Speciﬁcally, in heterogeneous scenarios, each behavior has
its own contexts and there exist strong transfer relations
among different behaviors (Gao et al. 2019). An example
is shown in Figure 1 by dotted lines, the behaviors may represent the action sequence of a user on an item: view should

Introduction
Recommender systems are designed to help deal with the information explosion problem and have been applied to various scenarios (Ricci, Rokach, and Shapira 2011; Chen et al.
2018b). In online information platforms, users can interact
with items in various types of behavior. Figure 1 shows an
example of heterogeneous user behaviors on E-commerce
scenarios. Users can view an item, add an item to shopping cart, or purchase an item, etc. These heterogeneous behaviors provide valuable signals of users preferences, which
are helpful for building a ﬁne-grained recommender system
(Gao et al. 2019).
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://github.com/chenchongthu/EHCF
19

