The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Probabilistic Inference for Predicate Constraint Satisfaction
Yuki Satake,1 Hiroshi Unno,1,2 Hinata Yanagi1
1

University of Tsukuba, 2 RIKEN AIP
{satake, uhiro, hinata}@logic.cs.tsukuba.ac.jp

This paper studies a generalization of CHCs called predicate Constraint Satisfaction Problems (pCSP) where each
constraint is represented by an arbitrary (i.e., possibly
non-Horn) clause. We show that this generalization further
widens the applicability to veriﬁcation of branching-time
safety properties of programs that exhibit ﬁnitely branching
non-determinism. In other words, this paves the way to use
pCSP as a common intermediate language for veriﬁcation
of branching-time safety properties in place of CHCs that
is limited to a strict subclass (i.e., linear-time safety properties).1 One of the notable instances of branching-time safety
veriﬁcation is non-termination veriﬁcation where the goal is
to check whether there is a non-terminating execution of the
given program (Gupta et al. 2008). For example, consider
the following program cnt :
while (x ≥ 0) do
if * then x := x - 1 else x := x + 1
The program repeatedly and non-deterministically (indicated by *) decrements or increments the integer variable x
by 1 while the condition x ≥ 0 is satisﬁed. Suppose we
would like to verify that there is a non-terminating execution of the program under the precondition that the initial
value of x is non-negative. The property actually holds because we can always take the else branch to avoid termination. The non-termination veriﬁcation problem is reduced to
the following pCSP Cnt :


x ≥ 0 ⇒ I(x),
(I(x) ∧ x ≥ 0) ⇒ (I(x − 1) ∨ I(x + 1)) ,
(I(x) ∧ x < 0) ⇒ ⊥

Abstract
In this paper, we present a novel constraint solving method for
a class of predicate Constraint Satisfaction Problems (pCSP)
where each constraint is represented by an arbitrary clause
of ﬁrst-order predicate logic over predicate variables. The
class of pCSP properly subsumes the well-studied class of
Constrained Horn Clauses (CHCs) where each constraint is
restricted to a Horn clause. The class of CHCs has been
widely applied to veriﬁcation of linear-time safety properties of programs in different paradigms. In this paper, we
show that pCSP further widens the applicability to veriﬁcation of branching-time safety properties of programs that
exhibit ﬁnitely-branching non-determinism. Solving pCSP
(and CHCs) however is challenging because the search
space of solutions is often very large (or unbounded), highdimensional, and non-smooth. To address these challenges,
our method naturally combines techniques studied separately
in different literatures: counterexample guided inductive synthesis (CEGIS) and probabilistic inference in graphical models. We have implemented the presented method and obtained
promising results on existing benchmarks as well as new ones
that are beyond the scope of existing CHC solvers.

1

Introduction

Constrained Horn Clauses (CHCs) (Grebenshchikov et al.
2012; Bjørner et al. 2015) is a class of constraint satisfaction problems where each constraint is represented by a
Horn clause of ﬁrst-order predicate logic with free predicate variables over a background theory such as quantiﬁer
free linear integer arithmetic (QFLIA). Thanks to its expressiveness, the class has been widely adopted as a veriﬁcation intermediate language to encode various veriﬁcation problems of deciding whether the given linear-time
safety properties are satisﬁed by the given programs in different paradigms such as functional (Unno and Kobayashi
2009), multi-threaded (Popeea and Rybalchenko 2012), imperative (Gurﬁnkel et al. 2015), and object-oriented programming (Kahsai et al. 2016). Accordingly, highly efﬁcient CHC solvers like S PACER (Komuravelli, Gurﬁnkel,
and Chaki 2014), E LDARICA (Hojjat and Rümmer 2018),
and H O I CE (Champion et al. 2018) have been developed.

Here, the predicate variable I represents a kind of loop
invariant (called a recurrent set in (Gupta et al. 2008;
Chen et al. 2014)) of the while loop and ⊥ represents the
contradiction. The ﬁrst clause requires that I is satisﬁed by
all the initial valuation conforming to the precondition. The
1

The generalization however is still not sufﬁcient for capturing programs with inﬁnitely branching non-determinism and the
full class of properties (in particular, liveness ones) expressible by
branching-time temporal logics such as CTL, CTL*, and modal-mu
calculus. This restriction can be easily overcome by further extending pCSP with well-foundedness constraints, though the extended
class is out of the scope of this paper for simplicity of exposition.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1644

