The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Neural Machine Translation with Joint Representation
Yanyang Li,1 Qiang Wang,1 Tong Xiao,1,2∗ Tongran Liu,3 Jingbo Zhu1,2
1

Natural Language Processing Lab., Northeastern University, Shenyang, China
2
NiuTrans Co., Ltd., Shenyang, China
3
CAS Key Laboratory of Behavioral Science, Institute of Psychology, CAS, Beijing, China
blamedrlee@outlook.com, wangqiangneu@gmail.com, {xiaotong, zhujingbo}@mail.neu.edu.cn, liutr@psych.ac.cn

interaction by dynamically aggregating a sequence of representations. Though successful, the receptive ﬁeld of each
position in the attention is restricted to one source or target
sequence only instead of the cartesian product of them as
required by the joint representation.
In this work, we take one step toward the model family
Reformer, which built entirely on top of the joint representation. We efﬁciently adapt the most advanced self-attention
module to the joint representation space RS×T ×H , namely
Separable Attention. With this building block at hand, we
present two instantiations of Reformer. The former one,
Reformer-base, enjoys the best theoretical effectiveness with
the capability that it can access any source or target token
with minimum O(1) operations but has higher complexity induced by stacking separable attentions. The latter one,
Reformer-fast, better trades off the effectiveness and efﬁciency of the separable attention, achieving comparable results as Reformer-base but 50% faster. As both Reformer
variants do not resort to either the encoder or the decoder,
they shed light on exploring the new promising Sequenceto-Sequence paradigm in the future.
We additionally show that with proper model scaling, our
Reformer models are superior to the state-of-the-art (SOTA)
Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017) with fewer parameters on
larger datasets. The proposed model scaling method requires
only O(2) runs to generate the enhanced model compared to
the common Grid Search, whose cost grows polynomially as
the candidates of hyper-parameters increase.
In our experiments, the Reformer models achieve 1.3,
0.8 and 0.7 BLEU point improvement over the Transformer
baseline in the small scale IWSLT15 Vietnamese-English
and IWSLT14 German-English, English-German datasets
as well as 1.9 in the large scale NIST12 Chinese-English
dataset. After scaling, it outperforms the SOTA large Transformer counterpart by 0.7 and 2 BLEU point with about
50% parameters in IWSLT14 German-English and NIST12
Chinese-English translations respectively.

Abstract
Though early successes of Statistical Machine Translation
(SMT) systems are attributed in part to the explicit modelling of the interaction between any two source and target
units, e.g., alignment, the recent Neural Machine Translation (NMT) systems resort to the attention which partially
encodes the interaction for efﬁciency. In this paper, we employ Joint Representation that fully accounts for each possible interaction. We sidestep the inefﬁciency issue by reﬁning
representations with the proposed efﬁcient attention operation. The resulting Reformer models offer a new Sequence-toSequence modelling paradigm besides the Encoder-Decoder
framework and outperform the Transformer baseline in either
the small scale IWSLT14 German-English, English-German
and IWSLT15 Vietnamese-English or the large scale NIST12
Chinese-English translation tasks by about 1 BLEU point. We
also propose a systematic model scaling approach, allowing
the Reformer model to beat the state-of-the-art Transformer
in IWSLT14 German-English and NIST12 Chinese-English
with about 50% fewer parameters. The code is publicly available at https://github.com/lyy1994/reformer.

Introduction
To translate one sentence in the source language to its equivalent in the target one, the translation model relies on the
bilingual interaction between any two source and target units
to select the appropriate hypothesis. Early SMT systems are
good examples of this as they use the alignment matrix between the source sentence and the translated part to direct
the decoding (Koehn 2009).
When it comes to NMT, the natural idea to explicitly
model the interaction is by extending the intrinsic representation to have the size S × T × H, dubbed Joint Representation, where S is the source sentence length, T is the target
sentence length and H is the hidden size. Despite that this
representation can ﬂexibly learn to encode various types of
interaction, it is inefﬁcient as it incurs high computation and
storage cost. A practical surrogate is the well-known attention mechanism (Vaswani et al. 2017). It mimics the desired

Background
Sequence-to-Sequence Learning

∗

Corresponding Author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Given a sentence pair (x, y), the NMT model learns to maximize its probability Pr(y|x), which is decomposed into the
8285

