The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Towards Better Forecasting by
Fusing Near and Distant Future Visions
Jiezhu Cheng,1,2 Kaizhu Huang,3,4 Zibin Zheng1,2
1

Sun Yat-sen University, School of Data and Computer Science, Guangzhou, China
Sun Yat-sen University, National Engineering Research Center of Digital Life, Guangzhou, China
3
Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University, Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Suzhou, China
4
Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Institute of Frontier Technologies, Hangzhou, China
chengjzh@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, kaizhu.huang@xjtlu.edu.cn, zibinzheng2@yeah.net
2

this case, the conditional expectation of the distribution can
be given as a function of the past values:

Abstract
Multivariate time series forecasting is an important yet challenging problem in machine learning. Most existing approaches only forecast the series value of one future moment, ignoring the interactions between predictions of future
moments with different temporal distance. Such a deﬁciency
probably prevents the model from getting enough information
about the future, thus limiting the forecasting accuracy. To address this problem, we propose Multi-Level Construal Neural
Network (MLCNN), a novel multi-task deep learning framework. Inspired by the Construal Level Theory of psychology,
this model aims to improve the predictive performance by
fusing forecasting information (i.e., future visions) of different future time. We ﬁrst use the Convolution Neural Network
to extract multi-level abstract representations of the raw data
for near and distant future predictions. We then model the
interplay between multiple predictive tasks and fuse their future visions through a modiﬁed Encoder-Decoder architecture. Finally, we combine traditional Autoregression model
with the neural network to solve the scale insensitive problem. Experiments on three real-world datasets show that our
method achieves statistically signiﬁcant improvements compared to the most state-of-the-art baseline methods, with average 4.59% reduction on RMSE metric and average 6.87%
reduction on MAE metric.

E[Xt+h |Xt , ..., Xt−p+1 ] = f (Xt , ..., Xt−p+1 ) .

(1)

For simplicity, we use Xt+h to represent the conditional
mean E[Xt+h |Xt , ..., Xt−p+1 ] in later descriptions.
Researchers have been studying the forecasting problem (1) for years, developing all kinds of linear, non-linear
and hybrid models for better predictions (Adhikari and
Agrawal 2013; Khashei and Bijari 2011). However, given
the past values, most of these models only estimate the conditional mean at the future moment Xt+h or in a continuous
future window {Xt+1 , ..., Xt+h }, using a single model architecture without considering the link between predictions
of different future moments. This drawback may limit the
models’ generalization ability, since only one kind of vision
about the future is obtained. Figure 1 shows three predictive tasks on Xt+h , Xt+h−i and Xt+h+i , where 0 < i < h.
Although they are performed based on the same past observations, different temporal distances from future observations give distinct future vision to each task. Current forecasting methods such as AR (Box and Jenkins 1970), AECRNN (Cirstea et al. 2018), DARNN (Qin et al. 2017) and
LSTNet (Lai et al. 2017) perform these tasks independently
with a single model architecture, ignoring the interplay between them. To our knowledge, there are few methods that
model the interactions between multiple predictive tasks and
fuse their future visions to improve the main task.
In this paper, we investigate whether the fusion of near
and distant future visions could improve the performance
of the main predictive task, as shown in Figure 1. Inspired
by the Construal Level Theory (CLT) (Liberman and Trope
1998) revealing that people use different levels of abstract
construals to predict future events, we propose a novel multitask deep learning framework called Multi-Level Construal
Neural Network (MLCNN) to perform multivariate time
series forecasting. It ﬁrst leverages a Convolution Neural
Network (CNN) (Lecun et al. 1998) to extract multi-level
feature abstractions from the raw time series and engages
them for multiple predictive tasks. Next, the extracted abstractions are fed into a shared Long Short-Term Memory
(LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997), which captures complex long-term dependencies of the time series and

Introduction
Multivariate time series consists of experimental data with
multiple variables observed at different points in time. They
occur everywhere in our daily life, from the energy consumption, the trafﬁc ﬂow, to the stock prices. In such ﬁelds,
effective decision often requires accurate prediction on relevant time series data. For example, knowing demand for
electricity in the next few hours could help us devise a better
energy use plan, and forecasting of stock market in the near
or distant future could produce more proﬁt.
Multivariate time series forecasting focuses on predicting
the future outcomes of each variable given their past. As it is
difﬁcult to estimate exact future values, it is generally considered that the future observations can be subject to a conditional probability distribution of the past observations. In
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3593

