The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Asymptotically Unambitious Artiﬁcial General Intelligence
Michael K. Cohen

Badri Vellambi

Marcus Hutter

Research School of Engineering Science
Oxford University
Oxford, UK OX1 3PJ
michael-k-cohen.com

Department of Computer Science
University of Cincinnati
Cincinnati, OH, USA 45219
badri.vellambi@uc.edu

Department of Computer Science
Australian National University
Canberra, ACT, Australia 2601
hutter1.net

A problem arises: if the RL agent manages to take over
the world (in the conventional sense), and ensure its continued dominance by neutralizing all intelligent threats to
it (read: people), it could intervene in the provision of its
own reward to achieve maximal reward for the rest of its
lifetime (Bostrom 2014; Taylor et al. 2016). “Reward hijacking” is just the correct way for a reward maximizer to behave
(Amodei et al. 2016). Insofar as the RL agent is able to maximize expected reward, (3) fails. One broader principle at work
is Goodhart’s Law: “Any observed statistical regularity [like
the correlation between reward and task-completion] will
tend to collapse once pressure is placed upon it for control
purposes.” (Goodhart 1984). Krakovna (2018) has compiled
an annotated bibliography of examples of artiﬁcial optimizers “hacking” their objective. An alternate way to understand
this expected behavior is Omohundro’s (2008) Instrumental
Convergence Thesis, which we summarize as follows: an
agent with a goal is likely to pursue “power,” a position from
which it is easier to achieve arbitrary goals.
To answer the failure mode of reward hijacking, we present
Boxed Myopic Artiﬁcial Intelligence (BoMAI), the ﬁrst RL
algorithm we are aware of which, in the limit, is indifferent
to gaining power in the outside world. The key features are
these: BoMAI maximizes reward episodically, it is run on a
computer which is placed in a sealed room with an operator,
and when the operator leaves the room, the episode ends.
We argue that our algorithm produces an AGI that, even if it
became omniscient, would continue to accomplish whatever
task we wanted, instead of hijacking its reward, eschewing its
task, and neutralizing threats to it, even if it saw clearly how
to do exactly that. We thereby defend reinforcement learning
as a path to AGI, despite the default, dangerous failure mode
of reward hijacking.
The intuition for why those features of BoMAI’s setup
render it unambitious is as follows:
• BoMAI only selects actions to maximize the reward for its
current episode.
• It cannot affect the outside world until the operator leaves
the room, ending the episode.
• By that time, rewards for the episode will have already
been given.
• So affecting the outside world in any particular way is
not “instrumentally useful” in maximizing current-episode

Abstract
General intelligence, the ability to solve arbitrary solvable
problems, is supposed by many to be artiﬁcially constructible.
Narrow intelligence, the ability to solve a given particularly
difﬁcult problem, has seen impressive recent development.
Notable examples include self-driving cars, Go engines, image classiﬁers, and translators. Artiﬁcial General Intelligence
(AGI) presents dangers that narrow intelligence does not: if
something smarter than us across every domain were indifferent to our concerns, it would be an existential threat to
humanity, just as we threaten many species despite no ill will.
Even the theory of how to maintain the alignment of an AGI’s
goals with our own has proven highly elusive. We present the
ﬁrst algorithm we are aware of for asymptotically unambitious
AGI, where “unambitiousness” includes not seeking arbitrary
power. Thus, we identify an exception to the Instrumental
Convergence Thesis, which is roughly that by default, an AGI
would seek power, including over us.

1

Introduction

The project of Artiﬁcial General Intelligence (AGI) is “to
make computers solve really difﬁcult problems” (Minsky
1961). Expanding on this, what we want from an AGI is a
system that (a) can solve any solvable task, and (b) can be
steered toward solving any particular one given some form
of input we provide.
One proposal for AGI is reinforcement learning (RL),
which works as follows:
(1) construct a “reward signal” meant to express our satisfaction with an artiﬁcial agent;
(2) design an algorithm which learns to pick actions that
maximize its expected reward, usually utilizing other
observations too; and
(3) ensure that solving the task we have in mind leads to
higher reward than can be attained otherwise.
As long as (3) holds, then insofar as the RL algorithm is able
to maximize expected reward, it deﬁnes an agent that satisﬁes
(a) and (b). This is why a sufﬁciently advanced RL agent,
well beyond the capabilities of current ones, could be called
an AGI. See Legg and Hutter (2007) for further discussion.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2467

