The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning to Deblur Face Images via Sketch Synthesis
Songnan Lin,1∗ Jiawei Zhang,2† Jinshan Pan,3 Yicun Liu,2
Yongtian Wang,1 Jing Chen,1† Jimmy Ren2
1

Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China, 2 SenseTime Research, Shenzhen, China
3
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
{linsongnan2015, wyt, chen74jing29}@bit.edu.cn, {zhjw1988, sdluran, yicunliu96, jimmy.sj.ren}@gmail.com

To estimate the blur kernels, most state-of-the-art methods (Cho and Lee 2009; Xu and Jia 2010; Krishnan, Tay, and
Fergus 2011; Xu, Zheng, and Jia 2013) either implicitly or
explicitly restore sharp edges from blurry images. Although
using the sharp edges is able to help motion blur estimation
for generic natural images, the sharp edges by these methods
consider only local edges rather than structural information
of a particular object class, which leads to less effectiveness
for the blurry face images as they contain scarce textures
(see Figure 1(c)).
In order to extract more reliable edges, Pan et al. (2014)
search similar exemplars from an external dataset and generate robust contours (Figure 1(k)) as the informative structures for kernel estimation. However, this method needs
manually labeled contours and the exemplar selection procedure is computationally inefﬁcient.
Recently, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
been developed for image deblurring and shown promising
results. Schuler et al. (2016) use a deep CNN to estimate
blur kernels. However, this method is less effective for the
large motion blur. Xu et al. (2018) and Pan et al. (2018)
use a deep CNN to predict local sharp edges from blurry
images for blur kernel estimation and employ the conventional deblurring algorithm (Pan et al. 2014) to estimate
blur kernels and latent images. These methods are effective for the images with rich textures but less effective for
the blurry face images with scarce textures (Figure 1(e)).
In addition, they use the iterative optimization framework
for kernel estimation and need non-blind deconvolution, e.g.
(Zoran and Weiss 2011), to restore the sharp images, which
makes them computationally expensive. Several algorithms
(Nah, Hyun Kim, and Mu Lee 2017; Kupyn et al. 2018;
Zhang et al. 2018; Tao et al. 2018) exploit the advantage of
high capacity of deep learning models and design end-to-end
trainable networks to restore the sharp images directly. However, these methods mainly rely on the large model capacity
and pay less attention to analyzing the adopted architectures,
which makes them less effective for face image deblurring
as shown in Figure 1(b) and (i).
To develop efﬁcient deep models for face image deblurring, Shen et al. (2018) directly concatenate face parsing results with blurry face images as the input of their network.
However, this method is limited by the face parsing results
as the face parsing and the image deblurring are handled sep-

Abstract
The success of existing face deblurring methods based on
deep neural networks is mainly due to the large model capacity. Few algorithms have been specially designed according to the domain knowledge of face images and the physical
properties of the deblurring process. In this paper, we propose
an effective face deblurring algorithm based on deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs). Motivated by the conventional deblurring process which usually involves the motion
blur estimation and the latent clear image restoration, the proposed algorithm ﬁrst estimates motion blur by a deep CNN
and then restores latent clear images with the estimated motion blur. However, estimating motion blur from blurry face
images is difﬁcult as the textures of the blurry face images
are scarce. As most face images share some common global
structures which can be modeled well by sketch information,
we propose to learn face sketches by a deep CNN so that the
sketches can help the motion blur estimation. With the estimated motion blur, we then develop an effective latent image
restoration algorithm based on a deep CNN. Although involving the several components, the proposed algorithm is trained
in an end-to-end fashion. We analyze the effectiveness of each
component on face image deblurring and show that the proposed algorithm is able to deblur face images with favorable
performance against state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Single-image motion deblurring has long been an active research topic in computer vision and image processing. It
aims to recover a latent clear image and the corresponding blur kernel from a single blurred input which is usually
caused by camera shake or object motion. The blurring process is usually modeled as a convolution when the blur is
spatially invariant:
y = k ∗ x + n,

(1)

where y, x, k, n denote blurred image, latent image, blur kernel and noise, respectively; ∗ denotes the convolution operator.
∗
This work was done when Songnan Lin was an intern at SenseTime.
†
Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11523

