The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

EPOC: Efﬁcient Perception via Optimal Communication
Masoumeh Heidari Kapourchali, Bonny Banerjee
Institute for Intelligent Systems, and Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Memphis
Memphis, TN 38152, USA
{mhdrkprc, bbnerjee}@memphis.edu
interactions (Han et al. 2018). Not all agents are equally informative in a situation (Kapourchali and Banerjee 2018a).
Communication with a less-informative agent increases cost
and might reduce the agent’s conﬁdence and accuracy.
Partially-observable
Markov
decision
processes
(POMDPs) have been widely used to learn a state-to-action
mapping, referred to as policy, which requires a reward function dependent on the agent’s goal. Predictive coding is a
more general framework for modeling an agent, with no explicit reward function (Friston, Daunizeau, and Kiebel 2009;
Banerjee and Dutta 2014). We propose an agent model in
the predictive coding framework with a uniﬁed objective
– minimization of variational free energy (VFE) – for
inference, learning, and action. Using the same objective,
our agent learns a communication policy as a mapping from
its belief state to with whom to communicate.
Human activity recognition from multimodal, multisource and heterogeneous sensor data is used as a testbed
to evaluate the proposed model. To test the model for larger
number of agents, we use Kinect skeleton data from UTDMHAD (Chen, Jafari, and Kehtarnavaz 2015) and KARD
(Gaglio, Re, and Morana 2015) datasets where each joint in
the skeleton is monitored by an agent. The learned policy
is compared to a myopic policy as well as a decision-level
fusion method where all agents send their messages to a central node. When all agents send reliable messages, an ofﬂine
and myopic approach performs as good as the learned policy. However, when the probability of failure of each agent
increases, online decision-making using the learned policy
maintains the same accuracy by increasing the number of
communications. If agents’ behaviors change over time, the
policy adapts to select other agents for communication.
The model is also applied to activity recognition from mutimodal UTD-MHAD dataset (Kinect skeleton, inertial and
depth video). Each sensor is assumed to be monitored by an
agent. A policy is learned for each activity class. Communication enhanced efﬁciency by using a subset of observations.
The estimation accuracy is comparable to the state-of-the-art
even though our model uses signiﬁcantly fewer parameters
and infers the state in a localized manner (i.e. it communicates neither with a central/global controller nor with all the
agents all the time).
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Sec. II introduces the necessary concepts. The problem statement and
proposed model are described in Sec. III and IV, respectively. The experimental results are discussed in Sec. V. A
brief literature review is provided in Sec. VI.

Abstract
We propose an agent model capable of actively and selectively communicating with other agents to predict its environmental state efﬁciently. Selecting whom to communicate
with is a challenge when the internal model of other agents is
unobservable. Our agent learns a communication policy as a
mapping from its belief state to with whom to communicate
in an online and unsupervised manner, without any reinforcement. Human activity recognition from multimodal, multisource and heterogeneous sensor data is used as a testbed to
evaluate the proposed model where each sensor is assumed
to be monitored by an agent. The recognition accuracy on
benchmark datasets is comparable to the state-of-the-art even
though our model uses signiﬁcantly fewer parameters and infers the state in a localized manner. The learned policy reduces number of communications. The agent is tolerant to
communication failures and can recognize unreliable agents
through their communication messages. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work on learning communication
policies by an agent for predicting its environmental state.

I. Introduction
This paper investigates how an agent can optimally use other
agents for predicting the state of its environment. The assumption is that, interacting agents might have distinct goals
but can still beneﬁt from each other’s knowledge. We propose an agent model that learns to communicate selectively
with other agents to predict its environmental state.1
We model communication as active perception (Bajcsy,
Aloimonos, and Tsotsos 2018). This allows an agent to actively and selectively sample (or communicate with) other
agents. Communication makes causal knowledge acquistion
efﬁcient by allowing to: (1) share causal knowledge regarding the same event even though the observations are from
different sensors in space, time or modality, and (2) acquire
high-level causal knowledge directly from another agent instead of from the low-level sensory environment. Hence,
communication by an agent is inevitable for predicting its
environmental state efﬁciently.
Learning with whom to communicate is crucial. Full communication does not scale well with the number of agents
(Hoshen 2017). Predeﬁned protocols cannot adapt to environmental changes or capture dynamic changes in agents’
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Analysis of the properties of multiagent interaction to achieve
a common goal using our proposed model, albeit interesting, is beyond the scope of this paper.
4107

