The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning Feature Interactions with Lorentzian Factorization Machine
Canran Xu,1∗ Ming Wu2∗†
1

2

eBay Inc.
Department of Electrical Engineering, Tongji University, China
canxu@ebay.com, 1730683@tongji.edu.cn

expressive enough for spurious or implicit feature interactions. Therefore, higher-order factorization machine (Blondel et al. 2016) is proposed to learn higher-order feature interactions efﬁciently. On the other hand, deep learning based
approaches have successfully enhanced the performance signiﬁcantly because sophisticated feature interactions can be
captured. Besides, another merit of the deep learning methods is that they can reduce human efforts in feature engineering. To name a few, DeepFM (Guo et al. 2017) integrates the
deep neural networks on top of the factorization machine,
and the Deep & Cross neural network (DCN) (Wang et al.
2017) takes outer product of features at the element wise
and vector wise level such that higher order feature interactions can be learned in an automatic and explicit fashion. In
DCN, the order of interactions is determined by the number
of multi-layer perceptron (MLP) layers. However, by using
multiple layers of MLPs it is inefﬁcient to learn multiplicative feature interactions. Therefore, in xDeepFM (Lian et al.
2018) it is proposed to use convolution neural network to
replace MLP.

Abstract
Learning representations for feature interactions to model
user behaviors is critical for recommendation system and
click-trough rate (CTR) predictions. Recent advances in this
area are empowered by deep learning methods which could
learn sophisticated feature interactions and achieve the stateof-the-art result in an end-to-end manner. These approaches
require large number of training parameters integrated with
the low-level representations, and thus are memory and computational inefﬁcient. In this paper, we propose a new model
named “LorentzFM” that can learn feature interactions embedded in a hyperbolic space in which the violation of triangle inequality for Lorentz distances is available. To this end,
the learned representation is beneﬁted by the peculiar geometric properties of hyperbolic triangles, and result in a signiﬁcant reduction in the number of parameters (20% to 80%)
because all the top deep learning layers are not required. With
such a lightweight architecture, LorentzFM achieves comparable and even materially better results than the deep learning
methods such as DeepFM, xDeepFM and Deep & Cross in
both recommendation and CTR prediction tasks.

In this paper, we re-examine the building block for these
models: the inner product between feature representations.
To this end, we propose to learn the low-dimensional representations in a hyperbolic geometry equipped with Lorentz
distance, such that the triangle inequality for feature vectors could be violated. Our work is inspired by the work
on collaborative metric learning (CML) (Hsieh et al. 2017),
where the inner product is replaced by the distance between
feature vectors, but following a completely different path.
As opposed to the work of CML, in which the authors argue that triangle inequality in a Euclidean space should be
strictly obeyed, we propose to take advantage of the sign of
the triangle inequality. Speciﬁcally, we construct our score
function for feature interactions not by the inner product or
distance between feature vectors, but by examining the triangle formed by them in a hyperbolic space. This reason for
our approach is two-folded: (1) a hyperbolic space is intrinsically a lot more capacious than the Euclidean space; (2)
the proposed score function will provide a robust objective
function to learn ﬁne-grained feature interactions. As a result, the embedding learned by this score function are therefore ready to use directly, just as the vanilla factorization ma-

Introduction
Recommendation system and ads click-trough rate (CTR)
prediction both have profound impact on web-scale big data,
and have been received a lot of attention in both academia
and industrial community. In these systems, the critical
problem is to predict the probability of clicks, which will
be used to rank the candidate items or ads.
These problems have been successfully tackled by supervised learning methods, in which user proﬁles and item attributes are used as input features. The challenge is that,
the data for web-scale recommendation systems is mostly
discrete and categorical, resulting in an extreme large and
sparse feature space to optimize. Feature sparsity of this kind
is commonly handled by constructing feature interactions
which are modeled by inner product of their low dimensional representations. In this so-called factorization machine model (Rendle 2010), the naive inner product is not
∗

Equal contribution.
Work done during internship at eBay Inc.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

6470

