The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Parsing as Pretraining
David Vilares,1 Michalina Strzyz,1 Anders Søgaard,2,3 Carlos Gómez-Rodrı́guez1
1

Universidade da Coruña, CITIC, Ciencias de la Computación y Tecnologı́as de la Información (CC&TI), A Coruña, Spain
2
University of Copenhagen, Department of Computer Science, Copenhagen, Denmark
3
Google Research, Berlin, Germany
{david.vilares, michalina.strzyz, carlos.gomez}@udc.es, soegaard@di.ku.dk

In parsing, two research paths have arisen with respect to
word vectors: (i) whether and to what extent pretraining architectures can offer help creating parsers which avoid the
need for dozens of hand-crafted structural features, ad-hoc
parsing algorithms, or task-speciﬁc decoders; and (ii) how
to explain what sort of syntactic phenomena are encoded in
such pretraining encoders. In related work, to test (i) it is
common to rely on ablation studies to estimate the impact of
removing features, or to further contextualize word embeddings with powerful, task-speciﬁc neural networks to show
that richer linguistic contextualization translates into better
performance. But to the best of our knowledge, there is no
work that has tried to do (full) parsing relying uniquely on
word embeddings, i.e. no features beyond words, no parsing
algorithms, and no task-speciﬁc decoders. To test (ii), the
most common probing framework consists in using models with limited expression (e.g. feed-forward networks on
top of the word vectors) to solve tasks that can give us insights about the linguistic information that word vectors can
encode (Tenney et al. 2018). However, these recent studies
do not provide results on full parsing setups, but instead on
simpliﬁed versions, which sometimes are even limited to analyzing capabilities on speciﬁc syntactic phenomena.

Abstract
Recent analyses suggest that encoders pretrained for language modeling capture certain morpho-syntactic structure.
However, probing frameworks for word vectors still do not report results on standard setups such as constituent and dependency parsing. This paper addresses this problem and does
full parsing (on English) relying only on pretraining architectures – and no decoding. We ﬁrst cast constituent and dependency parsing as sequence tagging. We then use a single
feed-forward layer to directly map word vectors to labels that
encode a linearized tree. This is used to: (i) see how far we can
reach on syntax modelling with just pretrained encoders, and
(ii) shed some light about the syntax-sensitivity of different
word vectors (by freezing the weights of the pretraining network during training). For evaluation, we use bracketing F1score and LAS, and analyze in-depth differences across representations for span lengths and dependency displacements.
The overall results surpass existing sequence tagging parsers
on the PTB (93.5%) and end-to-end EN - EWT UD (78.8%).

Introduction
Traditionally, natural language processing (NLP) models
represented input sentences using one-hot vectors, together
with weighting schemes such as TF - IDF. Such vectors can
encode shallow linguistic information, like term frequency
or local context if n-grams are allowed. However, they cannot capture complex linguistic structure due to the inability
to consider non-local context, their orderless nature, and the
curse of dimensionality.
This paradigm has however become obsolete for many
NLP tasks in favour of continuous vector representations,
also known as word embeddings. The idea is to encode
words as low-dimensional vectors (v ∈ Rn ), under the
premise that words with similar context should have similar vectors – which seemingly better capture semantic and
morpho-syntactic information. In practice, these architectures have been widely adopted because they have not only
made it possible to obtain more accurate models but also
conceptually simpler ones, reducing the number of features
required to obtain state-of-the-art results.

Contribution In this paper, we try to give an answer to
these questions using a uniﬁed framework. Our approach
consists in casting both (full) constituent and dependency
parsing as pretraining from language modelling.1 To do so,
we ﬁrst reduce constituent and dependency parsing to sequence labeling. Then, under this paradigm we can directly
map, through a single feed-forward layer, a sequence of
word embeddings of length n into an output sequence (also
of length n) that encodes a linearized tree. The novelty of
the paper is twofold: (i) we explore to what extent it is possible to do parsing relying only on pretrained encoders, (ii)
we shed light on the syntactic abilities of existing encoders.

Related work
We now review previous work on the two research directions
that we will be exploring in our paper.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

9114

In this paper, we limit our analysis to English.

