The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Hierarchical Attention Network with
Pairwise Loss for Chinese Zero Pronoun Resolution
Peiqin Lin,1 Meng Yang1,2∗
1

2

School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing (SYSU), Ministry of Education
linpq3@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, yangm6@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract

>䆖ᯩ@ᘰ⯁䘉ᱟа䎧唁ᷚṸԦˈ SUR ሶ
ᷚỠ઼ⳞवӔ䘱ᐲ䟼 SUR ԕ␵⨶ṸᛵǄ

Recent neural network methods for Chinese zero pronoun
resolution didn’t take bidirectional attention between zero
pronouns and candidate antecedents into consideration, and
simply treated the task as a classiﬁcation task, ignoring the
relationship between different candidates of a zero pronoun.
To solve these problems, we propose a Hierarchical Attention Network with Pairwise Loss (HAN-PL), for Chinese zero
pronoun resolution. In the proposed HAN-PL, we design a
two-layer attention model to generate more powerful representations for zero pronouns and candidate antecedents. Furthermore, we propose a novel pairwise loss by introducing
the correct-antecedent similarity constraint and the pairwisemargin loss, making the learned model more discriminative.
Extensive experiments have been conducted on OntoNotes
5.0 dataset, and our model achieves state-of-the-art performance in the task of Chinese zero pronoun resolution.

>7KHSROLFH@VXVSHFWHGWKDWWKLVLVDFULPLQDOFDVH
DERXWLOOHJDOJXQV SUR EURXJKWWKHJXQVDQG
EDJVWRWKHFLW\ SUR WRGHDOZLWKWKHFDVH
Figure 1: An example of zero pronoun phenomenon. Zero
pronouns are denoted as “*pro*”.
(Zhao and Ng 2007; Kong and Zhou 2010; Chen and Ng
2013; 2014; 2015). (Zhao and Ng 2007) investigated a series
of syntactic features based on parse trees to locate and resolve zero anaphoras. Based on (Zhao and Ng 2007), (Chen
and Ng 2013) further introduced lexical features and coreference links between zero pronouns. Despite the effectiveness
of feature engineering, it is labor intensive and highly relies
on annotated corpus.
Due to the powerful ability of deep learning, (Chen and
Ng 2016) was the ﬁrst to apply a deep neural network for
the task. Then (Liu et al. 2016) produced pseudo dataset
and adopted a pre-training-then-adaptation method; (Yin et
al. 2017) introduced a memory-based network to choose the
correct antecedent for the speciﬁc zero pronoun. To capture
more information, (Yin et al. 2016) encoded both local information and global information for candidates; (Yin et al.
2018a) integrated local and global decision-making by exploiting deep reinforcement learning models. In addition,
self-attention mechanism has also been introduced for encoding zero pronouns and the attention-based recurrent neural network was applied for encoding candidate antecedents
by their content (Yin et al. 2018b). However, these methods either did not consider any interaction between zero
pronouns and candidate antecedents (Chen and Ng 2016;
Yin et al. 2018a) or just employed unidirectional attention
from the representations of zero pronouns to those of candidate antecedents (Liu et al. 2016; Yin et al. 2018b), weakening the representation ability of the learned features. Moreover, these methods simply formulate the resolution task as
a classiﬁcation task (e.g., whether a candidate is the an-

Introduction
Zero pronoun, as a special linguistic phenomenon in prodropped languages, is pervasive in Chinese documents
(Zhao and Ng 2007). A zero pronoun is a gap in the sentence,
which refers to the component that is omitted because of the
coherence of language. As Figure 1 is shown, a zero pronoun can be an anaphoric zero pronoun (AZP) if it corefers
to one or more mentions in the associated text, which is usually represented by a coreference chain, or a non-anaphoric
one if there are no such mentions. In this example, ∗pro∗1 is
anaphoric and corefers to the mention “The police”, while
∗pro∗2 is non-anaphoric. These mentions for interpreting
zero pronouns are called the antecedents. How to correctly
resolve AZP is a challenging topic in semantic understanding and has attracted much attention.
Early approaches employed rule-based methods to resolve Chinese zero pronoun resolution (Converse and
Palmer 2006; Yeh and Chen 2007). After that, some traditional machine learning models with hand-crafted features, including supervised approaches and unsupervised approaches, were extensively employed to solve the problem
∗

Corresponding Author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8352

