The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Exploratory Combinatorial Optimization with Reinforcement Learning
Thomas D. Barrett,1 William R. Clements,2 Jakob N. Foerster,3 A. I. Lvovsky1,4
1

University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
2
indust.ai, Paris, France
3
Facebook AI Research
4
Russian Quantum Center, Moscow, Russia
{thomas.barrett, alex.lvovsky}@physics.ox.ac.uk william.clements@indust.ai, jnf@fb.com
et al. 2017) and their simulated counterparts (Kirkpatrick,
Gelatt, and Vecchi 1983; Clements et al. 2017; Tiunov,
Ulanov, and Lvovsky 2019). However, the effectiveness
of general algorithms is dependent on the problem being
considered, and high levels of performance often require
extensive tailoring and domain-speciﬁc knowledge. Machine learning offers a route to addressing these challenges,
which led to the demonstration of a meta-algorithm, S2VDQN (Khalil et al. 2017), that utilises reinforcement learning (RL) and a deep graph network to automatically learn
good heuristics for various combinatorial problems.
A solution to a combinatorial problem deﬁned on a graph
consists of a subset of vertices that satisﬁes the desired optimality criteria. Approaches following S2V-DQN’s framework incrementally construct solutions one element at a time
– reducing the problem to predicting the value of adding any
vertex not currently in the solution to this subset. However,
due to the inherent complexity of many combinatorial problems, learning a policy that directly produces a single, optimal solution is often impractical, as evidenced by the suboptimal performance of such approaches. Instead, we propose that a natural reformulation is for the agent to explore
the solution space at test time, rather than producing only
a single “best-guess”. Concretely, this means the agent can
add or remove vertices from the solution subset and is tasked
with searching for ever-improving solutions at test time. In
this work we present ECO-DQN (Exploratory Combinatorial Optimization DQN), a framework combining RL and
deep graph networks to realise this approach.
Our experimental work considers the Maximum Cut
(Max-Cut) problem as it is a fundamental combinatorial
challenge – in fact over half of the 21 NP-complete problems
enumerated in Karp’s seminal work (Karp 1972) can be reduced to Max-Cut – with numerous real-world applications.
The framework we propose can, however, be readily applied
to any graph-based combinatorial problem where solutions
correspond to a subset of vertices and the goal is to optimize
some objective function.
By comparing ECO-DQN to S2V-DQN as a baseline, we
demonstrate that our approach improves on the state-of-theart for applying RL to the Max-Cut problem. Suitable ablations show that this performance gap is dependent on both
allowing the agent to reverse its earlier decisions and providing suitable information and rewards to exploit this free-

Abstract
Many real-world problems can be reduced to combinatorial
optimization on a graph, where the subset or ordering of vertices that maximize some objective function must be found.
With such tasks often NP-hard and analytically intractable,
reinforcement learning (RL) has shown promise as a framework with which efﬁcient heuristic methods to tackle these
problems can be learned. Previous works construct the solution subset incrementally, adding one element at a time,
however, the irreversible nature of this approach prevents the
agent from revising its earlier decisions, which may be necessary given the complexity of the optimization task. We instead propose that the agent should seek to continuously improve the solution by learning to explore at test time. Our
approach of exploratory combinatorial optimization (ECODQN) is, in principle, applicable to any combinatorial problem that can be deﬁned on a graph. Experimentally, we show
our method to produce state-of-the-art RL performance on
the Maximum Cut problem. Moreover, because ECO-DQN
can start from any arbitrary conﬁguration, it can be combined
with other search methods to further improve performance,
which we demonstrate using a simple random search.

1

Introduction

NP-hard combinatorial problems – such as Travelling Salesman (Papadimitriou 1977), Minimum Vertex Cover (Dinur
and Safra 2005) and Maximum Cut (Goemans and
Williamson 1995) – are canonical challenges in computer
science. With practical applications ranging from fundamental science to industry, efﬁcient methods for approaching
combinatorial optimization are of great interest. However, as
no known algorithms are able to solve NP-hard problems in
polynomial time, exact methods rapidly become intractable.
Approximation algorithms guarantee a worst-case solution
quality, but sufﬁciently strong bounds may not exist and,
even if they do, these algorithms can have limited scalability (Williamson and Shmoys 2011). Instead, heuristics are
often deployed that, despite offering no theoretical guarantees, are chosen for high performance.
There are numerous heuristic methods, ranging from
search-based (Benlic and Hao 2013; Banks, Vincent, and
Anyakoha 2008) to physical systems that utilise both quantum and classical effects (Johnson et al. 2011; Yamamoto
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3243

