The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Correcting Predictions for Approximate Bayesian Inference
Tomasz Kuśmierczyk, Joseph Sakaya, Arto Klami
Helsinki Institute for Information Technology HIIT
Department of Computer Science, University of Helsinki
{tomasz.kusmierczyk, joseph.sakaya, arto.klami}@helsinki.ﬁ

Abstract

q-optimal
p-optimal p(y)

Bayesian models quantify uncertainty and facilitate optimal
decision-making in downstream applications. For most models, however, practitioners are forced to use approximate inference techniques that lead to sub-optimal decisions due to
incorrect posterior predictive distributions. We present a novel
approach that corrects for inaccuracies in posterior inference
by altering the decision-making process. We train a separate
model to make optimal decisions under the approximate posterior, combining interpretable Bayesian modeling with optimization of direct predictive accuracy in a principled fashion. The solution is generally applicable as a plug-in module
for predictive decision-making for arbitrary probabilistic programs, irrespective of the posterior inference strategy. We
demonstrate the approach empirically in several problems,
conﬁrming its potential.

1

q(y)

y
Quantiles
Bayesian
Model

Decision
Maker
Decision

Figure 1: Bayesian decision theory gives a closed-form analytic rule for making optimal decisions for a given loss, based
on the posterior predictive distribution (red). If the same decision rule is used for approximate predictive distribution
(blue) based on approximate inference strategy, the numerical decision may be badly off as indicated by the gap ε.
Our approach learns to correct for this mistake, by replacing
the theory-based decisions with parametric decision-making
module – a neural network – that maps quantiles of the incorrect predictive distribution into optimal decisions.

Introduction

Bayesian inference provides the fundamental basis for modeling uncertainty. The posterior distribution p(θ|D) provides a complete summary of what is known about the parameters θ of a model p(y, θ) given some observed data
D = {(xn , yn )}N
n=1 . In particular, the posterior is necessary and sufﬁcient information for making optimal decisions
under uncertainty (Berger 1985).
For predictive models p(y|x) (conditioning on D is assumed implicitly), such as regression or classiﬁcation, the
decisions correspond to committing to individual decision h
that minimizes the risk R, the expectation of a loss (y, h)
over the uncertainty in the model parameters. For example,
to minimize the squared loss we shouldcommit to the mean
of the predictive distribution p(y|x) = p(y|x, θ)p(θ|D)dθ,
whereas for a loss that penalizes for overestimation of the
true value the optimal decision is a suitably chosen lower
quantile of the predictive distribution. For many losses the
Bayes optimal decision is a simple statistic of the predictive
distribution (Table 1).
Unfortunately, the decisions obtained by minimizing the
risk are optimal only if we have access to the true posterior
p(θ|D). For most models we can only obtain an approximation q(θ) ≈ p(θ|D). The almost universally adopted practice
is to plug in the approximation in lieu of the posterior in

the predictive distribution and proceed as though the result
was the true predictive distribution. Even though this works
relatively well for good approximations (e.g., well-converged
Markov Chain Monte Carlo sampler), it may fail miserably
for bad approximations. Furthermore, even for good approximations it would make sense to account for common biases; e.g., mean-ﬁeld variational approximations are known
to underestimate the posterior variation and hence also the
variation in the predictive distribution (Blei, Kucukelbir, and
McAuliffe 2017). Consequently, using decision rules optimal
for the true posterior will have systematic bias as well.
Even though the problem persists in virtually all use of approximate Bayesian inference in decision-making problems,
the literature addressing the issue is limited. The best examples build on the concept of loss-calibrated inference. Originally proposed in the context of variational approximation
by Lacoste-Julien, Huszár, and Ghahramani (2011), the core
idea is to account for the eventual decision problem (charac-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4511

