The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

EC-GAN: Inferring Brain Effective
Connectivity via Generative Adversarial Networks
Jinduo Liu,1 Junzhong Ji,1∗ Guangxu Xun,2 Liuyi Yao,3 Mengdi Huai,2 Aidong Zhang2
1

Beijing Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Intelligent Software Technology, Beijing Artiﬁcial Intelligence Institute,
Faculty of Information Technology, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing 100124, China
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia 22904, USA
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, SUNY at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York 14260, USA
1
liujinduo0607@emails.bjut.edu.cn, jjz01@bjut.edu.cn, 2 {gx5bt, mh6ck, aidong}@virginia.edu, 3 liuyiyao@buffalo.edu
structing a directed graph structure from neuroimaging data,
e.g., functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data.
In other words, a brain effective connectivity network is
a causal graph (directed graph) where nodes denote brain
regions, the directed arcs denote effective connectivity between brain regions.

Abstract
Inferring effective connectivity between different brain regions from functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
data is an important advanced study in neuroinformatics in
recent years. However, current methods have limited usage in
effective connectivity studies due to the high noise and small
sample size of fMRI data. In this paper, we propose a novel
framework for inferring effective connectivity based on generative adversarial networks (GAN), named as EC-GAN. The
proposed framework EC-GAN infers effective connectivity
via an adversarial process, in which we simultaneously train
two models: a generator and a discriminator. The generator
consists of a set of effective connectivity generators based on
structural equation models which can generate the fMRI time
series of each brain region via effective connectivity. Meanwhile, the discriminator is employed to distinguish between
the joint distributions of the real and generated fMRI time
series. Experimental results on simulated data show that ECGAN can better infer effective connectivity compared to other
state-of-the-art methods. The real-world experiments indicate
that EC-GAN can provide a new and reliable perspective analyzing the effective connectivity of fMRI data.

In the last decade, there has been a growing interest in the
use of machine learning and data mining methods for brain
effective connectivity network construction (Shimizu et al.
2006; Seth, Barrett, and Barnett 2015; Wang et al. 2017;
Sanchez-Romero et al. 2019a; Liu et al. 2019). However,
these methods have their own limitations and cannot accurately infer effective connectivity in some cases due to the
characteristic of fMRI data (Smith et al. 2011). For instance,
Linear non-Gaussian acyclic model (LiNGAM) uses temporal Independent component analysis (ICA) to infer effective
connectivity from data. However, ICA requires a large number of data points, so it performs poorly when the fMRI data
sample is small (Shimizu et al. 2006). Besides, LiNGAM
also needs some prior assumptions on data generation and
data disturbance. Granger causality (GC) methods infer effective connectivity in fMRI time series by the multiple regression of time-indexed variables on lagged values of variables and require the time series to be wide-sense stationary
and have a zero mean (Seth, Barrett, and Barnett 2015).
Bayesian network (BN) methods search for effective connectivity under the assumption that the true effective connectivity network forms a directed acyclic graph (DAG), which
entails that there are no cycles in the networks. Because
BN is represented by a DAG, it is not possible to model
cyclic or bidirectional connections of the effective connectivity network with a BN method (Ramsey et al. 2010; Smith
et al. 2011; Meek 2013; Liu et al. 2016; Zhou et al. 2016;
Liu et al. 2019). Thus according to the related works, cyclic
or bidirectional structure, non-stationary information, and
small samples are the main factors that affect the performance of current methods. Therefore, it is necessary to develop novel methods for inferring effective connectivity networks from fMRI time series data, which can overcome the
above problems.

Introduction
Brain effective connectivity (EC), deﬁned as the neural inﬂuence that one brain region exerts over another (Friston
1994), is important for the assessment of normal brain function (Hein et al. 2016), and its impairment is associated with
neurodegenerative diseases, e.g., Alzheimer’s disease (AD)
(Rytsar et al. 2011). Naturally, inferring brain effective connectivity can be considered as a problem of searching or constructing a directed graph structure (causal discovery) in the
human brain. Due to the critical impact on brain research
and disease diagnosis, the study of brain EC networks has
become a frontier subject.
Machine learning and data mining methods have enormous potential in effective connectivity network construction, because effective connectivity network construction is
similar to graph construction. More precisely, inferring effective connectivity can be represented as a problem of con∗

Corresponding Author (jjz01@bjut.edu.cn).
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Recently, generative adversarial networks (GANs)
(Goodfellow et al. 2014) have demonstrated impres4852

