The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Further Understanding Videos through Adverbs: A New Video Task
Bo Pang, Kaiwen Zha, Yifan Zhang, Cewu Lu∗
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{pangbo, kevin zha, zhangyf sjtu, lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Video understanding is a research hotspot of computer vision and signiﬁcant progress has been made on video action recognition recently. However, the semantics information contained in actions is not rich enough to build powerful
video understanding models. This paper ﬁrst introduces a new
video semantics: the Behavior Adverb (BA), which is a more
expressive and difﬁcult one covering subtle and inherent characteristics of human action behavior. To exhaustively decode
this semantics, we construct the Videos with Action and Adverb Dataset (VAAD), which is a large-scale dataset with a semantically complete set of BAs. The dataset will be released
to the public with this paper. We benchmark several representative video understanding methods (originally for action
recognition) on BA and action recognition. The results show
that BA recognition task is more challenging than conventional action recognition. Accordingly, we propose the BA
Understanding Network (BAUN) to solve this problem and
the experiments reveal that our BAUN is more suitable for
BA recognition (11% better than I3D). Furthermore, we ﬁnd
these two semantics (action and BA) can propel each other
forward to better performance: promoting action recognition
results by 3.4% averagely on three standard action recognition datasets (UCF-101, HMDB-51, Kinetics).

VDGO\
VORZO\

KDSSLO\
FRPIRUWDEO\

5XQ

IDVW
DQ[LRXVO\

FDUHIXOO\
VORZO\

6ZRUG
([HUFLVH

H[SHUWO\
SURPSWO\
FDUHIXOO\

VROHPQO\
H[SHUWO\
VHULRXVO\

6PRNH

Figure 1: BA examples. As a rich video semantics, BA can
describe the mood, attitude and action attributes. Note that
each BA presents diverse patterns on different actions.

action, as well as the attitude and mood of the subject. From
the viewpoint of language research (White 1991), these concepts convey more sensitive semantics compared with nouns
and verbs, making them a suitable choice for developing
video understanding models! Motivated by these, we propose a new task: BA recognition (Fig. 1).
Note that the BA recognition task is different from ﬁnegrained actions task. Compared to ﬁne-grained action categories, BA categories own different feature space. For example, Latin dance can be ﬁnely categorized into Rumba, Chacha and so on, which requires the model to extract subtle
dance features, but still action-related features. But for BA,
the model needs to distinguish “professionally” and “amateurishly”, “happily” and “sadly”, which requires the model
to understand the video meticulously and capture relatively
action-irrelevant features since the same BA may present diverse movement patterns in different actions.
To dissect this new video semantics, we build a new
benchmark: Videos with Action and Adverb Dataset
(VAAD), containing 150k video clips, covering 2K actionadverb pairs (e.g., “smoking sadly”) over 200 action categories described by 51 adverb categories, where three types
of BA that can respectively describe the subject’s mood,
attitude and action attributes (e.g., “quietly” and “easily”)
are included. We highlight three features of VAAD. Firstly,

Introduction
Recognizing semantic labels in visual data is an essential
computer vision task. It is worth noting that these semantic
labels are part of our language system – we can use language to describe these semantics. For example, object detection/recognition (Ren et al. 2015; Redmon and Farhadi
2016) can be considered as exploiting “noun” in visual data.
To understand “verb”, action recognition (Donahue et al.
2015; Wu et al. 2015; Srivastava, Mansimov, and Salakhudinov 2015; Yue-Hei Ng et al. 2015; Karpathy et al. 2014;
Ji et al. 2013) has been extensively studied. Moreover, “adjective” labels (e.g., cool, dark, beautiful) can be explored
through attribute learning (Petrosino and Gold 2010). But till
now, few works have focused on an important kind of words
— “Adverb”, which can properly express the attributes of
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11823

