The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Path Ranking with Attention to Type Hierarchies
Weiyu Liu, Angel Daruna, Zsolt Kira, Sonia Chernova
Institute for Robotics and Intelligent Machines
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia
{wliu88, adaruna3, zkira}@gatech.edu, chernova@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract
The objective of the knowledge base completion problem is
to infer missing information from existing facts in a knowledge base. Prior work has demonstrated the effectiveness of
path-ranking based methods, which solve the problem by discovering observable patterns in knowledge graphs, consisting of nodes representing entities and edges representing relations. However, these patterns either lack accuracy because
they rely solely on relations or cannot easily generalize due to
the direct use of speciﬁc entity information. We introduce Attentive Path Ranking, a novel path pattern representation that
leverages type hierarchies of entities to both avoid ambiguity
and maintain generalization. Then, we present an end-to-end
trained attention-based RNN model to discover the new path
patterns from data. Experiments conducted on benchmark
knowledge base completion datasets WN18RR and FB15k237 demonstrate that the proposed model outperforms existing methods on the fact prediction task by statistically signiﬁcant margins of 26% and 10%, respectively. Furthermore,
quantitative and qualitative analyses show that the path patterns balance between generalization and discrimination.

Introduction
Knowledge bases (KBs), such as WordNet (Miller 1995)
and Freebase (Bollacker et al. 2008), have been used
to provide background knowledge for tasks such as
recommendation (Wang et al. 2018), and visual question answering (Aditya, Yang, and Baral 2018). Such
KBs typically contain facts stored in the form of
(source entity, relation, target entity) triples, such as
(F ork, in, Kitchen). Combined, the dataset of triples is often represented as a graph, consisting of nodes representing
entities and edges representing relations. Many KBs also
contain type information for entities, which can be represented as type hierarchies by ordering each entity’s types
based on levels of abstraction.
Despite containing millions of facts, existing KBs still
have a large amount of missing information (Min et al.
2013). As a result, robustly reasoning about missing information is important not only for improving the quality of
KBs, but also for providing more reliable information for

Figure 1: Paths and type hierarchies of a known triple and
two missing triples. Our proposed method, Attentive Path
Ranking, can correctly predict both missing triples by using
attention to select types at appropriate levels of abstraction.
applications relying on the contained data. The objective of
the knowledge base completion problem is to infer missing
information from existing facts in KBs. More speciﬁcally,
fact prediction is the problem of predicting whether a missing triple is true.
Prior work on fact prediction has demonstrated the effectiveness of path-ranking based methods (Lao, Mitchell,
and Cohen 2011; Gardner and Mitchell 2015; Neelakantan, Roth, and McCallum 2015; Das et al. 2016), which
solve the knowledge base completion problem by discovering observable patterns in knowledge graphs. A foundational approach in this area is the Path Ranking Algorithm (PRA) (Lao, Mitchell, and Cohen 2011), which

Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2893

