The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Deep Poetry: A Chinese Classical Poetry Generation System
Yusen Liu,∗ Dayiheng Liu,∗ Jiancheng Lv†
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University
24 Yihuan Road
Chengdu 610065, China
{liuyusen96, losinuris}@gmail.com, lvjiancheng@scu.edu.cn

tic conceptions, such as the Daoxiangju system1 and the Microsoft Quatrain.2 Moreover, without the assistance of the
teacher, it is difﬁcult for users to compose poems using the
systems above. To solve these problems, this paper introduces a new system that can accept plain text, images or
artistic conceptions as input and allow users to participate
in the process of generating. Our system not only can entertain people but also serve as a tool for poetry enthusiasts to
make their works perfect. In other words, Our system plays
the role of the assistant helping users polish their poems.
The jiuge system3 is a human-machine collaborative poetry generation system using neural networks (Guo et al.
2019). Comparing with the jiuge, our model is different from
them and our system uses a better way to help users write
poems. Furthermore, rather than a web application, we deploy our system at the WeChat applet platform. WeChat is
the largest social media app in China with over 1 billion
monthly active users. This means that users can access our
system easily and use it on the mobile device whenever and
wherever possible.
In summary, the contributions of our Chinese classical poetry generation system are as follows: 1) Multi-modal input
such as plain text, images or artistic conceptions can be accepted by our system. 2) Our system allows users to participate in the process of generating. 3) Our system is deployed
at the WeChat applet platform for easy access.

Abstract
In this work, we demonstrate a Chinese classical poetry generation system called Deep Poetry. Existing systems for Chinese classical poetry generation are mostly template-based
and very few of them can accept multi-modal input. Unlike
previous systems, Deep Poetry uses neural networks that are
trained on over 200 thousand poems and 3 million ancient
Chinese prose. Our system can accept plain text, images or
artistic conceptions as inputs to generate Chinese classical
poetry. More importantly, users are allowed to participate in
the process of writing poetry by our system. For the user’s
convenience, we deploy the system at the WeChat applet platform, users can use the system on the mobile device whenever
and wherever possible.

Introduction
Chinese classical poetry plays a special and signiﬁcant role
in Chinese history. Poetry is the treasure of Chinese culture.
During ancient times, many poets and poetry hobbyists were
devoted to poetry and created a lot of poems. However, only
a few best scholars can write coherent and beautiful poetry
nowadays, most people either pay less attention to poetry or
suffer from the high threshold of composing a poem. Therefore, we present a Chinese classical poetry generation system to arouse people’s interest in poetry and make writing
poetry easier.
Most recently, the automatic poetry generation has received great attention, neural networks have made this task
a great development, including recurrent neural network
(Zhang and Lapata 2014), encoder-decoder sequence to sequence model (Yi, Li, and Sun 2017), and neural attentionbased model (Wang et al. 2016), etc. These studies are of
great signiﬁcance to entertainment and education.
However, most of the released Chinese poetry generation
systems are template-based. The biggest drawback of this
method is the generated poems are mostly monotonous because the templates restrict the content of the results. Moreover, these systems restrict users from entering text only and
are unable to generate poetry according to images and artis-

Architecture
As shown in Fig. 1, the model which our system used consists of three components: a powerful method to process input, a self-attention neural network to generate poetry, and a
screening mechanism for results. The model is mainly based
on our previous work (Liu et al. 2018).
Our system allows multi-modal input then generating poetry according to the input. For each image, we map it into at
least two themes which recognized by Clarifai. The Clarifai
API offers image recognition as a service. Then we retrieve
and expand all related phrases. The phrases are from ShiXueHanYing, which is a poetic phrase taxonomy. Each theme
in ShiXueHanYing contains dozens of related phrases. If the

∗

Equal contribution.
Correspondence to Jiancheng Lv.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

†

http://www.poeming.com
http://duilian.msra.cn/jueju
3
https://jiuge.thunlp.cn
2

13626

