The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

LTL f Synthesis with Fairness and Stability Assumptions

Shufang Zhu,1 Giuseppe De Giacomo,2 Geguang Pu,1 Moshe Y. Vardi3
1

Each China Normal University, 2 Sapienza Università di Roma, 3 Rice University
shufangzhu.szhu@gmail.com, degiacomo@diag.uniroma1.it, ggpu@sei.ecnu.edu.cn, vardi@cs.rice.edu

Synthesis under assumptions has been extensively studied in LTL, where environment assumptions are expressed
as LTL formulas (Chatterjee and Henzinger 2007; Chatterjee, Henzinger, and Jobstmann 2008; D’Ippolito et al. 2013;
Bloem, Ehlers, and Könighofer 2015; Brenguier, Raskin,
and Sankur 2017). In fact, LTL formulas can be used as assumptions as long as it is guaranteed that the environment is
able to behave so as to keep the assumptions true, i.e., assumptions are environment realizable. Under these circumstances, it is possible to reduce synthesis for LTL goal ψG
under assumptions ψA to standard synthesis for ψA → ψG .
Note that because of the guarantee of ψA being environment
realizable, no agent strategy can win ψA → ψG by falsifying
ψA . See (Aminof et al. 2019) for a discussion.

Abstract
In synthesis, assumptions are constraints on the environment
that rule out certain environment behaviors. A key observation here is that even if we consider systems with LTLf
goals on ﬁnite traces, environment assumptions need to be
expressed over inﬁnite traces, since accomplishing the agent
goals may require an unbounded number of environment
action. To solve synthesis with respect to ﬁnite-trace LTLf
goals under inﬁnite-trace assumptions, we could reduce the
problem to LTL synthesis. Unfortunately, while synthesis in
LTLf and in LTL have the same worst-case complexity (both
2EXPTIME-complete), the algorithms available for LTL synthesis are much more difﬁcult in practice than those for LTLf
synthesis. In this work we show that in interesting cases we
can avoid such a detour to LTL synthesis and keep the simplicity of LTLf synthesis. Speciﬁcally, we develop a BDD-based
ﬁxpoint-based technique for handling basic forms of fairness
and of stability assumptions. We show, empirically, that this
technique performs much better than standard LTL synthesis.

When we turn to LTLf , a key observation is that even if
we consider (ﬁnite-trace) LTLf goals for the agent, assumptions need to be expressed considering inﬁnite traces, since
accomplishing the agent goals may require an unbounded
number of environment action. So we have an assumption
ψA expressed in LTL and a goal φG expressed in LTLf . To
solve synthesis under assumptions in LTLf , we could translate φG into LTL getting ψG , by applying the translation of
LTLf into LTL in (De Giacomo and Vardi 2013), and then do
LTL synthesis for ψA → ψG , see e.g. (Camacho, Bienvenu,
and McIlraith 2018).

Introduction
In many situations we are interested in expressing properties
over an unbounded but ﬁnite sequence of successive states.
Linear-time Temporal Logic over ﬁnite traces (LTLf ) and
its variants have been thoroughly investigated for doing so.
There has been broad research for logical reasoning (De Giacomo and Vardi 2013; Li et al. 2019), synthesis (De Giacomo and Vardi 2015; Camacho et al. 2018), and planning (Camacho et al. 2017; De Giacomo and Rubin 2018).
Recently synthesis under assumptions in LTLf has attracted speciﬁc interest (De Giacomo and Rubin 2018;
Camacho, Bienvenu, and McIlraith 2018). First, planning
for LTLf goals can be considered as a form of LTLf synthesis under assumptions, where the assumptions are the
dynamics of the environment encoded in the planning domain (Green 1969; Camacho, Bienvenu, and McIlraith 2018;
Aminof et al. 2018; 2019). However, more generally, assumptions can be arbitrary constraints on the environment
that can be exploited by the agent in devising a strategy to
fulﬁll its goal.

Unfortunately, while synthesis in LTLf and in LTL have
the same worst-case complexity, being both 2EXPTIMEcomplete (Pnueli and Rosner 1989; De Giacomo and Vardi
2015), the algorithms available for LTL synthesis are much
harder in practice than those for LTLf synthesis. In particular, the lack of efﬁcient algorithms for the crucial step of
automata determinization is prohibitive for ﬁnding scalable
implementations (Fogarty et al. 2013; Finkbeiner 2016).
In spite of recent advancement in synthesis such as reducing to parity games (Meyer, Sickert, and Luttenberger
2018), bounded synthesis based on solving iterated safety
games (Kupferman and Vardi 2005; Finkbeiner and Schewe
2013; Gerstacker, Klein, and Finkbeiner 2018), or recent
techniques based on iterated FOND planning (Camacho et
al. 2018), LTL synthesis remains very challenging. In contrast, LTLf synthesis is based on a translation to Deterministic Finite Automaton (DFA) (Rabin and Scott 1959), which

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3088

