The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

DARB: A Density-Adaptive Regular-Block Pruning for Deep Neural Networks
Ao Ren,†‡∗ Tao Zhang,† Yuhao Wang,† Sheng Lin,‡ Peiyan Dong,‡
Yen-kuang Chen,† Yuan Xie,† Yanzhi Wang‡
†

Alibaba DAMO Academy
‡
Northeastern University
{t.zhang, yuhao.w, yk.chen, y.xie}@alibaba-inc.com, {lin.sheng, dong.pe, ren.ao}@husky.neu.edu,
yanz.wang@northeastern.edu

ous application domains. The success of the state-of-the-art
deep learning models highly relies on the large number of
parameters and the resulting extensive computations. And
the trend of new models is to grow even larger and deeper.
However, the enormous number of parameters and computations prevents the models from being widely deployed in
the scenarios that have limited hardware resources, such as
running these models on mobile or edge devices. To address
this issue, a lot of research efforts have been paid to reduce
the model size and accelerate the inference process of DNNs
(Han, Mao, and Dally 2016; Park, Ahn, and Yoo 2017;
Zhou et al. 2017; Leng et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2018b;
Ren et al. 2019; Ye et al. 2019).
Neural network pruning is one of the major compression
techniques to reduce model size by removing the least important weights, i.e., the weights with small absolute value.
It has been empirically proved in prior works (Han, Mao,
and Dally 2016; Ren et al. 2019) that such irregular pruning can achieve the highest compression ratio than all other
compression techniques for neural networks, such as structured pruning, feature/activation pruning, and weight quantization. Nonetheless, irregular pruning is mostly opted out
in reality due to its notorious positional irregularity of retained weights, which incurs inefﬁcient index decoding and
high index storage overhead. Structured pruning techniques
are developed to address the drawbacks of irregular pruning. They reduce indexing overhead and achieve acceleration mainly through the trade-off among regularity, pruning
ratio, and model accuracy. That is, given the same accuracy,
the looser constraints on the regularity of the weights, the
higher pruning ratio can be achieved. However, little attention has been given to the intrinsic characteristics of neural
networks for efﬁcient trade-off.
In this work, we endeavor to ﬁnd a more effective structured pruning method by studying the structural characteristics of the irregularly pruned weight matrix. In particular,
we investigate the distribution of row density in the matrix
and its correlation with the pruning ratio1 . Our study focuses on recurrent neural networks (RNNs), such as long
short term memory (LSTM) and gated recurrent unit (GRU),

Abstract
The rapidly growing parameter volume of deep neural networks (DNNs) hinders the artiﬁcial intelligence applications
on resource constrained devices, such as mobile and wearable
devices. Neural network pruning, as one of the mainstream
model compression techniques, is under extensive study to reduce the model size and thus the amount of computation. And
thereby, the state-of-the-art DNNs are able to be deployed on
those devices with high runtime energy efﬁciency. In contrast to irregular pruning that incurs high index storage and
decoding overhead, structured pruning techniques have been
proposed as the promising solutions. However, prior studies
on structured pruning tackle the problem mainly from the
perspective of facilitating hardware implementation, without
diving into the deep to analyze the characteristics of sparse
neural networks. The neglect on the study of sparse neural networks causes inefﬁcient trade-off between regularity
and pruning ratio. Consequently, the potential of structurally
pruning neural networks is not sufﬁciently mined.
In this work, we examine the structural characteristics of the
irregularly pruned weight matrices, such as the diverse redundancy of different rows, the sensitivity of different rows to
pruning, and the position characteristics of retained weights.
By leveraging the gained insights as a guidance, we ﬁrst propose the novel block-max weight masking (BMWM) method,
which can effectively retain the salient weights while imposing high regularity to the weight matrix. As a further
optimization, we propose a density-adaptive regular-block
(DARB) pruning that can effectively take advantage of the
intrinsic characteristics of neural networks, and thereby outperform prior structured pruning work with high pruning ratio and decoding efﬁciency. Our experimental results show
that DARB can achieve 13× to 25× pruning ratio, which are
2.8× to 4.3× improvements than the state-of-the-art counterparts on multiple neural network models and tasks. Moreover,
DARB can achieve 14.3× decoding efﬁciency than block
pruning with higher pruning ratio.

1

Introduction

With the rapid development of deep neural networks
(DNNs), artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) has penetrated into vari∗
The work was done during Ao’s internship at Alibaba DAMO
Academy.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Row density is deﬁned as the percentage of retained weights
in a row after pruning, which is the compliment of sparsity.

5495

