The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Reasoning on Knowledge Graphs with Debate Dynamics
Marcel Hildebrandt,1,2,∗ Jorge Andres Quintero Serna,1,2,∗ Yunpu Ma,1,2
Martin Ringsquandl,1 Mitchell Joblin,1 Volker Tresp1,2
1

Siemens Corporate Technology, 2 Ludwig Maximilian University
ﬁrst name.last name@siemens.com

tasks. One major issue, however, is that most real-world
KGs are incomplete (i.e., true facts are missing) or contain
false facts. Machine learning algorithms designed to address
this problem try to infer missing triples or detect false facts
based on observed connectivity patterns. Moreover, many
tasks such as question answering or collaborative ﬁltering
can be formulated in terms of predicting new links in a KG
(e.g., (Lukovnikov et al. 2017), (Hildebrandt et al. 2018)).
Most machine learning approaches for reasoning on KGs
embed both entities and predicates into low dimensional vector spaces. A score for the plausibility of a triple can then
be computed based on these embeddings. Common to most
embedding-based methods is their black-box nature. This
lack of transparency constitutes a potential limitation when it
comes to deploying KGs in real world settings. Explainability in the machine learning community has recently gained
attention; in many countries laws that require explainable
algorithms have been put in place (Goodman and Flaxman
2017). Additionally, in contrast to one-way black-box conﬁgurations, comprehensible machine learning methods enable
the construction of systems where both machines and users
interact and inﬂuence each other.
Most explainable AI approaches can be roughly categorized into two groups: Post-hoc interpretability and integrated
transparency (Došilović, Brčić, and Hlupić 2018). While posthoc interpretability aims to explain the outcome of an already
trained black-box model (e.g., via layer-wise relevance propagation (Montavon et al. 2017)), integrated transparency-based
methods either employ internal explanation mechanisms or
are naturally explainable due to low model complexity (e.g.,
linear models). Since low complexity and prediction accuracy are often conﬂicting objectives, there is typically a trade
off between performance and explainability. The goal of this
work is to design a KG reasoning method with integrated
transparency that does not sacriﬁce performance while also
allowing a human-in-the-loop.
In this paper we introduce R2D2 (Reveal Relations using
Debate Dynamics), a novel method for triple classiﬁcation
based on reinforcement learning. Inspired by the concept outlined in (Irving, Christiano, and Amodei 2018) to increase AI
safety via debates, we model the task of triple classiﬁcation
as a debate between two agents, each presenting arguments
either in favor of the thesis (the triple is true) or the antithesis (the triple is false). Based on these arguments, a binary

Abstract
We propose a novel method for automatic reasoning on knowledge graphs based on debate dynamics. The main idea is to
frame the task of triple classiﬁcation as a debate game between
two reinforcement learning agents which extract arguments
– paths in the knowledge graph – with the goal to promote
the fact being true (thesis) or the fact being false (antithesis),
respectively. Based on these arguments, a binary classiﬁer,
called the judge, decides whether the fact is true or false. The
two agents can be considered as sparse, adversarial feature
generators that present interpretable evidence for either the
thesis or the antithesis. In contrast to other black-box methods, the arguments allow users to get an understanding of
the decision of the judge. Since the focus of this work is to
create an explainable method that maintains a competitive
predictive accuracy, we benchmark our method on the triple
classiﬁcation and link prediction task. Thereby, we ﬁnd that
our method outperforms several baselines on the benchmark
datasets FB15k-237, WN18RR, and Hetionet. We also conduct
a survey and ﬁnd that the extracted arguments are informative
for users.

1

Introduction

A large variety of information about the real world can be
expressed in terms of entities and their relations. Knowledge
graphs (KGs) store facts about the world in terms of triples
(s, p, o), where s (subject) and o (object) correspond to nodes
in the graph and p (predicate) denotes the edge type connecting both. The nodes in the KG represent entities of the
real world and predicates describe relations between pairs of
entities.
KGs are useful for various artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) tasks
in different ﬁelds such as named entity disambiguation in
natural language processing (Han and Zhao 2010), visual relation detection (Baier, Ma, and Tresp 2017), or collaborative
ﬁltering (Hildebrandt et al. 2019). Examples of large-size
KGs include Freebase (Bollacker et al. 2008) and YAGO
(Suchanek, Kasneci, and Weikum 2007). In particular, the
Google Knowledge Graph (Singhal 2012) is a well-known
example of a comprehensive KG with more than 18 billion
facts, used in search, question answering, and various NLP
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4123

