The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning from Positive and Unlabeled
Data without Explicit Estimation of Class Prior
Chenguang Zhang,1,2 Yuexian Hou,1∗ Yan Zhang2
1

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
2
School of Science, Hainan University, Haikou, China
{chenguang zhang, yxhou}@tju.edu.cn, zhangyanouc@sina.com

common assumption of LPU methods is that unlabeled data
can help to extract extra information to compensate for the
lack of labeled negative data. Under this assumption, two
general approaches have been proposed: the likely negative
examples-based strategy and the class prior-based strategy.

Abstract
Learning a classiﬁer from positive and unlabeled data may
occur in various applications. It differs from the standard classiﬁcation problems by the absence of labeled negative examples in the training set. So far, two main strategies have typically been used for this issue: the likely negative examplesbased strategy and the class prior-based strategy, in which the
likely negative examples or the class prior is required to be
obtained in a preprocessing step. In this paper, a new strategy
based on the Bhattacharyya coefﬁcient is put forward, which
formalizes this learning problem as an optimization problem
and does not need a preprocessing step. We ﬁrst show that
with the given positive class conditional probability density
function (PDF) and the mixture PDF of both the positive class
and the negative class, the class prior can be estimated by
minimizing the Bhattacharyya coefﬁcient of the positive class
with respect to the negative class. We then show how to use
this result in an implicit mixture model of restricted Boltzmann machines to estimate the positive class conditional PDF
and the negative class conditional PDF directly to obtain a
classiﬁer without the explicit estimation of the class prior.
Many experiments on real and synthetic datasets illustrated
the superiority of the proposed approach.

The former transforms LPU problems to standard classiﬁcation problems by using heuristics to identify a set of likely
negative examples from unlabeled data. Papers using this
idea include (Yu, Han, and Chang 2004; Li and Liu 2003;
Wang et al. 2006; Yu 2005). The disadvantage of this approach is the difﬁculty in deciding the size of the extracted
negative set, which may make the ﬁnal classiﬁer tend to
overﬁt or underﬁt, particularly when there is a signiﬁcant
overlap between the classes. The latter uses the estimated
class information, namely, the class prior, as weights to
train a classiﬁer on the positive data and the unlabeled
dataset directly (Liu et al. 2003; Elkan and Noto 2008;
du Plessis, Niu, and Sugiyama 2014; Kiryo et al. 2017;
du Plessis, Niu, and Sugiyama 2015). These methods have
been reported to be better than the likely negative examplesbased methods. However, the two-step learning strategy may
make the classiﬁcation performance heavily rely on the estimation of the class prior, which is biased due to the overlap
between the classes and is quite possibly distorted when the
set of labeled positive samples is small. Some effective class
prior estimation methods can be found in the papers (Elkan
and Noto 2008; du Plessis and Sugiyama 2014; Jain, White,
and Radivojac 2016; du Plessis, Niu, and Sugiyama 2017;
Bekker and Jesse 2018).

Learning a classiﬁcation from positive and unlabeled data
(LPU) is a task of great importance since it has many practical applications, such as land-cover classiﬁcation and document retrieval, where positive samples, i.e., labeled objects
of interest, and unlabeled samples are readily available, but
negative samples, i.e., the objects we are not interested in,
are too diverse to be labeled. Generally, traditional classiﬁcation methods are usually inapplicable to LPU problems, as
they assume the availability of explicit negative samples. In
this paper, we focus on using both labeled positive samples
and unlabeled samples to build binary classiﬁers.
The research on LPU problems dates back to at least the
work of Denis (1998), in which he proved that LPU is possible as soon as the weight of the target concept is known
by the learner. Liu et al. provided a learning rule for LPU
and analyzed its sample complexity bounds for VC classes
(Liu et al. 2002). Despite the diversity of these analyses, one

In this paper, we propose a Bhattacharyya coefﬁcientbased new strategy for LPU problems. This strategy is based
on the observation that the negative samples should not or
seldom appear in the places where the positive samples often appear and vice versa, which implies that the negative
class conditional PDF should have a small overlap with
the positive class conditional PDF. To formalize this observation, a distance measure between the distributions is
needed. Compared with other measures such as the KL divergence, the Bhattacharyya coefﬁcient, known as an intuitive and direct description of the overlap, is a bounded measure, which equals to zero if there is no overlap between
the two distributions (Comaniciu, Ramesh, and Meer 2003;

∗

Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6762

