The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Natural Image Matting via Guided Contextual Attention
Yaoyi Li, Hongtao Lu∗
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
{dsamuel, htlu}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Over the last few years, deep learning based approaches have
achieved outstanding improvements in natural image matting.
Many of these methods can generate visually plausible alpha
estimations, but typically yield blurry structures or textures
in the semitransparent area. This is due to the local ambiguity of transparent objects. One possible solution is to leverage
the far-surrounding information to estimate the local opacity. Traditional afﬁnity-based methods often suffer from the
high computational complexity, which are not suitable for
high resolution alpha estimation. Inspired by afﬁnity-based
method and the successes of contextual attention in inpainting, we develop a novel end-to-end approach for natural image matting with a guided contextual attention module, which
is speciﬁcally designed for image matting. Guided contextual attention module directly propagates high-level opacity
information globally based on the learned low-level afﬁnity. The proposed method can mimic information ﬂow of
afﬁnity-based methods and utilize rich features learned by
deep neural networks simultaneously. Experiment results on
Composition-1k testing set and alphamatting.com benchmark
dataset demonstrate that our method outperforms state-ofthe-art approaches in natural image matting. Code and models
are available at https://github.com/Yaoyi-Li/GCA-Matting.

Figure 1: The visualization of our guided contextual attention map. Top row from left to right, the image, trimap and
ground-truth. Second row, the alpha matte prediction, attention offset map from ﬁrst GCA block in the encoder, offset
from GCA block in the decoder.
B at each pixel i as:
Ii = αi Fi + (1 − αi )Bi ,

αi ∈ [0, 1],

(1)

where αi is the alpha value at pixel i that denotes the opacity
of the foreground object. If αi is not 0 or 1, then the image at
pixel i is mixed. Since the foreground color Fi , background
color Bi and the alpha value αi are left unknown, the expression of alpha matting is ill-deﬁned. Thus, most of the
previous hand-crafted algorithms impose a strong inductive
bias to the matting problem.
One of the basic idea widely adopted in both afﬁnitybased and sampling-based algorithms is to borrow information from the image patches with similar appearance.
Afﬁnity-based methods (Levin, Lischinski, and Weiss 2008;
Chen, Li, and Tang 2013; Aksoy, Ozan Aydin, and Pollefeys 2017) borrow the opacity information from known
patches with the similar appearance to unknown ones.
Sampling-based approaches (Wang and Cohen 2007; Gastal
and Oliveira 2010; He et al. 2011; Feng, Liang, and Zhang
2016) borrow a pair of samples from the foreground and
background to estimate the alpha value at each pixel in the
unknown region based on some speciﬁc assumption. One
obstacle of the previous afﬁnity-based and sampling-based
methods is that they cannot handle the situation that there
are only background and unknown areas in the trimap. It is

Introduction
The natural image matting is one of the important tasks in
computer vision. It has a variety of applications in image or
video editing, compositing and ﬁlm post-production (Wang,
Cohen, and others 2008; Aksoy, Ozan Aydin, and Pollefeys
2017; Lutz, Amplianitis, and Smolic 2018; Xu et al. 2017;
Tang et al. 2019). Matting has received signiﬁcant interest
from the research community and been extensively studied
in the past decade. Alpha matting refers to the problem that
separating a foreground object from the background and estimating transitions between them. The result of image matting is a prediction of alpha matte which represents the opacity of a foreground at each pixel.
Mathematically, the natural image I is deﬁned as a convex
combination of foreground image F and background image
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11450

