The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

On the Problem of Covering a 3-D Terrain
Eduard Eiben,1 Isuru S. Godage,2 Iyad Kanj,2 Ge Xia3
1

Department of Computer Science, Royal Holloway, University of London, UK. Email: Eduard.Eiben@rhul.ac.uk
2
School of Computing, DePaul University, USA. Emails: igodage@depaul.edu, ikanj@depaul.edu
3
Department of Computer Science, Lafayette College, USA. Email: xiag@lafayette.edu

given a set of points in the plane, one seeks a path that
“covers” all the points in the set, while optimizing a certain function/criterion. Various notions of coverage have
been studied, and their corresponding problems turn out
to be NP-hard, being variants of the Euclidean Travelling
Salesman problem (Euclidean TSP), for which polynomial
time approximation schemes (PTAS) exist (Arora 1998;
Mitchell 1999). For instance, Arkin and Hassin (Arkin and
Hassin 1994) gave constant-ratio approximation algorithms
for the Covering Salesman problem, in which we are given
a set of points referred to as “buyers”, each with a speciﬁed set of locations that she is willing to travel to in order
to meet the salesman, and the goal is to compute a closed
tour of minimum Euclidean length that meets all buyers. Another related problem is the sweeper problem, where one
is given a set of points in the plane, and a sweeper’s shape
(disk/rectangle/etc.), and the goal is to ﬁnd a path of minimum Euclidean length that sweeps through all given points;
constant-ratio approximation algorithms were also given for
continuous versions of the sweeper problem, referred to as the
milling and mowing problems (Arkin, Fekete, and Mitchell
2000), where the area to be milled/mowed is a continuous
region of the plane (e.g., disk or polygon).

Abstract
We study the problem of covering a 3-dimensional terrain by
a sweeping robot that is equipped with a camera. We model
the terrain as a mesh in a way that captures the elevation levels
of the terrain; this enables a graph-theoretic formulation of the
problem in which the underlying graph is a weighted plane
graph. We show that the associated graph problem is NP-hard,
and that it admits a polynomial time approximation scheme
(PTAS). Finally, we implement two heuristic algorithms based
on greedy approaches and report our ﬁndings.

Introduction
We study the problem of covering a 3-dimensional (3-D) terrain by a sweeping robot that is equipped with a camera; we
refer to this problem as the T ERRAIN C OVERAGE problem.
Informally speaking, the T ERRAIN C OVERAGE problem is
to compute a terrain path such that every point in the terrain
falls within the camera-range of at least one point of this path.
We show how to model the T ERRAIN C OVERAGE problem as
the following graph problem: Given an edge-weighted plane
graph, each of whose vertices is associated with a subset
of vertices that it can cover, compute a path of minimum
weight such that every vertex in the graph is covered by (at
least one point of) this path. Variants of this fundamental motion planning problem have been studied, motivated by their
robotics applications, which include de-mining (Gage 1994),
lawn mowing/harvesting (Arkin, Fekete, and Mitchell 2000;
Cao, Huang, and Hall 1988), painting (Atkar et al. 2005),
and autonomous underwater inspection of complex structures (Englot and Hover 2012; Hert, Tiwari, and Lumelsky
1996), among others.
In this paper, we study the complexity of the T ERRAIN
C OVERAGE problem and design approximation and heuristic
algorithms for it.

Perhaps the most related problem to the T ERRAIN C OVERAGE problem under consideration, albeit much simpler in
terms of its setting, is the Watchman (resp. Sweeper) Route
Under Limited Visibility problem, in which we are given
a simple polygon and a visibility range, and the goal is to
ﬁnd a tour of minimum Euclidean length such that each
point on the boundary of the polygon (resp. in the polygon) is visible from at least one point of the tour. Constantratio approximation algorithms were given for the watchman variant of the problem, and a PTAS was given for the
simpler sweeper variant (Li and Klette 2008; Ntafos 1991).
Other problems that are related to T ERRAIN C OVERAGE
have also been considered, with different notions of coverage
and/or optimization criteria; see (Arkin et al. 2011; 2005;
Fekete, Mitchell, and Schmidt 2012).

Related Work. A signiﬁcant amount of work has been
devoted to variants of the T ERRAIN C OVERAGE problem, which fall under the umbrella of the so-called Coverage Path Planning problem (CPP). In the CPP problem,

The problem of covering a 3-D terrain has also been extensively studied based on different approaches. One approach
relies on using a planar 2-dimensional (2-D) terrain covering algorithm, where the idea is to apply a planar cover-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10361

