The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

SynSig2Vec: Learning Representations from
Synthetic Dynamic Signatures for Real-World Veriﬁcation
Songxuan Lai, Lianwen Jin, Luojun Lin, Yecheng Zhu, Huiyun Mao
School of Electronic and Information Engineering, South China University of Technology
eesxlai@foxmail.com, eelwjin@scut.edu.cn

several researches have also applied deep learning models
to learn representations for dynamic signature sequences or
static signature images, and have achieved certain improvements in reducing the veriﬁcation error against skilled forgeries. However, these methods have several limitations. First
of all, they require skilled forgeries as training samples to
achieve good performance. One should know that, as a biometric trait and a special kind of private data, handwritten
signatures are non-trivial to collect; skilled forgeries, which
require the forgers to practise once and again, are even more
difﬁcult to acquire. Therefore, these methods can hardly perform equally well when there are only genuine signatures
for training. Second, these methods generally lack an appropriate data augmentation method, which is fundamental in
training deep learning models. The main reason lies in the
following questions: Which type of data augmentation can
essentially capture the variance of the underlying signing
process? To what extent can an augmented genuine signature maintain its “genuineness”? Third, existing loss functions do not consider ﬁne-grained signature similarities and
tend to overﬁt. For example, in Siamese networks, positive
and negative signature pairs are always labelled with 1s and
0s, respectively, regardless of the actual visual similarities.

Abstract
An open research problem in automatic signature veriﬁcation is the skilled forgery attacks. However, the skilled forgeries are very difﬁcult to acquire for representation learning.
To tackle this issue, this paper proposes to learn dynamic
signature representations through ranking synthesized signatures. First, a neuromotor inspired signature synthesis method
is proposed to synthesize signatures with different distortion levels for any template signature. Then, given the templates, we construct a lightweight one-dimensional convolutional network to learn to rank the synthesized samples, and
directly optimize the average precision of the ranking to exploit relative and ﬁne-grained signature similarities. Finally,
after training, ﬁxed-length representations can be extracted
from dynamic signatures of variable lengths for veriﬁcation.
One highlight of our method is that it requires neither skilled
nor random forgeries for training, yet it surpasses the stateof-the-art by a large margin on two public benchmarks.

Introduction
Handwritten signatures are the most socially and legally
accepted means of personal authentication. They are generally regarded as a formal and legal means to verify a
person’s identity in administrative, commercial and ﬁnancial applications, for example, when signing credit card receipts. Over the last forty years, research interest in automatic signature veriﬁcation (ASV) has grown steadily, and
a number of comprehensive survey papers have summarized the state-of-the-art results in the ﬁeld till 2018 (Plamondon and Lorette 1989; Plamondon and Srihari 2000;
Impedovo and Pirlo 2008; Diaz et al. 2019). Nowadays,
building an ASV system to separate genuine signatures and
random forgeries (produced by a forger who has no knowledge about the authentic author’s name or signature) can be
considered a solved task, while to separate genuine signatures and skilled forgeries (produced by a forger after unrestricted practice) still remains an open research problem.
Among the literatures over years, great research effort has
been devoted to obtaining good representations for signatures by developing new features and feature selection techniques. With the popularity of deep learning in recent years,

In this paper, we focus on dynamic signature veriﬁcation and propose a novel ASV system without the abovementioned limitations. A basis of our method is the kinematic theory of rapid human movements and its Sigma Lognormal (ΣΛ) model (Plamondon 1995). The ΣΛ model hypothesizes that the velocity of a neuromuscular system can
be modelled by a vector summation of a number of lognormal functions, each of which is described by six parameters. Rooted in this model, we extract the underlying neuromuscular parameters of genuine signatures and synthesize
new signatures by introducing perturbations to the parameters. The level of parameter perturbation controls the level
of signature distortion; based on one genuine signature, we
can synthesize signatures with various distortion levels, as
shown in Fig. 1. Thereafter, many representation learning
methodologies can be considered, such as metric learning.
In this study, we propose to learn dynamic signature representations through optimizing the average precision (AP) of
signature similarity ranking based on the direct loss mini-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
735

