The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Towards Cross-Modality Medical Image
Segmentation with Online Mutual Knowledge Distillation
Kang Li,1 Lequan Yu,1∗ Shujun Wang,1 Pheng-Ann Heng1,2
1
2

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Computer Vision and Virtual Reality Technology,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
{kli, lqyu, sjwang, pheng}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

tissues with distinct visual contrast. For example, in MRI
brain scans, MRI-T2 has better visual effects in edema,
while MRI-T1c highlights gross tumor core (Woo, Stone,
and Prince 2014). Therefore, multi-modality learning is progressively developed in medical imaging domain. In recent
years, deep learning based methods have achieved promising performance in many medical image analysis tasks, relying on the massive amount of annotated data (Litjens
et al. 2017). However, large annotated datasets are usually expensive and time-consuming to acquire in medical
domain, since the annotations have to be marked by professional medical experts under strict and meticulous inspection. Considering different imaging modalities reﬂect
the same anatomic structures, multi-modality learning has
became a promising direction to make up the annotation
scarcity in automatic medical image analysis. In this paper,
we aim to investigate the effectiveness of utilizing the prior
knowledge (e.g., shape priors) learned from one modality
(aka. assistant modality) to improve the segmentation performance on another modality (aka. target modality), where
no assistant-modality data is required in testing phase.

Abstract
The success of deep convolutional neural networks is partially attributed to the massive amount of annotated training
data. However, in practice, medical data annotations are usually expensive and time-consuming to be obtained. Considering multi-modality data with the same anatomic structures are
widely available in clinic routine, in this paper, we aim to exploit the prior knowledge (e.g., shape priors) learned from one
modality (aka., assistant modality) to improve the segmentation performance on another modality (aka., target modality)
to make up annotation scarcity. To alleviate the learning difﬁculties caused by modality-speciﬁc appearance discrepancy,
we ﬁrst present an Image Alignment Module (IAM) to narrow the appearance gap between assistant and target modality
data. We then propose a novel Mutual Knowledge Distillation
(MKD) scheme to thoroughly exploit the modality-shared
knowledge to facilitate the target-modality segmentation. To
be speciﬁc, we formulate our framework as an integration
of two individual segmentors. Each segmentor not only explicitly extracts one modality knowledge from corresponding annotations, but also implicitly explores another modality knowledge from its counterpart in mutual-guided manner.
The ensemble of two segmentors would further integrate the
knowledge from both modalities and generate reliable segmentation results on target modality. Experimental results on
the public multi-class cardiac segmentation data, i.e., MMWHS 2017, show that our method achieves large improvements on CT segmentation by utilizing additional MRI data
and outperforms other state-of-the-art multi-modality learning methods.

In general, one intuitive way is joint-training, where the
network is trained with both assistant-modality and targetmodality data. Another straightforward approach is to ﬁnetune a deep convolutional neural network (DCNN) learned
from assistant-modality data with the target-modality data,
so that it can transfer the prior knowledge learned from
assistant modality to target-modality tasks. Nevertheless,
the shared cross-modality information can not be well exploited in either joint-training or ﬁne-tuning, since the representative modality-shared features are hard to directly
learn from multi-modality data with large appearance discrepancy. Valindria et al. (2018) proposed to assign each
modality data with its speciﬁc feature extractor to alleviate
the negative inﬂuences from distinct multi-modality appearances. They presented four dual-stream architectures with
well-designed parameter sharing strategies to explore crossmodality information, and demonstrated X-shape architecture is more suitable for multi-modality image segmentation.
However, these dual-stream architectures incorporate human
intervention in determining parameter sharing, and would
require special adjustments to generalize to other medical

Introduction
Modern clinical practice usually involves multiple imaging techniques, e.g., magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and
computed tomography (CT), to acquire a more comprehensive view of particular tissues or organs in disease diagnosis
and surgical planning (Cao et al. 2017). For instance, CT
and MRI are extensively used to provide clear anatomical
information of cardiac structures (Zhuang et al. 2019). As
different imaging modalities are based on different physical imaging principles, they normally emphasize organs or
∗

Corresponding Author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
775

