The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Image Formation Model Guided Deep Image Super-Resolution
Jinshan Pan,1 Yang Liu,2 Deqing Sun,3 Jimmy Ren,4
Ming-Ming Cheng,5 Jian Yang,1 Jinhui Tang1 ∗
1

Nanjing University of Science and Technology, 2 Dalian University of Technology,
3
Google, 4 SenseTime Research, 5 Nankai University
{sdluran, lewisyangliu, deqing.sun, jimmy.sj.ren}@gmail.com, cmm@nankai.edu.cn, {csjian, jinhuitang}@njust.edu.cn

Abstract
We present a simple and effective image super-resolution algorithm that imposes an image formation constraint on the
deep neural networks via pixel substitution. The proposed algorithm ﬁrst uses a deep neural network to estimate intermediate high-resolution images, blurs the intermediate images
using known blur kernels, and then substitutes values of the
pixels at the un-decimated positions with those of the corresponding pixels from the low-resolution images. The output
of the pixel substitution process strictly satisﬁes the image
formation model and is further reﬁned by the same deep neural network in a cascaded manner. The proposed framework
is trained in an end-to-end fashion and can work with existing feed-forward deep neural networks for super-resolution
and converges fast in practice. Extensive experimental results
show that the proposed algorithm performs favorably against
state-of-the-art methods.

1

Figure 1: Super-resolution result (×4). Our algorithm uses
the image formation of super-resolution to constrain a deep
neural network via pixel substitution, which generates the
images satisfying the image formation model and better recovers structural details.
methods by large margins. However, as the SR problem is
highly ill-posed, using feed-forward networks may not be
sufﬁcient to estimate the LR-to-HR mapping. In particular,
the reconstructed HR images often do not strictly satisfy the
image formation model of SR.
To address this issue, several methods improve feedforward networks with feedback schemes, such as reimplementing iterative back-projection method (Irani and
Peleg 1991) by deep CNNs (Haris, Shakhnarovich, and
Ukita 2018), using deep CNNs as image priors to constrain
the solution space in a variational setting (Zhang et al. 2017),
using the image formation model in a feedback step to constrain the training process (Pan et al. 2018). However, these
algorithms all regenerate LR images from the reconstructed
intermediate HR results. The downsampling operation leads
to information loss and thus makes these algorithms hard to
estimate the details and structures (e.g., Figure 1(f)).
We note that the LR image is usually assumed to be obtained by a convolution followed by a downsampling process on the HR image. Under this assumption, at the undecimated positions, the LR image should have the same
pixel values as the blurred HR image which is obtained by
applying a convolution operation to the clear HR image.
Thus, we should impose this image formation constraint in
the network architecture to generate high-quality images.
However, it is challenging to apply the hard image formation constraint to deep neural networks, because it requires

Introduction

Single image super-resolution (SR) aims to estimate a high
resolution (HR) image from a low resolution (LR) image.
It is a classical image processing problem and has received
active research efforts in the vision and graphics community
within the last decade. The renewed interest is due to the
widely-used high-deﬁnition devices in our daily life, such
as iPhoneXS (2436×1125), Pixel3 (2960×1440), iPad Pro
(2732×2048), SAMSUNG Galaxy note9 (2960×1440), and
4K UHDTV (4096 × 2160). There is a great need to superresolve existing LR images so that they can be pleasantly
viewed on high-deﬁnition devices.
Recently signiﬁcant progress has been made by using
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in a regression way.
For example, numerous methods (Dong et al. 2014; Kim,
Lee, and Lee 2016a; 2016b; Shi et al. 2016; Lim et al. 2017;
Ledig et al. 2017; Dong, Loy, and Tang 2016; Zhang et al.
2018c) develop feed-forward networks with advanced network architectures (e.g., residual network (He et al. 2016),
attention model (Zhang et al. 2018a)) or optimization strategies to learn the LR-to-HR mapping. These methods are efﬁcient and outperform conventional hand-crafted prior-based
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11807

