The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Dynamic Control of Probabilistic Simple Temporal Networks
Michael Gao,∗ Lindsay Popowski,∗ James C. Boerkoel Jr.
Human Experience and Agent Teamwork Lab (heatlab.org)
Harvey Mudd College
Claremont, California 91711
{mgao, lpopowski, boerkoel}@hmc.edu

Abstract

[50,55]

The controllability of a temporal network is deﬁned as an
agent’s ability to navigate around the uncertainty in its schedule and is well-studied for certain networks of temporal constraints. However, many interesting real-world problems can
be better represented as Probabilistic Simple Temporal Networks (PSTNs) in which the uncertain durations are represented using potentially-unbounded probability density functions. This can make it inherently impossible to control for all
eventualities. In this paper, we propose two new dynamic controllability algorithms that attempt to maximize the likelihood
of successfully executing a schedule within a PSTN. The ﬁrst
approach, which we call M IN -L OSS DC, ﬁnds a dynamic
scheduling strategy that minimizes loss of control by using a
conﬂict-directed search to decide where to sacriﬁce the control in a way that optimizes overall success. The second approach, which we call M AX -G AIN DC, works in the other
direction: it ﬁnds a dynamically controllable schedule and
then attempts to progressively strengthen it by capturing additional uncertainty. Our approaches are the ﬁrst known that
work by ﬁnding maximally dynamically controllable schedules. We empirically compare our approaches against two existing PSTN ofﬂine dispatch approaches and one online approach and show that our M IN -L OSS DC algorithm outperforms the others in terms of maximizing execution success
while maintaining competitive runtimes.

t1

t3
[0, 5]

N(20, 4)

t5
[0, 5]

N(27.5, 9)
t2

t4

Figure 1: Graphical representation of the Probabilistic Simple Temporal Network corresponding to our running example. Mr. X has between 50 and 55 minutes to prepare dinner,
which requires sequentially baking two different dishes, one
which is expected to take about 20 minutes to bake and the
second which is expected to take about 27.5 minutes.

in his oven, but it is too small to handle both at once. The
ﬁrst takes a duration modelled by a normal distribution of
mean μ = 20 and standard deviation σ = 2 (i.e., N(20, 4),
where variance σ 2 = 4), and needs to be taken out within 5
minutes of ﬁnishing to avoid becoming over-baked. The second, which goes in right after, takes a time drawn from the
distribution N(27.5, 9), and again must be removed from the
oven in 5 minutes or under. His family will be home in 50
minutes and past experience tells him he has 5 minutes from
the time they arrive to the time dinner is served before his
hungry toddler has a meltdown. Thus, he must complete dinner prep in between 50 and 55 minutes so it is ready on time
without either dish going cold. Problems with probabilistically determined durations like Mr X’s can be represented
using Probabilistic Simple Temporal Networks (PSTNs).
Before execution starts, Mr. X knows he will not be successful in every possible situation; failure under certain baking times is inevitable under these constraints. A main advantage of PSTNs is the fact that uncertain durations are
characterized by distributions, which provide a rich source
of information that the dispatcher can leverage to push the
schedule towards success. However, the uncertainty of durations in PSTNs may be unbounded, and so the resulting network may be impossible to fully control. This highlights the

Introduction
Ideally, an agent would be able to schedule its events and
activities in a way that will succeed in every possible situation. However, in many circumstances, there are processes
with uncertain timings that make scheduling difﬁcult. The
ability of an agent to navigate around this uncertainty is
known as controllability. While the challenge of controlling
for scheduling uncertainty is a well-studied problem, many
scheduling problems have more uncertainty than can be controlled, for instance, tasks whose durations are determined
by an unbounded probability density function. In such scenarios, our goal becomes maximizing the chance of success.
For example, consider the situation where Mr. X wants to
make dinner for his family. Mr. X needs to cook two dishes
∗

Authors listed alphabetically but contributed equally.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9851

