The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Lifting Preferences over Alternatives to Preferences over Sets of
Alternatives: The Complexity of Recognizing Desirable Families of Sets
Jan Maly
Institute of Logic and Computation,
TU Wien, Austria
jmaly@dbai.tuwien.ac.at

Abstract

Voting Rule

The problem of lifting a preference order on a set of objects
to a preference order on a family of subsets of this set is a
fundamental problem with a wide variety of applications in
AI. The process is often guided by axioms postulating properties the lifted order should have. Well-known impossibility
results by Kannai and Peleg and by Barberà and Pattanaik
tell us that some desirable axioms – namely dominance and
(strict) independence – are not jointly satisﬁable for any linear order on the objects if all non-empty sets of objects are
to be ordered. On the other hand, if not all non-empty sets of
objects are to be ordered, the axioms are jointly satisﬁable for
all linear orders on the objects for some families of sets. Such
families are very important for applications as they allow for
the use of lifted orders, for example, in combinatorial voting.
In this paper, we determine the computational complexity of
recognizing such families. We show that it is Πp2 -complete
to decide for a given family of subsets whether dominance
and independence or dominance and strict independence are
jointly satisﬁable for all linear orders on the objects if the
lifted order needs to be total. Furthermore, we show that the
problem remains coNP-complete if the lifted order can be incomplete. Additionally, we show that the complexity of these
problem can increase exponentially if the family of sets is not
given explicitly but via a succinct domain restriction.

Preferences on sets
Lifting Procedure
Preferences on objects
Voter 1

Voter 2

Voter 3

Figure 1: The use of lifted orders in voting

Different approaches to solving this problem have been
discussed in the context of voting. Lang and Xia (2016) give
a thorough overview of the most promising ideas. The easiest solution is often to vote on each candidate separately.
However, this approach only works well if the voters have
separable preferences, i.e. if the preference on having a candidate in the committee is independent on who else is in the
committee. Another option is eliciting the top ranked committee. Then one can, for example, infer a preference order
on the committees via a distance measure like the Hamming
distance. This approach minimizes the communication cost
but only takes very little of the agent’s full preferences into
account. Alternatively, one can ask the agents to specify their
preferences using a CP-net or similar representations. This
can be very effective but requires the agents to learn a nontrivial preference representation. In many cases this is an unacceptable requirement. Finally, there are some voting rules
that select a winning committee directly from a preferences
over candidates. This approach has been mainly explored
for committees of ﬁxed size. In this paper we consider a different approach, namely inferring an order on sets of alternatives from an order on the alternatives. Then, traditional
voting rules can be applied to the inferred orders on sets.
Figure 1 shows how this approach can work in voting. Barberà, Bossert, and Pattanaik (2004) give an excellent survey
on the progress that has been made to solve this question.
Essentially, there are two ways to study this approach.
First, one can analyze speciﬁc methods to infer an order
on sets from an order on the objects, see e.g. (Moretti and

Introduction
Modeling preferences over alternatives is a major challenge
in many areas of AI, for example in knowledge representation and, especially, in computational social choice. If
the number of alternatives is small enough, preferences are
most often modeled as a total order. However, in many
applications the alternatives are ’combinatorial’, for example bundles of objects in packing or allocation problems
(Bouveret, Chevaleyre, and Maudet 2016), or committees
in voting (Brandt and Brill 2011; Lang and Xia 2016;
Brandt, Saile, and Stricker 2018). In such situations, the
number of alternatives grows exponentially with the number
of objects which makes it unfeasible for agents to specify a
full preference relation over all alternatives.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2152

