The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Differentially Private and Fair
Classiﬁcation via Calibrated Functional Mechanism
Jiahao Ding,1 Xinyue Zhang,1 Xiaohuan Li,2 Junyi Wang,2 Rong Yu,3 Miao Pan1
1

University of Houston
Guilin University of Electronic Technology
3
Guangdong University of Technology
{jding7, xzhang67, mpan2}@uh.edu, {lxhguet, wangjy}@guet.edu.cn, yurong@gdut.edu.cn
2

unfair behaviors observed in classiﬁcation models. For example, a classiﬁcation model of automated job hiring system
is more likely to hire candidates from certain racial or gender groups (Giang 2018; Wachter-Boettcher 2018). Hence,
substantial effort has centered on developing algorithmic
methods for designing fair classiﬁcation models and balancing the trade-off between accuracy and fairness, mainly
including two groups: pre/post-processing methods (Dwork
et al. 2012; Feldman et al. 2015; Hardt et al. 2016) and inprocessing methods (Kamishima, Akaho, and Sakuma 2011;
Zafar et al. 2017b). Pre/post-processing methods achieve
fairness by directly changing values of the sensitive attributes or class labels in the training data. As pointed out
in (Zafar et al. 2017b), pre/post-processing methods treat the
learning algorithm as a black box, which can result in unpredictable loss of the classiﬁcation utility. Thus, in-processing
methods, which introduce fairness constraints or regularization terms to the objective function to remove the discriminatory effect of classiﬁers, have been shown a great success.

Abstract
Machine learning is increasingly becoming a powerful tool
to make decisions in a wide variety of applications, such as
medical diagnosis and autonomous driving. Privacy concerns
related to the training data and unfair behaviors of some decisions with regard to certain attributes (e.g., sex, race) are becoming more critical. Thus, constructing a fair machine learning model while simultaneously providing privacy protection
becomes a challenging problem. In this paper, we focus on
the design of classiﬁcation model with fairness and differential privacy guarantees by jointly combining functional mechanism and decision boundary fairness. In order to enforce differential privacy and fairness, we leverage the functional
mechanism to add different amounts of Laplace noise regarding different attributes to the polynomial coefﬁcients of
the objective function in consideration of fairness constraint.
We further propose an utility-enhancement scheme, called relaxed functional mechanism by adding Gaussian noise instead of Laplace noise, hence achieving (, δ)-differential
privacy. Based on the relaxed functional mechanism, we
can design (, δ)-differentially private and fair classiﬁcation
model. Moreover, our theoretical analysis and empirical results demonstrate that our two approaches achieve both fairness and differential privacy while preserving good utility and
outperform the state-of-the-art algorithms.

In this big data era, machine learning has been becoming a
powerful technique for automated and data-driven decision
making processes in various domains, such as spam ﬁltering,
credit ratings, housing allocation, and so on. However, as the
success of machine learning mainly rely on a vast amount of
individual data (e.g., ﬁnancial transactions, tax payments),
there are growing concerns about the potential for privacy
leakage and unfairness in training and deploying machine
learning algorithms (Fredrikson, Jha, and Ristenpart 2015;
Datta, Tschantz, and Datta 2015). Thus, the problem of fairness and privacy in machine learning has attracted considerable attention.
Fairness-aware learning has received growing attentions
in the machine learning ﬁeld due to the social inequities and

At the same time, differential privacy (Dwork and Roth
2014) has emerged as the de facto standard for measuring
the privacy leakage associated with algorithms on sensitive
databases, which has recently received considerable attentions by large-scale corporations such as Google (Erlingsson, Pihur, and Korolova 2014) and Microsoft (Ding, Kulkarni, and Yekhanin 2017), etc. Generally speaking, differential privacy ensures that there is no statistical difference
to the output of a randomized algorithm whether a single
individual opts in to, or out of its input. A large class of
mechanisms has been proposed to ensure differential privacy. For instance, the Laplace mechanism is employed by
introducing random noise drawn from the Laplace distribution to the output of queries such that the adversary will not
be able to conﬁrm a single individual is in the input with
high conﬁdence (Dwork et al. 2006b). To design private
machine learning models, more complicated perturbation
mechanisms have been proposed like objective perturbation
(Chaudhuri, Monteleoni, and Sarwate 2011) and functional
mechanism (Zhang et al. 2012), which inject random noise
into the objective function rather than model parameters.

Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Thus, in this paper, we mainly focus on achieving classiﬁcation models that simultaneously provide differential pri-

Introduction

622

