The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

The Value of Paraphrase for Knowledge Base Predicates
Bingcong Xue,1 Sen Hu,1 Lei Zou,1,2 Jiashu Cheng3
1

Peking University, China;
Beijing Institute of Big Data Research, China;
3
Culver Academies, USA
{xuebingcong, husen, zoulei}@pku.edu.cn, jiashu.cheng@culver.org
2

to solve computer-hard tasks and has many successful applications, such as entity resolution (Vesdapunt, Bellare, and
Dalvi 2014; Wang, Xiao, and Lee 2015), image recognition
(Welinder and Perona 2010), data cleaning (Park and Widom
2014; Wang et al. 2014) and knowledge construction (Amsterdamer et al. 2015), especially when the public crowdsourcing platforms, like Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT)1 ,
CrowdFlower2 , and Upwork3 , have arisen and grown mature. In a crowdsourcing platform, requesters publish HITs
(human intelligence tasks); Workers ﬁnish the tasks and return the results, and they will get reward when their answers
are accepted. It is an easy part-time work pattern beneﬁting
both workers and requesters. At the same time, however, as
the tasks are distributed to a group of unskilled workers who
may make mistakes or give bad answers deliberately, the results obtained from crowdsourcing may have relatively low
quality, which signiﬁes delicate designs to control quality
is of great importance in a crowdsourcing job. Besides, requesters often hope to spend less money to get better results
in a shorter period of time. There is a compromise among
quality, money and time. So in crowdsourcing tasks, appropriate designs often have a crucial impact on the results.
Knowledge bases (KBs) are gaining more attention
for their wide use in many industrial ﬁelds. In a structured knowledge base, the Resource Description Framework
(RDF) is the general framework for representing entities
and their relations. Each RDF datum is stored as a triple
composed of three elements, in the form of subject, predicate, object. The predicate is often the key to comprehend the relation between entities (Zou and Özsu 2017). In
a given knowledge base, predicates are limited and ﬁxed,
and sometimes hard to understand, while natural language
expressions are abundant for the same meaning. There is
a need to map predicates of a KB to natural language expressions, i.e., collecting paraphrase for predicates in knowledge bases, which can be used in many NLP tasks such as
semantic parsing, question answering, machine translation
and query generation. Some existing works focus on paraphrasing and publish avaliable dictionaries (Miller 1995;

Abstract
Paraphrase, i.e., differing textual realizations of the same
meaning, has proven useful for many natural language processing (NLP) applications. Collecting paraphrase for predicates in knowledge bases (KBs) is the key to comprehend
the RDF triples in KBs. Existing works have published some
paraphrase datasets automatically extracted from large corpora, but have too many redundant pairs or don’t cover
enough predicates, which cannot be improved by computer
only and need the help of human beings. This paper shows
a full process of collecting large-scale and high-quality paraphrase dictionaries for predicates in knowledge bases, which
takes advantage of existing datasets and combines the technologies of machine mining and crowdsourcing. Our dataset
comprises 2284 distinct predicates in DBpedia and 31130
paraphrase pairs in total, the quality of which is a great leap
over previous works. Then it is demonstrated that such good
paraphrase dictionaries can do great help to natural language
processing tasks such as question answering and language
generation. We also publish our own dictionary for further
research.

1

Introduction

Paraphrase is the mapping from a text to a related one, where
the two texts describe the same thing or have the same meaning. It can be understood as ‘restate’ based on semantic similarity and word ontology. Paraphrase generation is the process of collecting or generating object-paraphrase pairs for a
given set of phrases, sentences or even passages. It often requires a subsequent veriﬁcation stage to determine whether
the two texts are paraphrastic, which is also called paraphrase recognition. However, due to the undemanding definition of paraphrase, this task cannot be perfectly ﬁnished
by computer only. Instead it needs human’s intuition, so it
is often distributed to a large group of people and improved
by human’s intelligence, the process of which is known as
crowdsourcing.
Crowdsourcing is the process of outsourcing a vast number of small, simple tasks to a distributed group of ordinary workers without speciﬁc skills. It is an effective way

1

https://www.mturk.com/
http://www.crowdﬂower.com
3
https://www.upwork.com
2

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9346

