The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Go From the General to the Particular:
Multi-Domain Translation with Domain Transformation Networks
Yong Wang*

Longyue Wang

The University of Hong Kong
wangyong@eee.hku.hk

Tencent AI Lab
vinnylywang@tencent.com

Shuming Shi

Victor O.K. Li

Zhaopeng Tu

Tencent AI Lab
shumingshi@tencent.com

The University of Hong Kong
vli@eee.hku.hk

Tencent AI Lab
zptu@tencent.com

A natural approach to this problem is ﬁne-tuning, which
ﬁrst trains a general model on all data and then separately
ﬁne-tunes it on each domain (Luong and Manning 2015).
However, the ﬁne-tuning approach requires maintaining a
distinct NMT model for each domain, which makes it unwieldy in practice. Towards learning a uniﬁed multi-domain
translation model, several researchers turn to augment the
NMT model to learn domain-speciﬁc knowledge. For example, Kobus et al. (2016) introduced a special domain tag
to the source sentence, and Britz et al. (2017) and Zeng
et al. (2018) guide the encoder output to embed domainspeciﬁc knowledge via an auxiliary object. However, all the
approaches require the encoder representations to embed
both the general and the particular knowledge at the same
time. Recent studies have shown that such overloaded usage
of hidden representation makes training the model difﬁcult,
and such problem can be mitigated by separating these functions (Rocktäschel et al. 2017; Zheng et al. 2018).

Abstract
The key challenge of multi-domain translation lies in simultaneously encoding both the general knowledge shared across
domains and the particular knowledge distinctive to each domain in a uniﬁed model. Previous work shows that the standard neural machine translation (NMT) model, trained on
mixed-domain data, generally captures the general knowledge, but misses the domain-speciﬁc knowledge. In response
to this problem, we augment NMT model with additional domain transformation networks to transform the general representations to domain-speciﬁc representations, which are subsequently fed to the NMT decoder. To guarantee the knowledge transformation, we also propose two complementary
supervision signals by leveraging the power of knowledge
distillation and adversarial learning. Experimental results on
several language pairs, covering both balanced and unbalanced multi-domain translation, demonstrate the effectiveness and universality of the proposed approach. Encouragingly, the proposed uniﬁed model achieves comparable results with the ﬁne-tuning approach that requires multiple
models to preserve the particular knowledge. Further analyses
reveal that the domain transformation networks successfully
capture the domain-speciﬁc knowledge as expected.1

In this work, we explicitly model the domain-speciﬁc
functionality for multi-domain translation by introducing
domain transformation networks (D TNs). More speciﬁcally,
the D TNs transform the general knowledge learned by the
encoder to the domain-speciﬁc knowledge, which is subsequently fed to the decoder. In this way, the encoder learns
general knowledge in the standard fashion, and the newly
added D TNs learn to preserve the particular knowledge. We
employ a residual connection on D TNs to enable the decoder to exploit both the general and particular knowledge.
To guarantee the knowledge transformation, we also propose
two supervision strategies: 1) domain distillation that encourages the uniﬁed model to learn domain-speciﬁc knowledge in a teacher-student framework; and 2) domain discrimination that guides the encoder output and the transformed representation to embed the required knowledge
with adversarial learning.

Introduction
In multi-domain translation, a uniﬁed neural machine translation (NMT) model is expected to provide high quality
translations across a wide range of diverse domains. The
main challenge of multi-domain translation lies in learning a uniﬁed model that simultaneously 1) exploits the general knowledge shared across domains, and 2) preserves
the particular knowledge that represents distinctive characteristics of each domain. Unfortunately, standard NMT
models trained on the mixed-domain data generally capture
the general knowledge while ignoring the particular knowledge, rendering them sub-optimal for multi-domain translation (Koehn and Knowles 2017).

We conduct experiments on three language pairs:
Chinese⇒English, German⇒English and English⇒French,
covering balanced, unbalanced and large-scale multidomain data. Experimental results show that our model signiﬁcantly and consistently outperforms both the T RANS FORMER baseline by +3.35 BLEU points and previous
multi-domain translation models (Kobus et al. 2016; Britz

* Work done when interning at Tencent AI Lab.
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The source code and experimental data are available at https:
//github.com/wangyong1122/dtn.

9233

