The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Transfer Value Iteration Networks
Junyi Shen,1,2 Hankz Hankui Zhuo,1∗ Jin Xu,2 Bin Zhong,2 Sinno Jialin Pan3
1

School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China
2
Data Quality Team, WeChat, Tencent Inc., China
3
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{vichyshen, jinxxu, harryzhong}@tencent.com, zhuohank@mail.sysu.edu.cn, sinnopan@ntu.edu.sg

policy. To relax this assumption, in this paper, we propose
a transfer learning framework to generate VIN-based policies across different domains even if their action spaces and
feature spaces are not identical.
Intuitively, if the target domain has different feature space
and action space to the source domain, the VIN-based policy
learned from the source domain fails to be used in the target
domain directly. A straight-forward solution is to learn a new
policy from scratch from the target domain, which is timeconsuming. Therefore, it is more desirable to transfer the
learned knowledge captured in the source-domain VIN-based
policy to the target domain, such that an optimal target policy
can be learned with less training data and shorter training
time. However, if the source domain and the target domain
have totally different feature spaces or action spaces, it is
extremely difﬁcult to adapt a learned policy across domains
effectively. Therefore, in this work, we assume that 1) the
feature spaces between the source and the target domains can
be different but are not heterogeneous (e.g., text v.s. images),
2) there is a common subset of actions between the source
and the target domains.
We propose the Transfer VIN (TVIN ) to transfer the a
well-trained VIN-based policy from the source domain to
the target domain with limited training data. Speciﬁcally,
to address the difference between feature spaces and action
spaces across domains, in TVIN , we develop two transfer
learning modules with respect to the learned reward function
and the learned transition function, respectively:
• We ﬁrst encode state observations (with different features
to the source domain) in the target domain to the same
representation of the source domain, such that the reward
function transferred from the pre-trained VIN can accurately produce reward images in the target domain.
• We then leverage the common subset of actions between
the source and the target domains to transfer state-action
transition information from the source domain to the target
domain. Furthermore, we ﬁne-tune the transferred transition function by introducing transfer weights to automatically learn to what degree the transferred actions resemble.
By leveraging knowledge transferred via the above transfer learning modules, we further design a new Value Iteration module (VI module) to generate a policy for the target

Abstract
Value iteration networks (VINs) have been demonstrated to
have a good generalization ability for reinforcement learning
tasks across similar domains. However, based on our experiments, a policy learned by VINs still fail to generalize well
on the domain whose action space and feature space are not
identical to those in the domain where it is trained. In this
paper, we propose a transfer learning approach on top of VINs,
termed Transfer VINs (TVINs), such that a learned policy
from a source domain can be generalized to a target domain
with only limited training data, even if the source domain and
the target domain have domain-speciﬁc actions and features.
We empirically verify that our proposed TVINs outperform
VINs when the source and the target domains have similar
but not identical action and feature spaces. Furthermore, we
show that the performance improvement is consistent across
different environments, maze sizes, dataset sizes as well as different values of hyperparameters such as number of iteration
and kernel size.

Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been applied
to reinforcement learning (RL) tasks to learn policies, i.e., a
mapping from observations of system states to actions (Mnih
et al. 2015). As analyzed in (Tamar et al. 2016), reactive
polices learned by conventional CNN-based architectures
usually fail to generalize well to previously unseen RL domains even though most of the conﬁgurations remain the
same to the training domain. To boost the generalization
performance, value iteration networks (VINs) (Tamar et al.
2016) have been proposed to integrate a planning module
into policy learning. VINs have been applied to various application tasks including path planning, e.g., visual navigation
(Gupta et al. 2017) and the WebNav challenge (Nogueira and
Cho 2016), which requires the agent to navigate the links of a
website towards a goal web-page, speciﬁed by a short query.
Despite the success of VINs, we observe that the generalizability of VINs is based on an implicit assumption that the
feature space and the action space in the unseen domain are
as the same as the ones in the seen domain for training the
∗

corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5676

