The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Side Information Dependence as a Regularizer for
Analyzing Human Brain Conditions across Cognitive Experiments
Shuo Zhou,1 Wenwen Li,2 Christopher R. Cox,3 Haiping Lu1,4
1

2

Department of Computer Science, University of Shefﬁeld, United Kingdom
Centre for Clinical Brain Sciences, University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom
3
Department of Psychology, Louisiana State University, United States
4
Shefﬁeld Institute for Translational Neuroscience, United Kingdom
{szhou20, h.lu}@shefﬁeld.ac.uk, wenwen.li@ed.ac.uk, chriscox@lsu.edu
the task(s) to be leveraged is called the source domain (Pan
et al. 2011). A TL problem is homogeneous when the feature and label space of the source and target domains are the
same, and heterogeneous if they are different.
Transfer learning techniques have been studied in some
fMRI applications. Mensch et al. (2017) take a multi-task
learning approach to use resting-state data from the Human Connectome Project (Van Essen et al. 2012) to learn
a general representation via matrix decomposition and then
jointly optimize multiple heterogeneous task-based fMRI
classiﬁcation tasks. Zhang, Chen, and Ramadge (2018) take
a matrix factorization approach that relies on shared subjects between datasets to learn better subject factor matrices.
Deep models such as autoencoder (Velioglu and Vural 2017;
Li, Parikh, and He 2018) and AlexNet (Zhang et al. 2019)
pre-trained on generic source data have also been used to
represent the target fMRI data for classiﬁcation.
However, the source data used by the existing fMRI
TL studies are independent to the target classiﬁcation task.
While public neuroimaging data from multiple sites, e.g., the
OpenNeuro (Gorgolewski et al. 2017), have many similar
brain conditions across different cognitive experiments. This
enables homogeneous TL studies to leverage the power of
overlapping labels across domains. Furthermore, it may potentially offer interpretation/insights from the domain shift
perspective for neuroscientists. Here, we make the ﬁrst attempt, to the best of our knowledge, to investigate homogeneous TL for brain condition decoding.
Homogeneous TL methods are mainly studied in the
ﬁelds of computer vision (CV) and natural language processing (NLP). They focus on minimizing data distribution
mismatch, i.e., making features from the source and target
to have as similar distributions as possible, via 1) learning a
feature mapping (Pan et al. 2011; Long et al. 2013b); or 2)
jointly optimizing the distribution mismatch and classiﬁer
parameters (Long et al. 2013a; Wang et al. 2018).
Brain condition decoding presents TL challenges different from those in CV/NLP. fMRI data are generated by
brain signals, which are not natural images that human visual system has adapted to interpret. Consequently, fMRI
analysis relies heavily on statistics. Furthermore, cognitive
stimuli are implemented varying across experiments. Even

Abstract
The increasing of public neuroimaging datasets opens a door
to analyzing homogeneous human brain conditions across
datasets by transfer learning (TL). However, neuroimaging
data are high-dimensional, noisy, and with small sample
sizes. It is challenging to learn a robust model for data across
different cognitive experiments and subjects. A recent TL
approach minimizes domain dependence to learn common
cross-domain features, via the Hilbert-Schmidt Independence
Criterion (HSIC). Inspired by this approach and the multisource TL theory, we propose a Side Information Dependence
Regularization (SIDeR) learning framework for TL in brain
condition decoding. Speciﬁcally, SIDeR simultaneously minimizes the empirical risk and the statistical dependence on the
domain side information, to reduce the theoretical generalization error bound. We construct 17 brain decoding TL tasks
using public neuroimaging data for evaluation. Comprehensive experiments validate the superiority of SIDeR over ten
competing methods, particularly an average improvement of
15.6% on the TL tasks with multi-source experiments.

Introduction
In cognitive neuroscience, neuroimaging can help relate different cognitive functions to patterns of neural activity using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) (Ogawa
et al. 1990). This often takes the form of a classiﬁcation
problem (Cox and Savoy 2003), e.g., distinguishing between brain conditions associated with experimental stimuli. While fMRI produces volumes with the number of voxels in the order of 105 , a typical experiment will have on
the order of 100 discrete trials. This severely constrains
the number of training examples available for the classiﬁer.
Moreover, neuroimaging data are noisy and contain a significant amount of physiological, respiratory, and mechanical
artifacts, which requires robust modeling against noise (Aydore, Thirion, and Varoquaux 2019).
Transfer learning (TL) is an attractive machine learning
scheme that can improve the classiﬁcation performance on
a learning task by leveraging the knowledge from related
tasks. The task of interest is called the target domain, while
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6957

