The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference (IAAI-20)

Combining Real-Time Segmentation and Classiﬁcation of
Rehabilitation Exercises with LSTM Networks and Pointwise Boosting
Antonio Bevilacqua,1 Giovanni Ciampi,2 Rob Argent,1,3 Brian Caulﬁeld,1 Tahar Kechadi1
1

Insight Centre for Data Analytics, University College Dublin, 2 Università degli studi di Salerno, 3 Beacon Hospital, Dublin
{antonio.bevilacqua, rob.argent, brian.caulﬁeld, tahar.kechadi}@insight-centre.org, g.ciampi5@studenti.unisa.it

thus it provides live feedback to the users, and does not require domain knowledge about the target exercises. These
two aspects constitute crutial requirements for any biofeedback system to be adopted in real world applications.
The rest of the paper is organised as follows. Section 2
brieﬂy introduces existing segmentation and classiﬁcation
methods currently in the state of the art. In Section 3 we
lay out a formal description of the segmentation task, and
we provide an overview of our proposed solution. In Section
4 we introduce our datasets and the basic processes behind
data collection and annotation. Findings of the experimental
campaigns are presented in Section 5, while ﬁnal remarks
and considerations are given in Section 6.

Abstract
Autonomous biofeedback tools in support of rehabilitation
patients are commonly built as multi-tier pipelines, where a
segmentation algorithm is ﬁrst responsible for isolating motion primitives, and then classiﬁcation can be performed on
each primitive. In this paper, we present a novel segmentation technique that integrates on-the-ﬂy qualitative classiﬁcation of physical movements in the process. We adopt Long
Short-Term Memory (LSTM) networks to model the temporal patterns of a streaming multivariate time series, obtained
by sampling acceleration and angular velocity of the limb
in motion, and then we aggregate the pointwise predictions
of each isolated movement using different boosting methods.
We tested our technique against a dataset composed of four
common lower-limb rehabilitation exercises, collected from
heterogeneous populations (clinical and healthy). Experimental results are promising and show that combining segmentation and classiﬁcation of orthopaedic movements is a valid
method with many potential real-world applications.

1

2

Related Work

An extensive body of literature exists about human motion
segmentation, and speciﬁcally rehabilitation exercise segmentation and classiﬁcation. In their comprehensive study,
Lin, Karg, and Kulić introduce the problem of segmentation
in the context of human motion modeling (Lin, Karg, and
Kulić 2016). The authors describe the main requirements of
a segmentation system, and introduce common state-of-theart segmentation techniques such as Zero Velocity Crossing
(ZVC) or Hidden Markov Models (HMM). ZVC is based
on the detection of points where there is a change of direction in the movement (Fod, Matarić, and Jenkins 2002),
while HMMs model the observed signals as a sequence of
unobservable Markovian states. Both ZVC and HMM are
popular in literature, as they do not rely on domain knowledge. However, given their poor mechanism of false positive rejection, they are prone to oversegmentation. In a study
conducted by Bevilacqua et al., the authors propose a segmentation technique based on the clustering of ZVC points.
The cluster centroids are used to extract segment candidates,
and analytically adjusted until a good match is found against
previously generated templates. Once segments are isolated,
they are classiﬁed using a set of features extracted from the
raw input signals (Bevilacqua et al. 2018). This method was
proved to be effective on a cohort of exercises collected in a
laboratory environment, however, it requires the entire exercise to be completed before segmentation and classiﬁcation
can take place. More recently, Lin, Joukov, and Kulić suggested a segmentation strategy based on the classiﬁcation of
individual points of the joint angle measure (Cheng and Oel-

Introduction

Integrating machine learning methods in healthcare applications is becoming an established trend within the context of
rehabilitative science (Tack 2019). Patients and practitioners
can both beneﬁt from the adoption of autonomous biofeedback tools, capable of producing quantitative and qualitative feedback during physical therapy, with the aim of supporting patient adherence (Argent, Daly, and Caulﬁeld 2018;
Giggins, Persson, and Caulﬁeld 2013). A common pipeline
to generate such feedback involves a segmentation step, that
is, the isolation of individual movements from a longer activity stream, and a subsequent classiﬁcation step, so that
deviant or aberrant movements can be identiﬁed and notiﬁed to the patients. Often, systems that acquire the input
data from inertial sensors such as accelerometer and gyroscope (Godfrey et al. 2008) address segmentation and classiﬁcation as completely distinct, disjoint steps. In this paper, we present a novel segmentation technique that embeds
on-the-ﬂy classiﬁcation for rehabilitation movements, sampled as multivariate timeseries of inertial signals, within the
segmentation process. Our method works on streaming data,
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13229

