The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Federated Latent Dirichlet Allocation:
A Local Differential Privacy Based Framework
Yansheng Wang, Yongxin Tong, Dingyuan Shi
SKLSDE Lab, BDBC, School of Computer Science and Engineering and IRI, Beihang University, China
{arthur wang, yxtong, chnsdy}@buaa.edu.cn

models, we investigate LDA model training in a federated
learning setting (McMahan et al. 2017; Yang et al. 2019).
That is, the LDA model is collaboratively trained between an
untrustworthy data collector and multiple users, where the
raw text data of each individual user are locally stored and
only privacy-protected intermediate results are transmitted
to the data collector for model training. However, to realize
such federated LDA learning is non-trivial. It is challenging
to decide how and what to communicate between the data
collector and the users such that there is guarantee on both
data privacy and model accuracy.
In this paper, we propose FedLDA, the ﬁrst-of-its-kind
solution to federated learning of LDA models without assuming any trustworthy data collector. FedLDA quantiﬁes
and protects user privacy in the context of local differential
privacy (LDP) (Evﬁmievski, Gehrke, and Srikant 2003), a
privacy measure naturally ﬁt for a federated learning setting
with no trusted third parties. Central in FedLDA is a novel
and practical LDP mechanism that offers theoretical guarantees for both privacy and utility (assessed by errors in model
parameters) by exploiting randomized response (RR) techniques (Erlingsson, Pihur, and Korolova 2014). We also devise techniques to reduce the communication cost of learning with FedLDA. The contributions of this work are summarized as follows.

Abstract
Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) is a widely adopted topic
model for industrial-grade text mining applications. However, its performance heavily relies on the collection of large
amount of text data from users’ everyday life for model training. Such data collection risks severe privacy leakage if the
data collector is untrustworthy. To protect text data privacy
while allowing accurate model training, we investigate federated learning of LDA models. That is, the model is collaboratively trained between an untrustworthy data collector and
multiple users, where raw text data of each user are stored
locally and not uploaded to the data collector. To this end,
we propose FedLDA, a local differential privacy (LDP) based
framework for federated learning of LDA models. Central
in FedLDA is a novel LDP mechanism called Random Response with Priori (RRP), which provides theoretical guarantees on both data privacy and model accuracy. We also design techniques to reduce the communication cost between
the data collector and the users during model training. Extensive experiments on three open datasets veriﬁed the effectiveness of our solution.

1

Introduction

The Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) (Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003) model is a popular topic model for text-mining. It
has widespread adoption in applications such as text classiﬁcation, tag recommendation, opinion mining etc. (Blei, Ng,
and Jordan 2003; Steyvers et al. 2004; Airoldi et al. 2008;
Blei 2012), and has been a fundamental building block for
many commercial products. For example, LDA is used by
Microsoft (Yuan et al. 2015), Baidu (Jiang et al. 2018) and
Tencent (Yu et al. 2017) in many of their services.
Accurate LDA models rely on large amounts of text data
collected from users’ everyday life for training. Reviews
of products, tags on movies, microblogs and E-mails are
all common sources for data collection. Consequently, improper exploitation of these data by an untrustworthy data
collector can easily leak sensitive information and violate
user privacy.
To avoid malicious use of text data from an untrustworthy
data collector while allowing accurate training of the LDA

• This is the ﬁrst work to consider LDA training in a federated setting without a trustworthy data collector, an increasingly important yet largely unexplored problem in
many industrial topic mining applications.
• We propose a local differential privacy (LDP) based solution to federated learning of topic models without trustworthy third parties. To the best of our knowledge, we are
the ﬁrst to introduce LDP to federated learning and we design a novel LDP mechanism with theoretical guarantees
on both data privacy and model accuracy.
• We evaluate our solution on three open datasets. Experimental results validate the effectiveness of our solution.
In the rest of this paper, we ﬁrst review basics on LDA and
LDP, and then elaborate on the design and performance of
our proposed FedLDA. Finally we review related work and
conclude this work.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6283

