The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Multi-Channel Neural Graphical Event Model with Negative Evidence
Tian Gao,†∗ Dharmashankar Subramanian,†∗ Karthikeyan Shanmugam,†
Debarun Bhattacharjya,† Nicholas Mattei§
†

Research AI, IBM T. J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA
Department of Computer Science, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA, USA
{tgao, dharmash, debarunb}@us.ibm.com
Karthikeyan.Shanmugam2@ibm.com, nsmattei@tulane.edu

§

proximal graphical event models (Bhattacharjya, Subramanian, and Gao 2018), forest-based point processes (Weiss and
Page 2013), piecewise-constant conditional intensity models
(Gunawardana, Meek, and Xu 2011), and Poisson networks
(Rajaram, Graepel, and Herbrich 2005), and others like nonhomogeneous Poisson processes (Goulding, Preston, and
Smith 2016), continuous time noisy-or (CT-NOR) models
(Simma et al. 2008), and Poisson cascades (Simma and Jordan 2010). One drawback is that all these approaches make
assumptions about the parametric form of the corresponding
model, and this is challenging in practice without ﬁrst-hand
knowledge of the underlying data generating process.
On the other hand, researchers have also proposed sequential deep learning techniques for event data sets (Xiao
et al. 2017b) such as recurrent marked temporal point processes (RMTPP) (Du et al. 2016) and neural Hawkes processes (Mei and Eisner 2017). These models use a recurrent neural network to capture the history dependency of
the conditional intensity function. Note that these methods
are semi-parametric; beyond just the network weights, they
make functional assumptions for how to translate the hidden states of the network to a corresponding event arrival
rate. They also show a remarkable similarity to the Hawkes
process where each historical event exerts an additive inﬂuence on conditional intensity, and which decays over time. In
neural Hawkes (Mei and Eisner 2017), the cell state of the
network decays exponentially. In RMTPP (Du et al. 2016),
there is a single event arrival rate whose epochs carry a
label to capture multiple event types, and this single rate
is an exponential function of the sum of a baseline intensity along with additive inﬂuences from the past. While
such representations can be powerful and expressive, they
may not adequately learn general-purpose forms of historydependence. For example, consider history-dependence that
doesn’t involve exponential decay; examples include piecewise constant intensities (Gunawardana, Meek, and Xu 2011;
Bhattacharjya, Subramanian, and Gao 2018), or processes
involving time lags with delayed excitation or inhibition, or
if different event types follow varying time scales, etc. Nonsimple-decay and delayed, nonlinear intensity functions are
not satisfactorily addressed by existing works.
In this paper, we propose a non-parametric deep learning
approach to model multivariate event data sets in continuoustime. We seek to learn history-dependent conditional intensity

Abstract
Event datasets are sequences of events of various types occurring irregularly over the time-line, and they are increasingly
prevalent in numerous domains. Existing work for modeling
events using conditional intensities rely on either using some
underlying parametric form to capture historical dependencies,
or on non-parametric models that focus primarily on tasks
such as prediction. We propose a non-parametric deep neural
network approach in order to estimate the underlying intensity
functions. We use a novel multi-channel RNN that optimally
reinforces the negative evidence of no observable events with
the introduction of fake event epochs within each consecutive inter-event interval. We evaluate our method against
state-of-the-art baselines on model ﬁtting tasks as gauged by
log-likelihood. Through experiments on both synthetic and
real-world datasets, we ﬁnd that our proposed approach outperforms existing baselines on most of the datasets studied.

Introduction
Event stream data is collected to explore the dynamics and
behavior of a wide variety of systems including social networks, biochemical networks, electronic health records, and
computer logs in data centers. In a multivariate event stream,
events of multiple types (labels) occur at irregularly spaced
time stamps on a common timeline. Event models seek to
capture the joint stochastic dynamics of such event streams.
Multivariate point processes and conditional intensity functions provide the mathematical framework for capturing event
dynamics (Aalen, Borgan, and Gjessing 2008). In this framework, the instantaneous arrival rate of an event type at any
point in time typically depends on the history of all historical
event arrivals before that point in time.
The model ﬁtting task for event stream data has a long
history in machine learning, including prior work in temporal
point process modeling (Gunawardana, Meek, and Xu 2011;
Parikh, Gunawardana, and Meek 2012; Weiss and Page 2013;
Bhattacharjya, Subramanian, and Gao 2018). It is fundamentally different from the prediction task as it is unsupervised
since no ground truth (graph) model is given. Various models have been proposed in the literature to capture historydependent arrival rates including graphical event models like
∗
indicates equal contribution
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3946

