The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Rank Aggregation via Heterogeneous Thurstone Preference Models
Tao Jin,1∗ Pan Xu,2∗ Quanquan Gu,2† Farzad Farnoud1†
1

University of Virginia, 2 University of California, Los Angeles
{taoj, farzad}@virginia.edu, {panxu, qgu}@cs.ucla.edu

ters include a true score for each of the items. In particular, Thurstone’s preference model (Thurstone 1927) assumes
that comparisons or partial rankings result from comparing
versions of the true scores corrupted by additive noise. Special cases of Thurstone’s model include the popular BradleyTerry-Luce (BTL) model for pairwise comparisons and the
Placket-Luce (PL) model for partial rankings. In these settings, estimating the true scores from data will allow us to
identify the true ranking of the items. Various estimation and
aggregation algorithms have been developed for Thurstone’s
preference model and its special cases, including (Hunter
2004; Guiver and Snelson 2009; Hajek, Oh, and Xu 2014;
Chen and Suh 2015; Vojnovic and Yun 2016; Negahban, Oh,
and Shah 2017).
Conventional models of ranked data and aggregation algorithms that rely on them make the assumption that the data
is either produced by a single user1 or from a set of users
that are similar. In real-world datasets, however, users that
provide the raw data are usually diverse with different levels
of familiarity with the objects of interest, thus providing data
that is not uniformly reliable and should not have equal inﬂuence on the ﬁnal result. This is of particular importance in
applications such as aggregating expert opinions for decisionmaking and aggregating annotations provided by workers in
crowd sourcing settings.
In this paper, we study the problem of rank aggregation for heterogeneous populations of users. We present a
generalization of Thurstone’s model, called the heterogeneous Thurstone model (HTM), which allows users with
different noise levels, as well as a certain class of adversarial users. Unlike previous efforts on rank aggregation
for heterogeneous populations such as (Chen et al. 2013;
Kumar and Lease 2011), the proposed model maintains the
generality of Thurstone’s framework and thus also extends its
special cases such as BTL and PL models. We evaluate the
performance of the method using simulated data for different
noise distributions. We also demonstrate that the proposed aggregation algorithm outperforms the state-of-the-art method
for real datasets on evaluating the difﬁculty of English text

Abstract
We propose the Heterogeneous Thurstone Model (HTM) for
aggregating ranked data, which can take the accuracy levels of
different users into account. By allowing different noise distributions, the proposed HTM model maintains the generality of
Thurstone’s original framework, and as such, also extends the
Bradley-Terry-Luce (BTL) model for pairwise comparisons
to heterogeneous populations of users. Under this framework,
we also propose a rank aggregation algorithm based on alternating gradient descent to estimate the underlying item scores
and accuracy levels of different users simultaneously from
noisy pairwise comparisons. We theoretically prove that the
proposed algorithm converges linearly up to a statistical error which matches that of the state-of-the-art method for the
single-user BTL model. We evaluate the proposed HTM model
and algorithm on both synthetic and real data, demonstrating
that it outperforms existing methods.

1

Introduction

Rank aggregation refers to the task of recovering the order of a set of objects given pairwise comparisons, partial
rankings, or full rankings obtained from a set of users or
experts. Compared to rating items, comparison is a more
natural task for humans which can provide more consistent
results, in part because it does not rely on arbitrary scales.
Furthermore, ranked data can be obtained not only by explicitly querying users, but also through passive data collection,
i.e., by observing user behavior, for example product purchases, clicks on search engine results, choice of movies in
streaming services, etc. As a result, rank aggregation has a
wide range of applications, from classical social choice applications (de Borda 1781) to information retrieval (Dwork
et al. 2001), recommendation systems (Baltrunas, Makcinskas, and Ricci 2010), and bioinformatics (Aerts et al. 2006;
Kim, Farnoud, and Milenkovic 2015).
In aggregating rankings, the raw data is often noisy and
inconsistent. One approach to arrive at a single ranking is
to assume a generative model for the data whose parame∗

Equal contribution.
Co-corresponding authors.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

1

We use the term user to refer to any entity that provides ranked
data. In speciﬁc applications other terms may be more appropriate,
such as voter, expert, judge, worker, and annotator.
4353

