The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Deep Discriminative CNN with Temporal
Ensembling for Ambiguously-Labeled Image Classiﬁcation
Yao Yao,1 Jiehui Deng,1 Xiuhua Chen,1 Chen Gong,1,∗ Jianxin Wu,3 Jian Yang1,2,∗
1

PCA Lab, the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry
of Education, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
2
Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security
3
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
{yaoyao, jhdeng, chenxh, chen.gong, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn, wujx2001@nju.edu.cn


Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of image classiﬁcation where training images are ambiguously annotated with
multiple candidate labels, among which only one is correct
but is not accessible during the training phase. Due to the
adopted non-deep framework and improper disambiguation
strategies, traditional approaches are usually short of the representation ability and discrimination ability, so their performances are still to be improved. To remedy these two shortcomings, this paper proposes a novel approach termed “Deep
Discriminative CNN” (D2 CNN) with temporal ensembling.
Speciﬁcally, to improve the representation ability, we innovatively employ the deep convolutional neural networks for
ambiguously-labeled image classiﬁcation, in which the wellknown ResNet is adopted as our backbone. To enhance the
discrimination ability, we design an entropy-based regularizer
to maximize the margin between the potentially correct label
and the unlikely ones of each image. In addition, we utilize
the temporally assembled predictions of different epochs to
guide the training process so that the latent groundtruth label
can be conﬁdently highlighted. This is much superior to the
traditional disambiguation operations which treat all candidate labels equally and identify the hidden groundtruth label
via some heuristic ways. Thorough experimental results on
multiple datasets ﬁrmly demonstrate the effectiveness of our
proposed D2 CNN when compared with other existing stateof-the-art approaches.

   
 

%

   
 

  
     
     
   

  ! 
  " # 
  $ 

Figure 1: Applications of learning from ambiguously labeled
images. (a) is a newsletter containing an image and the text
caption. From the caption we know that Lionel Messi and
Luis Suarez are in the image but we cannot ﬁgure out the
concrete correspondence between the names and the faces.
(b) shows an image of a mule for crowdsourcing. However,
some annotators may mistakenly label it as a horse or a donkey due to their limited cognitive ability.

face naming (Guillaumin et al. 2008; Zeng et al. 2013;
Chen et al. 2014), an image with faces is often associated
with textual description, by which we can roughly know who
appear in this image. However, the correspondence of the
faces in the image and the names in the textual description is
still unknown (see Figure 1 (a)). Another application is that
in crowdsourcing area, the annotators with different levels
of expertise may assign different labels (can be correct or
incorrect) to the same image. Therefore, it is necessary to
ﬁnd out the latent groundtruth label of every annotated image (see Figure 1 (b)).
Learning from such ambiguously labeled examples is also
related to “partial label learning” (Wu and Zhang 2018;
Feng and An 2019a; Wang, Li, and Zhou 2019) or “superset label learning” (Liu and Dietterich 2012; 2014; Gong et
al. 2018b). Formally speaking, let X ∈ Rd denote the ddimensional input space and Y = {1, 2, ..., c} denote the
label space with c class labels. We denote the training set
of the ambiguously labeled examples by D = {(xi , Si )|1 ≤
i ≤ n}, where xi is the i-th input feature vector and Si is the
corresponding candidate label set of xi . More speciﬁcally,
Si = Ai ∪ {yi }, where Ai is the set of false positive labels
and yi is the latent groundtruth label lying in Si , which is

Introduction
Image classiﬁcation is a fundamental computer vision problem which has been intensively studied in the past years.
In the traditional setting, the unique groundtruth label of
each training image should be available when the classiﬁers are trained. Unfortunately, in many real-world situations, the images may lack clear labels and manually
labeling them will incur unaffordable monetary or time
cost. Instead of acquiring full and clear human annotations,
ambiguously-labeled image classiﬁcation deals with the images which are associated with multiple candidate labels,
and only one of them is valid. For example, in automatic
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12669

