The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Active Learning in the Geometric Block Model
Eli Chien,1∗ Antonia Maria Tulino,2,3 Jaime Llorca2
1

2

ECE, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Illinois,
Nokia Bell Labs, New Jersey, 3 DIETI, University of Naples Federico II, Italy
ichien3@illinois.edu, {a.tulino, jaime.llorca}@nokia-bell-labs.com

Yuan 2006), identifying customer interests in recommendation systems (Sahebi and Cohen 2011), and performing image classiﬁcation and segmentation (Shi and Malik 2000).
The stochastic block model (SBM) is a popular random
graph model for community detection that generalizes the
well-known Erdös-Renyi model (Holland, Laskey, and Leinhardt 1983; Mossel, Neeman, and Sly 2015). In the SBM,
the probability of having an edge between a pair of nodes
depends only on the labels of the corresponding two nodes.
In its simplest version, the SBM contains two communities
of equal sizes, such that a pair of nodes from the same community are connected with probability p, and nodes from different communities are connected with probability q. Prior
works (see (Abbe 2017) for an overview) have established
the limits of unsupervised methods to achieve exact community detection (recovery) in terms of the relative difference
between p and q.
However, many practical scenarios fall in the regimes
where unsupervised methods fail to achieve exact recovery
(difference between p and q below fundamental limit). It has
then become apparent the need to understand if, in those
regimes where unsupervised methods fail, we can still recover the correct community memberships by querying the
labels of a small subset of nodes. The process of actively
querying the labels of a subset of nodes, referred to as active
learning, is a very useful tool for many machine learning applications where the acquisition of labeled data is expensive
and/or time consuming (Cohn, Atlas, and Ladner 1994). In
the active learning framework, we are allowed to query node
labels up to a budget constraint in order to improve overall
classiﬁcation accuracy. The authors of (Gadde et al. 2016)
showed that a sub-linear number of queries is sufﬁcient to
achieve exact recovery below the limit (in terms of difference between p and q) of unsupervised methods in the SBM,
and that the number of queries needed for exact recovery depends on how far we are below such limit – hence providing
a smooth trade-off between query complexity and clustering
accuracy in the SBM.
While the SBM has gained a lot of popularity to benchmark the performance of clustering algorithms owing to
its ease of tractability, it fails to capture very important
properties of real networks, such as “transitivity” (‘friends

Abstract
The geometric block model is a recently proposed generative
model for random graphs that is able to capture the inherent
geometric properties of many community detection problems,
providing more accurate characterizations of practical community structures compared with the popular stochastic block
model. Galhotra et al. recently proposed a motif-counting algorithm for unsupervised community detection in the geometric block model that is proved to be near-optimal. They
also characterized the regimes of the model parameters for
which the proposed algorithm can achieve exact recovery. In
this work, we initiate the study of active learning in the geometric block model. That is, we are interested in the problem of exactly recovering the community structure of random graphs following the geometric block model under arbitrary model parameters, by possibly querying the labels of
a limited number of chosen nodes. We propose two active
learning algorithms that combine the use of motif-counting
with two different label query policies. Our main contribution is to show that sampling the labels of a vanishingly small
fraction of nodes (sub-linear in the total number of nodes)
is sufﬁcient to achieve exact recovery in the regimes under
which the state-of-the-art unsupervised method fails. We validate the superior performance of our algorithms via numerical simulations on both real and synthetic datasets.

1

Introduction

Community detection (or graph clustering) is one of the
most important tasks in machine learning and data mining.
In this problem, it is assumed that each node (or vertex) in
a network (or graph) belongs to one of the underlying communities (or clusters), and that the topology of the network
depends on these latent group memberships (or labels). The
goal is to recover the communities by partitioning the nodes
into different classes that match the labels up to a permutation. This problem has many applications, such as clustering in social networks (Fortunato 2010), detecting protein complexes in protein interaction networks (Chen and
∗
This work was done during Eli Chien’s internship at Nokia
Bell Labs, New Jersey.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3641

