The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

To Signal or Not To Signal: Exploiting Uncertain Real-Time
Information in Signaling Games for Security and Sustainability
Elizabeth Bondi,1 Hoon Oh,2 Haifeng Xu,3 Fei Fang,2 Bistra Dilkina,4 Milind Tambe1
1

Center for Research on Computation and Society, Harvard University, ebondi@g.harvard.edu, tambe@seas.harvard.edu
2
Carnegie Mellon University, hooh@andrew.cmu.edu, feifang@cmu.edu
3
University of Virginia, hx4ad@virginia.edu
4
University of Southern California, dilkina@usc.edu

Abstract
Motivated by real-world deployment of drones for conservation, this paper advances the state-of-the-art in security games
with signaling. The well-known defender-attacker security
games framework can help in planning for such strategic
deployments of sensors and human patrollers, and warning
signals to ward off adversaries. However, we show that defenders can suffer signiﬁcant losses when ignoring real-world
uncertainties despite carefully planned security game strategies with signaling. In fact, defenders may perform worse
than forgoing drones completely in this case. We address
this shortcoming by proposing a novel game model that integrates signaling and sensor uncertainty; perhaps surprisingly,
we show that defenders can still perform well via a signaling
strategy that exploits uncertain real-time information. For example, even in the presence of uncertainty, the defender still
has an informational advantage in knowing that she has or has
not actually detected the attacker; and she can design a signaling scheme to “mislead” the attacker who is uncertain as to
whether he has been detected. We provide theoretical results,
a novel algorithm, scale-up techniques, and experimental results from simulation based on our ongoing deployment of a
conservation drone system in South Africa.

1

Figure 1: A drone and drone team member who are currently
searching for poachers in a South African park at night.

deter or prevent poaching. This work is motivated by this
ongoing, real-world deployment of drones for conservation.
Security challenges similar to those in conservation must
be addressed around the world, from protecting large public
gatherings such as marathons (Yin, An, and Jain 2014) to
protecting cities. Security game models have been shown to
be effective in many of these real-world domains (Tambe
2011; Bucarey et al. 2017). Recently, these models have
begun to take into account real-time information, for example by using information from footprints when tracking poachers, or images from sensors (Wang et al. 2019;
Basilico, De Nittis, and Gatti 2015). In particular, signaling
based on real-time information, e.g., signaling to indicate
the presence of law enforcement (Xu et al. 2018), has been
introduced and established as a fundamental area of work.
Despite the rising interest in real-time information and
signaling, unfortunately, security games literature has failed
to consider uncertainty in sensing real-time information and
signaling, hindering real-world applicability of the game
models. Previously, only some types of uncertainty have
been considered, such as uncertainty in the attacker’s observation of the defender’s strategy, attacker’s payoff values,
or attacker’s rationality (Yin et al. 2011; Nguyen et al. 2014;
Yang et al. 2011). However, there are fundamentally new insights when handling uncertainties w.r.t. real-time sensing
and signaling, which we discuss at the end of this section.
We therefore focus on uncertainty in security games, in
which real-time information comes from sensors that alert
the defender when an attacker is detected and can also send
warning signals to the attacker to deter the attack in real
time. We consider both uncertainty in the sensor’s detection
of adversaries (henceforth detection uncertainty) and uncer-

Introduction

Conservation drones are currently deployed in South Africa
to prevent wildlife poaching in national parks (Fig. 1). The
drones, equipped with thermal infrared cameras, ﬂy throughout the park at night when poaching typically occurs. Should
anything suspicious be observed in the videos, nearby park
rangers can prevent poaching, and a warning signal (e.g.,
drone lights) can be deployed for deterrence (Air Shepherd
2019). This requires a great deal of planning and coordination, as well as constant video monitoring. Rather than constant monitoring, we have recently worked with Air Shepherd to deploy an automatic detection system to locate humans and animals in these videos. Although an automatic
detection system is helpful, its detections are uncertain. Potential false negative detections, in which the system fails to
detect actual poachers, may lead to missed opportunities to
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1369

