The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

CAG: A Real-Time Low-Cost Enhanced-Robustness
High-Transferability Content-Aware Adversarial Attack Generator
Huy Phan,1∗ Yi Xie,1∗ Siyu Liao,1 Jie Chen,2 Bo Yuan1
1

Rutgers University - School of Engineering
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research
{huy.phan, yi.xie, siyu.liao}@rutgers.edu, chenjie@us.ibm.com, bo.yuan@soe.rutger.edu
2

their high vulnerability to adversarial attack (Goodfellow,
Shlens, and Szegedy 2014; Carlini and Wagner 2017), which
adds well-designed tiny perturbations to the legitimate inputs to cause the intended misclassiﬁcation of DNN models. Such attacks could cause severe safety, economic and
social problems if launched to the DNNs deployed in practical applications ranging from face recognition, autonomous
driving to speech authentication.

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are vulnerable to adversarial
attack despite their tremendous success in many artiﬁcial intelligence ﬁelds. Adversarial attack is a method that causes
the intended misclassﬁcation by adding imperceptible perturbations to legitimate inputs. To date, researchers have developed numerous types of adversarial attack methods. However, from the perspective of practical deployment, these
methods suffer from several drawbacks such as long attack
generating time, high memory cost, insufﬁcient robustness
and low transferability. To address the drawbacks, we propose a Content-aware Adversarial Attack Generator (CAG)
to achieve real-time, low-cost, enhanced-robustness and hightransferability adversarial attack. First, as a type of generative
model-based attack, CAG shows signiﬁcant speedup (at least
500 times) in generating adversarial examples compared to
the state-of-the-art attacks such as PGD and C&W. Furthermore, CAG only needs a single generative model to perform
targeted attack to any targeted class. Because CAG encodes
the label information into a trainable embedding layer, it differs from prior generative model-based adversarial attacks
that use n different copies of generative models for n different
targeted classes. As a result, CAG signiﬁcantly reduces the
required memory cost for generating adversarial examples.
Moreover, CAG can generate adversarial perturbations that
focus on the critical areas of input by integrating the class activation maps information in the training process, and hence
improve the robustness of CAG attack against the state-of-art
adversarial defenses. In addition, CAG exhibits high transferability across different DNN classiﬁer models in black-box
attack scenario by introducing random dropout in the process of generating perturbations. Extensive experiments on
different datasets and DNN models have veriﬁed the realtime, low-cost, enhanced-robustness, and high-transferability
beneﬁts of CAG.

1

Figure 1: Adversarial images generated with CAG using ImageNet dataset. From top row to bottom row: legitimate images, adversarial images, perturbations (enhanced).
In order to address this critical challenge, the machine
learning community has conducted extensive researches on
the vulnerability of DNNs, from both the attack and defense aspects. Adversarial attack technique was pioneered
by Szegedy et al. (2013). Since then, researchers have developed various adversarial attacking algorithms, targeting
different types of DNN models including convolutional neural networks, recurrent neural networks and graph neural
networks, and also different application scenarios, ranging from image classiﬁcation, machine translation, to graph
classiﬁcation etc. Among those algorithms, one popular
class of attack techniques is fast gradient sign method
(FGSM), which performs one-step gradient computation to
craft untargeted adversarial examples (Goodfellow, Shlens,
and Szegedy 2014). Considering the relatively weak attack
performance of FGSM, the machine learning community
has proposed several iterative optimization-based techniques
including C&W, I-FGSM and PGD that deliver the stateof-the-art attack performance (Carlini and Wagner 2017;
Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014; Madry et al. 2017).
Furthermore, some recent work has also proposed to use
generative models, e.g., GAN and U-Net, to generate ad-

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved unprecedented success in many artiﬁcial intelligence ﬁelds, such
as computer vision, natural language processing and speech
recognition (He et al. 2016; Conneau et al. 2016; Yu and
Deng 2014). Despite their current popularity and prosperity,
DNNs are still facing several severe challenges, especially
∗

Equal contribution
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5412

