The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Reborn Filters: Pruning Convolutional Neural Networks with Limited Data
Yehui Tang,1 * Shan You,2,6* Chang Xu,3* Jin Han,1 Chen Qian,2 Boxin Shi,4,5*
Chao Xu,1 Changshui Zhang6
1

2

Key Lab of Machine Perception (MOE), CMIC, School of EECS, Peking University, China
SenseTime Research, 3 School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney, Australia
4
National Engineering Laboratory for Video Technology, Peking University 5 Peng Cheng Laboratory
6
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
{yhtang, hanjin1619, shiboxin}@pku.edu.cn, {youshan, qianchen}@sensetime.com,
c.xu@sydney.edu.au, xuchao@cis.pku.edu.cn, zcs@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
sparse or low-rank. However, most of them (e.g., (Han, Mao,
and Dally 2015)) may need special hardwares for real acceleration. In contrast, prevalent channel-pruning methods tend
to identify and eliminate redundant channels, which lead to a
signiﬁcant decrease of the size of feature maps and CNN ﬁlters. Most importantly, network structure of the pruned network will not be changed, so it is friendly for the off-theshelf deep learning frameworks and complementary to other
compression methods.
In channel pruning, one of the mainstream practices is to
prune the channels (i.e. removing the corresponding ﬁlters)
according to the layer-wise reconstruction error (He, Zhang,
and Sun 2017; Luo, Wu, and Lin 2017). Most methods just
evaluate the importance of ﬁlters channel by channel, and
remove them for good. Nevertheless, this brings in the elimination of redundant information as well as the risk of discarding some useful individual information, which usually
induces large reconstruction error and the common catastrophic drop phenomenon on the network performance after the pruning. Therefore, most methods need to ﬁne-tune
the pruned network over sufﬁcient data (ideally the complete
original dataset) to recover the performance. It has been empirically found that even the training-from-scratch method
(Liu et al. 2018) is also capable of recovering the performance, when all training data sample are used.
However, in many real-world applications, users may not
have the access to sufﬁcient or complete data used for training the original networks. This scenario is rather practical
when it comes to some considerations such as commercial
interests or user’s experience. For example,

Abstract
Channel pruning is effective in compressing the pretrained
CNNs for their deployment on low-end edge devices. Most
existing methods independently prune some of the original
channels and need the complete original dataset to ﬁx the
performance drop after pruning. However, due to commercial
protection or data privacy, users may only have access to a
tiny portion of training examples, which could be insufﬁcient
for the performance recovery. In this paper, for pruning with
limited data, we propose to use all original ﬁlters to directly
develop new compact ﬁlters, named reborn ﬁlters, so that all
useful structure priors in the original ﬁlters can be well preserved into the pruned networks, alleviating the performance
drop accordingly. During training, reborn ﬁlters can be easily implemented via 1 × 1 convolutional layers and then be
fused in the inference stage for acceleration. Based on reborn
ﬁlters, the proposed channel pruning algorithm shows its effectiveness and superiority on extensive experiments.

Introduction
There are always strict limits on memory and inference
speed of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) deployed on various low-end edge devices (e.g., mobile
phones, tablets and wearable gadgets) (Cheng et al. 2017;
Wang, Li, and Smola 2019). However, popular CNN models such as VGGNet (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014) and
ResNet (He et al. 2016) have a huge number of model parameters and fail to meet the demands (Kim, Park, and Kwak
2018; Louizos, Ullrich, and Welling 2017; Wang et al. 2016;
You et al. 2017b).
Model compression serves as a remedy by investigating
and further eliminating the redundancy in the networks (Alvarez and Salzmann 2017; You et al. 2017a). For example, quantization (Courbariaux, Bengio, and David 2015;
Rastegari et al. 2016; Li et al. 2017) attempts to reduce the
redundancy on numerical precision, and sparse connection
(Han, Mao, and Dally 2015; Wen et al. 2016; Alvarez and
Salzmann 2016) or tensor factorization (Lebedev et al. 2014;
Novikov et al. 2015) seek to make the parameters to be

• Powerful models trained on fairly large datasets are released while the dataset is not available due to commercial
proﬁts. (Mahajan et al. 2018) trained CNNs on 940 million of Instagram images and released pre-trained models1 , whose accuracy on image recognition task was much
higher than those trained on public datasets. However,
only some example images can be found, and the training dataset will not be released as mentioned in the paper.
• For the model compression service provided by the cloud,
asking consumers to upload the whole huge training

* Corresponding authors

Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

5972

https://github.com/facebookresearch/WSL-Images

