The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Spatial-Temporal Gaussian Scale Mixture Modeling for Foreground Estimation
Qian Ning,1,2 Weisheng Dong,1,2∗ Fangfang Wu,2 Jinjian Wu,2 Jie Lin,2 Guangming Shi2
1

2

State Key Laboratory on Integrated Services Networks (ISN)
School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China

Numerous background subtraction methods have been
proposed. Early strategies for this task tried to classify the
background and foreground pixels by learning pixel classiﬁcation models, such as the Gaussian Mixture Models
(GMM) ((Stauffer and Grimson 1999);(Chen et al. 2018)),
local binary pattern (LBP) models (Heikkilä and Pietikäinen
2006), and the neural network models (Gemignani and
Rozza 2016). Despite the efﬁciency of these pixel-based
methods, they have limitations in exploiting global video
structures, e.g., the spatial-temporal correlations among the
backgrounds, leading to degraded performance for complex
scenarios. Based on the assumption that the backgrounds
are low-rank and the foregrounds are sparse, the robust
principle component analysis (RPCA) model (Candès et al.
2011) has been used for background subtraction ((Xin et
al. 2015);(Gao, Cheong, and Wang 2014);(Cao, Yang, and
Guo 2016)). By exploiting the global video structures and
the sparse prior, the RPCA-based methods have achieved
promising results.

Abstract
Subtracting the backgrounds from the video frames is an important step for many video analysis applications. Assuming that the backgrounds are low-rank and the foregrounds
are sparse, the robust principle component analysis (RPCA)based methods have shown promising results. However, the
RPCA-based methods suffered from the scale issue, i.e., the
1 -sparsity regularizer fails to model the varying sparsity of
the moving objects. While several efforts have been made
to address this issue with advanced sparse models, previous
methods cannot fully exploit the spatial-temporal correlations
among the foregrounds. In this paper, we proposed a novel
spatial-temporal Gaussian scale mixture (STGSM) model
for foreground estimation. In the proposed STGSM model,
a temporal consistent constraint is imposed over the estimated foregrounds through nonzero-means Gaussian models. Speciﬁcally, the estimates of the foregrounds obtained in
the previous frame are used as the prior for these of the current frame, and nonzero means Gaussian scale mixture models (GSM) are developed. To better characterize the temporal
correlations, the optical ﬂow has been used to model the correspondences between foreground pixels in adjacent frames.
The spatial correlations have also been exploited by considering that local correlated pixels should be characterized by
the same STGSM model, leading to further performance improvements. Experimental results on real video datasets show
that the proposed method performs comparably or even better
than current state-of-the-art background subtraction methods.

1

Despite their effectiveness, the RPCA-based methods suffered from two major issues, i.e., the scale issue and the ignorance of the dependencies among the foreground pixels.
The scale issue is due to the fact that the ﬁxed 1 -norm sparsity regularizer fails to characterize the varying sparsity of
the moving objects of different sizes. To address this issue,
the RPCA-based methods consisting of two-pass processes
have been proposed ((Gao, Cheong, and Wang 2014);(Liu et
al. 2015);(Liu et al. 2018)). The supports of the underlying
foregrounds were initially estimated in the ﬁrst pass. Based
on the detected supports, the structured sparsity was then exploited with tuned regularization parameters in the second
pass for better performance. In (Yong et al. 2018), Hong et
al. proposed a mixture of Gaussian (MoG) model to model
the noise and the foregrounds. By updating the model parameters frame by frame, the MoG-based method performs
better than classic RPCA-based methods. However, it cannot
fully exploit the spatial correlations between the foreground
pixels. To exploit the spatial correlations of the foreground
pixels, in (Ebadi and Lzquierdo 2018) tree-structured sparsity regularizer was proposed. However, the temporal correlations has not been exploited in (Ebadi and Lzquierdo
2018). More recently, Gaussian scale mixture (GSM) mod-

Introduction

Estimating the foregrounds in a video sequence is an important step for many video analysis applications, e.g., video
surveillance (Liu, Wu, and Lin 2015), vehicle navigation
(Unzueta et al. 2012), and object detection (Zhou, Yang, and
Yu 2013). As a fundamental research problem, foreground
estimation (also called background subtraction) has attracted
increasing attentions in the past decade. Due to the dynamic
backgrounds, camera motion, illumination change, and irregular objects motion issues, separating video frames into
the foreground and the background components is rather
challenging.
∗

Corresponding author (wsdong@mail.xidian.edu.cn).
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11791

