The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Pairwise Fairness for Ranking and Regression
Harikrishna Narasimhan, Andrew Cotter, Maya Gupta, Serena Wang
Google Research
1600 Amphitheatre Pkwy, Mountain View, CA 94043
{hnarasimhan, acotter, mayagupta, serenawang}@google.com

ranking problem to that of learning a binary classiﬁer to predict the relative ordering of pairs of examples. This reduction
of ranking to binary classiﬁcation enables us to formulate a
broad set of statistical fairness metrics, inspired by analogues
in the binary classiﬁcation setting, in terms of pairwise comparisons. The same general idea can actually be applied more
broadly: in addition to group-based fairness in the ranking
setting, we show that the same overall approach can also be
applied to (i) the regression setting, or (ii) the use of continuous protected attributes instead of discrete groups. In all
three of these cases, we show how to effectively train ranking
models or regression models to satisfy the proposed fairness
metrics, by applying state-of-the-art constrained optimization
algorithms.

Abstract
We present pairwise fairness metrics for ranking models and
regression models that form analogues of statistical fairness
notions such as equal opportunity, equal accuracy, and statistical parity. Our pairwise formulation supports both discrete protected groups, and continuous protected attributes.
We show that the resulting training problems can be efﬁciently
and effectively solved using existing constrained optimization
and robust optimization techniques developed for fair classiﬁcation. Experiments illustrate the broad applicability and
trade-offs of these methods.

Introduction
As ranking models and regression models become more
prevalent and have a greater impact on people’s day-to-day
lives, it is important that we develop better tools to quantify,
measure, track, and improve fairness metrics for such models.
A key question for ranking and regression is how to deﬁne
fairness metrics. As in the binary classiﬁcation setting, we
believe there is not one “right” fairness deﬁnition: instead,
we provide a paradigm that makes it easy to deﬁne and train
for different fairness deﬁnitions, analogous to those that are
popular for binary classiﬁcation problems.
One key distinction is between unsupervised and supervised fairness metrics: for example, consider the task of ranking restaurants for college students who prefer cheaper restaurants, and suppose we wish to be fair to French vs Mexican
restaurants. Our proposed unsupervised statistical parity constraint would require that the model be equally likely to (i)
rank a French restaurant above a Mexican restaurant, and
(ii) rank a Mexican restaurant above a French restaurant.
In contrast, our proposed supervised equal opportunity constraint would require that the model be equally likely to (i)
rank a cheap French restaurant above an expensive Mexican
restaurant, and (ii) rank a cheap Mexican restaurant above an
expensive French restaurant.
Like some recent work on fair ranking (Beutel et al. 2019;
Kallus and Zhou 2019), we draw inspiration from the standard learning-to-rank strategy (Liu 2011): we reduce the

We begin by considering a standard ranking set-up (Liu 2011):
we’re given a sample S of queries drawn i.i.d. from an underlying distribution D, where each query is a set of candidates
to be ranked, and each candidate is represented by an associated feature vector x ∈ X and label y ∈ Y. The label space
can be, for example, Y = {0, 1} (e.g. for click data: y = 1
if a result was clicked by a user, y = 0 otherwise), Y = R
(each result has an associated quality rating), or Y = N (the
labels are a ground truth ranking). We adopt the convention
that higher labels should be ranked closer to the top. Any
of these choices of label space Y induce a partial ordering
on examples, for which all candidates belonging to the same
query are totally ordered, and any two candidates (x, y) and
(x , y  ) belonging to different queries are incomparable.
Suppose that we have a set of K protected groups
G1 , . . . , GK partitioning the space of examples X × Y such
that every example belongs to exactly one group. We deﬁne
the group-dependent pairwise accuracy AGi >Gj as the accuracy of a ranking function f : X → R on those pairs for
which the labeled “better” example belongs to group Gi , and
the labeled “worse” example belongs to group Gj . That is:

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

where (x, y) and (x , y  ) are drawn i.i.d. from the distribution of examples, restricted to the appropriate protected

Ranking Pairwise Fairness Metrics

AGi >Gj :=
(1)


 
P (f (x) > f (x ) | y > y , (x, y) ∈ Gi , (x , y ) ∈ Gj ),

5248

