The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Interactive Learning with Proactive Cognition Enhancement for Crowd Workers
Jing Zhang,1∗ Huihui Wang,1 Shunmei Meng,1 Victor S. Sheng2
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
200 Xiaolingwei Street, Nanjing 210094, China
2
Department of Computer Science, Texas Tech University
2500 Broadway, Lubbock, TX 79409, U.S.A.
{jzhang, huihuiwang, mengshunmei}@njust.edu.cn, victor.sheng@ttu.edu

a moderate effect, and neither can be adjusted to speciﬁc
tasks nor ensure that errors dismiss in the results.
Another train of thought is to utilize some data integration methods to improve data quality, which has been widely
adopted in machine learning related communities. These
methods employ a redundancy mechanism to increase the
quality of labels, namely, repeated labeling scheme (Ipeirotis et al. 2014). It allows an instance to be labeled by different crowd workers to obtain multiple noisy labels and
then infers the true labels for these instances. Over the past
decade, researchers proposed numerous truth inference algorithms (Zheng et al. 2017), demonstrated as one of the most
important branches of crowdsourcing study. In addition to
obtaining true labels, an inference algorithm may also estimate the other aspects of the labeling process, such as the
difﬁculty of instances and the reliability of workers. Having
obtained the integrated (inferred) labels of instances, we can
use the dataset to train learning models, forming a two-stage
(i.e., “inference plus model training”) learning paradigm.
Although the repeated labeling scheme signiﬁcantly improves the quality of labels, it still faces two difﬁculties:
(1) the labeling cost sharply increases for multiple queries
on each instance; and (2) it cannot guarantee the stability
of the quality of answers provided by the crowd workers.
For the ﬁrst difﬁculty, we can resort to active learning (Settles 2009), which can reduce labeling cost through the design of sampling strategies that select the instances potentially contributing the most to current learning models. Compared with the traditional instance selection strategies (Fu,
Zhu, and Li 2013), active learning strategies in crowdsourcing may also consider the distributions of noisy labels and
some inferred information such as the reliability of workers (Sheng, Provost, and Ipeirotis 2008; Yan et al. 2011;
Rodrigues, Pereira, and Ribeiro 2014).
However, we have noticed that, compared with the traditional active learning, active learning from crowds can
hardly maintain a smooth rising learning curve, which was
observed from the experimental results in many previous
studies (Sheng, Provost, and Ipeirotis 2008; Yan et al. 2011;
Rodrigues, Pereira, and Ribeiro 2014; Zhang, Wu, and
Shengs 2015). This phenomenon not only causes the performance of learning models can hardly being improved but

Abstract
Learning from crowds often performs in an active learning
paradigm, aiming to improve learning performance quickly
as well as to reduce labeling cost by selecting proper workers
to (re)label critical instances. Previous active learning methods for learning from crowds do not have any proactive mechanism to effectively improve the reliability of workers, which
prevents to obtain steadily rising learning curves. To help
workers improve their reliability while performing tasks, this
paper proposes a novel Interactive Learning framework with
Proactive Cognitive Enhancement (ILPCE) for crowd workers. The ILPCE framework includes an interactive learning
mechanism: When crowd workers perform labeling tasks in
active learning, their cognitive ability to the speciﬁc domain
can be enhanced through learning the exemplars selected by
a psychological model-based machine teaching method. A
novel probabilistic truth inference model and an interactive
labeling scheme are proposed to ensure the effectiveness of
the interactive learning mechanism and the performance of
learning models can be simultaneously improved through a
fast and low-cost way. Experimental results on three realworld learning tasks demonstrate that our ILPCE signiﬁcantly
outperforms ﬁve representative state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Crowdsourcing has become a popular solution to acquire labels for machine learning because it is convenient, fast, and
costs less. However, one non-negligible ﬂaw of this manner is that the quality of labels collected from crowds is not
always high enough to train good models. Due to the varying levels of expertise of workers, incorrect labels (i.e., label
noises) are spread throughout the dataset. Therefore, quality
control becomes one of the most critical issues in crowdsourcing studies (Daniel et al. 2018). Crowdsourcing platforms usually would regulate the behaviors of workers via
various mechanisms (such as user interface design (Retelny
et al. 2014), reputation inspection and ranking (Irani and Silberman 2013), and incentives mechanism (Yang et al. 2016))
so that they are willing or might be forced to provide highquality answers. However, these methods usually only have
∗

Jing Zhang is the corresponding author of the paper.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
540

