The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Epistemic Integrity Constraints for Ontology-Based Data Management
Marco Console,1 Maurizio Lenzerini2
1

2

University of Edinburgh
Sapienza, University of Rome

al. 2003). DLs are logical formalisms that represent the domain of interest in terms of concepts, i.e., classes of objects,
and roles, i.e., binary relations between objects. Intuitively,
the models of the logical theory constituted by the ontology, the mapping, and the data, i.e., the models of the system, represent all the possible worlds that are consistent with
both the conceptual speciﬁcation and the data. An example
of OBDM system follows.
Example 1 Consider a set D of data sources, storing
HR data from different branches of a company. Branch
A stores information about employees and their department in table empA(N ame, Code, Department). The central HR ofﬁce stores information about departments in table dep(Code, M anager) and employee codes in table
pers(N ame, Code). The following database, denoted by D,
represents a possible instance of D.
pers
dep
empA
N
C
C
M
N
C
D
Bob 1B
D0 Tim
Bob 1B D1
Jim
2J
D1 Jim
Wim 3W
We assume that the domain of interest can be formally
described by a DL ontology T with concepts Emp, for
employees, and Dep, for departments, and roles hasDep,
associating employees to their department, hasCode, associating employees to their individual code, and hasM an,
associating departments to their manager. In this domain,
every employee works for at least one department, as
formalized by the following axioms in T .

Abstract
Ontology-based data management (OBDM) is a powerful
knowledge-oriented paradigm for managing data spread over
multiple heterogeneous sources. In OBDM, the data sources
of an information system are handled through the reconciled
view provided by an ontology, i.e., the conceptualization of
the underlying domain of interest expressed in some formal
language. In any information systems where the basic knowledge resides in data sources, it is of paramount importance
to specify the acceptable states of such information. Usually,
this is done via integrity constraints, i.e., requirements that
the data must satisfy formally expressed in some speciﬁc language. However, while the semantics of integrity constraints
are clear in the context of databases, the presence of inferred
information, typical of OBDM systems, considerably complicates the matter. In this paper, we establish a novel framework for integrity constraints in the OBDM scenarios, based
on the notion of knowledge state of the information system.
For integrity constraints in this framework, we deﬁne a language based on epistemic logic, and study decidability and
complexity of both checking satisfaction and performing different forms of static analysis on them.

1

Introduction

Managing information spread over multiple heterogeneous
data sources is a long-standing topic in the ﬁelds of data
management and knowledge representation. A powerful tool
to address this issue is the Ontology-based Data Management (OBDM) paradigm (Xiao et al. 2018), where a conceptual speciﬁcation of the domain of interest, called ontology,
is superimposed over a set of pre-existing data sources using
suitable mapping assertions (Doan, Halevy, and Ives 2012).
The resulting information systems, called Ontology-Based
Data Management Systems, enable users to interact with the
data using the vocabulary of the ontology, thus giving a highlevel view of the information contained in the data sources.
This high-level view of the data can be used to enhance
query answering (Calvanese et al. 2011; Calı̀ et al. 2010;
Rodriguez-Muro and Calvanese 2012) and other data management tasks (Lenzerini 2018). In this paper, we focus on
ontologies expressed in Description Logics (DL) (Baader et

Emp  ∃hasDep

∃hasDep−  Dep

The set M of mapping assertions (Figure 1) describes the
relationship between the data in D and the concepts and
roles of T . In the remainder of this section, we will denote
by O the OBDM system constituted by D, T , and M.
In the context of data management, a question that arises
naturally is whether the stored data conform with our understanding of the domain. During the years, this fundamental question gave rise to the concept of integrity constraints (Abiteboul, Hull, and Vianu 1995; Reiter 1988), ICs
for short. Informally, ICs are a means to describe the acceptable states of a knowledge base, and are very popular in re-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2790

