The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Discourse Level Factors for Sentence Deletion in Text Simpliﬁcation
Yang Zhong,*1 Chao Jiang,1 Wei Xu,1 Junyi Jessy Li2
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Ohio State University
2
Department of Linguistics, The University of Texas at Austin
{zhong.536, jiang.1530, xu.1265}@osu.edu, jessy@austin.utexas.edu

most prevalent, as simpliﬁed texts tend to be shorter (Petersen and Ostendorf 2007; Drndarevic and Saggion 2012;
Woodsend and Lapata 2011).
This work aims to facilitate better understanding of sentence deletion in document-level text simpliﬁcation. While
prior work analyzed sentence position and content in a corpus study (Petersen and Ostendorf 2007), we hypothesize
and show that sentence deletion is driven partially by contextual, discourse-level information, in addition to the content within a sentence.
We utilize the Newsela2 corpus (Xu, Callison-Burch, and
Napoles 2015) which contains multiple versions of a document rewritten by professional editors. This dataset allows
us to compare sentence deletion strategies to meet different
readability requirements. Unlike prior work that often uses
automatically aligned data for analysis (c.f. Section 5), we
manually aligned 50 articles of more than 5,000 sentences
across three reading levels to provide a reliable ground truth
for the analysis and model evaluation in this paper.3 We
ﬁnd that sentence deletion happens very often at rates of
17.2%–44.8% across reading levels, indicating that sentence
deletion prediction is an important task in text simpliﬁcation. Several characteristics of the original document, including its length and topic, signiﬁcantly inﬂuence sentence
deletion. By analyzing the rhetorical structure (Mann and
Thompson 1988) of the original articles, we show that the
sentence deletion process is also informed by how a sentence
is situated in terms of its connections to neighboring sentences, and its discourse salience within a document. In addition, we reveal that the use of discourse connectives within
a sentence also inﬂuence whether it will be deleted.
To predict whether a sentence in the original article will
be deleted during simpliﬁcation, we utilize noisy supervision obtained from 886 automatically aligned articles with a
total of 42,264 sentences. Our neural network model learns
from both the content of the sentence itself, as well as the
discourse level factors we analyzed. Evaluated on our manually annotated data, our best model that utilizes Gaussian-

Abstract
This paper presents a data-driven study focusing on analyzing and predicting sentence deletion — a prevalent but understudied phenomenon in document simpliﬁcation — on a large
English text simpliﬁcation corpus. We inspect various document and discourse factors associated with sentence deletion,
using a new manually annotated sentence alignment corpus
we collected. We reveal that professional editors utilize different strategies to meet readability standards of elementary and
middle schools. To predict whether a sentence will be deleted
during simpliﬁcation to a certain level, we harness automatically aligned data to train a classiﬁcation model. Evaluated
on our manually annotated data, our best models reached F1
scores of 65.2 and 59.7 for this task at the levels of elementary and middle school, respectively. We ﬁnd that discourse
level factors contribute to the challenging task of predicting
sentence deletion for simpliﬁcation.

1

Introduction

Text simpliﬁcation aims to rewrite an existing document to
be accessible to a broader audience (e.g., non-native speakers, children, and individuals with language impairments)
while remaining truthful in content. The simpliﬁcation process involves a variety of operations, including lexical and
syntactic transformations, summarization, removal of difﬁcult content, and expliciﬁcation (Siddharthan 2014).
While recent years saw a bloom in text simpliﬁcation
research (Xu et al. 2016; Narayan and Gardent 2016; Nisioi et al. 2017; Zhang and Lapata 2017; Vu et al. 2018;
Sulem, Abend, and Rappoport 2018; Maddela and Xu 2018;
Kriz et al. 2019) thanks to the development of large parallel
corpora of original-to-simpliﬁed sentence pairs (Zhu, Bernhard, and Gurevych 2010; Xu, Callison-Burch, and Napoles
2015), most of the recent work is conducted at the sentencelevel, i.e., transducing each complex sentence to its simpliﬁed version.
As a result, this line of work does not capture documentlevel phenomena, among which sentence deletion is the

2

Newsela is an educational tech company that provides reading
material for children in school curricula.
3
To request our data, please ﬁrst obtain access to the Newsela
corpus at: https://newsela.com/data/, then contact the authors.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* Work started as an undergraduate student at UT Austin.
9709

