The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Frank-Wolfe Framework for Efﬁcient and Effective Adversarial Attacks
Jinghui Chen,1 Dongruo Zhou,1 Jinfeng Yi,2 Quanquan Gu1
1

Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles
2
JD AI Research
{jhchen, drzhou, qgu}@cs.ucla.edu, yijinfeng@jd.com

and even on systems that operate in the physical world (Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio 2016).
Depending on how much information an adversary can
access to, adversarial attacks can be classiﬁed into two
classes: white-box attack (Szegedy et al. 2013; Goodfellow,
Shlens, and Szegedy 2015) and black-box attack (Papernot,
McDaniel, and Goodfellow 2016; Chen et al. 2017c). In the
white-box setting, the adversary has full access to the target model, while in the black-box setting, the adversary can
only access the input and output of the target model but not
its internal conﬁgurations.
Several optimization-based methods have been proposed
for the white-box attack. One of the ﬁrst successful attempt
is the FGSM method (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy
2015), which works by linearizing the network loss function.
CW method (Carlini and Wagner 2017) further improves the
attack effectiveness by designing a regularized loss function
based on the logit-layer output of the network and optimizing the loss by Adam (Kingma and Ba 2015). Even though
CW largely improves the effectiveness, it requires a large
number of gradient iterations to optimize the distortion of
the adversarial examples. Iterative gradient (steepest) descent based methods such as PGD (Madry et al. 2018) and IFGSM (Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio 2016) can achieve
relatively high attack success rates within a moderate number of iterations. However, they tend to generate adversarial
examples near or upon the boundary of the perturbation set,
due to the projection nature of the algorithm. This leads to
large distortion in the resulting adversarial examples.
In the black-box attack, since one needs to make gradient
estimations in such setting, a large number of queries are required to perform a successful black-box attack, especially
when the data dimension is high. A naive way to estimate
gradient direction is to perform ﬁnite difference approximation on each dimension (Chen et al. 2017c). This would
take O(d) queries to performance one full gradient estimation where d is the data dimension and therefore result in
inefﬁcient attacks. For example, attacking a 299 × 299 × 3
ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009) image may take hundreds of
thousands of queries. This signiﬁcantly limits the practical usefulness of such algorithms since they can be easily
defeated by limiting the number of queries that an adver-

Abstract
Depending on how much information an adversary can access
to, adversarial attacks can be classiﬁed as white-box attack
and black-box attack. For white-box attack, optimizationbased attack algorithms such as projected gradient descent
(PGD) can achieve relatively high attack success rates within
moderate iterates. However, they tend to generate adversarial
examples near or upon the boundary of the perturbation set,
resulting in large distortion. Furthermore, their corresponding
black-box attack algorithms also suffer from high query complexities, thereby limiting their practical usefulness. In this
paper, we focus on the problem of developing efﬁcient and
effective optimization-based adversarial attack algorithms. In
particular, we propose a novel adversarial attack framework
for both white-box and black-box settings based on a variant of Frank-Wolfe algorithm. We show in theory that√the
proposed attack algorithms are efﬁcient with an O(1/ T )
convergence rate. The empirical results of attacking the ImageNet and MNIST datasets also verify the efﬁciency and
effectiveness of the proposed algorithms. More speciﬁcally,
our proposed algorithms attain the best attack performances
in both white-box and black-box attacks among all baselines,
and are more time and query efﬁcient than the state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have made many breakthroughs in different areas of artiﬁcial intelligence such
as image classiﬁcation (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton
2012; He et al. 2016), object detection (Ren et al. 2015; Girshick 2015), and speech recognition (Mohamed et al. 2012;
Bahdanau et al. 2016). However, recent studies show that
deep neural networks are vulnerable to adversarial examples (Szegedy et al. 2013; Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy
2015) – a tiny perturbation on an image that is almost invisible to human eyes could mislead a well-trained image classiﬁer towards misclassiﬁcation. Soon later this is proved to be
not a coincidence in image classiﬁcation: similar phenomena
have been observed in other problems such as speech recognition (Carlini et al. 2016), visual QA (Xu et al. 2017), image
captioning (Chen et al. 2017a), machine translation (Cheng
et al. 2018), reinforcement learning (Pattanaik et al. 2018),
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3486

