The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Hierarchically Clustered Representation Learning
Su-Jin Shin,1 Kyungwoo Song,2 Il-Chul Moon∗2
1

Institute of Defense Advanced Technology Research, Agency for Defense Development
2
Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, KAIST
1,2
Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, Republic of Korea
sujinshin@add.re.kr, {gtshs2, icmoon}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
The joint optimization of representation learning and clustering in the embedding space has experienced a breakthrough in
recent years. In spite of the advance, clustering with representation learning has been limited to ﬂat-level categories, which
often involves cohesive clustering with a focus on instance relations. To overcome the limitations of ﬂat clustering, we introduce hierarchically-clustered representation learning (HCRL),
which simultaneously optimizes representation learning and
hierarchical clustering in the embedding space. Compared
with a few prior works, HCRL ﬁrstly attempts to consider
a generation of deep embeddings from every component of
the hierarchy, not just leaf components. In addition to obtaining hierarchically clustered embeddings, we can reconstruct
data by the various abstraction levels, infer the intrinsic hierarchical structure, and learn the level-proportion features. We
conducted evaluations with image and text domains, and our
quantitative analyses showed competent likelihoods and the
best accuracies compared with the baselines.

Figure 1: Example of hierarchically clustered embeddings
on MNIST with three levels of hierarchy (left), the generated
digits from the hierarchical Gaussian mixture components
(top right), and the extracted level proportion features (bottom
right). We marked the mean of a Gaussian mixture component
with the colored square, and the digit written inside the square
refers to the unique index of the mixture component.

Introduction

Gaussian prior on the embeddings. The autoencoder, whether
it is probabilistic or not, has a limitation in reﬂecting the
intrinsic hierarchical structure of data. For instance, VAE
assuming a single Gaussian prior needs to be expanded to
suggest an elaborate clustering structure.
Due to the limitations of modeling the cluster structure with autoencoders, prior works combine the autoencoder and the clustering algorithm. While some early cases
pipeline just two models, e.g., (Huang et al. 2014), a typical merging approach is to model an additional loss, such
as a clustering loss, in the autoencoders (Xie, Girshick,
and Farhadi 2016; Guo et al. 2017; Yang et al. 2017;
Nalisnick, Hertel, and Smyth 2016; Chu and Cai 2017;
Jiang et al. 2017). These suggestions exhibit gains from unifying the encoding and the clustering, yet they remain at
the parametric and ﬂat-structured clustering. A more recent
development releases the previous constraints by using the
nonparametric Bayesian approach. For example, the inﬁnite
mixture of VAEs (IMVAE) (Abbasnejad, Dick, and van den
Hengel 2017) explores the inﬁnite space for VAE mixtures
by looking for an adequate embedding space through sampling, such as the Chinese restaurant process (CRP). Whereas

Clustering is one of the most traditional and frequently used
machine learning tasks. Clustering models are designed to
represent intrinsic data structures, such as latent Dirichlet
allocation (Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003). The recent development of representation learning has contributed to generalizing model feature engineering, which also enhances
data representation (Bengio, Courville, and Vincent 2013).
Therefore, representation learning has been merged into the
clustering models, e.g., variational deep embedding (VaDE)
(Jiang et al. 2017). Besides merging representation learning
and clustering, another critical line of research is structuring
the clustering result, e.g., hierarchical clustering.
Autoencoder (Rumelhart, Hinton, and Williams 1985) is a
typical neural network for unsupervised representation learning and achieves a non-linear mapping from a input space
to a embedding space by minimizing reconstruction errors.
To turn the embeddings into random variables, a variational
autoencoder (VAE) (Kingma and Welling 2014) places a
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5776

