The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Automatically Neutralizing Subjective Bias in Text
Reid Pryzant,1 Richard Diehl Martinez,1 Nathan Dass,1
Sadao Kurohashi,2 Dan Jurafsky,1 Diyi Yang3
1

Stanford University
{rpryzant, rdm, ndass, jurafsky}@stanford.edu
2
Kyoto University
kuro@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp
3
Georgia Institute of Technology
diyi.yang@cc.gatech.edu
Abstract
Texts like news, encyclopedias, and some social media strive
for objectivity. Yet bias in the form of inappropriate subjectivity — introducing attitudes via framing, presupposing truth,
and casting doubt — remains ubiquitous. This kind of bias
erodes our collective trust and fuels social conﬂict. To address
this issue, we introduce a novel testbed for natural language
generation: automatically bringing inappropriately subjective
text into a neutral point of view (“neutralizing” biased text).
We also offer the ﬁrst parallel corpus of biased language. The
corpus contains 180,000 sentence pairs and originates from
Wikipedia edits that removed various framings, presuppositions, and attitudes from biased sentences. Last, we propose
two strong encoder-decoder baselines for the task. A straightforward yet opaque CONCURRENT system uses a BERT encoder to identify subjective words as part of the generation
process. An interpretable and controllable MODULAR algorithm separates these steps, using (1) a BERT-based classiﬁer
to identify problematic words and (2) a novel join embedding through which the classiﬁer can edit the hidden states
of the encoder. Large-scale human evaluation across four domains (encyclopedias, news headlines, books, and political
speeches) suggests that these algorithms are a ﬁrst step towards the automatic identiﬁcation and reduction of bias.

Figure 1: Example output from our MODULAR algorithm.
“Exposed” is a factive verb that presupposes the truth of its
complement (that McCain is unprincipled). Replacing “exposed” with “described” neutralizes the headline because it
conveys a similar main clause proposition (someone is asserting McCain is unprincipled), but no longer introduces
the authors subjective bias via presupposition.

Writers and editors of texts like encyclopedias, news, and
textbooks strive to avoid biased language. Yet bias remains
ubiquitous. 62% of Americans believe their news is biased
(Gallup 2018) and bias is the single largest source of distrust
in the media (Foundation 2018).
This work presents data and algorithms for automatically reducing bias in text. We focus on a particular kind of
bias: inappropriate subjectivity (“subjective bias”). Subjective bias occurs when language that should be neutral and
fair is skewed by feeling, opinion, or taste (whether consciously or unconsciously). In practice, we identify subjective bias via the method of Recasens, Danescu-NiculescuMizil, and Jurafsky (2013): using Wikipedia’s neutral point

of view (NPOV) policy.1 This policy is a set of principles
which includes “avoiding stating opinions as facts” and
“preferring nonjudgemental language”.
For example a news headline like “John McCain exposed
as an unprincipled politician” (Figure 1) is biased because
the verb expose is a factive verb that presupposes the truth
of its complement; a non-biased sentence would use a verb
like describe so as not to presuppose the subjective opinion
of the writer. “Pilfered” in “the gameplay is pilfered from
DDR” (Table 1) subjectively frames the shared gameplay as
a kind of theft. “His” in “a lead programmer usually spends
his career” again introduces a biased and subjective viewpoint (that all programmers are men) through presupposition.
We aim to debias text by suggesting edits that would make
it more neutral. This contrasts with prior research which has
debiased representations of text by removing dimensions
of prejudice from word embeddings (Bolukbasi et al. 2016;
Gonen and Goldberg 2019) and the hidden states of predictive models (Zhao et al. 2018; Das, Dantcheva, and Bremond
2018). To avoid overloading the deﬁnition of “debias,” we
refer to our kind of text debiasing as neutralizing that text.
Figure 1 gives an example.
We introduce the Wiki Neutrality Corpus (WNC). This is

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Neutral point of
view

1

Introduction

480

