The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Top-Quality Planning: Finding Practically Useful Sets of Best Plans
Michael Katz, Shirin Sohrabi, Octavian Udrea
IBM T.J. Watson Research Center
1101 Kitchawan Rd, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA

The problem of ﬁnding a set of plans is studied in the context of both diverse planning (e.g., Nguyen et al. 2012) and
top-k planning (e.g., Katz et al. 2018). Diverse planning focuses on difference between plans, evaluating a set of plans
by aggregating over the pairwise differences between plans
in the set. Recent work in diverse planning introduced additional restrictions on solution quality, requiring each plan
in the set to also be of bounded cost (Vadlamudi and Kambhampati 2016; Katz and Sohrabi 2020). Top-k planning is a
generalization of cost-optimal planning. The focus of top-k
planning is on the cost of each plan, guaranteeing that no
plan of better cost exists outside the solution set.

Abstract
The need for ﬁnding a set of plans rather than one has been
motivated by a variety of planning applications. The problem is studied in the context of both diverse and top-k planning: while diverse planning focuses on the difference between pairs of plans, the focus of top-k planning is on the
quality of each individual plan. Recent work in diverse planning introduced additionally restrictions on solution quality.
Naturally, there are application domains where diversity plays
the major role and domains where quality is the predominant
feature. In both cases, however, the amount of produced plans
is often an artiﬁcial constraint, and therefore the actual number has little meaning.
Inspired by the recent work in diverse planning, we propose a new family of computational problems called topquality planning, where solution validity is deﬁned through
plan quality bound rather than an arbitrary number of plans.
Switching to bounding plan quality allows us to implicitly
represent sets of plans. In particular, it makes it possible to
represent sets of plans that correspond to valid plan reorderings with a single plan. We formally deﬁne the unordered
top-quality planning computational problem and present the
ﬁrst planner for that problem. We empirically demonstrate the
superior performance of our approach compared to a top-k
planner-based baseline, ranging from 41% increase in coverage for ﬁnding all optimal plans to 69% increase in coverage
for ﬁnding all plans of quality up to 120% of optimal plan
cost. Finally, complementing the new approach by a complete
procedure for generating all valid reorderings of a given plan,
we derive a top-quality planner. We show the planner to be
competitive with a top-k planner based baseline.

1

Naturally, in some application domains diversity plays
the major role, while in other quality is the predominant
feature. The latter include plan recognition (Sohrabi, Riabov, and Udrea 2016), multi-agent plan recognition (Shvo,
Sohrabi, and McIlraith 2018), human team planning (Kim
et al. 2018), and explainable AI (Chakraborti et al. 2018).
These applications exploit top-k planners to derive a large
number of plans. In these domains, though, the focus on
the number of plans provided is somewhat artiﬁcial, and is
intended solely to ensure that a sufﬁcient number of plans
is found. Further, ordering of actions in a plan can be of
less importance in some applications. Plan recognition is
one such example application. In plan recognition as planning (Sohrabi, Riabov, and Udrea 2016; Shvo, Sohrabi, and
McIlraith 2018), a planning task consists of actions that explain/discard observations. There is no meaning to the order
among these actions. Some speciﬁc practical applications
for plan recognition are hypothesis generation (Sohrabi et al.
2016) and scenario planning advisor (Sohrabi et al. 2018).
These applications use a top-k planner with a large bound
on the number of required plans k, and the obtained plans
are post-processed to discard reorderings and cluster similar
plans. This would also apply to e.g., problems with actions
that correspond to information gathering, where no particular ordering is required. One clear disadvantage of a top-k
planner in such cases is that it would generate all possible
valid orderings before proceeding to plans of a higher cost.
Thus, the number of required plans used in practice is often a
crude over-approximation. Further, even quite large numbers
are often not sufﬁcient to ensure that the set of plans includes

Introduction

While the main focus in classical planning was on producing
a single plan, a variety of applications has shown the need
for ﬁnding a set of plans rather than one. These applications
include malware detection (Boddy et al. 2005), plan recognition as planning and its applications (Riabov et al. 2015;
Sohrabi, Riabov, and Udrea 2016; Sohrabi et al. 2018;
Shvo, Sohrabi, and McIlraith 2018), human team planning
(Kim et al. 2018), explainable AI (Chakraborti et al. 2018),
re-planning and plan monitoring (Fox et al. 2006).
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9900

