The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

LS-Tree: Model Interpretation When the Data Are Linguistic
Jianbo Chen

Michael I. Jordan

University of California, Berkeley
jianbochen@berkeley.edu

University of California, Berkeley
jordan@cs.berkeley.edu

Shrikumar, Greenside, and Kundaje 2017; Karpathy, Johnson, and Fei-Fei 2016; Sundararajan, Taly, and Yan 2017;
Godin et al. 2018). Model-agnostic methods can be applied in
a black-box manner to arbitrary models (Ribeiro, Singh, and
Guestrin 2016; Baehrens et al. 2010; Lundberg and Lee 2017;
Štrumbelj and Kononenko 2010; Datta, Sen, and Zick 2016;
Li, Monroe, and Jurafsky 2016).
While the generality of the stand-alone approach to interpretation is appealing, current methods provide little opportunity to leverage prior knowledge about what constitutes a
satisfying interpretation in a given domain. Such interpretive capabilities are available most notably in the setting of
natural-language processing (NLP), where there is an ongoing effort to incorporate linguistic structure (syntactic, semantic and pragmatic) in machine learning models. Such
structure can be brought to bear in the model construction,
the interpretation of a model, or both. For example, Socher et
al. (2013) introduced a recursive deep model to understand
and leverage compositionality in tasks such as sentiment detection. Lei, Barzilay, and Jaakkola (2016) proposed to use
a combination of two modular components, generator and
encoder, to explicitly generate rationales and make prediction
for NLP tasks.
Compositionality, expressed in the rules used to construct
a sentence from its constituent expressions, is an important
property of natural language. While current interpretation
methods fall short of quantifying compositionality directly,
there has been a growing interest in investigating the manner
in which existing deep models capture the interactions between constituent expressions that are critical for successful
prediction (Li et al. 2016; Lei, Barzilay, and Jaakkola 2016;
Li, Monroe, and Jurafsky 2016; Godin et al. 2018). However, existing approaches generally fall short of providing
a systematic, quantitative treatment of interactions, and the
generality to be applied to arbitrary models.
In the current paper, we focus on the model-agnostic interpretation of NLP models. Our approach quantiﬁes the
importance of words by leveraging the syntactic structure of
linguistic data, as represented by constituency-based parse
trees. In particular, we develop the LS-Tree value, a procedure
that provides instance-wise importance scores for a model
by minimizing the sum-of-squared residuals at every node
of a parse tree for the sentence in consideration. We provide
theoretical support for this by relating it to the Banzhaf value

Abstract
We study the problem of interpreting trained classiﬁcation
models in the setting of linguistic data sets. Leveraging a parse
tree, we propose to assign least-squares-based importance
scores to each word of an instance by exploiting syntactic
constituency structure. We establish an axiomatic characterization of these importance scores by relating them to the
Banzhaf value in coalitional game theory. Based on these importance scores, we develop a principled method for detecting
and quantifying interactions between words in a sentence. We
demonstrate that the proposed method can aid in interpretability and diagnostics for several widely-used language models.

Introduction
Modern machine learning models can be difﬁcult to probe
and understand after they have been trained. This is a major
problem for the ﬁeld, with consequences for trustworthiness, diagnostics, debugging, robustness, and a range of other
engineering and human interaction issues surrounding the
deployment of a model.
There have been several lines of attack on this problem.
One involves changing the model design or training process
so as to enhance interpretability. This can involve retreating
to simpler models and/or incorporating strong regularizers
that effectively simplify a complex model. In both cases,
however, there is a possible loss of prediction accuracy. Models can also be changed in more sophisticated ways to enhance interpretability; for example, attention-based methods have yielded deep models for vision and language tasks
that improve interpretability at no loss to prediction accuracy (Ba, Mnih, and Kavukcuoglu 2014; Xu et al. 2015;
Gregor et al. 2015; Chen et al. 2015; Yang et al. 2016;
Xu and Saenko 2016; Vaswani et al. 2017).
Another approach treats interpretability as a separate problem from prediction. Given a predictive model, an interpretation method yields, for each instance to which the
model is applied, a vector of importance scores associated
with the underlying features. Within this general framework, methods can be classiﬁed as being model-agnostic
or model-aware. Model-aware methods require additional
assumptions, or are speciﬁc to a certain class of models (Simonyan, Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2014; Bach et al. 2015;
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3454

