The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Enumerating Maximal k-Plexes with Worst-Case Time Guarantee
Yi Zhou,1 Jingwei Xu,1 Zhenyu Guo,1 Mingyu Xiao,1 Yan Jin2∗
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China,
2
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
zhou.yi@uestc.edu.cn, {Jingw.Xu, Harry.Guo}@outlook.com, myxiao@gmail.com, jinyan@mail.hust.edu.cn.

which relax the vertex degree, pairwise distance of vertices
and edge density in induced subgraph, respectively. In this
paper, we mainly study the k-plex, a relax clique model
which has been receiving increasing popularity in recent
years (Gao et al. 2018; Conte et al. 2018; Xiao et al. 2017;
Conte et al. 2017).
A k-plex (k is a positive integer), ﬁrst appeared in (Seidman and Foster 1978), is a subgraph such that the degree of
each vertex is at least n − k, n being the vertex number of
the subgraph. Intuitively, the k-plex mimics the clique but
each vertex can miss at most k − 1 links to the other vertices. A k-plex is said to be maximal if it is not a subgraph
of any larger k-plex. To effectively use k-plexes in detecting communities, a fundamental problem is to enumerate all
maximal k-plexes.
Most existing maximal k-plex enumeration algorithms
originate from the celebrated Bron-Kerbosch algorithm by
(Bron and Kerbosch 1973), which was initially designed
for enumerating all maximal cliques. Wu and Pei (2007)
were the ﬁrst ones of adapting the Bron-Kerbosch algorithm
to maximal k-plex (k ≥ 1) enumeration. Then, Wang et
al. (2017) improved the performance by integrating more
heuristic pruning rules and using multi-thread parallelization
technique. It is also worth mention that Conte et al. (2018)
modiﬁed the Bron-Kerbosch algorithm for ﬁnding communities, i.e., maximal k-plexes with speciﬁed connectivity and
cardinality constraints and Bentert et al. (2018) extended the
algorithm from static graphs to temporal graphs where edges
can appear and disappear in different time intervals.
Aside from Bron-Kerbosch families, Berlowitz, Cohen,
and Kimelfeld (2015) designed another type of k-plex enumeration algorithm, which optimizes the runtime between
the output of two consecutive solutions. Conte et al. (2017)
then integrated this algorithm into their framework which
reduces larger graphs via efﬁcient k-core and clique computation.
Though we have observed a considerable number of algorithms for enumerating maximal k-plexes, this problem
is still intrinsically hard since the numbers of maximal kplexes can be exponential to the size of a given graph. Indeed, even ﬁnding a k-plex of speciﬁed size is NP-hard (Balasundaram, Butenko, and Hicks 2011). As demonstrated in
this paper, existing Bron-Kerbosch-based algorithms enumerate all the maximal k-plexes in running time O(n2 2n )

Abstract
The problem of enumerating all maximal cliques in a graph
is a key primitive in a variety of real-world applications such
as community detection and so on. However, in practice,
communities are rarely formed as cliques due to data noise.
Hence, k-plex, a subgraph in which any vertex is adjacent
to all but at most k vertices, is introduced as a relaxation of
clique. In this paper, we investigate the problem of enumerating all maximal k-plexes and present FaPlexen, an enumeration algorithm which integrates the “pivot” heuristic and new
branching schemes. To our best knowledge, for the ﬁrst time,
FaPlexen lists all maximal k-plexes with provably worst-case
running time O(n2 γ n ) in a graph with n vertices, where
γ < 2. Then, we propose another algorithm CommuPlex
which non-trivially extends FaPlexen to ﬁnd all maximal kplexes of prescribed size for community detection in massive
real-life networks. We ﬁnally carry out experiments on both
real and synthetic graphs and demonstrate that our algorithms
run much faster than the state-of-the-art algorithms.

Introduction
The analysis of cohesive groups also known as communities
(or clusters) has received a lot of attention from researchers
of different areas like social and computer science, biology,
economics, physics and discrete mathematics. Clique, a subgraph where vertices are pairwise connected, is perhaps the
earliest and most studied community model. A large body
of literature has emerged in mining cliques with respect
to different goals, e.g., ﬁnding cliques from general graphs
(Xiao and Nagamochi 2017), sparse graphs (Chang, Yu, and
Qin 2013; Eppstein and Strash 2011) and uncertain graphs
(Mukherjee, Xu, and Tirthapura 2016), ﬁtting the algorithm
in main memory (Cheng et al. 2012) and optimizing the running time as a function of the output (Conte et al. 2016).
In real-life applications, due to the existence of data noice,
large and closely linked cohesive groups can rarely appear as
cliques (Conte et al. 2017; 2018; Balasundaram, Butenko,
and Hicks 2011). So other forms of relaxed clique are resorted to. For example, the k-core (Cheng et al. 2011), kclub (Pajouh, Balasundaram, and Hicks 2016) and quasiclique (Veremyev et al. 2016) are such clique-like graphs
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2442

