The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

ABSent: Cross-Lingual Sentence
Representation Mapping with Bidirectional GANs
Zuohui Fu, Yikun Xian, Shijie Geng, Yingqiang Ge,
Yuting Wang, Xin Dong, Guang Wang, Gerard de Melo
Department of Computer Science
Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ, USA
{zuohui.fu, sg1309, yingqiang.ge, xd48}@rutgers.edu, siriusxyk@gmail.com,
{yw632, gw255}@cs.rutgers.edu, gdm@demelo.org
Abstract

X domain (English)
(Is it snowing?) ࢞૚

A number of cross-lingual transfer learning approaches based
on neural networks have been proposed for the case when
large amounts of parallel text are at our disposal. However, in
many real-world settings, the size of parallel annotated training data is restricted. Additionally, prior cross-lingual mapping research has mainly focused on the word level. This
raises the question of whether such techniques can also be
applied to effortlessly obtain cross-lingually aligned sentence
representations. To this end, we propose an Adversarial Bidirectional Sentence Embedding Mapping (ABSent) framework, which learns mappings of cross-lingual sentence representations from limited quantities of parallel data. The experiments show that our method outperforms several technically more powerful approaches, especially under challenging low-resource circumstances. The source code is available
from https://github.com/zuohuif/ABSent along with relevant
datasets.

1

‫ܩ‬௫ : ‫ ݔ‬՜ ‫ݕ‬ො
‫ܩ‬௬ : ‫ ݕ‬՜ ‫ݔ‬ො

Y domain (German)
࢟૚ (Es schneit?)

(I thought you liked to
learn new things.) ࢞૛
(How long does it take to
get to the station?) ࢞૜

?

(I am at a loss for words.) ࢞૝

?

(What does this
package contain?) ࢞૞

?

࢟૛ (Ich dachte, du magst
es, neue Dinge zu lernen.)
࢟૜ (Wie lange dauert
es bis zum Bahnhof?)
࢟૝ (Ich bin sprachlos.)
࢟૞ (Was enthält
dieses Paket?)

Figure 1: Sentence alignment between the respective embeddings of English and German sentences. Solid circles represent training samples, while hollow circles represent test
samples. The challenge is to align test samples (connected
by dotted segments) with limited numbers of training pairs
(connected by solid segments) and a large number of unpaired training samples.

Introduction

Not only have regular vector representations of words become ubiquitous (Mikolov et al. 2013), but bilingual word
embeddings (Ruder 2017) have as well enjoyed remarkable
success, enabling many novel forms of cross-lingual NLP.
Owing to the availability of adequate cross-lingual word
datasets and supervised learning methods, cross-lingual
transfer learning at the word level is well-studied. However,
only few results exist on sentence-level cross-lingual mapping, let alone studying low-resource settings.
In order to effortlessly obtain sentence-level representations, one of the most popular methods is to compute
a (possibly weighted) average of the word vectors of all
words encountered in a sentence. The method is favored
for its straightforward simplicity, particularly in light of
the widespread availability of pre-trained word vectors.
While there are numerous more powerful methods (cf. Section 2), they require substantially longer training times and
pre-trained models are typically less convenient to load.
Somewhat surprisingly, weighted averages of word vectors have been shown capable of outperforming several
more advanced techniques, including certain Long shortterm memory (LSTM)-based setups (Wieting et al. 2015;

Arora, Liang, and Ma 2017). In this paper, we study to what
extent sentence embeddings based on simple word vector
averages can be aligned cross-lingually. While word vector averages have been studied for embeddings of entire text
documents, such document embeddings mainly need to capture topic information. Sentence embeddings, in contrast,
are typically expected to retain more detailed semantic information. If simple word vector averages can achieve this
cross-lingually despite being entirely oblivious of the order of words in the input sentences, this would provide a
simple means of connecting semantically related sentences
across language boundaries, in support of a diverse range
of possible tasks such as question answering, recommendation, plagiarism detection (Liu et al. 2019b; Xian et al. 2019;
Ferrero et al. 2017). While there has been research on joint
multilingual training of NMT to obtain richer cross-lingual
sentence embeddings (Wang et al. 2019), such methods tend
to require substantial training data.
At the same time, aligning sentences cross-lingually with
limited parallel data is challenging, as it is not obvious how
to exploit non-parallel data (see Figure 1). While linear
transformations have proven fruitful for cross-lingual word
vector mapping (Mikolov, Le, and Sutskever 2013), recent

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7756

