The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Answering Conjunctive Queries with Inequalities in DL-LiteR
Gianluca Cima,1 Maurizio Lenzerini,1 Antonella Poggi2,1
1

Dipartimento di Ingegneria Informatica, Automatica e Gestionale, Sapienza Università di Roma
2
Dipartimento di Lettere e Culture Moderne, Sapienza Università di Roma
{cima, lenzerini, poggi}@diag.uniroma1.it

several limitations in expressive power. Notably, they do
not allow any form of negation, not even the one expressed
by the inequality (i.e., “not equal”) predicate. For instance,
the query computing all triangles in an undirected graph
cannot be expressed as a conjunctive query (CQ), whereas
it can be expressed as the following CQ with inequalities {(x, y, z) | edge(x, y), edge(x, z), edge(y, z), x =
y, x = z, y = z}, where the predicate edge represents the
connections between nodes in the graph.
The above example shows that inequalities are indeed necessary for expressing even very simple properties,
like triangle graphs. However, while answering UCQs in
DL-LiteR has been extensively studied in recent years (Xiao
et al. 2018), the problem of answering CQs with inequalities
(CQ= s) and unions thereof (UCQ= s) has been rarely investigated. To the best of our knowledge, the basic facts that are
known about such problem can be summarized as follows.

Abstract
DL-Lite=
R,

In the context of the Description Logic
i.e.,
DL-LiteR without UNA and with inequality axioms, we address the problem of adding to unions of conjunctive queries
(UCQs) one of the simplest forms of negation, namely, inequality. It is well known that answering conjunctive queries
with unrestricted inequalities over DL-LiteR ontologies is in
general undecidable. Therefore, we explore two strategies for
recovering decidability, and, hopefully, tractability. Firstly,
we weaken the ontology language, and consider the variant
of DL-Lite=
R corresponding to RDFS enriched with both inequality and disjointness axioms. Secondly, we weaken the
query language, by preventing inequalities to be applied to
existentially quantiﬁed variables, thus obtaining the class of
queries named UCQ=,b s. We prove that in the two cases,
query answering is decidable, and we provide tight complexity bounds for the problem, both for data and combined complexity. Notably, the results show that answering UCQ=,b s
0
over DL-Lite=
R ontologies is still in AC in data complexity.

1

• In stark contrast to the UCQ case, answering UCQ= s is
undecidable, even in the case of ontologies expressed in
DL-Litecore , which is the fragment of DL-LiteR without
role disjointness and role inclusion axioms (GutiérrezBasulto, Ibáñez-Garcı́a, and Kontchakov 2012). For
DL-LiteR ontologies, undecidability holds already for
CQ= s (Gutiérrez-Basulto et al. 2015). Looking at these
results, one can easily realize that the main of source of
undecidability stems from both the ability of the ontology language to express incomplete information through
existential quantiﬁers, and the possibility of imposing inequalities between existential variables in the query.

Introduction

Description Logics (DLs) (Baader et al. 2003; 2017) allow for deﬁning ontologies in terms of two components,
named TBox (general axioms on the concepts and relations in the domain of interest), and ABox (axioms about
instances of concepts and relations). In this paper we consider DL-LiteR , which is the DL of the DL-Lite family (Calvanese et al. 2004; 2007) underpinning the OWL 2 proﬁle
OWL 2 QL (Motik et al. 2012), and is arguably one of the
most important formalisms in Ontology-Based Data Access (OBDA) (Poggi et al. 2008; Bienvenu 2016; Xiao et
al. 2018; Ortiz 2018), where the aim is to access a typically huge amount of data represented as an ABox, either
materialized or virtual. In particular, DL-LiteR has been
designed so that answering unions of conjunctive queries
(UCQs) posed to an ontology expressed in this language can
be reduced to evaluating ﬁrst-order logic queries over the
database corresponding to the ABox, and therefore the problem is in AC0 in the size of the ABox, i.e., in the so-called
data complexity (Vardi 1982).
Although UCQs constitute the most popular class of
queries studied for both databases and ontologies, they have

• In (Gutiérrez-Basulto et al. 2015) it is also proved that
for the subclasses of CQ= s and UCQ= s named local
CQ= s and local UCQ= s, respectively, query answering over DL-LiteR ontologies is decidable, but with a
CO NE XP T IME upper bound in data complexity. Furthermore, it is provably intractable (in general coNP-hard in
data complexity) already for local CQ= s. Local (U)CQs
are special (U)CQs with inequalities, designed in such a
way that each inequality atom in the query that contributes
to a certain answer with respect to a DL ontology has at
least one of its terms bound by an individual in the ABox.
The goal of this paper is to investigate under which conditions, stronger than local UCQs, tractability of answering
queries with inequalities is recovered, or at least the com-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2782

