The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Subsidy Allocations in the Presence of Income Shocks
Rediet Abebe,1,2 Jon Kleinberg,2 S. Matthew Weinberg3
1

Harvard University
Cornell University
3
Princeton University
2

that we need to broaden our frameworks for quantifying
economic well-being; the reports state that “ofﬁcial ‘income
only’ measurements of poverty . . . painted a picture that was
too optimistic and didn’t capture the magnitude of disadvantage, nor the true struggles New Yorkers face in trying to
make ends meet” (Wimer et al. 2014).

Abstract
Poverty and economic hardship are understood to be highly
complex and dynamic phenomena. Due to the multi-faceted
nature of welfare, assistance programs targeted at alleviating
hardship can face challenges, as they often rely on simpler
welfare measurements, such as income or wealth, that fail to
capture to full complexity of each family’s state. Here, we
explore one important dimension – susceptibility to income
shocks. We introduce a model of welfare that incorporates income, wealth, and income shocks and analyze this model to
show that it can vary, at times substantially, from measures
of welfare that only use income or wealth. We then study the
algorithmic problem of optimally allocating subsidies in the
presence of income shocks. We consider two well-studied objectives: the ﬁrst aims to minimize the expected number of
agents that fall below a given welfare threshold (a min-sum
objective) and the second aims to minimize the likelihood
that the most vulnerable agent falls below this threshold (a
min-max objective). We present optimal and near-optimal algorithms for various general settings. We close with a discussion on future directions on allocating societal resources and
ethical implications of related approaches.

1

Shocks. What are the missing dimensions in these basic
measurements? Several additional components of economic
hardship manifest themselves through a common mechanism: unexpected and disruptive shocks to a family’s state
(Giesbert and Schindler 2012; Kochar 1995; O’Flaherty
2009). Such shocks can be a result of an unexpected expense
(e.g., a parking ticket or medical expense), a delayed paycheck or unexpected loss of a job, loss of a romantic relationship, interactions with the criminal justice system, and
many other experiences. Income shocks are receiving increasing attention from social scientists and policy-makers
alike; summarizing a recent round of ﬁndings, the Poverty
Tracker analysis discussed above reports that “the most persistently disadvantaged New Yorkers are beset by repeated
shocks to their ﬁnances and well-being” (Wimer et al. 2014).
A crucial point is that families vary signiﬁcantly in their
ability to withstand income shocks; while an unexpected bill
might be a mere inconvenience for some families, for other
families, it can lead to eviction, poor health, loss of a job, and
other undesirable outcomes that may trigger or lock families
into persistent poverty (Desmond 2012; 2016; Dinkelman,
Lam, and Leibbrandt 2008; Kochar 1999; O’Flaherty 2009).
In many cases, it is signiﬁcantly more challenging to remedy
the consequences of such experiences than it is to prevent
families from experiencing them in the ﬁrst place.
Despite the signiﬁcance of shocks in hardship, they do
not play a correspondingly central role in the evaluations
and decisions made by social assistance programs. For instance, standard eligibility guidelines for housing assistance
programs are based on income, adjusted for family size, or
percentage of income spent on housing. Likewise, other assistance programs such as the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program and Medicaid are based on income eligibility.
Yet two families that look similar under such measures may
still differ signiﬁcantly in their vulnerability if one family
experiences a signiﬁcantly different proﬁle of shocks. There

Introduction

Understanding and measuring economic hardship is a fundamental question that directly informs the design of policies
and assistance programs designed to address the needs of
vulnerable individuals and families (Anand and Sen 1997;
Atkinson 2003). A crucial challenge here is the range of factors that play a role in poverty and economic hardship, including health, demographics, social ties, intergenerational
dynamics, and many other dimensions (Grusky 2018).
Recent studies have sought to address this gap between
ofﬁcial measures of welfare and the more complex formulations that might be needed to accurately identify the sources
of greatest need. One active and ongoing effort is the Poverty
Tracker program (Wimer et al. 2014; 2016), which surveys
approximately 2300 families in New York City, documenting the intricate associations between their circumstances
and levels of hardship. As with other studies in this area,
the Poverty Tracker study is in part based on the premise
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7032

