The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Tweedie-Hawkes Processes: Interpreting the Phenomena of Outbreaks
Tianbo Li, Yiping Ke
School of Computer Science and Engineering
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
tianbo001@e.ntu.edu.sg, ypke@ntu.edu.sg

• invariant excitation—the probability of events triggering
subsequent ones are either same or i.i.d. distributed;
• neglecting content/features—some models only consider
the temporal information of the event sequences, but the
contents are usually neglected;
• weak interpretability—parameters in the model are inaccessible, especially for those combined with neural networks and non-parametric techniques;
• unrealistic distribution of aggregation—Taylor’s power
law (Taylor 1961), which states that the variance of
species population density is proportional to a fractional
power of the mean, is more natural and common for population and aggregation, whereas some existing works simply adopt Gaussian distribution;
• failure to sub-criticality—sub-criticality is a property that
the diffusion process produces ﬁnite number of events,
which many existing works fail to consider.
In this paper, we propose a Bayesian model called
Tweedie-Hawkes Process (THP). The model parameterizes
the excitation parameter in Hawkes process with a Tweedie
regression (Jorgensen 1987) over event features, and provides a solution to all the aforementioned drawbacks.
Why Tweedie distribution is more realistic? There
are two reasons. First, Tweedie distribution obeys Taylor’s
power law (Taylor 1961). This law is applicable to many circumstances, such as the spatial distribution of Colorado beetle (Harcourt 1963) and daily turnovers of stocks traded on
the NYSE (Fronczak and Fronczak 2010). Hence, equipped
with this law, Tweedie distribution is powerful in modeling
data that exhibit aggregation (outbreak) phenomena. Second, Tweedie distribution has two important characteristics:
heavy-tail and zero-inﬂation. Zero-inﬂation means the probability has a large mass at zero, resulting a natural sparsity. Empirical studies such as (Oestreicher-Singer and Sundararajan 2012) and (Klugman, Panjer, and Willmot 2012),
especially in social networks, suggest that many population
distributions are heavy-tailed and zero-inﬂated. In the context of self-excited data, the majority of events are “silent”
(i.e., do not have much excitation effect), while a small percentage of events would trigger numerous descendants (in
fact, this is how outbreaks are formed). We call the former

Abstract
Self-exciting event sequences, in which the occurrence of an
event increases the probability of triggering subsequent ones,
are common in many disciplines. In this paper, we propose
a Bayesian model called Tweedie-Hawkes Processes (THP),
which is able to model the outbreaks of events and ﬁnd out
the dominant factors behind. THP leverages on the Tweedie
distribution in capturing various excitation effects. A variational EM algorithm is developed for model inference. Some
theoretical properties of THP, including the sub-criticality,
convergence of the learning algorithm and kernel selection
method are discussed. Applications to Epidemiology and information diffusion analysis demonstrate the versatility of
our model in various disciplines. Evaluations on real-world
datasets show that THP outperforms the rival state-of-the-art
baselines in the task of forecasting future events.

Introduction
Self-exciting event sequences are ubiquitous. In such an
event sequence, the occurrence of an event will raise the
probability of triggering succeeding events. These events
could be: posts in social networking sites, cases of an epidemic, comments on a popular movie, or aftershocks following an earthquake. The self-exciting nature often brings
about outbreaks of events in a short period of time. People
care about why an outbreak happens. Why are certain tweets
re-tweeted so many times but not the others? What factors
activate an outbreak of a certain epidemic? To answer these
questions, an effective and interpretable tool to model and
understand outbreaks is needed.
A typical tool for modeling self-/mutually excited data is
Hawkes process (Hawkes 1971). Many recent works have
explored its application in many disciplines, such as modeling high-frequency transactions (Bowsher 2007), aftershock
prediction (Ogata 1988), network inference (Linderman and
Adams 2014), recommendation (Du et al. 2015b), etc. Despite its success in many applications, traditional Hawkes
processes and most Hawkes-related models are not competent in capturing outbreaks. They mainly suffer from one or
many of the following drawbacks:
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4699

