The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Improving Domain-Adapted Sentiment
Classiﬁcation by Deep Adversarial Mutual Learning
Qianming Xue,1 Wei Zhang,1∗ Hongyuan Zha2
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, KLATASDS-MOE, East China Normal University
2
School of Computational Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology
xueqianming200@hotmail.com, zhangwei.thu2011@gmail.com, zha@cc.gatech.edu

Thus developing automatically domain-adapted methods is
imperative in this area. It is worth noting that this task is
somewhat more challenging than some other cross-domain
sentiment classiﬁcation tasks which require a few labeled
data in target domains (Peng et al. 2018).

Abstract
Domain-adapted sentiment classiﬁcation refers to training on
a labeled source domain to well infer document-level sentiment on an unlabeled target domain. Most existing relevant
models involve a feature extractor and a sentiment classiﬁer,
where the feature extractor works towards learning domaininvariant features from both domains, and the sentiment classiﬁer is trained only on the source domain to guide the feature extractor. As such, they lack a mechanism to use sentiment polarity lying in the target domain. To improve domainadapted sentiment classiﬁcation by learning sentiment from
the target domain as well, we devise a novel deep adversarial mutual learning approach involving two groups of feature
extractors, domain discriminators, sentiment classiﬁers, and
label probers. The domain discriminators enable the feature
extractors to obtain domain-invariant features. Meanwhile,
the label prober in each group explores document sentiment
polarity of the target domain through the sentiment prediction generated by the classiﬁer in the peer group, and guides
the learning of the feature extractor in its own group. The
proposed approach achieves the mutual learning of the two
groups in an end-to-end manner. Experiments on multiple
public datasets indicate our method obtains the state-of-theart performance, validating the effectiveness of mutual learning through label probers.

A straightforward solution to the task is to directly apply the sentiment classiﬁcation models trained on a source
domain to a target domain. It does not obtain any training
guidance from target domains. However, this is not ideal
since it ignores the semantic gap between different domains.
Taking Movie and Food domains as examples, the ﬁrst domain contains common sentiment words such as “romantic”,
“violent”, and “dramatic”. By contrast, the second includes
opinion words like “tasty” and “delicious”. The potentially
small set intersection of domain-dependent sentiment words
indicates that there is huge potential for improving the naive
solution. As such, it is important to build a domain-adapted
sentiment classiﬁcation model to perform well.
Existing relevant studies could be attributed into two categories: two-stage approaches (Blitzer, Dredze, and Pereira
2007; Glorot, Bordes, and Bengio 2011; Ziser and Reichart
2018; 2019) and end-to-end models (Ganin et al. 2016;
He et al. 2018; Qu et al. 2019). The two-stage approaches
typically construct unsupervised feature extractors or manually select pivot features across domains in the ﬁrst stage.
And in the second stage, a sentiment classiﬁer is trained
on the labeled source domain. Yet the ﬁrst stage could not
be directly guided by the ground-truth, and the selection of
pivot features is a little too empirical and costly. On the other
hand, beneﬁting from the advanced learning techniques such
as adversarial learning (Ganin and Lempitsky 2015) and
maximum mean discrepancy (Gretton et al. 2012a), end-toend models overcome the above issues by training domainvariant feature extractors and sentiment classiﬁers holistically, without relying on pivot features. However, despite the
promising results they have made, there still remains a major limitation in most of the end-to-end models: data from
target domains is not fully utilized. That is, their sentiment
classiﬁers and feature extractors overlook the sentiment polarity lying in the review text of target domains. One relevant
study (He et al. 2018) in this regard obtains pseudo-labels in
target domains by a self-ensemble bootstrapping technique

Introduction
Domain-adapted sentiment classiﬁcation aims at training on
a labeled source domain to well infer document-level sentiment on an unlabeled target domain. It is a natural intersection of researches on sentiment classiﬁcation (Liu 2012) and
unsupervised domain adaptation (Ben-David et al. 2010),
and has attracted much attention with the ﬂourish of online
review platforms, such as Amazon, Yelp, etc. On the one
hand, the total amount of reviews is exceedingly huge, which
brings opportunities to pursue effective sentiment classiﬁcation models (Tang, Qin, and Liu 2015a). On the other hand, a
large number of review domains (e.g., product categories in
Amazon) make it intractable to manually annotate enough
data in each domain for training domain-speciﬁc models.
∗

Wei Zhang is corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9362

