The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference (IAAI-20)

Draining the Water Hole: Mitigating
Social Engineering Attacks with CyberTWEAK
Zheyuan Ryan Shi,1 Aaron Schlenker,2 Brian Hay,3
Daniel Bittleston,1 Siyu Gao,1 Emily Peterson,1 John Trezza,1 Fei Fang1
1
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 Facebook, Inc., 3 Security Works
ryanshi@cmu.edu, aschlenker@fb.com, bhay@securityworks.com
{dbittles, siyug, emilypet, jtrezza}@andrew.cmu.edu, feif@cs.cmu.edu

Sand-boxing potential attacks by VM requires high-end
hardware, which hinders its wide adoption (Farquhar 2017).
White/blacklisting websites is of limited use, since the adversary is strategically infecting trustworthy websites.
We propose a game-theoretic deception framework to mitigate social engineering attacks, and, in particular, the watering hole attacks. Deception is to delay and misdirect an
adversary by incorporating ambiguity. Watering hole attackers rely on the identiﬁcation of a visitor’s system environment
to deliver the correct malware to compromise a victim. Towards this end, the defender can manipulate the identifying
information in the network packets, such as the user-agent
string, IP address, and time-to-live. Consequently, the attacker might receive false or confusing information about the
environment and send incompatible exploits. Thus, deceptively manipulating employees’ network packets provides a
promising countermeasure to social engineering attacks.
Our Contributions We provide the ﬁrst game-theoretic
framework for autonomous countermeasures to social engineering attacks. We propose the Social Engineering Deception (SED) game, in which an organization (defender)
strategically alters its network packets. The attacker selects
websites to compromise, and captures the organization’s trafﬁc to launch an attack. We model it as a zero-sum game and
consider the minimax strategy for the defender.
Second, we analyze the structure and properties of the
SED game, based on which we identify real-world scenarios
where the optimal protection policy can be found efﬁciently.
Third, we propose the C YBERTWEAK (Thwart WatEring
hole AttacK) algorithm to solve the SED game. C YBER TWEAK exploits theoretical properties of SED, linear program relaxation of the attacker’s best response problem, and
the column generation method, and is enhanced with dominated website elimination. We show that our algorithm can
handle corporate-scale instances involving over 105 websites.
Finally, we have developed a browser extension based on
our algorithm. The software is now publicly available on the
Chrome Web Store.1 The extension is able to manipulate the
user-agent string in the network packets. We take additional
steps to improve the its usability and explain the output of
C YBERTWEAK intuitively. We believe it will be vital to the

Abstract
Cyber adversaries have increasingly leveraged social engineering attacks to breach large organizations and threaten the
well-being of today’s online users. One clever technique, the
“watering hole” attack, compromises a legitimate website to
execute drive-by download attacks by redirecting users to another malicious domain. We introduce a game-theoretic model
that captures the salient aspects for an organization protecting
itself from a watering hole attack by altering the environment
information in web trafﬁc so as to deceive the attackers. Our
main contributions are (1) a novel Social Engineering Deception (SED) game model that features a continuous action set
for the attacker, (2) an in-depth analysis of the SED model to
identify computationally feasible real-world cases, and (3) the
C YBERTWEAK algorithm which solves for the optimal protection policy. To illustrate the potential use of our framework,
we built a browser extension based on our algorithms which is
now publicly available online. The C YBERTWEAK extension
will be vital to the continued development and deployment of
countermeasures for social engineering.

1

Introduction

Social engineering attacks are a scourge for the well-being
of today’s online user and the current threat landscape only
continues to become more dangerous (Mitnick and Simon
2011). Social engineering attacks manipulate people to give
up conﬁdential information through the use of phishing campaigns, spear phishing whaling or watering hole attacks. For
example, in watering hole attacks, the attacker compromises
a legitimate website and redirects visitors to a malicious domain where the attacker can intrude the user’s network. The
number of social engineering attacks is growing at a catastrophic rate. In a recent survey, 60% organizations were or
may have been victim of at least one attack (Agari 2016).
Such cybercrime poses an enormous threat to the security at
all levels – national, business, and individual.
To mitigate these attacks, organizations take countermeasures from employee awareness training to technology-based
defenses. Unfortunately, existing defenses are inadequate.
Watering hole attackers typically use zero-day exploits, rendering patching and updating almost useless (Sutton 2014).
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

13363

http://bit.ly/CyberTWEAK

