The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Actor Critic Deep Reinforcement Learning for Neural Malware Control
Yu Wang, Jack W. Stokes, Mady Marinescu
Microsoft Corporation
One Microsoft Way
Redmond, WA 98052
{wany, jstokes, mady}@microsoft.com

tual machine (VM) (i.e., virtualization) which includes additional monitoring. In the remainder of this paper, we focus
on emulation, but the methods can be directly applied to virtualization as well.

Abstract
In addition to using signatures, antimalware products also detect malicious attacks by evaluating unknown ﬁles in an emulated environment, i.e. sandbox, prior to execution on a computer’s native operating system. During emulation, a ﬁle cannot be scanned indeﬁnitely, and antimalware engines often set
the number of instructions to be executed based on a set of
heuristics. These heuristics only make the decision of when
to halt emulation using partial information leading to the execution of the ﬁle for either too many or too few instructions.
Also this method is vulnerable if the attackers learn this set
of heuristics.
Recent research uses a deep reinforcement learning (DRL)
model employing a Deep Q-Network (DQN) to learn when
to halt the emulation of a ﬁle. In this paper, we propose a new
DRL-based system which instead employs a modiﬁed actor
critic (AC) framework for the emulation halting task. This AC
model dynamically predicts the best time to halt the ﬁle’s execution based on a sequence of system API calls. Compared to
the earlier models, the new model is capable of handling adversarial attacks by simulating their behaviors using the critic
model. The new AC model demonstrates much better performance than both the DQN model and antimalware engine’s
heuristics. In terms of execution speed (evaluated by the halting decision), the new model halts the execution of unknown
ﬁles by up to 2.5% earlier than the DQN model and 93.6%
earlier than the heuristics. For the task of detecting malicious
ﬁles, the proposed AC model increases the true positive rate
by 9.9% from 69.5% to 76.4% at a false positive rate of 1%
compared to the DQN model, and by 83.4% from 41.2% to
76.4% at a false positive rate of 1% compared to a recently
proposed LSTM model.

One important aspect of a malware detection system is
determining when to halt the execution of the unknown ﬁle
during emulation. Malware often delays the execution of its
malicious actions in an attempt to evade detection by the
emulation engine. The antimalware engine’s emulator employs heuristics to determine when to halt the execution of
a ﬁle. Recently, the authors in (Wang, Stokes, and Marinescu 2019) proposed a model based on deep reinforcement
learning (DRL) which learns when to halt the ﬁle’s execution during emulation. Their system uses a Deep Q-Network
(DQN) to learn a policy to either continue or halt execution
using the operating system’s application programming interface (API) calls made by the ﬁle. In addition to being able
to halt the execution of 91.3% ﬁles earlier than the antimalware engine’s heuristics, the inclusion of the DQN model
improved the binary classiﬁcation of unknown ﬁles by over
61.5% compared to a recent recurrent deep learning model.
In this work, we propose a new deep reinforcement learning model which uses an Actor Critic (AC) model instead
of the DQN model (Wang, Stokes, and Marinescu 2019).
The Actor Critic method utilizes two interactive models: an
actor and a critic. The actor determines the best action to
take based on the current environment information. In addition, the critic plays an evaluation role for the actor by
considering the environment state and returning a score that
represents how good the action is for that state. Unlike previous models employing RNNs (Pascanu et al. 2015; Athiwaratkun and Stokes 2017) or a DQN (Wang, Stokes, and
Marinescu 2019) which cannot handle adversarial learningbased attacks (Hu and Tan 2017), this new structure ﬁts
much better into our antimalware detection scenario, particularly for adversarial cases where the malware can dynamically change its action based on the antimalware system’s performance. In this paper, we propose a new modiﬁed
critic structure which can simulate the malware’s responses
with adversarial attacks, and then train the actor to handle
these simulated adversarial learning-based attacks generated
by the critic.

Introduction
The detection of malware (i.e., malicious software) is a
signiﬁcant problem for the world’s computer users, and
deep learning-based systems have been proposed for this
task (Dahl et al. 2013; Pascanu et al. 2015; Athiwaratkun and
Stokes 2017). To avoid infecting computers in a production
test environment, unknown ﬁles are either emulated within
the antimalware engine itself or executed in a special virc 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1005

