The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Comparing Election Methods Where Each Voter Ranks Only Few Candidates
Matthias Bentert,1 Piotr Skowron2
1

Algorithmics and Computational Complexity, Faculty IV, TU Berlin, Berlin, Germany
matthias.bentert@tu-berlin.de
2
Faculty of Mathematics, Informatics, and Mechanics, University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland
p.skowron@mimuw.edu.pl

ballot). We investigate how well positional scoring rules and
the Minimax rule (a.k.a., Simpson rule) can be approximated
by algorithms that use one of the two elicitation methods.

Abstract
Election rules are formal processes that aggregate voters’
preferences, typically to select a single winning candidate.
Most of the election rules studied in the literature require the
voters to rank the candidates from the most to the least preferred one. This method of eliciting preferences is impractical when the number of candidates to be ranked is large. We
ask how well certain election rules (focusing on positional
scoring rules and the Minimax rule) can be approximated
from partial preferences collected through one of the following procedures: (i) randomized—we ask each voter to rank a
random subset of  candidates, and (ii) deterministic—we ask
each voter to provide a ranking of her  most preferred candidates (the -truncated ballot). We establish theoretical bounds
on the approximation ratios and complement our theoretical
analysis with computer simulations. We ﬁnd that it is usually
better to use the randomized approach.

1

Our Contribution
1. In Section 3.1 we identify a class Sep  of positional scoring rules that, for a given , can be well approximated
using the randomized approach. Sep 2 consists of a single
rule, namely the Borda count; the number of rules in Sep 
grows exponentially with . We theoretically prove approximation guarantees for the rules from Sep  —these
guarantees are more likely to be accurate when the number of voters is large. In Section 3.2 we provide an analogous analysis for the Minimax rule.
2. In Section 4 we prove upper-bounds on the approximation ratios of algorithms that use -truncated ballots. We
show that the algorithm that minimizes the maximal regret of Lu and Boutilier (2011) (we recall this algorithm
in Section 4.1) matches our upper-bounds (for Minimax
our analysis is tight up to a small constant factor).
3. We ran computer simulations to verify how the approximation ratio depends on the particular distribution of voters preferences (Section 5). Our experiments conﬁrm that
in most cases (with the exception of very unstructured
preferences) the randomized approach is superior. We also
show that usually only a couple of hundreds of voters are
required to achieve a reasonably good approximation.

Introduction

An election rule is a function that takes as input a collection
of voters’ preferences over a given set of m candidates and
returns a single candidate, called the winner. There is a large
variety of election rules known in the literature (we refer the
reader to the survey by Zwicker (2015) for an overview);
most of them require the voters to provide strict linear orders over the candidates. Yet, it is often hard, or even infeasible for a voter to provide such a preference ranking,
especially when the set of candidates is large. Indeed, it is
often believed that a voter can rank at most ﬁve to nine candidates (Miller 1956).
In this paper, we ask how the quality of decisions made
through voting depends on the amount of information available. Speciﬁcally, our goal is to assess the quality of outcomes of elections when each voter can be asked to rank at
most  < m candidates. We compare two ways of eliciting preferences. In the ﬁrst approach—which we call randomized—we ask each voter to rank a random subset of 
candidates. In the second approach—which we call deterministic—we ask each voter to provide the ranking of her
top  most preferred candidates (the so-called -truncated

Related Work
Our work contributes to the broad literature on handling
incomplete information in voting—for a survey on this
topic, we refer the reader to the book chapter by Boutilier
and Rosenschein (2015). Speciﬁcally, our research is closely
related to the idea of minimizing the maximal regret (Lu and
Boutilier 2011). Therein, for a partial preference proﬁle P ,
the goal is to select a candidate c such that the score of c
in the worst possible completion of P is maximized. Our
paper complements this literature by (1) providing an accurate analysis of the approximation ratios for various methods
(which allows to better judge suitability of different methods
for handling incomplete information), and (2) by analyzing
two natural methods of preference elicitation.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2218

