The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Forest from the Trees: Generation through Neighborhoods
Yang Li, Tianxiang Gao, Junier B. Oliva
Department of Computer Science, UNC Chapel Hill
{yangli95, tianxiang, joliva}@cs.unc.edu

is difﬁcult to control the properties of generated samples.
In this work, we more closely follow nature’s paradigm for
generative modeling, making use of our data not only to learn
features but to pull instances as neighbors.
Neighborhood based methods abound much of the history
of machine learning and statistics. For instance, the wellknown k-nearest neighbor estimator often achieves surprisingly good results (Altman 1992). Moreover, by equipping
models with neighborhood information, one reduces the problem to a local-manifold, a much simpler domain (Roweis and
Saul 2000; Seung and Lee 2000). In this work, we focus our
attention on density estimation, which features a staple neighbor based estimator: the kernel density estimator (KDE). The
KDE models a local manifold as a Gaussian, an untenable
restriction when dealing with complicated data such as images, see Fig. 1. Instead, we model local manifolds using
more ﬂexible densities, simultaneously better representing
the local space of a neighborhood whilst reducing the burden
of the density estimator. In doing so, this work brings forth
methodology that is in the same vein as non-parametric density estimation. We begin with a simple observation about the
kernel density estimator. Recall that KDE models a dataset
{xi ∈ Rd }N
i=1 as a mixture of “kernel” distributions K centered around each data-point:

Abstract
In this work, we propose to learn a generative model using
both learned features (through a latent space) and memories
(through neighbors). Although human learning makes seamless use of both learned perceptual features and instance recall,
current generative learning paradigms only make use of one
of these two components. Take, for instance, ﬂow models,
which learn a latent space that follows a simple distribution.
Conversely, kernel density techniques use instances to shift
a simple distribution into an aggregate mixture model. Here
we propose multiple methods to enhance the latent space of a
ﬂow model with neighborhood information. Not only does our
proposed framework represent a more human-like approach
by leveraging both learned features and memories, but it may
also be viewed as a step forward in non-parametric methods.
In addition, our proposed framework allows the user to easily control the properties of generated samples by targeting
samples based on neighbors. The efﬁcacy of our model is
shown empirically with standard image datasets. We observe
compelling results and a signiﬁcant improvement over baselines. Combined further with a contrastive training mechanism,
our proposed methods can effectively perform non-parametric
novelty detection.

1

Introduction

The typical training paradigm for many generative models
makes a one time use of the training data. For instance, VAEs
(Kingma and Welling 2013) and ﬂow models (Dinh, Krueger,
and Bengio 2014; Dinh, Sohl-Dickstein, and Bengio 2016;
Kingma and Dhariwal 2018) use the training data to ﬁt a
latent space. After the features (the latent space) are learned,
the training data is discarded, as the learned network is entirely responsible for the generative process. This paradigm
has proven effective, however it leaves the entire burden of
modeling a complicated support (such as the space of images)
completely on the learned latent space and network capacity.
Moreover, such an approach is in stark contrast to human
learning, which not only uses data to learn perceptual features
(Kuhl, Tsao, and Liu 2003), but will reuse data as memories
with instance recall (Carrier and Pashler 1992). Furthermore,
since samples are generated from a random latent code, it

1 
K(xi , x).
N i=1
N

p(x) =

(1)

In practice, the kernel is often chosen to be a Gaussian distribution centered at the data-points with a diagonal covariance
matrix:
N
1 
N (x | xi , σ 2 I),
(2)
p(x) =
N i=1
where N (x | xi , σ 2 I) is the pdf of a Gaussian with mean xi
and covariance matrix σ 2 I. That is, the density is modeled
as a mixture of training data-centered distributions. The sampling procedure is simple, as one selects a training point xi
from the training data at random and adds Gaussian noise to
it. More generally, one sees that KDE models the density as:
1 
p(x | xi ),
N i=1
N

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

p(x) =

4755

(3)

