The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

An Analysis Framework for Metric Voting based on LP Duality
David Kempe
University of Southern California

Voting is an important way for a group to choose one out
of multiple available candidate options. The group could be
a country, academic department, or other organization, and
the n candidate options they choose from could be courses
of action or human candidates. Typically, each voter submits
a total order of all options, called a ranking or preference
order. Based on all the submitted rankings, a social choice
rule (or mechanism) determines the winning option.

Complementing the “traditional” axiomatic approach for
comparing social choice rules (see, e.g., (Brandt et al. 2016)
for a fairly recent overview), an alternative approach is to
view social choice through the lens of optimization and approximation. In this line of work (e.g., (Boutilier et al. 2015;
Caragiannis and Procaccia 2011; Procaccia 2010; Procaccia and Rosenschein 2006)), each voter has a cost/utility for
each candidate, and the social welfare of a candidate is the
sum/average of the costs/utilities of all voters.
While the social choice rule might aim to optimize social
welfare, it does not have access to the actual costs/utilities;
rather, it only receives the voters’ rankings, which convey
partial information. In other words, even though the voting
mechanism must optimize a cardinal objective function, it
only receives ordinal information as input, namely, for each
voter, whether her1 utility/cost for candidate x is larger or
smaller than that for candidate y. As a result, the mechanism
will typically select a suboptimal candidate. The distortion
of a mechanism is the worst-case ratio between the welfare/cost of the mechanism’s selected (based only on ordinal
information) candidate and the optimum (with full knowledge of the cardinal values) candidate, over all possible inputs. (Formal deﬁnitions of this concept and all other terms
can be found in Section 2.)
A particularly natural way of deﬁning costs is via a joint
metric space on candidates and voters. The distance d(v, x)
between voter v and candidate x captures their difference in
opinion and hence the cost; therefore, voters rank candidates
by non-decreasing distance from themselves. This modeling approach was proposed in (Anshelevich, Bhardwaj, and
Postl 2015); see also (Anshelevich et al. 2018) for an expanded/improved journal version, and (Anshelevich 2016)
for a broader overview of the area and its results.
The main result of (Anshelevich, Bhardwaj, and Postl
2015; Anshelevich et al. 2018) is that under the model of
metric costs, many widely used voting rules (including Plurality, Veto, Borda count, and others) have distortion linear
in the number of candidates or worse. Furthermore, even
with just 2 candidates and a 1-dimensional metric space, every deterministic voting mechanism has distortion at least 3.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
For ease of presentation, we use female pronouns for voters
and male pronouns for candidates throughout.

Abstract
Distortion-based analysis has established itself as a fruitful
framework for comparing voting mechanisms. m voters and
n candidates are jointly embedded in an (unknown) metric
space, and the voters submit rankings of candidates by nondecreasing distance from themselves. Based on the submitted
rankings, the social choice rule chooses a winning candidate;
the quality of the winner is the sum of the (unknown) distances to the voters. The rule’s choice will in general be suboptimal, and the worst-case ratio between the cost of its chosen candidate and the optimal candidate is called the rule’s
distortion. It was shown in prior work that every deterministic rule has distortion at least 3, while the Copeland rule and
related rules guarantee distortion at√
most 5; a very recent result gave a rule with distortion 2 + 5 ≈ 4.236.
We provide a framework based on LP-duality and ﬂow interpretations of the dual which provides a simpler and more
uniﬁed way for proving upper bounds on the distortion of
social choice rules. We illustrate the utility of this approach
with three examples. First, we show √
that the Ranked Pairs
and Schulze rules have distortion Θ( n). Second, we give
a fairly simple proof of a strong generalization of the upper
bound of 5 on the distortion of Copeland, to social choice
rules with short paths from the winning candidate to the optimal candidate in generalized weak preference graphs.
√ A special case of this result recovers the recent 2 + 5 guarantee. Finally, our framework naturally suggests a combinatorial rule that is a strong candidate for achieving distortion 3,
which had also been proposed in recent work. We prove that
the distortion bound of 3 would follow from any of three combinatorial conjectures we formulate.

1

Introduction

2079

