The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Are Noisy Sentences Useless for Distant Supervised Relation Extraction?
Yu-Ming Shang,1,2,4 He-Yan Huang,1 Xian-Ling Mao,1 Xin Sun,1 Wei Wei3
1

School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
2
CETC Big Data Research Institute Co., Ltd., Guiyang, China,550022
3
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Hu’bei, China
4
Big Data Application on lmproving Government Governance Capabilities
National Engineering Laboratory Guiyang, China, 550022
{ymshang, hhy63, maoxl, sunxin}@bit.edu.cn, Weiw@hust.edu.cn
Sentence

Abstract

Bag Label

#1: Barack Obama was born in the
United States.

The noisy labeling problem has been one of the major obstacles for distant supervised relation extraction. Existing approaches usually consider that the noisy sentences are useless and will harm the model’s performance. Therefore, they
mainly alleviate this problem by reducing the inﬂuence of
noisy sentences, such as applying bag-level selective attention or removing noisy sentences from sentence-bags. However, the underlying cause of the noisy labeling problem is
not the lack of useful information, but the missing relation
labels. Intuitively, if we can allocate credible labels for noisy
sentences, they will be transformed into useful training data
and beneﬁt the model’s performance. Thus, in this paper, we
propose a novel method for distant supervised relation extraction, which employs unsupervised deep clustering to generate reliable labels for noisy sentences. Speciﬁcally, our model
contains three modules: a sentence encoder, a noise detector
and a label generator. The sentence encoder is used to obtain
feature representations. The noise detector detects noisy sentences from sentence-bags, and the label generator produces
high-conﬁdence relation labels for noisy sentences. Extensive
experimental results demonstrate that our model outperforms
the state-of-the-art baselines on a popular benchmark dataset,
and can indeed alleviate the noisy labeling problem.

Bag

#2: Barack Obama was the ﬁrst
African American to be elected to the
president of the United States.
#3: Barack Obama served as the 44th
president of the United States from
2009 to 2017.

president of

Noise?

Correct Label

Yes

born in

No

president of

No

president of

Table 1: An example of sentence-bag annotated by distant
supervision. “Yes” and “No” indicate whether or not each
sentence is a noisy sentence. “Correct Label” means the true
relationship between the entity pair expressed in each sentence.
president of, United States) is a relational triple in knowledge graph. Distant supervision will regard all sentences that
contain [Barack Obama]e1 and [United States]e2 as the instance of relation “president of ”. As a consequence, the ﬁrst
sentence which expresses the relation “born in” is wrongly
labeled with relation “president of ”, and becomes a noisy
sentence in the sentence-bag.
Previous studies usually adopt Multi-Instance Learning
(MIL) framework to address this problem (Riedel, Yao, and
Mccallum 2010). In this framework, the training and test
process is proceeded at the sentence-bag level, where the
sentence-bag contains all the sentences that mention the
same triple (e1 , r, e2 ). Existing MIL studies broadly fall into
two categories: One is the soft decision methods, which tend
to place soft weights on sentences to reduce the impact of
noisy sentences (Lin et al. 2016; Yuan et al. 2019a; 2019b;
Ye and Ling 2019). The other is the hard decision methods that try to remove noisy sentences from sentence-bags to
eliminate their inﬂuence (Zeng et al. 2015; Feng et al. 2018;
Qin, Xu, and Wang 2018).
However, previous de-noising methods ignore the essential cause of the noisy labeling problem — the lack of correct
relation labels. To ﬁll this gap, we try to solve this problem
from the perspective of noisy sentences utilization, i.e., correcting their wrong labels. As shown in Table 1, “Barack
Obama was born in the United States” is a noisy sentence
in the sentence-bag. While it indeed expresses the relation
“born in” between [Barack Obama]e1 and [United States]e2 .

Introduction
Relation Extraction, deﬁned as the task of extracting structured relations from unstructured text, is a crucial task in
natural language processing (NLP). One of the main challenges of relation extraction is the lack of large-scale manually labeled data. Thus, Mintz et al. (2009) proposed distant
supervision to automatically construct training data. The assumption of distant supervision is that if two entities (e1 , e2 )
have a relationship r in knowledge graph, then any sentence
that mentions the two entities might express the relation r.
Obviously, this assumption is too strong and will cause
the noisy labeling problem. Since it only focuses on the existence of entities in text and knowledge graph, but cannot
identify the one-to-one mapping between sentences and relations. For example, as shown in Table 1, (Barack Obama,
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8799

