The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Fine-Grained Named Entity Typing over
Distantly Supervised Data Based on Reﬁned Representations∗
Muhammad Asif Ali,1 Yifang Sun,1 Bing Li,1 Wei Wang1,2
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, UNSW, Australia
2
College of Computer Science and Technology, DGUT, China
{muhammadasif.ali, bing.li}@unsw.edu.au, {yifangs, weiw}@cse.unsw.edu.au
small contextual differences (Section 4.6), manual labeling
is error-prone and time-consuming, thus distant supervision
is widely used to automatically acquire the training data.
Distant supervision follows a two-step approach, i.e., detecting the entity mentions followed by assigning type labels
to the mentions using existing knowledge bases. However,
it assigns type labels irrespective of the mention’s context,
which results in high label noise (Ren et al. 2016b). This
phenomenon is illustrated in Figure 1, where, for the sentences denoted as: S1:S4, the entity mention “Imran Khan”
is labeled with all possible labels in the knowledge-base
{person, author, athlete, coach, politician}. Whereas, from
the contextual perspective, in S1 the mention should be labeled as {person, athlete}; in S2 it should be assigned labels
{person, author}, etc. This label noise propagates in model
learning, which hinders the improvement in performance.
In an attempt to deal with the noisy training data, existing research on FG-NET relies on the following different approaches: (i) assume all labels to be correct (Ling
and Weld 2012; Yogatama, Gillick, and Lazic 2015), which
severely affects the model performance; (ii) apply different pruning heuristics to prune the noisy labels (Gillick et
al. 2014), however, these heuristics drastically reduce the
size of training data; (iii) bifurcate the training data into
two categories: clean and noisy, if the type labels correspond to the same type path or otherwise (Ren et al. 2016a;
Abhishek, Anand, and Awekar 2017), they ignore the fact
that the labels, even corresponding to the same type path,
may be noisy. For these approaches, it is hard to guarantee
that underlying modeling assumptions will have a substantial impact on alleviating the label noise. In addition, these
approaches model the entity mentions entirely independent
of each other, which hinders effective propagation of labelspeciﬁc contextual information across noisy entity mentions.
In order to address the challenges associated with the
noisy training data, we introduce a novel approach that
puts an equal emphasis on analyzing the entity mentions
w.r.t label-speciﬁc corpus-level context in addition to the
sentence-speciﬁc context. Speciﬁcally, we propose FineGrained named Entity Typing with Reﬁned Representations
(FGET-RR), shown in Figure 2. FGET-RR initially uses
mention’s sentence-speciﬁc context to generate the noisy
mention representation (Phase-I). Later, it uses corpus-level
contextual clues to form a sparse graph that surrounds a sub-

Abstract
Fine-Grained Named Entity Typing (FG-NET) is a key component in Natural Language Processing (NLP). It aims at
classifying an entity mention into a wide range of entity types.
Due to a large number of entity types, distant supervision is
used to collect training data for this task, which noisily assigns type labels to entity mentions irrespective of the context. In order to alleviate the noisy labels, existing approaches
on FG-NET analyze the entity mentions entirely independent
of each other and assign type labels solely based on mention’s sentence-speciﬁc context. This is inadequate for highly
overlapping and/or noisy type labels as it hinders information passing across sentence boundaries. For this, we propose an edge-weighted attentive graph convolution network
that reﬁnes the noisy mention representations by attending
over corpus-level contextual clues prior to the end classiﬁcation. Experimental evaluation shows that the proposed model
outperforms the existing research by a relative score of upto
10.2% and 8.3% for macro-f1 and micro-f1 respectively.

1

Introduction

Named Entity Typing (NET) aims at classifying an entity
mention to a set of entity types (e.g., person, location and
organization) based on its context. It is one of the crucial
components in NLP, as it helps in numerous down streaming applications, e.g., information retrieval (Carlson et al.
2010), Knowledge Base Construction (KBC) (Dong et al.
2014), question answering (Lee et al. 2006), machine translation (Britz et al. 2017), etc. Fine-Grained Named Entity Typing (FG-NET) is an extension of traditional NET
to a much wide range of entity types (Corro et al. 2015;
Ren et al. 2016a), typically over hundred types arranged in
a hierarchical structure. It has shown promising results in
different applications including KBC (Dong et al. 2014), relation extraction (Mitchell et al. 2018), etc.
In FG-NET, an entity mention is labeled with multiple
overlapping entity types based on the context. For instance,
in the sentence: “After having recorded his role, Trump
spent the whole day directing the movie.” Trump can be annotated as both actor and director at the same time. Owing to a broad range of highly correlated entity types with
∗

M.A. ALi and W. Wang are the co-corresponding authors.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7391

