The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Weakly-Supervised Video Moment
Retrieval via Semantic Completion Network
Zhijie Lin,1 Zhou Zhao,1∗ Zhu Zhang,1 Qi Wang,2 Huasheng Liu2
1

College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China,
2
Alibaba Inc., China
{linzhijie, zhaozhou, zhangzhu}@zju.edu.cn, {wq140362, fangkong.lhs}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

 

Video moment retrieval is to search the moment that is most
relevant to the given natural language query. Existing methods are mostly trained in a fully-supervised setting, which
requires the full annotations of temporal boundary for each
query. However, manually labeling the annotations is actually
time-consuming and expensive. In this paper, we propose a
novel weakly-supervised moment retrieval framework requiring only coarse video-level annotations for training. Speciﬁcally, we devise a proposal generation module that aggregates
the context information to generate and score all candidate
proposals in one single pass. We then devise an algorithm
that considers both exploitation and exploration to select topK proposals. Next, we build a semantic completion module to
measure the semantic similarity between the selected proposals and query, compute reward and provide feedbacks to the
proposal generation module for scoring reﬁnement. Experiments on the ActivityCaptions and Charades-STA demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method.



       

   

 !&

%!$&

          



"!!

# !

Figure 1: Examples of video moment retrieval: search the
temporal boundary of the most relevant moment in video
according to the given natural language query.

Relatively, it is much easier to obtain coarse descriptions
of a video without marking the temporal boundaries, such
as the captions of videos in YouTube. This motivates us to
develop a weakly-supervised method for moment retrieval
that needs only coarse video-level annotations for training.
Existing weakly-supervised method in (Mithun, Paul, and
Roy-Chowdhury 2019) proposes to learn a joint visual-text
embedding, and utilizes the latent alignment produced by intermediate Text-Guided Attention (TGA) to localize the target moment. However, the latent attention weights without
extra supervision usually focus on the most discriminative
but small regions (Singh and Lee 2017) instead of covering
complete regions. To deal with these issues, in this paper,
we devise a novel weakly-supervised Semantic Completion
Network (SCN) including proposal generation and selection,
semantic completion for semantic similarity estimation and
scoring reﬁnement.
Firstly, rather than localizing the most relevant moment
relying on the ambiguous attention weights, we extract the
semantically important proposals through a proposal generation module. Further than method in (Gao et al. 2017)
that treats each candidate proposal separately, we leverage
the cross-modal fusion representations of video and query to
score all the candidate proposals sampled at different scales
in a single pass, which makes full use of context information
for scoring other proposals.

Introduction
Video moment retrieval, a key topic in information retrieval
and computer vision, has attracted more and more interests
in recent years (Gao et al. 2017; Hendricks et al. 2017). As
two examples in Figure 1 show, according to a given natural
language query, moment retrieval aims to locate the temporal boundary of the most related moment in the video, which
can help us quickly ﬁlter out useless contents in the video.
More accurate moment retrieval requires sufﬁcient understanding of both the video and the query, which makes it a
challenging task. Although recent works (Chen et al. 2018;
Zhang et al. 2019b; 2019a) has achieved good results, they
are mostly trained in a fully-supervised setting, which requires the full annotations of temporal boundary for each
video. However, manually labeling the ground truth temporal boundaries is time-consuming and expensive, requiring a large amount of human labor. Moreover, considering
an untrimmed video contains multiple consecutive temporal
activities, it can be difﬁcult to mark the boundaries accurately, which produces ambiguity and noise in training data.
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11539

