The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Model Watermarking for Image Processing Networks
Jie Zhang,†1 Dongdong Chen,†∗2 Jing Liao,3 Han Fang,1
Weiming Zhang,1 Wenbo Zhou,1 Hao Cui,1 Nenghai Yu1
1

University of Science and Technology in China, 2 Microsoft Cloud AI, 3 City University of Hong Kong
1
{zjzac, fanghan, welbeckz, cvhc}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zhangwm, ynh}@ustc.edu.cn
2
cddlyf@gmail.com 3 jingliao@cityu.edu.hk

processing (Vaswani et al. 2017), and signiﬁcantly outperforms traditional state-of-the-art methods. To fully utilize
the strong learning capability of these deep models and
avoid overﬁtting, a large scale of high-quality labeled data
and massive computation resources are often required. Since
both human annotation and computation resources are expensive, these learned models are of great business value
and need to be protected. But compared to traditional image
watermarking techniques, protecting the intellectual property (IP) of deep models is much more challenging. Because
of the exponential search space of network structures and
weights, numerous structure and weight combinations exist
for one speciﬁc task. In other words, we can achieve similar
or better performance even if we slightly change the structure or weights of the target model.

Abstract
Deep learning has achieved tremendous success in numerous industrial applications. As training a good model often
needs massive high-quality data and computation resources,
the learned models often have signiﬁcant business values.
However, these valuable deep models are exposed to a huge
risk of infringements. For example, if the attacker has the full
information of one target model including the network structure and weights, the model can be easily ﬁnetuned on new
datasets. Even if the attacker can only access the output of the
target model, he/she can still train another similar surrogate
model by generating a large scale of input-output training
pairs. How to protect the intellectual property of deep models
is a very important but seriously under-researched problem.
There are a few recent attempts at classiﬁcation network protection only.
In this paper, we propose the ﬁrst model watermarking framework for protecting image processing models. To achieve this
goal, we leverage the spatial invisible watermarking mechanism. Speciﬁcally, given a black-box target model, a uniﬁed
and invisible watermark is hidden into its outputs, which can
be regarded as a special task-agnostic barrier. In this way,
when the attacker trains one surrogate model by using the
input-output pairs of the target model, the hidden watermark
will be learned and extracted afterward. To enable watermarks from binary bits to high-resolution images, both traditional and deep spatial invisible watermarking mechanism are
considered. Experiments demonstrate the robustness of the
proposed watermarking mechanism, which can resist surrogate models learned with different network structures and objective functions. Besides deep models, the proposed method
is also easy to be extended to protect data and traditional image processing algorithms.

In the white-box case, where the full information including the detailed network structure and weights of the target model is known, one typical and effective attacking way
would be ﬁne-tuning or pruning based on the target model
on new task-speciﬁc datasets. Even in the black-box case,
where only the output of the target model can be accessed,
we can still steal the intellectual property of the target model
by using another surrogate model to imitate its behavior.
Speciﬁcally, we can ﬁrst generate a large scale of inputoutput training pairs based on the target model then directly
train the surrogate model in a supervised manner by regarding the outputs of the target model as ground-truth labels.
Very recently, some research works (Uchida et al. 2017;
Adi et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2018; Merrer, Perez, and Trédan
2017) start paying attention to the IP protection problem for
deep neural networks. They often either add a parameter regularizer to the loss function or use the predictions of a special
set of indicator images as the watermarks. However, deep
watermarking is still a seriously under-researched ﬁeld and
all existing methods only consider the classiﬁcation task.
And in real scenarios, labeling the training data for image
processing tasks, is much more complex and expensive than
classiﬁcation tasks, because their ground-truth labels should
be pixel-wisely precise. Examples include removing all the
ribs in Chest X-ray images and the rain streaks in real rainy
images. Therefore protecting such image processing models
is more valuable.

Introduction
In recent years, deep learning has revolutionized a wide
variety of tasks such as image recognition (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; He et al. 2016), medical image
processing (Hong et al. 2017b; 2019; Zhang et al. 2017a;
Hong et al. 2017a), speech recognition (Graves, Mohamed,
and Hinton 2013; Zhang et al. 2017b) and natural language
∗

Corresponding author, † Equal contribution.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12805

