The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Cycle-CNN for Colorization towards Real Monochrome-Color Camera Systems
Xuan Dong,1 Weixin Li,2∗ Xiaojie Wang,1 Yunhong Wang2
1

2

School of Computer Science, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, 100876
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data and Brain Computing, Beihang University, Beijing, 100191
{dongxuan8811, xjwang}@bupt.edu.cn, {weixinli, yhwang}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Colorization in monochrome-color camera systems aims to
colorize the gray image IG from the monochrome camera using the color image RC from the color camera as reference.
Since monochrome cameras have better imaging quality than
color cameras, the colorization can help obtain higher quality
color images. Related learning based methods usually simulate the monochrome-color camera systems to generate the
synthesized data for training, due to the lack of ground-truth
color information of the gray image in the real data. However,
the methods that are trained relying on the synthesized data
may get poor results when colorizing real data, because the
synthesized data may deviate from the real data. We present
a new CNN model, named cycle CNN, which can directly
use the real data from monochrome-color camera systems for
training. In detail, we use the colorization CNN model to do
the colorization twice. First, we colorize IG using RC as
reference to obtain the ﬁrst-time colorization result IC . Second, we colorize the de-colored map of RC , i.e. RG , using the ﬁrst-time colorization result IC as reference to obtain

the second-time colorization result RC . In this way, for the

second-time colorization result RC , we use the original color
map RC as ground-truth and introduce the cycle consistency

loss to push RC ≈ RC . Also, for the ﬁrst-time colorization
result IC , we propose a structure similarity loss to encourage the luminance maps between IG and IC to have similar structures. In addition, we introduce a spatial smoothness
loss within the colorization CNN model to encourage spatial smoothness of the colorization result. Combining all these
losses, we could train the colorization CNN model using the
real data in the absence of the ground-truth color information
of IG . Experimental results show that we can outperform related methods largely for colorizing real data.

(a) Input pair of gray image IG and color image RC . (b)
Our colorization result I∗C .
Figure 1: The input pair of gray image IG and color image
RC are shot by the monochrome and color cameras, respectively. By directly using these real data for training, our algorithm learns to colorize IG using RC as reference.
the monochrome camera using the color image RC from
the color camera as reference. Between the monochrome
and color cameras, there exist different hardwares, e.g. the
color ﬁlter array, and different software modules, e.g. white
balance, demosaic, etc. As a result, on the one hand, the
monochrome camera has better light efﬁciency (Jeon et al.
2016; Dong et al. 2019) than the color camera, and thus the
gray image has higher quality, i.e. signal-noise ratio, than
the color image. This motivates researchers to do the colorization so as to get higher quality color images using the
monochrome-color camera systems. On the other hand, the
pair of gray and color images have different luminance, blur,
noises, etc. These cause the difﬁculty for the colorization.
Among existing methods for colorization within the
monochrome-color camera system, some are traditional
hand-crafted methods, e.g. (Jeon et al. 2016). With the successful use of deep learning in various computer vision problems, some deep learning based methods, e.g. (Dong et al.
2019) are proposed recently, which have shown to be able
to obtain higher accuracy than the traditional ones. However, in the deep learning methods, e.g. (Dong et al. 2019),
the models usually need ground-truth color information of
the input gray images as annotations for training. Due to
the lack of ground-truth color information in the real data,
as shown in Fig. 2, current methods, e.g. (Jeon et al. 2016;
Dong et al. 2019), usually synthesize data to simulate the

Introduction
With the increasing use of monochrome-color camera systems in high-end smart phones, e.g. Huawei P30, Mate30,
etc., the colorization problem within these systems is attracting more and more attentions from the academic and industrial communities.
As shown in Fig. 1, colorization in monochrome-color
camera systems aims to colorize the gray image IG from
∗

Corresponding Author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10721

