The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Bidding in Smart Grid PDAs: Theory, Analysis and Strategy
Susobhan Ghosh,1 Sujit Gujar,1 Praveen Paruchuri,1 Easwar Subramanian,2 Sanjay P. Bhat2
1

Machine Learning Lab, IIIT Hyderabad, India susobhan.ghosh@research.iiit.ac.in, {sujit.gujar, praveen.p}@iiit.ac.in
2
Tata Consultancy Services, TCS Innovation Labs, Hyderabad, India {easwar.subramanian, sanjay.bhat}@tcs.com

of the distributing agencies. Motivated by this, we take up
a formal game-theoretic approach in this work for devising
bidding strategies.
Typically, for double auctions, clearing price and payment
rules differ from market to market. Equilibrium analysis of
double auctions has been explored extensively with different payment and clearing price rules (Wilson 1992). Specifically, for k-double auctions, Satterthwaite and Williams
(1989) proved the existence of multiple non-trivial equilibria
for k ∈ [0, 1]. They also focused on a class of well-behaved
equilibria, by making generalist assumptions on buyer’s and
seller’s bidding strategies. Our focus in this paper is Average
Clearing Price Rule (ACPR) based Periodic Double Auctions (PDAs), commonly used in smart grids (Power TAC
(Ketter, Collins, and Weerdt 2017)). In ACPR, the clearing
price set as the average of last executing bid and last executing ask (a special case of k-double auction with k = 0.5).
For ACPR, Chatterjee and Samuelson (1983) constructed
a symmetric equilibrium for the case of one buyer and one
seller with uniformly distributed valuations. However, in the
vast literature of double auctions, a generic equilibrium analysis for ACPR with more buyers has not been well explored
(Wilson 1992). We take up a double auction with ACPR
as a case study. We assume all the agents involved (buyers
and sellers) deploy scaling based strategies, and identify the
Nash Equilibrium (NE) of the induced game. Researchers
have used ﬁctitious play-based convergence to equilibrium
(e.g., (Shi et al. 2010)) in double auctions. However, such
strategies are not useful in PDAs when the agents need to
place bids in real-time for new auctions. In such settings,
we believe scaling based strategies are easy to interpret and
implement. The equilibrium analysis of non-linear or other
complex forms are analytically difﬁcult to compute; moreover may not be appealing to the real users of these markets.
We characterize NEs for One Buyer and One Seller
(OBOS) and Two Buyer and One Seller (TBOS) analytically
(Theorem 1 and 2). Given our assumption of scaling based
bidding strategies and uniform type distributions, generic
equilibrium analysis of double auctions, following ACPR,
beyond these settings is challenging. To test our double auction strategies, we take the help of the PowerTAC simulation environment. PowerTAC is a simulation platform that

Abstract
Periodic Double Auctions (PDAs) are commonly used in the
real world for trading, e.g. in stock markets to determine stock
opening prices, and energy markets to trade energy in order
to balance net demand in smart grids, involving trillions of
dollars in the process. A bidder, participating in such PDAs,
has to plan for bids in the current auction as well as for the future auctions, which highlights the necessity of good bidding
strategies. In this paper, we perform an equilibrium analysis of single unit single-shot double auctions with a certain
clearing price and payment rule, which we refer to as ACPR,
and ﬁnd it intractable to analyze as number of participating
agents increase. We further derive the best response for a bidder with complete information in a single-shot double auction
with ACPR. Leveraging the theory developed for single-shot
double auction and taking the PowerTAC wholesale market
PDA as our testbed, we proceed by modeling the PDA of
PowerTAC as an MDP. We propose a novel bidding strategy,
namely MDPLCPBS. We empirically show that MDPLCPBS
follows the equilibrium strategy for double auctions that we
previously analyze. In addition, we benchmark our strategy
against the baseline and the state-of-the-art bidding strategies
for the PowerTAC wholesale market PDAs, and show that
MDPLCPBS outperforms most of them consistently.

Introduction
Auctions are mechanisms which facilitate buying and selling
of goods or items amongst a group of agents. Double auctions are prevalent when both the sides of a market actively
bid. For example, in the New York Stock Exchange, opening prices are determined using double auctions (Parsons,
Rodriguez-Aguilar, and Klein 2011). In smart grids, multiple power generating companies and different distributing
agencies (brokers) trade electricity in the wholesale markets
using double auctions.
In this work, we focus primarily on electricity markets. In
July 2019, approximately 1.2 Billion Euros worth electricity
was traded in Nord Pool alone, with 52% of the volume being traded using APIs (Nord Pool AS 2019). Any small improvement in cost optimization by deploying better bidding
strategies can lead to signiﬁcant improvements in the proﬁts
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1974

