The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Temporal Network Embedding with High-Order Nonlinear Information
Zhenyu Qiu,1,2 Wenbin Hu,1,4∗ Jia Wu,3 Weiwei Liu,1† Bo Du,1 Xiaohua Jia2
1

School of Computer Science, Wuhan Univiesity
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
3
Department of Computing, Macquarie University
4
Shenzhen Research Institute, Wuhan University, China
{qiuzy, hwb, remoteking}@whu.edu.cn, jia.wu@mq.edu.au, liuweiwei863@gmail.com, csjia@cityu.edu.hk
2

in real-world networks are dynamic in nature (e.g., Twitter,
Facebook), where the edges evolve over time (Falzon et al.
2018). Static methods that ignore the temporal information
of a given network can hardly capture the actual network
properties (Zhu et al. 2018). Typically, a static network is
constructed by aggregating interactions between nodes over
a speciﬁc period of time while ignoring the time dimensional
information (Falzon et al. 2018). The ignore of the temporal interactions will make network embedding failing to preserve temporal network structures.
In view of this, several temporal network embedding
methods have been proposed. For example, Zou et al. (Zuo
et al. 2018) adopted the Hawkes process to model the neighborhood formation process. Zhou et al. (Zhou et al. 2018)
proposed a more fundamental mechanism, triadic closure
process, to model the formation and evolution of networks.
However, both methods focus on the modeling of network
evolution pattern, but limit the scope of structural properties
to low-order proximities. Zhu et al. (Zhu et al. 2018) proposed DHPE (Zhu et al. 2018) to preserve the high-order
proximity, but it does so by applying a static model to each
snapshot and thus fails to capture temporal evolution. Moreover, the underlying structure of temporal network is highly
nonlinear (Luo et al. 2011), existing temporal network embedding methods are not able to preserve the nonlinear structure.
There are three challenges to learn temporal network representations:

Abstract
Temporal network embedding, which aims to learn the lowdimensional representations of nodes in temporal networks
that can capture and preserve the network structure and evolution pattern, has attracted much attention from the scientiﬁc community. However, existing methods suffer from two
main disadvantages: 1) they cannot preserve the node temporal proximity that capture important properties of the network
structure; and 2) they cannot represent the nonlinear structure
of temporal networks. In this paper, we propose a high-order
nonlinear information preserving (HNIP) embedding method
to address these issues. Speciﬁcally, we deﬁne three orders
of temporal proximities by exploring network historical information with a time exponential decay model to quantify
the temporal proximity between nodes. Then, we propose a
novel deep guided auto-encoder to capture the highly nonlinear structure. Meanwhile, the training set of the guide autoencoder is generated by the temporal random walk (TRW) algorithm. By training the proposed deep guided auto-encoder
with a speciﬁc mini-batch stochastic gradient descent algorithm, HNIP can efﬁciently preserves the temporal proximities and highly nonlinear structure of temporal networks. Experimental results on four real-world networks demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed method.

Introduction
Network embedding has attracted increasing attention in recent years. The basic idea is to embed a network into a
low-dimensional vector space where the inherent structural
properties of the network are preserved so that the network
analysis and prediction tasks can be conducted in the vector space (Zhu et al. 2018). Recent work on network embedding methods have been demonstrated to be effective in
a variety of applications such as link prediction (Yu et al.
2017), classiﬁcation (Sun, Yuan, and Wang 2018), and clustering (Xie et al. 2019; Peng et al. 2019). Generally, most of
the existing methods for network embedding focus on static
networks (Zhang, Lyu, and Zhang 2018; Wang et al. 2017;
Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena 2014). However, interactions

• Temporal proximity deﬁnition (Challenge 1): Node
proximity is always the ﬁrst and foremost property of a
network (Tang et al. 2015). Most temporal embedding
methods simply preserve the traditional static proximity
(Zhu et al. 2018) while ignoring the historical information. In fact, temporal network structures could provide
more semantic meanings than static networks for node
proximity quantiﬁcation. For example, a static network
simply counts the number of interactions between two
nodes as the ﬁrst-order proximity between them. While,
it is generally accepted that the impact of an interaction
decreases with time, and an interaction is more important if it happens in a closer proximity of time (Rümmele,
Ichise, and Werthner 2015). Thus, it is the ﬁrst challenge

∗

Corresponding author: Wenbin Hu
Co-corresponding author: Weiwei Liu
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

5436

