The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Adaptive Convolutional ReLUs
Hongyang Gao,1 Lei Cai,2 Shuiwang Ji1
1

Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA
Washington State University, Pullman, WA, USA
{hongyang.gao, sji}@tamu.edu, lei.cai@wsu.edu

2

network never activated again (Chen et al. 2017). Many attempts have tried to resolve or alleviate this problem such
as LeakyReLUs (Maas, Hannun, and Ng 2013) and PReLUs (He et al. 2015). These works tackle the problem by
using a small constant or trainable slope for negative arguments. However, the behaviors of such activation functions
are different from how biological neurons are activated, as biological neurons actually employ different thresholds within
a certain range (Islam and Islam 2016).
In this work, we propose a simple but effective method
known as adaptive ReLUs, which activates the arguments
based on trainable thresholds. Based on the adaptive ReLUs,
we develop a novel parameter sharing scheme that is especially applicable to convolution layers. This leads to adaptive
convolutional ReLUs (ConvReLUs). For the parameters involved in ConvReLUs, we employ the zero initialization with
L2-regularization as it encourages the trainable thresholds to
be close to zero. Finally, we propose the partial replacement
strategy for ReLUs replacement in the network to relieve
dying ReLU problem and retain sparse representations for
linear classiﬁers in neural networks.

Abstract
Rectiﬁed linear units (ReLUs) are currently the most popular
activation function used in neural networks. Although ReLUs
can solve the gradient vanishing problem and accelerate training convergence, it suffers from the dying ReLU problem in
which some neurons are never activated if the weights are not
updated properly. In this work, we propose a novel activation
function, known as the adaptive convolutional ReLU (ConvReLU), that can better mimic brain neuron activation behaviors and overcome the dying ReLU problem. With our novel
parameter sharing scheme, ConvReLUs can be applied to convolution layers that allow each input neuron to be activated by
different trainable thresholds without involving a large number of extra parameters. We employ the zero initialization
scheme in ConvReLU to encourage trainable thresholds to
be close to zero. Finally, we develop a partial replacement
strategy that only replaces the ReLUs in the early layers of
the network. This resolves the dying ReLU problem and retains sparse representations for linear classiﬁers. Experimental
results demonstrate that our proposed ConvReLU has consistently better performance compared to ReLU, LeakyReLU,
and PReLU. In addition, the partial replacement strategy is
shown to be effective not only for our ConvReLU but also for
LeakyReLU and PReLU.

Related Work
Activation functions have been a popular research ﬁeld due
to its importance in deep neural networks. Initially, tanh(·)
and sigmoid(·) were applied in neural networks with tanh(·)
being preferred for its zero-centering property (LeCun et al.
1998a). To solve the gradient vanishing problem suffered by
saturating activation functions like tanh(·) and sigmoid(·),
the non-saturating function ReLU (Nair and Hinton 2010)
was proposed and successfully applied in various state-of-theart deep neural networks (He et al. 2016; Huang et al. 2017;
Gao et al. 2019).
ReLUs compute the function

Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (LeCun et al. 1998b)
have shown great capability in various ﬁelds such as computer vision (Ren et al. 2015; Laina et al. 2016) and natural
language processing (Johnson and Zhang 2017). In CNNs, activation functions play important roles for introducing nonlinearity to networks. Among various activation functions such
as tanh(·) and sigmoid(·), ReLU is the most popular one.
ReLU computes the identity for positive arguments while
outputs zero for negative ones. It was initially proposed for
Boltzmann machines (Nair and Hinton 2010) and has been
successfully applied to neural networks for its non-saturating
property, which alleviates the gradient vanishing problem
and accelerates convergence speed.
Though effective and efﬁcient, ReLUs suffer from the
dying ReLU problem, which makes some neurons in the

f (x) = max(0, x),

(1)

which solves the gradient vanishing problem and accelerates
convergence in training (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton
2012). However, it suffers from a problem known as the “dying ReLU” (Chen et al. 2017). In this scenario, a large weight
update may cause the ReLU neuron to be never activated
again. Thus gradients that ﬂow through those neurons will

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3914

