The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

POST: POlicy-Based Switch Tracking
Ning Wang,1 Wengang Zhou,1 Guojun Qi,2 Houqiang Li1
1

CAS Key Laboratory of GIPAS, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Futurewei Technologies
wn6149@mail.ustc.edu.cn, guojun.qi@huawei.com, {zhwg, lihq}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

DƵůƚŝƉůĞĞǆƉĞƌƚƐƌƵŶŝŶƉĂƌĂůůĞů

In visual object tracking, by reasonably fusing multiple experts, ensemble framework typically achieves superior performance compared to the individual experts. However, the
necessity of parallelly running all the experts in most existing ensemble frameworks heavily limits their efﬁciency. In
this paper, we propose POST, a POlicy-based Switch Tracker
for robust and efﬁcient visual tracking. The proposed POST
tracker consists of multiple weak but complementary experts
(trackers) and adaptively assigns one suitable expert for tracking in each frame. By formulating this expert switch in consecutive frames as a decision-making problem, we learn an
agent via reinforcement learning to directly decide which expert to handle the current frame without running others. In
this way, the proposed POST tracker maintains the performance merit of multiple diverse models while favorably ensuring the tracking efﬁciency. Extensive ablation studies and
experimental comparisons against state-of-the-art trackers on
5 prevalent benchmarks verify the effectiveness of the proposed method.

1

KŶůǇŽŶĞĞǆƉĞƌƚƌƵŶƐ

Figure 1: Top: classic ensemble trackers mostly operate
multiple experts in parallel. Bottom: our method avoids unnecessary computations by directly assigning only one expert to handle the current frame.

Introduction

Visual object tracking plays a vital role in many practical
applications such as autonomous driving, video surveillance,
human-computer interaction, etc. As a basic pre-processing
component, visual tracking is also a time-critical task.
In the past decade, several popular tracking frameworks
have emerged. Different trackers perform distinctively with
their own strength and weakness. Compared with a single
model that typically struggles to deal with various challenging factors, it is well recognized that ensemble-based approach, by absorbing the strength of multiple diverse experts/models, has the superiority to handle complex scenarios. In an ensemble framework, the core problem lies in how
to effectively fuse or switch among multiple models. Some
algorithms rely on the expert self-evaluation such as the output scores of different models (Han, Sim, and Adam 2017)
or forward-backward trajectory consistency (Lee, Sim, and
Kim 2015) to assess each single expert. On the other hand,
some ensemble methods leverage the pair-wise relationship

to vote on or evaluate the reliability of different experts
(Wang and Yeung 2014). Despite their impressive performance, previous ensemble frameworks mostly suffer two
limitations: (1) the fusion or selection strategies are manually designed in a heuristic manner and typically contain
carefully selected hyperparameters; (2) the overall efﬁciency
is inevitably reduced by running multiple models in parallel.
When tracking objects, humans can rapidly capture the
most discriminative features based on the tracking environment to distinguish the target from backgrounds. In different scenarios, our visual system takes advantage of different cues to track (e.g., color, shape, or semantics), and
most of them may be redundant in a certain circumstance.
The ensemble tracker shares partial similarity with the human visual system from the perspective of maintaining multiple cues for robust tracking. However, by concurrently
operating multiple models, previous ensemble frameworks
(Lee, Sim, and Kim 2015; Bailer, Pagani, and Stricker 2014;
He et al. 2018; Han, Sim, and Adam 2017) generally make a
tradeoff between efﬁciency and performance. So a question

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12184

