The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Constructing Minimal Perfect Hash Functions Using SAT Technology
Sean A. Weaver

Marijn J.H. Heule

Laboratory for Advanced Cybersecurity Research
U.S. National Security Agency
saweave@evoforge.org

Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
marijn@cmu.edu
Amazon Scholar

Abstract

Table 1: The information-theoretic limit (αn ) of bits per key
for a various number of keys (n).
n
10
20
30
40
102
103
104

Minimal perfect hash functions (MPHFs) are used to provide
efﬁcient access to values of large dictionaries (sets of keyvalue pairs). Discovering new algorithms for building MPHFs
is an area of active research, especially from the perspective of storage efﬁciency. The information-theoretic limit for
MPHFs is ln12 ≈ 1.44 bits per key. The current best practical algorithms range between 2 and 4 bits per key. In this
article, we propose two SAT-based constructions of MPHFs.
Our ﬁrst construction yields MPHFs near the informationtheoretic limit. For this construction, current state-of-the-art
SAT solvers can handle instances where the dictionaries contain up to 40 elements, thereby outperforming the existing
(brute-force) methods. Our second construction uses XORSAT ﬁlters to realize a practical approach with long-term storage of approximately 1.83 bits per key.

αn

1.143 1.268 1.317 1.343 1.396 1.436 1.442

Our ﬁrst construction encodes the MPHF construction as
a Boolean formula and computes a solution for it using a
SAT solver. It aims at the construction of MPHFs near the
information-theoretic limit (roughly 1.44 bits per key for
large sets, say consisting of over a few thousand keys) and
can be queried in log2 n steps. The information-theoretic
limit αn for smaller values of n are shown in Table 1.
We present a compact O(n2 log2 n) SAT encoding and a
more effective O(n3 ) encoding. On these encodings, current
SAT solvers (both complete and incomplete approaches) exhibit exponential runtime on the number of elements in the
dictionary, with runtimes growing prohibitively large around
40 elements, making our construction currently impractical
for large sets. However, to the best of our knowledge, no
other existing construction (including brute-force) can construct MPHFs near the information-theoretic limit for sets
with more than 20 elements in reasonable time.
Since we are only interested in satisﬁable formulas (existence of MPHFs), SAT approaches based on local-search
technology seem a natural ﬁt. Currently complete solving
methods work best on our encodings. However, our construction creates formulas with a strong random ﬂavor and
enormous progress has been made on local-search techniques for uniform random k-SAT instances (Kautz and Selman 1996; Balint and Schöning 2012; Gableske 2014).
Our second construction uses approximately 1.83 bits per
key and can build MPHFs in O(n3 ) steps (though construction is trivially parallelizable). These MPHFs can be
queried in max(3, ln n + ln(ln n)) steps in the worst case.
Formally, the construction involves storing a minimumweight perfect matching of a weighted bipartite graph in
a space-efﬁcient retrieval structure called an XORSAT ﬁlter (Weaver, Roberts, and Smith 2018). Our implemented
prototype demonstrates that the approach can produce
MPHFs for large datasets (230 keys) with fast query speed
(a million queries per second) for low costs.

Introduction
A minimal perfect hash function (MPHF) for a set Y with
n distinct elements is a collision-free mapping from the elements of Y to the set [n] = {1, . . . , n}. MPHFs enable efﬁcient access to data stored in large databases by providing
a unique index for each key in a set of key-value pairs. This
allows the value of each key-value pair to be stored at its associated index in an n-entry table. Since industrial databases
are often of signiﬁcant size, if an MPHF is going to be used,
one would want it to use as little extra space as possible.
The information-theoretic limit for MPHFs is ln12 ≈ 1.44
bits per key (Mehlhorn 1982; Fredman and Komlós 1984),
yet no practical constructions (those not relying on bruteforce) have been found that meet this limit. In fact, the current best algorithms range between 2 and 4 bits per key (Belazzougui, Botelho, and Dietzfelbinger 2009; Botelho, Pagh,
and Ziviani 2013; Genuzio, Ottaviano, and Vigna 2016;
Limasset et al. 2017). Since applications may also consider
costs such as build time and query time, MPHF construction and querying should not be so costly as to outweigh the
beneﬁt of a compact representation.
We introduce two new constructions for static MPHFs:
i.e., MPHFs where the set Y is immutable and known in advance. Both constructions are based on satisﬁability (SAT)
techniques and utilize a universal family of hash functions.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1668

