The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Online Knowledge Distillation with Diverse Peers
Defang Chen,1,2 Jian-Ping Mei,3 *
Can Wang,1,2 Yan Feng,1,2 Chun Chen1,2
1

College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University, Hang Zhou, China.
2
ZJU-LianlianPay Joint Research Center.
3
College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University of Technology, Hang Zhou, China.
{defchern, wcan, fengyan, chenc}@zju.edu.cn, jpmei@zjut.edu.cn

the soft predicted distributions carry richer information that
helps to optimize small networks more effectively (Hinton,
Vinyals, and Dean 2015; Chaudhari et al. 2017).

Abstract
Distillation is an effective knowledge-transfer technique that
uses predicted distributions of a powerful teacher model as
soft targets to train a less-parameterized student model. A
pre-trained high capacity teacher, however, is not always
available. Recently proposed online variants use the aggregated intermediate predictions of multiple student models as
targets to train each student model. Although group-derived
targets give a good recipe for teacher-free distillation, group
members are homogenized quickly with simple aggregation functions, leading to early saturated solutions. In this
work, we propose Online Knowledge Distillation with Diverse peers (OKDDip), which performs two-level distillation
during training with multiple auxiliary peers and one group
leader. In the ﬁrst-level distillation, each auxiliary peer holds
an individual set of aggregation weights generated with an
attention-based mechanism to derive its own targets from predictions of other auxiliary peers. Learning from distinct target
distributions helps to boost peer diversity for effectiveness of
group-based distillation. The second-level distillation is performed to transfer the knowledge in the ensemble of auxiliary
peers further to the group leader, i.e., the model used for inference. Experimental results show that the proposed framework
consistently gives better performance than state-of-the-art approaches without sacriﬁcing training or inference complexity,
demonstrating the effectiveness of the proposed two-level distillation framework.

The vanilla Knowledge Distillation (KD) method is a twostage process in which a high capacity teacher model is
trained and then used for distillation. This will increases
both training cost and pipeline complexity. Recent attempts
on group-based online knowledge distillation explored less
costly and uniﬁed models to eliminate the necessity of
pre-training a large teacher model. (Zhang et al. 2018;
Anil et al. 2018; Lan, Zhu, and Gong 2018; Song and Chai
2018). The main idea is to train a number of student models
simultaneously by learning from ground-truth labels as well
as distilling from their group-derived soft targets, which is
a speciﬁc form of aggregation of intermediate peer predictions.
With the absence of a powerful teacher model, the groupderived targets play a key role in transferring group knowledge to each student model. Averaging over predictions of
group members is a simple aggregation to derive the targets
for representing the group knowledge (Zhang et al. 2018;
Anil et al. 2018; Song and Chai 2018). Since the quality
of predictions varies among peers, it is important to treat
peers unequally (Lan, Zhu, and Gong 2018). Unfortunately,
naive aggregation functions tend to cause peers to quickly
homogenize, hurting the effectiveness of group distillation
(Kuncheva and Whitaker 2003; Zhou 2012). In this paper, we propose a new two-level distillation approach called
Online Knowledge Distillation with Diverse peers (OKDDip), which involves two types of student models, i.e., multiple auxiliary peers and one group leader. Base distillation is
performed among auxiliary peers equipped with a diversity
holding mechanism. An ensemble of predictions of these diverse peers is further distilled into the group leader. Unlike
naive group-based learning where all peers end up with similar behaviors, trained peer models in our approach could be
quite different from each other. It is thus unreasonable to arbitrarily select a single peer for inference. The second-level
distillation therefore is necessary to reduce inference cost
using only one student model. With this design, OKDDip
can be effectively trained without a high capacity teacher
network by taking advantages of group distillation and re-

Introduction
Modeling with tens of millions of parameters helps deep
neural networks achieve great success in various applications. However, over-parameterized models are computationally demanding, making them unsuitable for deployment
with limited resources or a stringent requirement on latency
(Denil et al. 2013; Han, Mao, and Dally 2016). The distillation technique transfers the knowledge of a teacher model
in the form of soft predictions to improve the generalization ability of a less-parameterized student model through
regularization (Ba and Caruana 2014; Romero et al. 2015;
Yim et al. 2017). Compared to hard ground-truth labels,
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3430

