The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Plan2Dance: Planning Based Choreographing from Music
Yuechang Liu,1 Dongbo Xie,1 Hankz Hankui Zhuo,2∗ Liqian Lai1
1

Jiaying University, China. {ycliu, 201701041}@jyu.edu.cn, sfreebobo@163.com
2
Sun Yat-sen University, China. zhuohank@mail.sysu.edu.cn

dancing motions and choreography preferences according to
music. We convert each input music into a planning problem
and solve the problem with an off-the-shelf planner based on
the created action models.
The challenges of the demonstration are two folds. The
ﬁrst one is about how to build PDDL action models based on
basic dancing motions, which involves taking care of complex domain knowledge of dancing (we created 58 action
models based on a library of basic dancing motions). The
other one is about how to convert a music into a planning
problem (including an initial state and the goal).

Abstract
The ﬁeld of dancing robots has drawn much attention from
numerous sources. Despite the success of previous systems
on choreography for robots to dance with external stimuli,
they are often either limited to a pre-deﬁned set of movements or lack of considering “hard” relations among dancing
motions. In the demonstration, we design a planning based
choreographing system, which views choreography with music as planning problems and solve the problems with off-theshelf planners. Our demonstration exhibits the effectiveness
of our system via evaluating our system with various music.

An Overview of Plan2Dance

Introduction
The ﬁeld of dancing robots has drawn much attention from
numerous sources. For example, SONY presented a humanoid robot, called QRIO (Geppert 2004), which can
dance with multiple units in a highly coordinated fashion
via imitating human’s dance. Nakaoka et al. explored a motion capture system to teach a robot, called HRP-2, a traditional Japanese folk dance (Nakaoka et al. 2005). Despite
the success of previous systems, they are often either limited
to a pre-deﬁned set of movements (together with music) or
demonstrate little variance according to external stimuli. To
improve the variance of dances, Bi et al. proposed to allow
legged robots to dance in synchronization with musics in a
diverse fashion (Bi et al. 2018). They created a dance choreography by picking from a dance motion library according
to the beats of music. Dance motions include various stepping and base motions. The picking process from the library
is deﬁned by a Markov chain, which depends on the previously picked dance motion and the current music tempo. In
those probabilistic graphical models based approaches, motions which are unreasonable to previous motions, are often
selected, due to the limit of probabilistic models on representing logical relations between dancing motions.
In this demonstration, we design a system, called
Plan2Dance, to create choreography based on music. A set
of action models is built (in the form of PDDL (Fox and
Long 2003) language) based on the relations of basic dancing motions, by considering the temporal requirement of

Figure 1: An overview of our Plan2Dance system
We exhibit an overview of our Plan2Dance system in Figure 1. We ﬁrst take music, i.e., sound waves, as input from
environments via robot’s sensors. We then analyse the music
based on basic actions of dances (denoted by “Actionbase”
in Figure 1) using machine learning approaches (we exploited the pyAudioAnalysis library (Giannakopoulos 2015)
for building planning problems from music), and output a
planning problem, including an initial state and a goal, for
an off-the-shelf planner. Note that we collect a library of basic actions of dances, i.e., “Actionbase”, and create their action models, namely “Dancingbot domains” in Figure 1, according to the relations of dancing motions with the help of
dancing experts. Provided as input the planning problem, denoted by “problem ﬁle” in Figure 1, and action models, denoted by ”domain ﬁle” in Figure 1, an off-the-shelf planner

∗

corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13624

