The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

DeepVar: An End-to-End Deep Learning Approach
for Genomic Variant Recognition in Biomedical Literature
Chaoran Cheng,1 Fei Tan,2 Zhi Wei1∗
1

New Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, NJ, USA
2
Yahoo Research, New York, NY, USA
{cc424, zhi.wei}@njit.edu, fei.tan@verizonmedia.com

and Pietra 1996) and Conditional Random Fields (CRFs)
(Lafferty, McCallum, and Pereira 2001) are used in most of
the previous works with either learning patterns associated
with a particular type of entities or hand-built rules. The performance of such algorithms heavily depends on the design
of hand-crafted features. Recently, the Deep Neural Network
(DNN) models have increasingly been used in generic NER
tasks and achieved signiﬁcant success, pushing most of the
benchmarks to a new level. More importantly, those models minimized the feature engineering efforts by learning the
hidden patterns from a large volume of labeled samples.
Our goal in this work is to develop an end-to-end DNN
NER model that can automatically identify variants in
biomedical literature and classify them into a set of predeﬁned types. However, due to the prohibitive cost of expert
curation, the size of curated training data with gold label
annotations is often restricted in biomedical domains. As
shown in Table 1, the sample size of the benchmark dataset
of variants, tmVar (Wei et al. 2013), is much smaller than
others. Furthermore, it exhibits more exotic linguistic heterogeneity. The complex morphological heterogeneity exacerbates the challenge for solving this problem, let alone the
small data size. Despite numerous attempts on other biomedical benchmarks in the past, it is the ﬁrst attempt to leverage
a deep learning approach for the genomic variants recognition. The main challenges in this work include:

Abstract
We consider the problem of Named Entity Recognition
(NER) on biomedical scientiﬁc literature, and more speciﬁcally the genomic variants recognition in this work. Signiﬁcant success has been achieved for NER on canonical tasks
in recent years where large data sets are generally available.
However, it remains a challenging problem on many domainspeciﬁc areas, especially the domains where only small gold
annotations can be obtained. In addition, genomic variant entities exhibit diverse linguistic heterogeneity, differing much
from those that have been characterized in existing canonical
NER tasks. The state-of-the-art machine learning approaches
heavily rely on arduous feature engineering to characterize
those unique patterns. In this work, we present the ﬁrst successful end-to-end deep learning approach to bridge the gap
between generic NER algorithms and low-resource applications through genomic variants recognition. Our proposed
model can result in promising performance without any handcrafted features or post-processing rules. Our extensive experiments and results may shed light on other similar lowresource NER applications.

1

Introduction

Due to the up-surging volume of new biomedical literature
in the past decades, it becomes infeasible for researchers to
access all those up-to-date publications manually. The automated information extraction tools play a critical role in
assisting researchers to keep up with the explosive knowledge effectively. In general, the ﬁrst step is to identify name
entities from text, which is termed as Named Entity Recognition (NER), a common task in the nature language processing ﬁeld. In the biomedical context, entities are typically
short phrases as the representations of a speciﬁc object, e.g.,
names of genes or proteins, genetic variants, diseases, drugs,
etc. Moreover, a noticeable amount of those entities contain
letters, digits, and punctuation, resulting in more complex
semantic alternations and differing much from entities characterized in news or conventional articles.
To identify named entities present in the text, statistical
approaches such as Maximum Entropy (ME) (Berger, Pietra,

• To minimize feature engineering effort, automatically
generalizing hidden diverse linguistic patterns is harder
from limited training resources.
• To differentiate the ambiguous entities or synonym, learning some effective feature representation is harder with
shallow networks from restricted resources.
• To limit the false positive error, both the entity identiﬁcation and the entity boundaries need to be accurately inferred, which is critical for downstream applications such
as entity normalization and relation extraction.
In this work, we took full advantage of the generic stateof-the-art deep learning algorithms and proposed a Deep
Variant (DeepVar) Named Entities Recognition model. We
aimed to ﬁnd a principled way to transfer domain knowledge
and build an end-to-end DeepVar model. Our results show

∗

Corresponding Author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
598

