The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Proportional Belief Merging
Adrian Haret, Martin Lackner, Andreas Pfandler, Johannes P. Wallner
{haret, lackner, pfandler, wallner}@dbai.tuwien.ac.at
TU Wien
Vienna, Austria

Marquis 2004; Konieczny and Pino Pérez 2002; 2011),
which allows agents to combine their individual positions on
a set of issues in order to obtain a collective solution, with
the added option of imposing constraints on admissible outcomes. Though the agents’ individual positions are called
beliefs, the belief merging framework is versatile enough
that it can accommodate a broad range of attitudes (e.g., beliefs, preferences, judgments, goals or items of knowledge),
as long as these, together with the constraint and the outcome, can be expressed as formulas in a logical language.
The key challenges of such a process are that agents may
hold mutually conﬂicting beliefs, and that beliefs may reﬂect
complex interdependencies between issues. The theory of
belief merging then offers (i) a range of methods, called belief merging operators, for aggregating beliefs and (ii) postulates used to assess the rationality of the operators.
The most prominent belief merging operators studied so
far tend to fall into two main categories: operators following the majority opinion, and which can be said to embody
a utilitarian stance; and operators that place particular emphasis on the worst-off agents, and which can be said to be
based on an egalitarian viewpoint. Our aim is to ﬁnd a compromise between these two opposing positions, which, in a
belief merging scenario, translates as the following desideratum: if a large enough proportion of the agents share common beliefs, then these beliefs should be reﬂected at the collective level, to a degree matching their proportion. Despite
its intuitive appeal, such a proportionality requirement has
yet to ﬁnd its way in the study of belief merging operators.
In deﬁning proportional belief merging operators we rely
on the Proportional Approval Voting (PAV) rule, studied in
multiwinner voting scenarios and known to satisfy particularly strong proportionality requirements (Aziz et al. 2017).
Based on PAV, we introduce three belief merging operators:
the PAV operator, the bounded PAV operator and the harmonic Hamming operator. All these operators fall into the
class of satisfaction-based operators, introduced by us (Section 4) as an alternative to the standard way of representing
merging operators, which is distance-based.
We look at the proposed belief merging operators from
three perspectives. Firstly, in Section 5, the operators are
placed against the standard belief merging IC-postulates. We

Abstract
In this paper we introduce proportionality to belief merging.
Belief merging is a framework for aggregating information
presented in the form of propositional formulas, and it generalizes many aggregation models in social choice. In our analysis, two incompatible notions of proportionality emerge: one
similar to standard notions of proportionality in social choice,
the other more in tune with the logic-based merging setting.
Since established merging operators meet neither of these
proportionality requirements, we design new proportional belief merging operators. We analyze the proposed operators
against established rationality postulates, ﬁnding that current
approaches to proportionality from the ﬁeld of social choice
are, at their core, incompatible with standard rationality postulates in belief merging. We provide characterization results
that explain the underlying conﬂict, and provide a complexity
analysis of our novel operators.

1

Introduction

Proportionality is one of the central fairness notions studied
in social choice theory (Black 1958; Dummett 1984; Monroe 1995), arising whenever a collective decision should reﬂect the amount of support in favor of a set of issues. Thus,
notions of proportionality are key when it is desirable that
preferences of larger groups have more inﬂuence on the outcome, while preferences of smaller groups are not neglected.
The idea of proportional representation shows up in many
application scenarios: it is a key ingredient of parliamentary elections (Balinski and Young 1982) and, more generally, of multiwinner voting, i.e., the task of electing a
committee of multiple candidates (Faliszewski et al. 2017).
Recent work has set out to extend the notion of proportionality from mathematically simple formalisms (mainly
the apportionment setting) to more general settings, with
signiﬁcant progress in areas such as approval-based multiwinner voting (Aziz et al. 2017; Sánchez-Fernández et
al. 2017), ordinal multiwinner voting (Elkind et al. 2017a;
2017b), proportional rankings (Skowron et al. 2017), and
multi-attribute committees (Lang and Skowron 2018).
In this paper we introduce proportionality to the very general framework of belief merging (Konieczny, Lang, and
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2822

