The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Fixed-Horizon Temporal Difference
Methods for Stable Reinforcement Learning
Kristopher De Asis,1 Alan Chan,1,3 Silviu Pitis,2 Richard S. Sutton,1 Daniel Graves3
1

University of Alberta, 2 University of Toronto, 3 Huawei Technologies Canada, Ltd.
{kldeasis, achan4, rsutton}@ualberta.ca, spitis@cs.toronto.edu, daniel.graves@huawei.com

span (van Hasselt and Sutton 2015). It’s often set to a constant γ ∈ [0, 1), but prior work generalizes the discount rate
to be a transition-dependent termination function (White
2016). This allows for (variable) ﬁnite-length sums dependent on state transitions, like in episodic tasks.
In this paper, we explore a case of time-dependent discounting, where the sum considers a ﬁxed number of future steps regardless of where the agent ends up. We derive
and investigate properties of ﬁxed-horizon TD algorithms,
and identify beneﬁts over inﬁnite-horizon algorithms in both
prediction and control. Speciﬁcally, by storing and updating a separate value function for each horizon, ﬁxed-horizon
methods avoid feedback loops when bootstrapping, so that
learning is stable even in presence of function approximation. Fixed-horizon agents can approximate inﬁnite-horizon
returns arbitrarily well, expand their set of learned horizons freely (computation permitting), and combine forecasts
from multiple horizons to make time-sensitive predictions
about rewards. We emphasize our novel focus on predicting
a ﬁxed-horizon return from each state as a solution method,
regardless of the problem setting. Our algorithms can be applied to both ﬁnite-horizon and inﬁnite-horizon MDPs.

Abstract
We explore ﬁxed-horizon temporal difference (TD) methods,
reinforcement learning algorithms for a new kind of value
function that predicts the sum of rewards over a ﬁxed number
of future time steps. To learn the value function for horizon h,
these algorithms bootstrap from the value function for horizon h−1, or some shorter horizon. Because no value function
bootstraps from itself, ﬁxed-horizon methods are immune to
the stability problems that plague other off-policy TD methods using function approximation (also known as “the deadly
triad”). Although ﬁxed-horizon methods require the storage
of additional value functions, this gives the agent additional
predictive power, while the added complexity can be substantially reduced via parallel updates, shared weights, and nstep bootstrapping. We show how to use ﬁxed-horizon value
functions to solve reinforcement learning problems competitively with methods such as Q-learning that learn conventional value functions. We also prove convergence of ﬁxedhorizon temporal difference methods with linear and general
function approximation. Taken together, our results establish
ﬁxed-horizon TD methods as a viable new way of avoiding
the stability problems of the deadly triad.

1

Temporal Difference Learning

2

Temporal difference (TD) methods (Sutton 1988) are an important approach to reinforcement learning (RL) that combine ideas from Monte Carlo estimation and dynamic programming. A key view of TD learning is that it incrementally learns testable, predictive knowledge of the environment (Sutton et al. 2011). The learned values represent answers to questions about how a signal will accumulate over
time, conditioned on a way of behaving. In control tasks, this
signal is the reward sequence, and the values represent an
arbitrarily long sum of rewards an agent expects to receive
when acting greedily with respect to its current predictions.
A TD learning agent’s prediction horizon is speciﬁed
through a discount factor (Sutton and Barto 2018). This
parameter adjusts how quickly to exponentially decay the
weight given to later outcomes in a sequence’s sum, and
allows computational complexity to be independent of

MDPs and One-step TD Methods

The RL problem is usually modeled as a Markov decision
process (MDP), in which an agent interacts with an environment over a sequence of discrete time steps.
At each time step t, the agent receives information about
the environment’s current state, St ∈ S, where S is the set
of all possible states in the MDP. The agent uses this state
information to select an action, At ∈ A(St ), where A(s)
is the set of possible actions in state s. Based on the current state and the selected action, the agent gets information
about the environment’s next state, St+1 ∈ S, and receives
a reward, Rt+1 ∈ R, according to the environment model,
p(s , r|s, a) = P (St+1 = s , Rt+1 = r|St = s, At = a).
Actions are selected according to a policy, π(a|s) =
P (At = a|St = s), which gives the probability of taking
action a given state s. An agent is interested in the return:

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Gt =

T
−t−1
k=0

3741

γ k Rt+k+1

(1)

