The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Algorithm-in-the-Loop Decision Making
Ben Green,1 Yiling Chen1
1
Harvard University
bgreen@g.harvard.edu, yiling@seas.harvard.edu

We report here on two sets of experiments studying how
people make predictions when presented with the aid of
a machine learning model. We ran experiments on Amazon Mechanical Turk, asking participants to make predictions in two settings: pretrial release and ﬁnancial lending. Participants were presented with narrative proﬁles about
people—either criminal defendants or loan applicants—and
were asked to predict how likely those people were to take
a certain action in the future (for defendants, failing to appear in court for trial or being arrested before trial; for applicants, defaulting on the loan). Some of the experimental participants were shown, in addition, the prediction of
a machine learning-based risk assessment for that individual. These risk assessments were trained on historical data
from the U.S. Department of Justice and a ﬁnancial lending
company. Participants were ﬁnancially incentivized to report
their true predictions. After making these predictions, participants were asked to report their beliefs about their own
performance and the risk assessment’s performance.

Abstract
We introduce a new framework for conceiving of and studying algorithms that are deployed to aid human decision making: “algorithm-in-the-loop” systems. The algorithm-in-theloop framework centers human decision making, providing
a more precise lens for studying the social impacts of algorithmic decision making aids. We report on two experiments
that evaluate algorithm-in-the-loop decision making and ﬁnd
signiﬁcant limits to these systems.

Introduction
Machine learning models are increasingly being incorporated into important decision making processes (such as
criminal sentencing) under the assumption that they will improve decision making. These models are typically evaluated according to statistical metrics related to considerations
such as accuracy and fairness.
Yet these evaluations fail to fully capture the impacts of
algorithmic decision making aids. In practice, these tools do
not make deﬁnitive judgments, but instead are typically used
to inform human decision makers. It is therefore essential
that considerations of algorithmic decision making aids be
informed by rigorous studies of how people actually interpret and use them.
With this in mind, we introduce a new framework of
“algorithm-in-the-loop” systems: processes that employ algorithmic aids to enhance human decision making. In contrast to the human-in-the-loop paradigm, which privileges
algorithms as the central focus and uses people to improve algorithmic performance, the algorithm-in-the-loop
perspective privileges people as the central focus and uses
algorithms to improve human decision making.
The algorithm-in-the-loop framework can inform the design and evaluation of algorithmic decision making aids. In
terms of design, it emphasizes developing systems for integration into sociotechnical contexts rather than for isolated
decision making. In terms of evaluation, it emphasizes the
human’s decisions—rather than the algorithm’s decisions—
as the primary outcome of interest.

Disparate Interactions
Our ﬁrst experiments studied algorithm-in-the-loop decision
making in the context of pretrial release (Green and Chen
2019a). We particularly focused on how people respond to
the risk assessment’s predictions based on defendant race.
This evaluation shifts the focus of algorithmic fairness from
the model itself to the decisions that people make with
the model. We found two types of evidence for what we
call “disparate interactions”: racially disparate impacts that
emerge through people’s biased interactions with the risk assessment.
We looked ﬁrst at the inﬂuence of risk scores on people’s behavior, based on the race of defendants. When the
risk assessment suggested that people reduce their predictions of risk, the risk assessment exerted a similar inﬂuence on participants regardless of the defendant’s race. Yet
when the risk assessment suggested that people predict a
higher level of risk than they otherwise would have, it exerted a 25.9% stronger average inﬂuence on predictions
about black defendants than on predictions about white defendants. In other words, our experiment participants were
25.9% more strongly inﬂuenced by the risk assessment to

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13663

