The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Revisiting Bilinear Pooling: A Coding Perspective
Zhi Gao,1 Yuwei Wu,1∗ Xiaoxun Zhang,2 Jindou Dai,1 Yunde Jia,1 Mehrtash Harandi3
1

Beijing Laboratory of Intelligent Information Technology
School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
2
Alibaba Group
3
Department of Electrical and Computer Systems Eng., Monash University, and Data61, Australia
{gaozhi2017, wuyuwei, daijindou, jiayunde}@bit.edu.cn, xiaoxun.zhang@alibaba-inc.com, mehrtash.harandi@monash.edu

showed that in such a high-dimensional space, less than 5%
of dimensions are informative (Gao et al. 2016). The dimensionality of bilinear representations unnecessarily increases
the memory footprint and incurs heavy computational loads.
Second, the bilinear representation could suffer from the
burstiness phenomenon (Wei et al. 2018; Lin and Maji 2017;
Li et al. 2017a). Generally speaking, the burstiness corresponds to the problem that features are not invariant enough
where the feature elements may have large variances within
the same class (Wei et al. 2018). This becomes more dramatic in visual recognition when there exist large illumination and appearance changes, and repeated visual elements.
To get a feeling about this issue, in Figure 1a and Figure 1c,
we plot bilinear representations for two challenging tasks,
namely visual question answering (VQA) using the VQA
2.0 dataset (Goyal et al. 2017) and material classiﬁcation using the MINC dataset (Quattoni and Torralba 2009). These
plots suggest that bilinear representations in the same class
may have large variances. This, in return, creates intertwined
distributions. For example, in Figure 1a, each of the ‘batter’
and ‘umbrellas’ classes has two separate clusters with large
distances. Besides, bilinear representations of ‘store’, ‘oven’
and ‘hand’ classes have large intra-class distances, leading
to a non-discriminative geometry.
To address the shortcomings of BiP, some methods opt for
approximating BiP via the tensor sketch (Gao et al. 2016;
Fukui et al. 2016) or factorization (Li et al. 2017b; Kim et
al. 2016; Ben-Younes et al. 2017; 2019) to generate compact
representations. To improve the discriminative power of BiP,
several methods investigate normalization strategies (Li et
al. 2017a; Lin and Maji 2017) and orthonormal representations (Wei et al. 2018). Despite providing solutions for the
targeted issues, studying compact and discriminative BiP in
a uniﬁed framework has received little attention and is still a
challenging and open problem.
In this paper, we prove that BiP is a form of similaritybased coding-pooling (Riesenhuber and Poggio 1999). This
new perspective helps us to better analyze and understand
the nature of the redundancy and discriminative issues of
BiP. In particular, we will see that bilinear features are rankone matrices, hence overly redundant in high-dimensional
spaces (see Corollary 1 of the ‘Further Insights’ section).

Abstract
Bilinear pooling has achieved state-of-the-art performance on
fusing features in various machine learning tasks, owning to
its ability to capture complex associations between features.
Despite the success, bilinear pooling suffers from redundancy
and burstiness issues, mainly due to the rank-one property of
the resulting representation. In this paper, we prove that bilinear pooling is indeed a similarity-based coding-pooling formulation. This establishment then enables us to devise a new
feature fusion algorithm, the factorized bilinear coding (FBC)
method, to overcome the drawbacks of the bilinear pooling.
We show that FBC can generate compact and discriminative
representations with substantially fewer parameters. Experiments on two challenging tasks, namely image classiﬁcation
and visual question answering, demonstrate that our method
surpasses the bilinear pooling technique by a large margin.

Introduction
Bilinear Pooling (BiP) provides an expressive representation
to fuse features by exploiting the higher-order information
captured in the form of pairwise correlations between features (Lin, RoyChowdhury, and Maji 2015). Various studies
show the superiority of bilinear representations over other
fusion techniques such as concatenation, element-wise sum,
Hadamard product, and Vector of Locally Aggregated Descriptor (VLAD) (Gong et al. 2014).
Despite the success of BiP in many computer vision tasks
including image classiﬁcation (Lin, RoyChowdhury, and
Maji 2015) and heterogeneous multi-modal tasks (Fukui et
al. 2016), two shortcomings, i.e., the redundancy and the
burstiness, hinder the wide-application of BiP. First, BiP
creates a redundant representation in an exceptionally highdimensional space. For example, in the case of image classiﬁcation, several studies (Lin, RoyChowdhury, and Maji
2015; Ionescu, Vantzos, and Sminchisescu 2015) leveraged
the relatively small VGG-16 network to fuse features, yet
they have to process (512 × 512 = 262, 144) dimensional
representations as the result of BiP, where 512 is the dimensionality of input features. A recent study by Gao et al.
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3954

