The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Diana’s World: A Situated Multimodal Interactive Agent
Nikhil Krishnaswamy,1 Pradyumna Narayana,2 Rahul Bangar,2 Kyeongmin Rim,1 Dhruva Patil,2
David McNeely-White,2 Jaime Ruiz,3 Bruce Draper,4 Ross Beveridge,2 James Pustejovsky1
1

Brandeis University Department of Computer Science, Waltham, MA, USA
Colorado State University Department of Computer Science, Fort Collins, CO, USA
3
University of Florida Department of Computer & Information Science & Engineering, Gainesville, FL, USA
4
DARPA Information Innovation Ofﬁce, Arlington, VA, USA∗
{nkrishna, jamesp}@brandeis.edu; ross.beveridge@colostate.edu; jaime.ruiz@uﬂ.edu; bruce.draper@darpa.mil
2

Abstract
State of the art unimodal dialogue agents lack some core aspects of peer-to-peer communication—the nonverbal and visual cues that are a fundamental aspect of human interaction.
To facilitate true peer-to-peer communication with a computer, we present Diana, a situated multimodal agent who exists in a mixed-reality environment with a human interlocutor,
is situation- and context-aware, and responds to the human’s
language, gesture, and affect to complete collaborative tasks.

Figure 1: Diana’s world (human inset in upper right)

Introduction
Sophisticated language models trained over large amounts
of data have allowed dialogue agents to have convincing
conversations using spoken or written language. But even
a state-of-the-art unimodal system will be unable to answer
such basic questions as “What am I pointing at?” Unimodal
language agents are not environmentally aware of their interlocutor’s embodiment or of objects and actions in the
situation. They are not co-situated with their interlocutors
and lack machinery to integrate a visual stream of the environment with the interlocutor’s language. Here, we present
and demonstrate Diana, a multimodal interactive agent with
awareness of her environment and coagent, who can interpret multi-channel inputs—including language, gesture, affect, and emotion—in real time, and plays a proactive role
in collaborative interactions with a human.

Figure 2: Diana’s world within the real world
two humans interacting. For instance, a human may 1) ask
Diana to “put the red block on the green block”; or 2) point
to the red block, and say “(put it) on the green block”; or
3) say “the red block,” make a “claw” gesture representing
“grab it,” and then point to the green block. All of these and
other mixes of modality and order prompt the same action.
Diana will ask questions or offer suggestions if she needs
clariﬁcation. For instance, if the human points to a spot containing multiple objects, Diana may suggest one, e.g., “Do
you mean the purple block?”, or if a speciﬁed action has
multiple possible results, may ask the user to choose, e.g.,
“Should I push the orange block left of the black block?”
Through accumulating and integrating partial information, prompting, and clarifying, Diana moves the conversation forward similarly to a human, allowing the human user
to instruct her in building structures (e.g., staircase, pyramid,
tower, etc.) or executing routines, i.e., laying a place setting.

Situated Multimodal Interaction
Diana exists in a virtual world built on the Unity game engine (Fig. 1), where she can manipulate virtual objects by
grasping, lifting, moving, and sliding them. This world is
R
displayed by a computer attached to a Kinect
RGB+depth
camera and a microphone, through which she consumes inputs from the human user (Fig. 2).
Diana understands up to 34 individual gestures which the
human can use to both indicate speciﬁc objects as well as
what to do with them. She also understands spoken language
in the form of full or partial sentences, allowing these modalities to be mixed and matched in real time in the manner of

Interpretive Machinery
Diana in her current state is an updated version of a previous
system that could interpret coarse, purely gestural instructions (Krishnaswamy et al. 2017), and later simple natural

∗

Work performed at Colorado State University.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13618

