The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

TEINet: Towards an Efﬁcient Architecture for Video Recognition
Zhaoyang Liu,1∗ Donghao Luo,2∗ Yabiao Wang,2 Limin Wang,1†
Ying Tai,2 Chengjie Wang,2 Jilin Li,2 Feiyue Huang,2 Tong Lu1
1

State Key Lab for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
Youtu Lab, Tencent

Abstract
Efﬁciency is an important issue in designing video architectures for action recognition. 3D CNNs have witnessed remarkable progress in action recognition from videos. However, compared with their 2D counterparts, 3D convolutions
often introduce a large amount of parameters and cause high
computational cost. To relieve this problem, we propose an
efﬁcient temporal module, termed as Temporal Enhancementand-Interaction (TEI Module), which could be plugged into
the existing 2D CNNs (denoted by TEINet). The TEI module presents a different paradigm to learn temporal features
by decoupling the modeling of channel correlation and temporal interaction. First, it contains a Motion Enhanced Module (MEM) which is to enhance the motion-related features
while suppress irrelevant information (e.g., background).
Then, it introduces a Temporal Interaction Module (TIM)
which supplements the temporal contextual information in
a channel-wise manner. This two-stage modeling scheme is
not only able to capture temporal structure ﬂexibly and effectively, but also efﬁcient for model inference. We conduct
extensive experiments to verify the effectiveness of TEINet
on several benchmarks (e.g., Something-Something V1&V2,
Kinetics, UCF101 and HMDB51). Our proposed TEINet can
achieve a good recognition accuracy on these datasets but still
preserve a high efﬁciency.

1













   







 

 

 

  





Figure 1: TEINet building block. We present an effective
TEI module to decouple temporal modeling into a MEM to
enhance motion-related features and a TIM capture temporal
contextual information. This TEI module could be inserted
into the 2D ResNet block to construct an efﬁcient video architecture of TEINet.

information in a proper way is crucial for action recognition,
which has aroused great interest of research.
Recently the convolutional networks (LeCun et al. 1998)
have become the mainstream method in action recognition (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; Carreira and Zisserman 2017; Tran et al. 2018). TSN (Wang et al. 2016) is an
efﬁcient method which ignores the constraint on temporal
order information and only aggregates temporal information
at the ﬁnal classiﬁer layer. To capture temporal information
slowly and earlier, some new efﬁcient 2D CNN based architectures are developed such as StNet (He et al. 2019) and
TSM (Lin, Gan, and Han 2018). However, they involve some
hand-crafted designs, which lacks a clear explanation and
may be suboptimal for temporal modeling. 3D CNNs (Tran
et al. 2015; Carreira and Zisserman 2017) are more principled architectures for directly learning spatiotemporal features from RGB frames. Unfortunately, this simple extension from a 2D convolution to its 3D version leads to a critical issue: it causes high computational cost when densely replacing 2D convolutions with 3D counterparts. Therefore we
hope to devise a ﬂexible temporal modeling module which

Introduction

Video understanding is one of the most important problems in computer vision (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014;
Tran et al. 2015; Wang et al. 2016). Action recognition is
a fundamental task in video understanding, as it is able to
not only extract semantic information from videos, but also
yield general video representations for other tasks such as
action detection and localization (Feichtenhofer et al. 2018;
Zhao et al. 2017). Unlike static images, the core problem of
action recognition is how to model temporal information effectively. Temporal dimension typically exhibits a different
property with respect to spatial domain. Modeling temporal
∗

indicates equal contribution.
Corresponding author (lmwang@nju.edu.cn).
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

11669

