The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Interactive Rare-Category-of-Interest Mining from Large Datasets∗
Zhenguang Liu,*1 Sihao Hu,*2,4 Yifang Yin,3 Jianhai Chen,2
Kevin Chiew, Luming Zhang,2 Zetian Wu2
1

Zhejiang Gongshang University
2
Zhejiang University
3
National University of Singapore
4
Alibaba Group
liuzhenguang2008@gmail.com, {husihao26, chenjh919}@zju.edu.cn, idsyin@nus.edu.sg
portion of normal network connections forming the major
category and a small portion of intrusions forming a few
rare categories, which however are usually more signiﬁcant.
The motivation and aims of rare category mining have enabled it to have a wide variety of applications such as fraudulent transaction detection (Zhou et al. 2018), network security bug discovering, and forest ﬁre identiﬁcation in satellite images (Mithal et al. 2017), and etc (He, Tong, and
Carbonell 2010; Svenstrup, Jørgensen, and Winther 2015;
Liu et al. 2017; Cheng et al. 2019).
Following the existing work (Huang et al. 2014; He and
Carbonell 2007; He, Tong, and Carbonell 2010), rare category mining can be decomposed into two sequential subtasks, namely RCD (rare category detection) and RCE (rare
category exploration). (1) RCD targets to detect a few data
examples for an undiscovered rare category to prove its existence in the unlabeled dataset, e.g., detecting an instance of
a network attack. (2) If the user ﬁnds the detected rare category data examples valuable or interesting, RCE further tries
to identify other similar and interesting data examples in the
same rare category, e.g., identifying interesting instances of
the same attack type as the detected one.
Facing a few challenges such as (1) skewed category
distribution, (2) the non-separability nature of interesting
data examples from uninteresting data examples, and (3)
the extremely limited number of labeling budget of the user,
most of the existing methods (e.g., (He and Carbonell 2007;
Huang et al. 2013; Yu and Lam 2019; Pérez-Ortiz et al.
2019; Feuz and Cook 2017)) have been focused on the discovery of statistically signiﬁcant data examples of a rare category. However, not all rare category data examples are necessarily of equal importance (Vatturi and Wong 2009). For
examples, a user might be interested in only a few ﬁghting
scenes in a rare game instead of all game images; a doctor in
digestive diseases may not be interested in a rare psychopath
instance. This motivates us to identify rare category data examples that are of interest to a user subjectively besides of
their statistical signiﬁcance (which is objective).
More importantly, scrutinizing the implementations of existing methods, e.g., (Vatturi and Wong 2009; Tu et al. 2018),
we empirically found that current RCD approaches often
have quadratic time complexities w.r.t. dataset size in an-

Abstract
In the era of big data, rare category data examples are often
of key importance despite their scarcity, e.g., rare bird audio is usually more valuable than common bird audio. However, existing efforts on rare category mining consider only
the statistical characteristics of rare category data examples,
while ignoring their ‘true’ interestingness to the user. Moreover, current approaches are unable to support real-time user
interactions due to their prohibitive computational costs for
answering a single user query.
In this paper, we contribute a new model named IRim,
which can interactively mine rare category data examples of
interest over large datasets. The mining process is carried
out by two steps, namely rare category detection (RCD) followed by rare category exploration (RCE). In RCD, by introducing an ofﬂine phase and high-level knowledge abstractions, IRim reduces the time complexity of answering a user
query from quadratic to logarithmic. In RCE, by proposing
a collaborative-reconstruction based approach, we are able
to explicitly encode both user preference and rare category
characteristics. Extensive experiments on ﬁve diverse realworld datasets show that our method achieves the response
time in seconds for user interactions, and outperforms stateof-the-art competitors signiﬁcantly in accuracy and number
of queries. As a side contribution, we construct and release
two benchmark datasets which to our knowledge are the ﬁrst
public datasets tailored for rare category mining task.

Introduction
The big data era provides tremendous opportunities for extracting valuable knowledge from large datasets (Cao et al.
2015). In many real-world applications, it is often the case
that the dataset is mixed with a great number of data examples belonging to a major category together with a small
number of data examples belonging to a few rare categories,
whereas the rare categories are more valuable than the major
category (Pelleg and Moore 2004; He and Carbonell 2007).
For example, a network access dataset may contain a big
∗

The ﬁrst two authors are of equal contributions. Corresponding to: Jianhai Chen(chenjh919@zju.edu.cn), Yifang Yin
(idsyin@nus.edu.sg).
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4965

