The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Actionable Ethics through Neural Learning
Daniele Rossini,1 Danilo Croce,2 Sara Mancini,1 Massimo Pellegrino,1 Roberto Basili2
1

PricewaterhouseCoopers Italy
University of Rome, Tor Vergata
{daniele.rossini, sara.mancini, massimo.pellegrino}@pwc.com
{basili, croce}@info.uniroma2.it
2

ing ethics issues is an active area (Bostrom and Yudkowsky
2014; Boddington 2017).
Performing audit-like, i.e. post-hoc, ethic validation on a
deployed AI system is certainly a possible approach, but it
hardly constitutes a reliable guarantee: the space of possible
input states, especially in evolved systems, may be too big to
allow for exhaustive explorations. Moreover, the conditions
between testing and real scenarios may inherently exhibit
signiﬁcant discrepancies or the required data may be insufﬁcient or unavailable. For example, let us consider a bank
launching a Digital Lending solution: it offers short term
loans, by exploiting a machine learning algorithm based on
the risk associated with the user proﬁle, hence granting or
denying the loan. Here, the ethical implications span many
dimensions, e.g. fairness, transparency and data privacy, all
socially relevant aspects. Worse, a satisfactory a-posteriori
validation would be hard. For example, it would be complex
to assess the system’s performance on false negatives, e.g.
rejected requests for lack of data about their ﬁnancial history as information would likely not be available after bank
rejection. While it seems mandatory to guarantee the adherence to acceptable levels of ethical compliance, this goal is
clearly dependent on methods to inject ethical awareness at
all stages the development and use of an AI application. For
this reason, we consider for the notion of Embedding Principles of ethics by design (EPbD) for a target AI application.
In this work, we thus propose a framework for EPbD
that, although extending generic AI applications, mainly focuses on the learning of the ethical behaviour by numerical optimization, i.e. through a deep neural model (Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville 2016). The core idea is to
model ethics as automated reasoning over formal descriptions of the AI system, e.g. based on ontologies, but making it available during the learning stage. Note that our approach does not induce an ethical set of rules from a collection of observable behaviours; it is rather the opposite.
In fact our approach gives for granted an explicit formulation of ethical principles (as done for example in previous
work, (Bonnemains, Saurel, and Tessier 2018; Vanderelst
and Winﬁeld 2018)) and focuses on a form of ethical learning as external alignment (learning from others, (KleimanWeiner, Saxe, and Tenenbaum 2017)). It uses ethical evidence inferred from an ethical ontology to guide the model
selection in deep learning. The resulting deep neural net-

Abstract
While AI is going to produce a great impact on society, its
alignment with human values and expectations is an essential
step towards a correct harnessing of AI potentials for good.
There is a corresponding growing need for mature and established technical standards to enable the assessment of an AI
application as the evaluation of its graded adherence to formalized ethics. This is clearly dependent on methods to inject
ethical awareness at all stages of an AI application development and use. For this reason we introduce the notion of Embedding Principles of ethics by Design (EPbD) as a comprehensive inductive framework. Although extending generic AI
applications, it mainly aims at learning the ethical behaviour
through numerical optimization, i.e. deep neural models. The
core idea is to support ethics by integrating automated reasoning over formal knowledge and induction from ethically enriched training data. A deep neural network is proposed here
to model both the functional as well as the ethical conditions
characterizing a target decision. In this way, the discovery of
latent ethical knowledge is enabled and made available to the
learning process. The application of the above framework to a
banking application, i.e. AI-driven Digital Lending, is used to
show how accurate classiﬁcation can be achieved without neglecting the ethical dimension. Results over existing datasets
demonstrate that the ethical compliance of the sources can be
used to output models able to optimally ﬁne tune the balance
between business and ethical accuracy.

Introduction
Penetration of Artiﬁcial Intelligence systems into everyday
life promises major changes and the opening of new opportunities (Craglia 2018). However, this enthusiasm also
brings concerns about the risks it poses on human society
about chance of misuse. Unacceptable behaviours are triggered by several issues, ranging from design misspeciﬁcations (Amodei et al. 2016), to limited robustness with respect
to adversarial attacks (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy
2014) to unfair treatments (O’Neil 2016) and controversies
on AI experimentation itself (Bird et al. 2016). As the alignment with human values and expectations is an essential
step towards a correct harnessing of AI potential for good
(Smuha 2019), research about ethics in AI aiming at mitigatc 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5537

