The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Task and Motion Planning Is PSPACE-Complete
William Vega-Brown, Nicholas Roy∗
CSAIL, MIT
32 Vassar Street, 32-33x
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139
{wrvb,nickroy}@csail.mit.edu

priori bounded. This means that designing an effective decision procedure remains difﬁcult, even if the task planner
and motion planner are both complete and correct. Practical approaches work around this issue in a variety of ways,
but constructing such a decomposition, or even just showing
such a decomposition exists, is the core technical difﬁculty
in analyzing TMP.
In this paper, we introduce a new intermediate representation, the continuous constraint contract representation (C3 ).
C3 places both the discrete and continuous aspects of a problem in a single uniﬁed framework, and describes the capabilities of a system using an explicit constraint graph between the state of the world before and after an action. We
show that every robotic planning problem satisfying mild
technical conditions can be accurately represented by a C3
instance, and we use tools from semialgebraic geometry
and geometric control theory to show that if the constraints
can be decomposed in a certain way—a technical property
called uniform stratiﬁed accessibility—then we can decide if
a semialgebraic C3 instance has a solution using only polynomial space. Furthermore, we show that without this condition, semialgebraic C3 is undecidable. Our algorithm bounds
the complexity of TMP from above, and implies that task
and motion planning is PSPACE-complete.

Abstract
We present a new representation for task and motion planning that uses constraints to capture both continuous and
discrete phenomena in a uniﬁed framework. We show that
we can decide if a feasible plan exists for a given problem
instance using only polynomial space if the constraints are
semialgebraic and all actions have uniform stratiﬁed accessibility, a technical condition closely related to both controllability and to the existence of a symbolic representation of
a planning domain. We show that there cannot exist an algorithm that solves the more general problem of deciding if a
plan exists for an instance with arbitrary semialgebraic constraints. Finally, we show that our formalism is universal, in
the sense that every deterministic robotic planning problem
can be well-approximated within our formalism. Together,
these results imply task and motion planning is PSPACEcomplete.

Introduction
Generalized deterministic robotic planning problems like
mobile manipulation or legged locomotion have been
studied for decades (Lozano-Pérez 1976; Wilfong 1988;
Koditschek 1994). While numerous practical algorithms
have been presented (recent examples include Garrett,
Lozano-Pérez, and Kaelbling (2018) and Dantam et
al. (2018), among many others), many fundamental questions of decidability and complexity remain open. In particular, it is not known under what conditions we can decide if
a given deterministic planning problem has a solution, nor
is there an effective decision procedure for the generalized
problem of deterministic task and motion planning (TMP).
Part of the challenge in resolving these questions is that
it is not obvious how to make these questions precise, as
there is no consensus on what deﬁnes a TMP problem. In
addition, many obvious approaches fail. For example, one
naı̈ve approach to TMP might be to combine a task planner with a motion planner and arrive at an effective decision procedure. Unfortunately, this requires choosing start
states and goal states with which to query our motion planner, and the set of possible motion planning queries is not a

Complexity Results in Planning
To illustrate the complexity of TMP, consider the special
case of path planning, where an articulated robot with arbitrarily many links must navigate among polygonal obstacles. Reif (1979) proved this problem was PSPACE-hard by
explicitly constructing an oddly-shaped articulated body for
which the feasible paths can simulate any given Turing machine with a polynomial space bound. Canny matched this
lower bound by constructing a polynomial space algorithm
for the path planning problem, thus proving path planning is
PSPACE-complete (Canny 1988).
Canny’s analysis does not extend to the case of planning
under differential constraints, where not every collision-free
path through conﬁguration space is considered feasible. To
the best of our knowledge there are no known upper bounds
on the complexity of complete planners for differentially
constrained systems, let alone general TMP problems. Still,
Reif’s construction provides a straightforward lower bound

∗
This research was supported by the US Army Research Laboratory’s RCTA program. Their support is gratefully acknowledged.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10385

