The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Scalable Attentive Sentence-Pair
Modeling via Distilled Sentence Embedding
Oren Barkan,*1 Noam Razin,*12 Itzik Malkiel,12 Ori Katz,13 Avi Caciularu,14 Noam Koenigstein12
1Microsoft, 2Tel Aviv University, 3Technion, 4Bar-Ilan University

significantly advanced the state-of-the-art in various linguistic tasks such as machine translation (Vaswani et al.
2017), sentiment analysis (Socher et al. 2013), question
answering (Rajpurkar et al. 2016) and sentence similarity
(Dolan and Brockett 2005; Cer et al. 2017). These models
are built upon a stack of self-attention layers that enable
each word to attend other words in a sentence.
In the latest models such as BERT and XLNet, selfattention is applied in a bidirectional manner. This is different from conventional language models (Collobert et al.
2011), in which each word in a sentence is conditioned
solely on its preceding words. In addition, the architectures
in (Devlin et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2019) support sentencepair input, endowing these models with the ability to infer
sentence similarity. However, this capability entails a nonnegligible computational cost. In these models, scoring
sentence-pairs involves a cross-attention (CA) operation in
which each word in a sentence 𝐴 attends to all words in a
sentence 𝐵 and vice versa (excluding the fact that each
word attends to all other words in the same sentence as
well). Moreover, CA is repeatedly applied in a cascade
throughout a stack of multi-head attention layers (Vaswani
et al. 2017). This CA entanglement is a double-edged
sword. On the one hand, it is allegedly a key property that
pushes forward the state-of-the-art, computing similarity
between sentences by analyzing the relations between individual words 𝑎 ∈ 𝐴 and 𝑏 ∈ 𝐵. On the other hand, it entails an excessively demanding inference phase in terms of
time and computational power.
The computational bottleneck that is imposed by CA
severely affects the inference phase in ranking and retrieval
tasks. Assume a CA model 𝑇 and a set of candidates 𝑋 that
contains 𝑁 sentences. The task is to retrieve the topmost
similar sentences in 𝑋 w.r.t. a new query sentence 𝑞. A
naïve solution is to compute the similarity between each
sentence 𝑥 ∈ 𝑋 and 𝑞, which amounts to 𝑁 applications of
𝑇 (scoring each sentence-pair (𝑞, 𝑥) using 𝑇). In other
words, the propagation of the entire candidates set 𝑋
through 𝑇 is necessary to produce the similarity scores
w.r.t. a single query 𝑞.
A second problem with CA models is the fact that they
are not trained to produce sentence embeddings w.r.t. the

Abstract
Recent state-of-the-art natural language understanding models, such as BERT and XLNet, score a pair of sentences (𝐴
and 𝐵) using multiple cross-attention operations – a process
in which each word in sentence 𝐴 attends to all words in
sentence 𝐵 and vice versa. As a result, computing the similarity between a query sentence and a set of candidate sentences, requires the propagation of all query-candidate sentence-pairs throughout a stack of cross-attention layers. This
exhaustive process becomes computationally prohibitive
when the number of candidate sentences is large. In contrast, sentence embedding techniques learn a sentence-tovector mapping and compute the similarity between the sentence vectors via simple elementary operations. In this paper, we introduce Distilled Sentence Embedding (DSE) – a
model that is based on knowledge distillation from crossattentive models, focusing on sentence-pair tasks. The outline of DSE is as follows: Given a cross-attentive teacher
model (e.g. a fine-tuned BERT), we train a sentence embedding based student model to reconstruct the sentence-pair
scores obtained by the teacher model. We empirically
demonstrate the effectiveness of DSE on five GLUE sentence-pair tasks. DSE significantly outperforms several
ELMO variants and other sentence embedding methods,
while accelerating computation of the query-candidate sentence-pairs similarities by several orders of magnitude, with
an average relative degradation of 4.6% compared to BERT.
Furthermore, we show that DSE produces sentence embeddings that reach state-of-the-art performance on universal
sentence representation benchmarks. Our code is made publicly available at https://github.com/microsoft/DistilledSentence-Embedding.

1. Introduction
The emergence of self-attentive models such as the Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017), GPT (Radford et al. 2018),
BERT (Devlin et al. 2019) and XLNet (Yang et al. 2019)
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
*

Equal contribution

3235

