The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

PSENet: Psoriasis Severity Evaluation Network
∗

∗

∗

Yi Li,1 Zhe Wu,1,3 Shuang Zhao,2 Xian Wu,3 Yehong Kuang,2
†
†
Yangtian Yan,3 Shen Ge,3 Kai Wang,3 Wei Fan,3 Xiang Chen,2 Yong Wang1
1

School of Automation, Central South University
Department of Dermatology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University
3
Tencent Medical AI Lab
{liyi1002, wuzhe950818, shuangxy, ywang}@csu.edu.cn, {yh 927, chenxiangck}@126.com
{kevinxwu, yangtianyan, shenge, ironswang, davidwfan}@tencent.com
2

their entire lives. But if treated properly and timely, patients
can still maintain a relatively high life quality. For Psoriasis with different severities, different therapies can be chosen accordingly. For example, balm, radiation, and biologic
are suitable treatments for mild, medium, and serious conditions, respectively. However if the deterioration of Psoriasis is not detected and handled in time, it could cause serious complications, such as diabetes and heart failure (BerthJones et al. 2006; Zhou et al. 2015). Therefore, tracking the
progress of Psoriasis is of great importance which requires a
quantitative indicator.
In current clinical practice, Psoriasis Area and Severity
Index (PASI) (Berth-Jones et al. 2006) is the most frequently
used indicator. PASI mainly evaluates the severity of skin lesions from four aspects: the redness of erythema, the thickness of induration, the scaling of desquamation, and the lesion area ratio, resulting in a score ranging from 0 to 72.
One drawback of PASI is that it is manually calculated by
dermatologists and usually takes more than 30 minutes per
patient (Berth-Jones et al. 2006). However, there is a serious
shortage of dermatologists in less developed and developing
countries. For example, in Africa, there are few dermatologists in many countries; and in China, the ratio between
dermatologists and patients is 1:70000 (Zhou et al. 2015).
Even for developed countries, considering the large number
of Psoriasis patients, calculating PASI is still a heavy burden
for dermatologists. Another drawback of PASI is the inconsistency. Due to the complexity of PASI calculation, different dermatologists could come up with different scores for
the same case. Even the same dermatologist may give different scores for the same case. Such inconsistency could
mislead the judgement of Psoriasis severity.
To overcome the above disadvantages of PASI, we propose PSENet which applies deep neural network to estimate
the severity. PSENet takes clinical images of Psoriasis as input and generates a numeric score to measure the severity. It
has the following two components: (1) Score reﬁne module:
this module simulates the process how PASI evaluates the
severity. On the one hand, this module locates skin lesions
and estimates their sizes. On the other hand, this module
evaluates the abnormality degree of skin lesions. By combining these two results, this module can output a numeric score
to estimate the severity with high robustness. This module is
deployed at different depths of the deep neural network. In

Abstract
Psoriasis is a chronic skin disease which affects hundreds
of millions of people around the world. This disease cannot
be fully cured and requires lifelong caring. If the deterioration of Psoriasis is not detected and properly treated in time,
it could cause serious complications or even lead to a life
threat. Therefore, a quantitative measurement that can track
the Psoriasis severity is necessary. Currently, PASI (Psoriasis
Area and Severity Index) is the most frequently used measurement in clinical practices. However, PASI has the following disadvantages: (1) Time consuming: calculating PASI
usually takes more than 30 minutes which poses a heavy
burden on dermatologists; and (2) Inconsistency: due to the
complexity of PASI calculation, different or even the same
dermatologist could give different scores for the same case.
To overcome these drawbacks, we propose PSENet which
applies deep neural networks to estimate Psoriasis severity
based on skin lesion images. Different from typical deep
learning frameworks for image processing, PSENet has the
following characteristics: (1) PSENet introduces a score reﬁne module which is able to capture the visual features of
skin at both coarse and ﬁne-grained granularities; (2) PSENet
uses siamese structure in training and accepts pairwise inputs,
which reduces the dependency on large amount of training
data; and (3) PSENet can not only estimate the severity, but
also locate the skin lesion regions from the input image. To
train and evaluate PSENet, we work with professional dermatologists from a top hospital and spend years in building
a golden dataset. The experimental results show that PSENet
can achieve the mean absolute error of 2.21 and the accuracy
of 77.87% in pair comparison, outperforming baseline methods. Overall, PSENet not only relieves dermatologists from
the dull PASI calculation but also enables patients to track
Psoriasis severity in a much more convenient manner.

Introduction
Psoriasis is a chronic inﬂammatory skin disease which affects about 2%-3% of the population worldwide1 . It is an
immune system disease and cannot be fully cured. As a result, many patients have to suffer from Psoriasis throughout
∗
These authors contributed equally. This work has been done
when Zhe Wu was with Tencent Medical AI Lab as intern.
†
Corresponding authors
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://www.worldpsoriasisday.com/

800

