The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Tensor Graph Convolutional Networks for Text Classiﬁcation
Xien Liu,*1 Xinxin You,∗3,4 Xiao Zhang,1 Ji Wu,1,2 Ping Lv3,4
1

Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
2
Institute for Precision Medicine, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
3
Tsinghua-iFLYTEK Joint Lab, iFlytek Research, Beijing 100084, China
4
State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence, Hefei, Anhui 230088, China

ing models. According to the learning models, the manners
of feature learning can be further cast into two categories:
1) sequential-based learning models and 2) graph-based
learning models. The most used sequential-based learning
models include convolutional neural networks (Kim 2014;
Zhang, Zhao, and LeCun 2015; Conneau et al. 2016) and
recurrent neural networks (Liu, Qiu, and Huang 2016; Tai,
Socher, and Manning 2015), which promote to capture text
features from local consecutive word sequences. Recently,
graph-based learning models, such as graph neural networks
(Cai, Zheng, and Chang 2018; Battaglia et al. 2018), have attracted widespread attention and been successfully applied
for solving the text classiﬁcation problem (Kipf and Welling
2016; Yao, Mao, and Luo 2019).

Abstract
Compared to sequential learning models, graph-based neural networks exhibit some excellent properties, such as ability capturing global information. In this paper, we investigate graph-based neural networks for text classiﬁcation problem. A new framework TensorGCN (tensor graph convolutional networks), is presented for this task. A text graph tensor is ﬁrstly constructed to describe semantic, syntactic, and
sequential contextual information. Then, two kinds of propagation learning perform on the text graph tensor. The ﬁrst
is intra-graph propagation used for aggregating information
from neighborhood nodes in a single graph. The second is
inter-graph propagation used for harmonizing heterogeneous
information between graphs. Extensive experiments are conducted on benchmark datasets, and the results illustrate the
effectiveness of our proposed framework. Our proposed TensorGCN presents an effective way to harmonize and integrate
heterogeneous information from different kinds of graphs.

Different from sequence learning models, graph neural
networks (GNN) can directly deal with complex structured
data, and prioritize exploiting global features. Data from
many real applications can be naturally cast into a graph
(Deac et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2019), but it does not hold for sequential free text. Therefore, GNN-based text learning must
include two stages: 1) construct graphs from free text, and
2) build a graph-based learning framework. A straightforward manner of graph construction is to build and connect
relationships between words/entities in the free text. Recently, Yao et al. (2019) proposed a text graph-based neural
network TextGCN, which achieved state-of-the-art performance in some benchmark datasets of text classiﬁcation. In
their framework, a text graph is ﬁrstly constructed based on
the sequential contextual relationship between words. Then
a graph convolutional network (GCN) (Kipf and Welling
2016) is employed to learn on the text graph. According to
the more recently reported in (Luo, Uzuner, and Szolovits
2016; Bastings et al. 2017; Vashishth et al. 2019), more contextual information should be considered, such as semantic
and syntactic contextual information.

Introduction
Text classiﬁcation is one of the most fundamental tasks in
the natural language processing community. It can be simply
formulated as X → y, where X is a piece of text (such as
a sentence/document) , and y ∈ [0, 1]n is the corresponding
label vector. In this study, we only consider one label classiﬁcation problem. In practice, numerous real applications
can be cast into a text classiﬁcation problem, such as document organization, news ﬁltering, spam detection, EHRbased disease diagnoses (Lipton et al. 2015; Che et al. 2015;
Miotto et al. 2016).
Text representation learning is the ﬁrst and essential step
for the text classiﬁcation problem. The study of text representation can be summarized into two lines: 1) engineering
features and 2) learning features. In the study of engineering
features, a piece of text is represented with hand-crafted features, such as bag-of-word features, sparse lexical features
(Wang and Manning 2012), and entity-based features (Chenthamarakshan et al. 2011). Recently, text features are automatically extracted from the raw text with machine learn-

Inspired by the recent progress, we propose a new graphbased text classiﬁcation framework TensorGCN (see ﬁgure
1). Semantic-based, syntactic-based, and sequential-based
text graphs are ﬁrstly constructed to form a text graph
tensor. The graph tensor is used to capture text information of semantic context, syntactic context, and sequential
context, respectively. As pointed out in (Vashishth et al.

∗

The ﬁrst two authors contribute equally to this work.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8409

