The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Multi-Scale Anomaly Detection on Attributed Networks
Leonardo Gutiérrez-Gómez,1,3∗ Alexandre Bovet,1 Jean-Charles Delvenne1,2
1

Institute for Information and Communication Technologies, Electronics and Applied Mathematics (ICTEAM)
2
Center for Operations Research and Econometrics (CORE)
Université catholique de Louvain, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium
{alexandre.bovet, jean-charles.delvenne}@uclouvain.be
3
Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology (LIST), Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg
leonardo.gutierrez@list.lu
Age: 26
Gender: male
Income: 1000
Education: master
Productivity: 7.5
Role: comercial
Experience: 3
Nationality: Belgian
Status: single
Kids: 1

Abstract
Many social and economic systems can be represented as attributed networks encoding the relations between entities who
are themselves described by different node attributes. Finding anomalies in these systems is crucial for detecting abuses
such as credit card frauds, web spams or network intrusions.
Intuitively, anomalous nodes are deﬁned as nodes whose attributes differ starkly from the attributes of a certain set of
nodes of reference, called the context of the anomaly. While
some methods have proposed to spot anomalies locally, globally or within a community context, the problem remain challenging due to the multi-scale composition of real networks
and the heterogeneity of node metadata. Here, we propose a
principled way to uncover outlier nodes simultaneously with
the context with respect to which they are anomalous, at all
relevant scales of the network. We characterize anomalous
nodes in terms of the concentration retained for each node after smoothing speciﬁc signals localized on the vertices of the
graph. Besides, we introduce a graph signal processing formulation of the Markov stability framework used in community detection, in order to ﬁnd the context of anomalies. The
performance of our method is assessed on synthetic and realworld attributed networks and shows superior results concerning state of the art algorithms. Finally, we show the scalability of our approach in large networks employing Chebychev polynomial approximations.

Departments

Oces

Company

O2

O1

Node attributes
(metadata)

O3
1st scale

O1
O3
2nd scale

O3
3rd scale

Figure 1: A toy example of work relation network. Nodes
have attributes describing individual features. Node attributes deﬁne structural clusters in multiple scales. At the
1st scale outlier nodes (O1 , O2 , O3 ) lie within a local context, i.e, ofﬁces. In a 2nd scale, departments emerge as new
contexts where O2 is not deﬁned. Finally, at a larger scale O3
remains as a global anomaly in context of the whole company.
network, nodes represent items and might contain information about them as attributes, while an edge is present between two items when the same person has bought them.
Because the mechanisms generating anomalies in real
world networks are usually unknown, deﬁning ground truth
anomalies, is problematic and measuring the degree for
which a node is anomalous is a challenging problem. For
this reason, anomalies must be deﬁned in opposition to a
background of “normal” nodes, i.e., the context relevant for
an anomaly.
So far, the issue of ﬁnding anomalous nodes, or outliers
(we consider these words as synonyms in this paper) on networks together with their relevant contexts has not been entirely solved. Existing approaches consider outliers within
local or community contexts (Liu, Huang, and Hu 2017;
Gao et al. 2010) sometimes with strong assumptions about
the distribution of the attributes (Gao et al. 2010), or separate
the context identiﬁcation from outlier detection (Sánchez et
al. 2014). Other methods detect anomalies without considering any context (Li et al. 2017).
However, real world networks representing complex economic, social, or biological systems are characterized by
modular, multiscalar, and often hierarchical structures (Boccaletti et al. 2006). Taking into account the node attributes

Anomaly detection is an important problem in data mining with multiple applications in diverse domains (Aggarwal 2013). Examples include credit card fraud detection, intrusion detection for network systems, identifying anomalous users in communication networks, web spam detection,
and so on. Anomalous data can be understood as noteworthy objects with patterns or behaviors that deviate significantly from a background property. Investigating anomalies in networks is especially interesting because many real
world systems are well modeled by a network consisting
of nodes with speciﬁc attributes and edges representing the
relations between nodes. For instance, in a social network
where nodes represent persons and edges social ties, node attributes could be demographic information. In a co-purchase
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
678

