The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Time-Inconsistent Planning:
Simple Motivation Is Hard to Find
Fedor V. Fomin,1 Torstein J. F. Strømme1
1

University of Bergen, Norway

follow through on his initial intentions despite circumstances
remaining essentially unchanged. Resulting phenomenons
include procrastination and abandonment.
A common explanation for time-inconsistent behavior is
the notion of present bias, which states that agents give undue
salience to events that are close in time and/or space. This
idea was described mathematically already in 1930’s when
(Samuelson 1937) introduced the discounted-utility model,
which has since been reﬁned in different versions (Laibson
1994).
George Akerlof describes in his lecture (Akerlof 1991)
an even simpler mathematical model; here, the agent simply
has a salience factor causing immediate events to be emphasized more than future ones. He goes on to show how even
a very small salience factor in combination with many repeated decisions can lead to arbitrary large extra costs for the
agent. This salience factor also has support from psychology,
where (McClure et al. 2004) showed by using brain imaging
that separate neural systems are in play when humans value
immediate and delayed rewards.1
In 2014, (Kleinberg and Oren 2018) introduced a graphtheoretic model which elegantly captures the salience factor
and scenarios of Akerlof. In this framework, where the agent
is maneuvering through a weighted directed acyclic graph,
it is possible to model many interesting situations. We will
provide an example here.

Abstract
People sometimes act differently when making decisions affecting the present moment versus decisions affecting the
future only. This is referred to as time-inconsistent behaviour,
and can be modeled as agents exhibiting present bias. A resulting phenomenon is abandonment, which is when an agent
initially pursues a task, but ultimately gives up before reaping
the rewards.
With the introduction of the graph-theoretic time-inconsistent
planning model due to Kleinberg and Oren, it has been possible to investigate the computational complexity of how a task
designer best can support a present-biased agent in completing
the task. In this paper, we study the complexity of ﬁnding a
choice reduction for the agent; that is, how to remove edges
and vertices from the task graph such that a present-biased
agent will remain motivated to reach his target even for a limited reward. While this problem is NP-complete in general,
this is not necessarily true for instances which occur in practice, or for solutions which are of interest to task designers.
For instance, a task designer may desire to ﬁnd the best task
graph which is not too complicated.
We therefore investigate the problem of ﬁnding simple motivating subgraphs. These are structures where the agent will
modify his plan at most k times along the way. We quantify
this simplicity in the time-inconsistency model as a structural
parameter: The number of branching vertices (vertices with
out-degree at least 2) in a minimal motivating subgraph.
Our results are as follows: We give a linear algorithm for
ﬁnding an optimal motivating path, i. e. when k = 0. On the
negative side, we show that ﬁnding a simple motivating subgraph is NP-complete even if we allow only a single branching
vertex — revealing that simple motivating subgraphs are indeed hard to ﬁnd. However, we give a pseudo-polynomial
algorithm for the case when k is ﬁxed and edge weights are
rationals, which might be a reasonable assumption in practice.

Example
The student Bob is planning his studies. He considers taking
a week-long course whose passing grade is a reward he quantiﬁes to be worth r = 59. And indeed, Bob discovers that he
can actually complete the course incurring costs and effort
he quantiﬁes to be only 46 — if he works evenly throughout
the week (the upper path in Figure 1). Bob will reevaluate
the cost every day, and as long as he perceives the cost to be
at most equal to the reward, he will follow the path he ﬁnds
to have the lowest cost.

Introduction
Time-inconsistent behavior is a theme attracting great attention in behavioral economics and psychology. The ﬁeld
investigates questions such as why people let their bills go
to debt collection, or buy gym memberships without actually
using them. More generally, inconsistent behavior over time
occurs when an agent makes a multi-phase plan, but does not

1

We remark that quasi-hyperbolic discounting (discussed in
(Laibson 1994; McClure et al. 2004)) can be seen as a generalization of both the discounted-continuity model (Samuelson 1937) and
the salience factor (Akerlof 1991). There has been some empirical
support for this model; however there are also many known psychological phenomena about time-inconsistent behavior it does not
capture (Frederick, Loewenstein, and O’Donoghue 2002).

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9843

