The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Not All Attention Is Needed: Gated Attention Network for Sequence Data
∗

Lanqing Xue,1 Xiaopeng Li,2 Nevin L. Zhang1,3
1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
2
Amazon Web Services, WA, USA
3
HKUST-Xiaoi Joint Lab, Hong Kong
{lxueaa, lzhang}@cse.ust.hk, xiaopel@amazon.com

namic attention weights to select a portion of the input to
pay attention to in a soft manner. In image captioning, attention mechanism allows the model to learn alignment between the visual portion of an image and the corresponding word in its text description (Xu et al. 2015). In neural machine translation, an encoder computes a sequence
of hidden states from an arbitrary-length sentence, and the
decoder needs to extract relevant information from the encoder in order to make predictions of each word. Attention mechanism aggregates the whole sequence of hidden
states in the encoder by taking the weighted average of them
with attention weights computed according to current decoding context. In such a manner, the decoding of different
words in the target sentence pays attention to different words
in the source sentence (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015;
Vaswani et al. 2017). And it has achieved remarkable performance in those applications.

Abstract
Although deep neural networks generally have ﬁxed network
structures, the concept of dynamic mechanism has drawn
more and more attention in recent years. Attention mechanisms compute input-dependent dynamic attention weights
for aggregating a sequence of hidden states. Dynamic network conﬁguration in convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
selectively activates only part of the network at a time for
different inputs. In this paper, we combine the two dynamic
mechanisms for text classiﬁcation tasks. Traditional attention
mechanisms attend to the whole sequence of hidden states
for an input sentence, while in most cases not all attention
is needed especially for long sequences. We propose a novel
method called Gated Attention Network (GA-Net) to dynamically select a subset of elements to attend to using an auxiliary
network, and compute attention weights to aggregate the selected elements. It avoids a signiﬁcant amount of unnecessary
computation on unattended elements, and allows the model to
pay attention to important parts of the sequence. Experiments
in various datasets show that the proposed method achieves
better performance compared with all baseline models with
global or local attention while requiring less computation and
achieving better interpretability. It is also promising to extend the idea to more complex attention-based models, such
as transformers and seq-to-seq models.

Dynamic network conﬁguration is another dynamic
mechanism with dynamic connections for convolutional
neural networks (CNNs), and has drawn more and more attention recently. Different from attention mechanism, it selectively activates only part of the network at a time in an
input-dependent fashion (Bengio et al. 2016; Chen et al.
2019). For example, if we think we are looking at a car,
we only need to compute the activations of the vehicle detecting units, not of all features that a network could possible compute (Bengio et al. 2016). The beneﬁt of including only part of units for each input is that the propagation
through the network will be faster both at training and test
time since redundant computations are avoided while the
cost of deciding which units to turn on and off is not high.
While several works on dynamic network conﬁguration have
been proposed for CNNs, such as (Bengio et al. 2016;
Veit and Belongie 2018; Chen et al. 2019), few such attempts
have been made in sequence models such as recurrent neural
networks (RNNs) for natural language processing.

Introduction
In recent years, deep learning has achieved great success in
many applications, such as computer vision and natural language processing. Various neural network structures have
been proposed to solve challenging problems. Although
deep neural networks generally have ﬁxed network structures, the concept of dynamic mechanism has drawn more
and more attention. Instead of having a ﬁxed computational
graph, neural networks with dynamic mechanism adaptively
determine how the computation should be conducted based
on the inputs.
Attention mechanism is one of such dynamic mechanisms
with dynamic weights. Motivated by human visual attention, attention mechanism computes input-dependent dy-

In this paper, we seek to combine the two dynamic mechanisms for text classiﬁcation tasks, and improve attention
mechanism by dynamically adjusting attention connections
in attention networks. Although attention-based neural networks achieved promising results, common attention mechanism has its limitations. Traditional attention mechanism is

∗

Work was done prior to joining Amazon.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6550

