The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Data-Driven Ranking and Visualization of Products by Competitiveness
Sheema Usmani, Mariana Bernagozzi, Yufeng Huang,
Michelle Morales, Amir Sabet Sarvestani, Biplav Srivastava
IBM Chief Analytics Ofﬁce,
Armonk, NY, USA 10504

telecommunication providers in Ghana. In (Bhatt, Mcneil,
and Patel 2014), the authors track general sentiment overtime for products by calculating a sentiment score based on
user-generated content such as reviews and comments.
Our system builds upon previous work by introducing a
novel competitive metric (shown in Figure 1) that encompasses sentiment towards key drivers as one of its contributing factors. The competitive scores and contributing factors
are visualized in an interactive dashboard (described through
a running example in the video) that allows users to track
their product’s performance. Due to business reasons, product names are anonymized in the demonstration.

Abstract
Competitive analysis is a critical part of any business. Product managers, sellers, and marketers spend time and resources
scouring through a huge volume of online and ofﬂine content,
aiming to discover what their competitors are doing in the
marketplace and to understand what type of threat they pose
to their business’ ﬁnancial well-being. Currently, this process
is slow, costly and labor-intensive. We demonstrate Clarity, a
data-driven unsupervised system for assessment of products,
which is currently in deployment at IBM. Clarity has been
running for more than a year and is used by over 1,500 people
to perform over 160 competitive analyses involving over 800
products. The system considers multiple factors from a collection of online content: numeric ratings by users, sentiment
towards key product drivers, content volume, and recency of
content. The results and explanations of factors leading to the
results are visualized in an interactive dashboard that allows
users to track the performance of their products as well as
understand the main contributing factors. main contributing
factors.

Introduction
Every business wants to know how their products are doing in comparison to its competition. In the ﬁeld of market research, this has mostly been a manual process with
researchers scanning through a large volume of online and
ofﬂine content, keeping track of key drivers of interest for
each product, deciding whether a mention represented positive or negative feedback by manually annotating each mention, etc. Researchers would repeat this process for every
additional public domain forum, for every new driver. It is
time and labor-intensive, error-prone, slow and costly process. Furthermore, as competition and feedback from users
continue to evolve, any analysis done previously needs to be
frequently updated to ensure accuracy.
Recently, there have been concerted efforts towards automating parts of the above process by leveraging natural
language processing and machine learning. In Joung et al.
(2018), the authors use text mining methods to analyze customer complaints and ﬁnd gaps in the company’s products.
In Afful-Dadzie et al. (2014), the authors perform text analysis on user comments posted on social media to compare

Figure 1: Sorted stream graph to visualize product’s competitiveness. X-axis: time, Y-axis: product rank and thickness of
line: absolute competitiveness score.

System Overview
The main steps of Clarity are:
1. Prepare review data of products p1 to pN from sources
d1 to dM (ofﬂine)
2. Process request for analysis for product pi (online)
3. Visualize analysis results (online, optional)
The steps involved in the computation and visualization of
the competitive score for a product are described below.
Data preparation As input, the system aggregates unstructured text from an undisclosed set of public forums and
review sites, where comments are widely shared by users

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13640

