The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Perpetual Voting: Fairness in Long-Term Decision Making
Martin Lackner
TU Wien
Vienna, Austria
lackner@dbai.tuwien.ac.at

cess in a mathematically principled and fair way. Their main
strength is that they can ensure fairness across a sequence of
decisions, even if the individual decisions are contested and
no compromise alternatives are available. Ideally, perpetual
voting rules guarantee each voter a fair amount of inﬂuence
on the decision process. In this way, also minorities are incentivized to participate and we obtain a sustainable (stable)
process of collective decision making. The inclusion of minorities can be important both from a social perspective (for
the social cohesion of the collective) and from a technical
perspective (to be able to base decisions on more representative and detailed preference data). In summary, perpetual
voting rules can be beneﬁcial in all repeated collective decision making scenarios where particular emphasis is given to
fairness towards minorities and individual agents1 .
The main contribution of our paper is the introduction of
perpetual voting as a formalism, together with axioms and
metrics to evaluate perpetual voting rules. Our research results in the recommendation of two speciﬁc perpetual voting
rules: Perpetual Consensus and Perpetual Quota (deﬁned in
Section 3). The former achieves the best results in the axiomatic analysis, the latter proves to be particularly strong
in the experimental evaluation (while also enjoying good axiomatic properties).
In more detail, the contributions of this paper are as follows. In Section 2 we introduce the perpetual voting formalism based on approval ballots. Then, in Section 3, we suggest eight voting rules suitable for perpetual voting, some
of which are inspired by the literature on multiwinner voting (Kilgour 2010; Faliszewski et al. 2017).
We analyze the proposed rules based on three axiomatic
properties (Section 4). All three express a certain form of
fairness in the perpetual voting setting. The ﬁrst, simple proportionality, requires that perpetual voting rules behave proportionally on certain simple instances related to the apportionment setting (apportionment being the task of assigning seats to parties in a parliamentary assembly (Balinski
and Young 1982; Brill, Laslier, and Skowron 2018)). Even
though simple proportionality is a rather weak proportional-

Abstract
In this paper we introduce a new voting formalism to support
long-term collective decision making: perpetual voting rules.
These are voting rules that take the history of previous decisions into account. Due to this additional information, perpetual voting rules may offer temporal fairness guarantees
that cannot be achieved in singular decisions. In particular,
such rules may enable minorities to have a fair (proportional)
inﬂuence on the decision process and thus foster long-term
participation of minorities. This paper explores the proposed
voting rules via an axiomatic analysis as well as a quantitative
evaluation by computer simulations. We identify two perpetual voting rules as particularly recommendable in long-term
collective decision making.

1

Introduction

Consider the following simple scenario: A group of ﬁve
friends have a joint dinner every week. Three of them prefer
French food, two of them Indian food. It is apparent that a
fair suggestion would consist of going to French restaurants
60% of the time and to Indian restaurants 40% of the time,
although there is a majority that prefers French food every
single week.
In this simple example it is clear that a majoritarian decision is not desirable, instead a proportional distribution constitutes a fair solution. But how can this form of fairness
be achieved when preferences change over time? Moreover,
is such fairness possible if the available alternatives change
or even if subsequent decisions concern different topics? For
example, consider a company, club, or university department
where collective decisions are repeatedly made on varying
topics. In this paper, we develop voting methods that can
deal with such complex scenarios of perpetual voting. The
central emphasis of this paper is the long-term aspect: instead of considering singular decisions to be made, we view
the current decision in the context of previously taken decisions, the decision history.
The goal of this paper is to introduce a new form of voting
rules—perpetual voting rules—that are suitable in a longterm decision making process and can guide such a pro-

1

This assumption does not necessarily hold for political, highstake decision making, in particular in the presence of extremist
opinions that are harmful to society.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2103

