The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Beliefs We Can Believe in: Replacing
Assumptions with Data in Real-Time Search
Maximilian Fickert,*1 Tianyi Gu,*2 Leonhard Staut,*1 Wheeler Ruml,2
Jörg Hoffmann,1 Marek Petrik2
1

Saarland University, Saarland Informatics Campus, Saarbrücken, Germany
2
Department of Computer Science, University of New Hampshire, USA

Korf (1990), updating state value estimates backwards from
the lookahead frontier at the end of each iteration. The resulting three-phase paradigm – lookahead, update, execute
– has become standard, with perhaps LSS-LRTA* (Koenig
and Sun 2008) being its most popular exemplar.
In this paper, we emphasize additional ways in which a
search can reason about heuristic error. Such concerns are
central to real-time planning, for the agent must commit
to action decisions while the leaf nodes of the search are
still open and it has no immediate information about them
other than their heuristic values. Various methods for reasoning about heuristic error have been proposed for purposes different from real-time search (Stern et al. 2014;
Rose, Burns, and Ruml 2011; Burns and Ruml 2013), that
we outline in some detail further below. For real-time search,
proposals in this direction have a long history in AI research (e.g. (Mutchler 1986; Pemberton and Korf 1994)).
Here we follow up on a recent proposal: the Nancy algorithm
(Mitchell et al. 2019). Adapting earlier ideas by Pemberton
and Korf (1994), Nancy manipulates cost-to-go beliefs, i.e.,
distributions of cost-to-go. Nancy backs up such belief distributions instead of just heuristic values, thereby explicitly
maintaining state-value uncertainty. The belief distributions
are used to guide expansions towards the most informative
states, replacing the conventional A* expansion policy with
one that attempts to minimize risk, i.e., the regret if the action committed to is in fact not the optimal choice.
The key question then becomes where these cost-to-go beliefs actually come from. Instead of a heuristic value, Nancy
requires such distributions at each leaf node. Mitchell et
al. (2019) address this by adopting assumptions. They obtain
the desired beliefs as a function of heuristic value, assuming that (1) the beliefs are Gaussian and (2) their variance
decreases as search gets closer to the goal. While these assumptions seem plausible, and while Nancy has been shown
to outperform LSS-LRTA* in certain situations, the question
arises if it is possible to replace the assumption-based beliefs
with actual data. This is what we explore in this paper.
We develop a data-driven variant of Nancy, DDNancy,
that gathers its beliefs from statistics. Prior to the real-time
search on instances of some domain, we solve example instances of that domain and store pairs of heuristic value h

Abstract
Suboptimal heuristic search algorithms can beneﬁt from reasoning about heuristic error, especially in a real-time setting
where there is not enough time to search all the way to a
goal. However, current reasoning methods implicitly or explicitly incorporate assumptions about the cost-to-go function. We consider a recent real-time search algorithm, called
Nancy, that manipulates explicit beliefs about the cost-togo. The original presentation of Nancy assumed that these
beliefs are Gaussian, with parameters following a certain
form. In this paper, we explore how to replace these assumptions with actual data. We develop a data-driven variant of
Nancy, DDNancy, that bases its beliefs on heuristic performance statistics from the same domain. We extend Nancy and
DDNancy with the notion of persistence and prove their completeness. Experimental results show that DDNancy can perform well in domains in which the original assumption-based
Nancy performs poorly.

Introduction
When an agent has to react to its environment in real time,
there often is not enough planning time to ﬁnd a complete
plan. Instead, partial commitments must be made based on
partial exploration. Real-time heuristic search approaches
this problem by exploiting the information contained in a
heuristic function. Such a search can be viewed as starting
from an initial state and then trying to reach the goal via a
series of search episodes. Within each episode the agent performs an amount of lookahead search limited by runtime or
by the number of expanded nodes, guided by the heuristic
function. The agent commits to the most promising action,
or subsequence of actions, given its lookahead, and iterates
until it reaches a goal state.
One key element in such an arrangement is learning: the
agent needs to revise its heuristic estimation of state values.
Otherwise it can easily get stuck in cycles; in particular, it
will never escape a local minimum unless its lookahead is
large enough to see beyond the minimum’s exits. A natural
form of learning is the backpropagation step proposed by
*

These authors contributed equally to this work.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9827

