The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

System Identiﬁcation with Time-Aware Neural Sequence Models
Thomas Demeester
Internet Technology and Data Science Lab, Ghent University - imec
thomas.demeester@ugent.be

sampling times (Eckner 2014). For example, a patient’s clinical variables may only be measured at irregular moments.
Or, observations from systems in meteorology, economics,
ﬁnance, or geology might only be possible at irregular points
in time. Multivariate data consisting of individual time series with different sample rates are also naturally treated as
unevenly spaced time series. Eckner (2014) further summarizes a number of disadvantages of transforming unevenly
spaced data through resampling into evenly spaced data.
On the other hand, numerical methods such as the RungeKutta schemes (Butcher 2016) lead to highly accurate solutions for dynamical systems with known differential equations, and are by construction able to deal with varying time
intervals.
The main research question that we tackle is therefore the
following. Given a set of dynamical system observations,
how can we build a model that can make use of the full expressive power of general-purpose RNNs, but that naturally
deals with unevenly spaced time series?
It has already been pointed out that the Euler scheme
for numerically solving differential equations bears similarities with artiﬁcial neural network models containing residual
connections (E 2017; Zhu and Fu 2018; Chang et al. 2019).
Naively applying this numerical scheme to RNNs for time
series modeling, would indeed allow correctly dealing with
uneven time intervals. However, unlike traditional RNNs,
such schemes are incremental in nature, due to the residual connections along the time dimension, and therefore illsuited for modeling stationary time series. We will show
how this can be resolved, leading to models that take advantage of both the bounded character and expressive power of
well-known RNNs, and the time-aware nature of numerical
schemes for differential equations.
The paper makes the following contributions:

Abstract
Established recurrent neural networks are well-suited to solve
a wide variety of prediction tasks involving discrete sequences. However, they do not perform as well in the task of
dynamical system identiﬁcation, when dealing with observations from continuous variables that are unevenly sampled in
time, for example due to missing observations. We show how
such neural sequence models can be adapted to deal with variable step sizes in a natural way. In particular, we introduce a
‘time-aware’ and stationary extension of existing models (including the Gated Recurrent Unit) that allows them to deal
with unevenly sampled system observations by adapting to
the observation times, while facilitating higher-order temporal behavior. We discuss the properties and demonstrate the
validity of the proposed approach, based on samples from two
industrial input/output processes.

1

Introduction

The ﬁeld of system identiﬁcation, aiming to build mathematical models of dynamical systems based on observed data,
has been a large active research area for many years, with
several specialized sub-ﬁelds (Ljung 2013). Within this general ﬁeld, the topic of research in this paper is the joint application of numerical methods developed to solve systems of
differential equations, with established techniques from the
ﬁeld of artiﬁcial neural networks.
On the one hand, neural networks provide a highly ﬂexible tool to train unknown parameterized functions to ﬁt
available data (Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville 2016).
In particular, recurrent neural networks (RNNs), and especially variants such as Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM)
networks (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) or Gated Recurrent Units (GRU) (Cho et al. 2014), have become important general-purpose tools for modeling discrete sequential
data, for example in the area of natural language processing
(Young, Hazarika, and Poria 2017). These models are however not naturally suited to deal with sampled time series
where the interval between consecutive samples may not be
constant over time. Yet, so-called unevenly spaced time series occur often in practice, due to missing data after discarding invalid measurements, or because of variations in the

• We introduce an extension of general-purpose RNNs to
deal with unevenly spaced time series (Section 3.1), and
which can be used in higher-order numerical schemes
(Section 3.2). In particular, we propose a solution for the
so-called ‘unit root’ problem related to incremental recurrent schemes, to make the proposed approach suited for
modeling stationary dynamical systems.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We introduce a time-aware and higher-order extension of
3757

