The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Cluster-Weighted Kernel K-Means Method for Multi-View Clustering
Jing Liu,1,2 Fuyuan Cao,1 Xiao-Zhi Gao,3 Liqin Yu,1 Jiye Liang1,∗
1

School of Computer and Information Technology, Shanxi University, Taiyuan 030006, P.R. China
2
School of Software, Shanxi Agricultural University, Taigu 030801, P.R. China
3
School of Computing, University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio 70211, Finland
{jingliu sxu, liqinyu sxu}@hotmail.com, {cfy, ljy}@sxu.edu.cn, xiao-zhi.gao@uef.ﬁ

means the corresponding instances in different views belong to the same cluster. Simply concatenating features
from different views into a single one clustered by traditional clustering algorithms often results in poor performance, since it ignores the heterogeneity of different feature spaces and may lead to dimension curse. Most existing
multi-view algorithms tend to obtain a common clustering
partition by jointly exploiting information of multiple views
without breaking the inherent structure of each view. The
general idea of these algorithms is to guarantee the consistency among different views by using common cluster discrimination information, which can be expressed by common eigenvector matrix for multi-view spectral clustering
(Kumar and Daumé 2011; Kumar, Rai, and Daumé 2011;
Li et al. 2015; Nie, Li, and Li 2016), common coefﬁcient
matrix for multi-view subspace clustering (Yin et al. 2015;
Gao et al. 2015; Wang et al. 2016), and common indicator
matrix for multi-view nonnegative matrix factorization clustering (Akata, Thurau, and Bauckhage 2011; Liu et al. 2013;
Qian et al. 2016) and multi-view k-type clustering (Tzortzis
and Likas 2012; Cai, Nie, and Huang 2013; Xu, Wang, and
Lai 2016).

Abstract
Clustering by jointly exploiting information from multiple
views can yield better performance than clustering on one single view. Some existing multi-view clustering methods aim at
learning a weight for each view to determine its contribution
to the ﬁnal solution. However, the view-weighted scheme can
only indicate the overall importance of a view, which fails to
recognize the importance of each inner cluster of a view. A
view with higher weight cannot guarantee all clusters in this
view have higher importance than them in other views. In this
paper, we propose a cluster-weighted kernel k-means method
for multi-view clustering. Each inner cluster of each view is
assigned a weight, which is learned based on the intra-cluster
similarity of the cluster compared with all its corresponding
clusters in different views, to make the cluster with higher
intra-cluster similarity have a higher weight among the corresponding clusters. The cluster labels are learned simultaneously with the cluster weights in an alternative updating way,
by minimizing the weighted sum-of-squared errors of the kernel k-means. Compared with the view-weighted scheme, the
cluster-weighted scheme enhances the interpretability for the
clustering results. Experimental results on both synthetic and
real data sets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
method.

1

In some cases, the low-quality views (views with high
clustering loss under the common clustering partition) may
degrade the performance if equally using all available views.
To determine the contribution of different views to the ﬁnal clustering, many view-weighted methods for learning
a weight for each view have been proposed. Some methods (Tzortzis and Likas 2012; Xia et al. 2010; Li et al.
2015) multiply each view with a weight factor, and the distribution of the weights is controlled by an extra hyperparameter. Some methods (Nie, Li, and Li 2016; 2017;
Huang, Kang, and Xu 2018) use a self-weighted scheme
to automatically learn a weight for each view without introducing any extra hyper-parameter. Xu, Wang, and Lai
(2016) proposed a method to jointly learn the view weights
as well as the feature weights for high-dimensional feature selection. Xu, Tao, and Xu (2015) proposed a selfpaced smoothed weighting scheme that dynamically assigns
weights to views in clustering process for gradually training
from ’easy’ to ’complex’ views. In general, most existing
view-weighted methods determine the weight for each view

Introduction

Multi-view data widely exist in real-world applications,
where the same set of instances are represented by multiple
distinct feature sets from different perspectives. For example, images can be described by different visual descriptors;
documents may be translated into various languages; and patients are diagnosed by several types of medical examinations. These heterogeneous views usually have consistent as
well as complementary information with each other, which
can be simultaneously learned to get better performance than
learning one single view.
Multi-view clustering has gained much attention in recent years (Chao, Sun, and Bi 2017). It assumes that different views have a common clustering partition, which
∗

Corresponding author: Jiye Liang. Email: ljy@sxu.edu.cn.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4860

