The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Guided Weak Supervision for Action Recognition
with Scarce Data to Assess Skills of Children with Autism
Prashant Pandey,1 Prathosh AP,2 Manu Kohli,3 Josh Pritchard4
1
IIT Delhi, 2 IIT Delhi
IIT Delhi, 4 Florida Institute of Technology
getprashant57@gmail.com, prathoshap@iitd.ac.in, manu.kohli@cogniable.tech, josh@factari.com
3

Abstract
Diagnostic and intervention methodologies for skill assessment of autism typically requires a clinician repetitively initiating several stimuli and recording the child’s response. In
this paper, we propose to automate the response measurement through video recording of the scene following the use
of Deep Neural models for human action recognition from
videos. However, supervised learning of neural networks demand large amounts of annotated data that is hard to come
by. This issue is addressed by leveraging the ‘similarities’ between the action categories in publicly available large-scale
video action (source) datasets and the dataset of interest.
A technique called Guided Weak Supervision is proposed,
where every class in the target data is matched to a class
in the source data using the principle of posterior likelihood
maximization. Subsequently, classiﬁer on the target data is
re-trained by augmenting samples from the matched source
classes, along with a new loss encouraging inter-class separability. The proposed method is evaluated on two skill assessment autism datasets, SSBD (Sundar Rajagopalan, Dhall, and
Goecke 2013) and a real world Autism dataset comprising 37
children of different ages and ethnicity who are diagnosed
with autism. Our proposed method is found to improve the
performance of the state-of-the-art multi-class human action
recognition models in-spite of supervision with scarce data.

a) RGB frame b) Optical ﬂow c) RGB frame d) Optical ﬂow
from Autism for (a).
from Kinetics for (c).
data.
data.

e) RGB frame f) Optical ﬂow g) RGB frame h) Optical ﬂow
from Autism for (e).
from HMDB51. for (g).
data.

Figure 1: Illustration of the similarity between the action
classes in two different datasets in the optical ﬂow domain.
One representative RGB and Flow frame is depicted in each
case: The directional closeness of the optical ﬂow frames
can be observed despite being from unrelated classes. (a)-(b)
‘Arms up’ action in Autism data is close to (c)-(d) ‘Jumping
jacks’ action in Kinetics (Kay et al. 2017) data. (e)-(f) ‘Rolly
polly’ action in Autism data is close to (g)-(h) ‘Flic ﬂac’ action in HMDB51 (Kuehne et al. 2011) data.

are entire swaths of children in dire need of treatment who
remain untreated and unseen. Much of this strain and inaccessibility could be alleviated by incorporating technology
to assist in early screening and automate the assessment and
initial treatment planning process, which is a prerequisite to
deliver individualized behavior treatment to children. Skill
assessment processes for autism typically involves invoking
instructions to a child, monitoring and recording their responses as they occur. This requires a trained clinician to engage with the child, perform mundane repetitive tasks such
as recording the child’s observation and human action responses to ﬁxed set of stimuli. With the advent of tremendously powerful modern Deep learning techniques, one can
hope to automate a lot of such tasks bringing affordability
and improved access in value chain of autism screening, diagnosis and behavioral treatment activities while reducing
the dependence on trained clinicians. Speciﬁcally, in this paper, we examine the application of human action recognition
from video recordings for tracking the physical behavior of
children diagnosed with ASD or otherwise to build cognitive

Introduction
Autism is a complex neuro-developmental disorder that
manifests in children during preschool years (Rapin 1991;
CDC 2019) as deﬁcits in communication, social skills and
stereotypical repetitive behavior. In the last two decades,
the prevalence rate of Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD)
has grown by more than 150% (CDC 2019). It is wellestablished that early intervention services modelled on behavior therapies yield the best outcomes for children diagnosed with autism (Estes et al. 2015) leading to signiﬁcant
societal beneﬁts and cost savings. However, resource and expert scarcity in low resource settings result in delay in the
initiation of the treatment process due to lack of identiﬁcation of the disorder. Families have limited access to diagnostic and evidence-based treatment options because of
affordability, lack of insurance support and non-availability
of physical infrastructure. In the developing countries, there
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
463

