The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

The Missing Data Encoder: Cross-Channel Image
Completion with Hide-and-Seek Adversarial Network
Arnaud Dapogny,1,2 Matthieu Cord,2,3 Patrick Perez3∗
2

1
Datakalab, 114 Boulevard Malesherbes, 75017 Paris
LIP6, Sorbonne Université, 4 place Jussieu, 75005 Paris
3
Valeo.ai, 43 Rue Bayen, 75017 Paris
arnaud.dapogny@datakalab.com

Abstract
Image completion is the problem of generating whole images
from fragments only. It encompasses inpainting (generating a
patch given its surrounding), reverse inpainting/extrapolation
(generating the periphery given the central patch) as well as
colorization (generating one or several channels given other
ones). In this paper, we employ a deep network to perform
image completion, with adversarial training as well as perceptual and completion losses, and call it the “missing data
encoder” (MDE). We consider several conﬁgurations based
on how the seed fragments are chosen. We show that training MDE for “random extrapolation and colorization” (MDEREC), i.e. using random channel-independent fragments, allows a better capture of the image semantics and geometry.
MDE training makes use of a novel “hide-and-seek” adversarial loss, where the discriminator seeks the original nonmasked regions, while the generator tries to hide them. We
validate our models qualitatively and quantitatively on several
datasets, showing their interest for image completion, representation learning as well as face occlusion handling.

Figure 1: Image completion from a small fragment in each
color channel. From left to right: Original image masked
channel-wise; Images generated with proposed missing
data encoder, trained respectively with completion, perceptual+adversarial and perceptual+adversarial+hide-andseek losses (see text for details). In all cases, the image is
completed using only the information within the boxes. The
hide-and-seek loss ensures that there is no trace left of the
generation process in the completed images.

Introduction
In this paper, we investigate the problem of image completion, i.e. the one of generating a complete image from RGB
or single-channel parts of an original image. From a representation learning standpoint, learning to perform image
completion amounts to encoding the underlying structures
of the visual objects. A number of approaches have been
proposed in the literature that try to learn this structure in
an unsupervised fashion, in the hope that the representations
learned by doing so could help other (mostly supervised)
tasks, such as image classiﬁcation, object detection or semantic segmentation. Indeed, for a number of these tasks,
performing a supervised pre-training on a large database
such as ImageNet is beneﬁcial to the accuracy. Yet, collecting such vast amounts of data is tedious, if not impractical.
Following recent advances in the ﬁeld of text understanding (Graves 2013), one can wonder if using the regularity

of the images in an unsupervised fashion would yield such
representations at virtually no cost. This echoes the ideas introduced in (Mathieu, Couprie, and LeCun 2016), where it
is theorized that a strong artiﬁcial intelligence model should
build an inner representation through unsupervised learning. A general idea for doing so is to design a proxy task
for pretraining. The authors in (Doersch, Gupta, and Efros
2015) proposed to predict the relative position of two adjacent image patches from their content. In the same vein, the
authors in (Noroozi and Favaro 2016) trained a network to
solve jigsaw puzzles, created by shufﬂing a grid of patches.
Intuitively, the network has to learn the structure of the objects to correctly predict the patches spatial layout and to
solve the puzzle. Image colorization (Larsson, Maire, and

∗

This work was supported by the French National Agency
(ANR) in the frame of its Technological Research (DS0705) 2016
program (Deep in France, project number ANR-13-CORD-0004).
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10688

