The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Table2Analysis: Modeling and Recommendation of
Common Analysis Patterns for Multi-Dimensional Data
Mengyu Zhou,1 Tao Wang,2∗ Pengxin Ji,2∗ Shi Han,1 Dongmei Zhang1
1
Microsoft Research
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
Beijing, China
{mezho, shihan, dongmeiz}@microsoft.com, {wangt, jpx}@bupt.edu.cn
2

For this purpose in §2 we design an analysis language that
encodes analysis process into a sequence of action tokens.
Each token is either a predeﬁned analysis operation or a
reference to a data-ﬁeld from the given multi-dimensional
dataset. (E.g., “sum of sales by quarter” could be represented
as the sequence [ANA] [Sales] [SEP] [Quarter] [Sum].)
The analysis language enables a structured representation of
various analyses against which learning will be conducted.
Based on such an analysis language, each table is a set of
data-ﬁeld tokens and each analysis is a sequence of operation/reference tokens. We propose Table2Analysis (§3) as a
set-to-sequence framework. At learning stage, it learns from
large amount of (table, analysis) pairs. At recommendation
stage, it generates top-k sequences of analyses for a given
table. The key is language modeling (§2.2) that can be transformed into an action value (Q-value) function that models
the next-action score based on the current state of a given
input set and already generated preﬁx. However, following
facts challenge the learning of such a Q-value function:
• It is an open-vocabulary problem while the tokens are not
discrete nor enumerable. A reference token can refer to
any data ﬁeld of any given table, consisting of a combination of header text and data values. It challenges conventional techniques in typical NLP scenarios.
• The exposure bias (see §3.4) cannot be mitigated by directly applying conventional techniques due to different
success metric. At inference stage, when a preﬁx deviates
from ground truth distribution, it implies the analysis is
already broken. Instead of optimizing next- (and all subsequent) action generation to remedy some BLEU scorelike target, the model training should optimize the chance
of switching to a more promising search branch.
Therefore, in §3.2 we design an input layer of neural network
models to embed semantics of unlimited data-ﬁelds from tables. In §3.4 we run multiple agents using the customized
beam searching with the model itself to collect samples to
bridge the gap between training and inference.
We verify the effectiveness of Table2Analysis on PivotTable recommendation. As shown in Figure 1b, PivotTable
(see §4.1) is a widely used type of analysis. We collect over
121,000 tables from 74,000 real world Excel ﬁles. For recommendation, we achieve over 65% recall at top 1 and 78%

Abstract
Given a table of multi-dimensional data, what analyses would
human create to extract information from it? From scientiﬁc
exploration to business intelligence (BI), this is a key problem to solve towards automation of knowledge discovery and
decision making. In this paper, we propose Table2Analysis
to learn commonly conducted analysis patterns from large
amount of (table, analysis) pairs, and recommend analyses for
any given table even not seen before. Multi-dimensional data
as input challenges existing model architectures and training techniques to fulﬁll the task. Based on deep Q-learning
with heuristic search, Table2Analysis does table to sequence
generation, with each sequence encoding an analysis. Table2Analysis has 0.78 recall at top-5 and 0.65 recall at top-1
in our evaluation against a large scale spreadsheet corpus on
the PivotTable recommendation task.

1

Introduction

For data analysis and information sharing, people create PivotTables, charts (Figure 1), and other various types of visuals
using analytics tools such as spreadsheets and other BI software. Non-trivial interactions and skills are often required to
operate them, which could be difﬁcult and time consuming.
Opportunities exist for enabling automatic recommendation of data analyses (Milo and Somech 2018; Ding et al.
2019) to mitigate this productivity issue. There are large
amount of data analysis artifacts providing both source
dataset and result visuals, e.g. Excel spreadsheets or Power
BI reports. Such artifacts embed commonly conducted analysis patterns across users, denoted as Common Analysis,
including patterns of typical combinations of data semantics (e.g., “sum of sales by quarter” or “average price per
month by region”) and patterns about data characteristics
(e.g., without bucketing, a data-ﬁeld with continuous ﬂoat
numbers in [0, 1] is rarely used as breakdown dimension).
These opportunities motivate us to devise a technology for
learning and recommending Common Analysis patterns.
First, an abstraction is needed to encode the essential analysis components that are invariant to interested visual types.
∗
The contributions by Tao and Pengxin have been conducted
and completed during their internships at Microsoft Research Asia.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

320

