The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

D-SPIDER-SFO: A Decentralized Optimization
Algorithm with Faster Convergence Rate for Nonconvex Problems
Taoxing Pan,1 Jun Liu,2 Jie Wang1∗
1

University of Science and Technology of China, 2 Inﬁnia ML, Inc.
tx1997@mail.ustc.edu.cn
jun.liu@inﬁniaml.com
jiewangx@ustc.edu.cn

their centralized counterparts. These motivate many works
on decentralized algorithms. Nedić and Ozdaglar (2009)
studied distributed subgradient method for optimizing a sum
of convex objective functions. Shi et al. (2014) analyzed
the linear convergence rate of the ADMM in decentralized
consensus optimization. Yuan, Ling, and Yin (2016) studied
the convergence properties of the decentralized gradient descent method (DGD). They proved that the local solutions
and the mean solution converge to a neighborhood of the
global minimizer at a linear rate for strongly convex problems. Mokhtari and Ribeiro (2016) studied decentralized
double stochastic averaging gradient algorithm (DSA) and
Wei et al. (2015) proposed decentralized exact ﬁrst-order algorithm (EXTRA). Both of these two algorithms converge
to an optimal solution at a linear rate for strongly convex
problems. Lian et al. (2017) studied decentralized PSGD (DPSGD) and showed that decentralized algorithms could be
faster than their centralized counterparts. Tang et al. (2018)
proposed D2 algorithm which is less sensitive to the data
variance across workers. Scaman et al. (2018) provided two
optimal decentralized algorithms, called multi-step primaldual (MSPD) and distributed randomized smoothing (DRS),
and their corresponding optimal convergence rate for convex
problems in certain regimes. Assran et al. (2019) proposed
Stochastic Gradient Push (SGP) and proved that SGP converges to a stationary point of smooth and nonconvex objectives at the sub-linear rate.

Abstract
Decentralized optimization algorithms have attracted intensive interests recently, as it has a balanced communication
pattern, especially when solving large-scale machine learning problems. Stochastic Path Integrated Differential Estimator Stochastic First-Order method (SPIDER-SFO) nearly
achieves the algorithmic lower bound in certain regimes for
nonconvex problems. However, whether we can ﬁnd a decentralized algorithm which achieves a similar convergence
rate to SPIDER-SFO is still unclear. To tackle this problem, we propose a decentralized variant of SPIDER-SFO,
called decentralized SPIDER-SFO (D-SPIDER-SFO). We
show that D-SPIDER-SFO achieves a similar gradient computation cost—that is, O(−3 ) for ﬁnding an -approximate
ﬁrst-order stationary point—to its centralized counterpart.
To the best of our knowledge, D-SPIDER-SFO achieves the
state-of-the-art performance for solving nonconvex optimization problems on decentralized networks in terms of the computational cost. Experiments on different network conﬁgurations demonstrate the efﬁciency of the proposed method.

Introduction
Distributed optimization is a popular technique for solving large scale machine learning problems (Li et al. 2014),
ranging from visual object recognition (Huang et al. 2017;
He et al. 2016) to natural language processing (Vaswani
et al. 2017; Devlin et al. 2019). For distributed optimization, a set of workers form a connected computational network, and each worker is assigned a portion of the computing task. The centralized network topology, like parameter
server (Jianmin et al. 2016; Dean et al. 2012; Li et al. 2014;
Zinkevich et al. 2010), consists of a central worker connected with all other workers. This communication mechanism could degrade the performance signiﬁcantly in scenarios where the underlying network has low bandwidth or
high latency (Lian et al. 2017).
In contrast, the decentralized network topology offers better network load balance—as all nodes in the network only
communicate with their neighbors instead of the central
node—which implies that they may be able to outperform

On the other hand, to achieve a faster convergence rate,
researchers have also proposed many nonconvex optimization algorithms. Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) (Robbins and Monro 1951) achieves an -approximate stationary point with a gradient cost of O(−4 ) (Ghadimi and Lan
2013). To improve the convergence rate of SGD, researchers
have proposed variance-reduction methods (Roux, Schmidt,
and Bach 2012; Defazio, Bach, and Lacoste-Julien 2014).
Speciﬁcally, the ﬁnite-sum Stochastic Variance Reduced
Gradient method (SVRG) (Johnson and Zhang 2013; Reddi
et al. 2016) and online Stochastically Controlled Stochastic
Gradient method (SCSG) (Lei et al. 2017) achieve a gradient cost of O(min(m2/3 −2 , −10/3 )), where m is the number of samples. SNVRG (Zhou, Xu, and Gu 2018) achieves
 −3 ), while SPIDER-SFO (Fang et
a gradient cost of O(

∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1619

