The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Deep Mixed Effect Model Using Gaussian Processes:
A Personalized and Reliable Prediction for Healthcare
Ingyo Chung,1 Saehoon Kim,2 Juho Lee,2 Kwang Joon Kim,3 Sung Ju Hwang,1,2 Eunho Yang1,2
1

KAIST, 2 AITRICS, 3 Yonsei University College of Medicine, South Korea
{jik0730, sjhwang82, eunhoy}@kaist.ac.kr, {shkim, juho}@aitrics.com, preppie@yuhs.ac

kind of so-called “population based” models (that is, learning a single model for all patients as in RNN) might fail
to give personalized predictions due to huge variability or
heterogeneity among patients originated from diverse (possibly unobserved) sources such as intrinsic differences of patients due to demographical and biological factors, or other
environmental factors (Marlin et al. 2012; Ng et al. 2015;
Alaa et al. 2016). To demonstrate this issue, we illustrate
in Figure 1 how heterogeneities across patients can impact
the overall performances of population based models. In this
toy simulation (see Appendix for details), we generate a
bunch of patient-speciﬁc time-series f (i) (x) (i is patient index) with some globally shared structure and train the model
with data from limited region (before dashed line). Figure 1
shows some test case. Here we can observe that for the region not used for training (after dashed line), teacher forced
RNN tends to make biased predictions to the average of
training patients. One possible and the easiest solution towards personalization is to model separate functions, one
per patient to model the heterogeneity, but in a multitask
framework to share the common knowledge across patients.
However, deep models typically require large data, making
it very challenging to train separate models for each patient.
Gaussian Process (GP) is another popular model for timeseries as a non-parametric model, hence it might be the
proper choice to separately model each patient. Due to its
probabilistic nature, GP has additional beneﬁt of representing uncertainty, which is also critical in medical problems
for reliable prediction. However, when working with large
amount of data, modeling exact GP gets computationally
challenging since it requires to compute the inverse of covariance matrix across all data points (O(n3 ) in exact inference for n data points), although several approximations
such as (Snelson and Ghahramani 2006; Titsias 2009) have
been proposed at the expense of performance degradation
(We will discuss related multi-task GPs and their computational issues in later sections). Some works such as (Clifton
et al. 2013) have proposed to use separate GP for each timeseries as an alternative, however these models cannot take
advantages from global perspective as simply shown in Figure 1, Personalized GP.
In order to only take beneﬁts from different approaches

Abstract
We present a personalized and reliable prediction model for
healthcare, which can provide individually tailored medical
services such as diagnosis, disease treatment, and prevention. Our proposed framework targets at making personalized
and reliable predictions from time-series data, such as Electronic Health Records (EHR), by modeling two complementary components: i) a shared component that captures global
trend across diverse patients and ii) a patient-speciﬁc component that models idiosyncratic variability for each patient. To
this end, we propose a composite model of a deep neural network to learn complex global trends from the large number
of patients, and Gaussian Processes (GP) to probabilistically
model individual time-series given relatively small number of
visits per patient. We evaluate our model on diverse and heterogeneous tasks from EHR datasets and show practical advantages over standard time-series deep models such as pure
Recurrent Neural Network (RNN).

Introduction
Precision medicine, which aims to provide individually tailored medical services such as diagnosis, disease treatment,
and prevention, is an ultimate goal in healthcare. While
rendered difﬁcult in the past, nowadays it is becoming increasingly realizable due to the advances in data-driven
approaches such as machine learning. Especially, recent
widespread use of Electronic Health Record (EHR), a systematic collection of diverse clinical records of patients, has
encouraged machine learning researchers to explore various clinical inferences (such as heart failure risk prediction (Choi et al. 2016b), sepsis prediction (Futoma, Hariharan, and Heller 2017), and physiological time-series analysis (Dürichen et al. 2015), to name a few) based on the
records of personal medical history to improve the quality
of clinical cares (Lipton et al. 2016; Lipton, Kale, and Wetzel 2016; Che et al. 2018).
As we have seen the recent huge success of deep learning, one of the most popular choices when working with
EHR is to use Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) based models (Lipton et al. 2016; Choi et al. 2016b). However, this
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3649

