The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Pose-Assisted Multi-Camera Collaboration for Active Object Tracking
Jing Li,∗1,3 Jing Xu,*1 Fangwei Zhong,*2 Xiangyu Kong,2 Yu Qiao,4 Yizhou Wang2,5,6
1

Center for Data Science, Peking University
Computer Science Dept., Sch’l of EECS, Peking University
3
Advanced Innovation Center for Future Visual Entertainment(AICFVE), Beijing Film Academy
4
Key Lab. of System Control and Information Processing (MoE), Shanghai; Automation Dept., Shanghai Jiao Tong University
5
Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies, Peking University
6
Deepwise AI Lab
{lijingg, jing.xu, zfw, kong, yizhou.wang}@pku.edu.cn, qiaoyu@sjtu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Active Object Tracking (AOT) is crucial to many visionbased applications, e.g., mobile robot, intelligent surveillance. However, there are a number of challenges when deploying active tracking in complex scenarios, e.g., target is
frequently occluded by obstacles. In this paper, we extend the
single-camera AOT to a multi-camera setting, where cameras
tracking a target in a collaborative fashion. To achieve effective collaboration among cameras, we propose a novel PoseAssisted Multi-Camera Collaboration System, which enables
a camera to cooperate with the others by sharing camera
poses for active object tracking. In the system, each camera is equipped with two controllers and a switcher: The
vision-based controller tracks targets based on observed images. The pose-based controller moves the camera in accordance to the poses of the other cameras. At each step, the
switcher decides which action to take from the two controllers according to the visibility of the target. The experimental results demonstrate that our system outperforms all
the baselines and is capable of generalizing to unseen environments. The code and demo videos are available on
our website https://sites.google.com/view/pose-assistedcollaboration.

Figure 1: The overview of our multi-camera collaboration
system. When the target is visible, the camera uses its visionbased controller to make an action decision. Otherwise, the
camera chooses the pose-based controller. For example, the
vision-based controller of camera 1 fails to track. Thus, it
uses the output action of the pose-based controller instead,
and the useless visual observation is marked as gray.

of targets and obstacles, and other factors that make the observation imperfect. 2) limitation of camera mobility, i.e.,
the camera is only allowed to rotate and unable to shift
as mobile robots do. Hence, it is particularly hard for a
single-camera system to accomplish AOT in complex environments.
We argue that it is desirable to do AOT by deploying multiple cross-view cameras and train them to work collaboratively. Since, the trackers are able to beneﬁt from the complimentary information provided by other cameras. Here,
we extend the single-camera AOT to a Collaborative MultiCamera Active Object Tracking(CMC-AOT) problem, which
aims at coordinating multiple cameras in one system to improve the performance of the active tracker. However, it is
expensive and difﬁcult to learn a general collaborative protocol under the high-dimensional visual observation, especially with the increasing number of cameras.
Therefore, in this paper, we focus on building an efﬁcient
yet effective multi-camera collaboration system for CMCAOT. We propose a “Pose-Assisted Multi-Camera Collab-

Introduction
Active Object Tracking (AOT) is a fundamental and practical skill for an intelligent visual system. It requires that a
tracker be able to control its motion so as to follow a target autonomously. In recent years, AOT has been widely deployed in various real-world applications, such as controlling a mobile robot to follow a moving target for taking cinematic shots (Hong et al. 2018; Luo et al. 2018) or rotating a
3-axis stabilized camera to auto-track a face or a pedestrian.
Applying active tracking in the surveillance scenario, rotating the camera actively, can continuously track the target in long-term. However, there are two factors to prevent
us from developing a practical AOT system for surveillance
scenarios: 1) high complexity of environments, in which
there are occlusion, illumination variations, scale variations
∗

indicates equal contribution
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
759

