The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Asymptotic Risk of Bézier Simplex Fitting
Akinori Tanaka

Akiyoshi Sannai

RIKEN AIP, Keio University
akinori.tanaka@riken.jp

RIKEN AIP, Keio University
akiyoshi.sannai@riken.jp

Ken Kobayashi

Naoki Hamada

Fujitsu Laboratories LTD., RIKEN AIP, Tokyo Tech
ken-kobayashi@fujitsu.com

Fujitsu Laboratories LTD., RIKEN AIP
hamada-naoki@fujitsu.com
respectively. Most numerical optimization approaches (e.g.,
goal programming (Miettinen 1999; Eichfelder 2008), evolutionary computation (Deb 2001; Zhang and Li 2007;
Deb and Jain 2014), homotopy methods (Hillermeier 2001;
Harada et al. 2007), Bayesian optimization (HernandezLobato et al. 2016; Yang et al. 2019)) give a ﬁnite number of points as an approximation of the Pareto set or front.
Since the Pareto set and front usually have an inﬁnite number of points, such a point approximation cannot reveal the
complete shapes of the Pareto set and front. In order to gain
richer information, we consider in this paper a ﬁtting problem of the Pareto set and front.

Abstract
The Bézier simplex ﬁtting is a novel data modeling technique which utilizes geometric structures of data to approximate the Pareto set of multi-objective optimization problems.
There are two ﬁtting methods based on different sampling
strategies. The inductive skeleton ﬁtting employs a stratiﬁed
subsampling from skeletons of a simplex, whereas the all-atonce ﬁtting uses a non-stratiﬁed sampling which treats a simplex as a single object. In this paper, we analyze the asymptotic risks of those Bézier simplex ﬁtting methods and derive
the optimal subsample ratio for the inductive skeleton ﬁtting.
It is shown that the inductive skeleton ﬁtting with the optimal
ratio has a smaller risk when the degree of a Bézier simplex
is less than three. Those results are veriﬁed numerically under small to moderate sample sizes. In addition, we provide
two complementary applications of our theory: a generalized
location problem and a multi-objective hyper-parameter tuning of the group lasso. The former can be represented by a
Bézier simplex of degree two where the inductive skeleton
ﬁtting outperforms. The latter can be represented by a Bézier
simplex of degree three where the all-at-once ﬁtting gets an
advantage.

1

It is known that the Pareto set and front often have skeleton structures that can be used to enhance ﬁtting accuracy.
An M -objective problem is simplicial if the Pareto set and
front are homeomorphic to an (M − 1)-dimensional simplex and each m-dimensional subsimplex corresponds to
the Pareto set of an (m + 1)-objective subproblem for all
0 ≤ m ≤ M − 1 (see (Hamada et al. 2019) for precise
deﬁnition and an example is shown in Figure 1). There are
a lot of practical problems being simplicial: location problems (Kuhn 1967) and a phenotypic divergence model in
evolutionary biology (Shoval et al. 2012) are shown to be
simplicial, and an airplane design (Mastroddi and Gemma
2013) and a hydrologic modeling (Vrugt et al. 2003) have
numerical solutions which imply those problems are simplicial. The Pareto set and front of any simplicial problem can
be approximated with arbitrary accuracy by a Bézier simplex
of an appropriate degree (Kobayashi et al. 2019). There are
two ﬁtting algorithms for Bézier simplices: the all-at-once
ﬁtting is a naı̈ve extension of Borges-Pastva algorithm for
Bézier curves (Borges and Pastva 2002), and the inductive
skeleton ﬁtting (Kobayashi et al. 2019) exploits the skeleton
structure of simplicial problems discussed above.

Introduction

Given functions f1 , . . . , fM : X → R on a subset X of a
Euclidean space RN , consider the multi-objective optimization problem
minimize f (x) := (f1 (x), . . . , fM (x))
subject to x ∈ X(⊆ RN )
with respect to the Pareto ordering deﬁned as follows:
def

x ≺ y ⇐=⇒ ∀i [fi (x) ≤ fi (y)] ∧ ∃j [fj (x) < fj (y)] .
The goal is to ﬁnd the Pareto set and its image, called the
Pareto front, which are denoted by

An important problem class which is (generically) simplicial is strongly convex problems. It has been shown that
many practical problems can be considered as strongly convex via appropriate transformations preserving the essential
problem structure, i.e., the Pareto ordering and the topology (Hamada et al. 2019). For example, the multi-objective
location problem (Kuhn 1967) becomes strongly convex by
squaring each objective function. The resulting problem has

X ∗ (f ) := { x ∈ X | ∀y ∈ X [y ≺ x] }
and
f (X ∗ (f )) :=





f (x) ∈ RM  x ∈ X ∗ (f ) ,

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2416

