The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Exploiting Motion Information from
Unlabeled Videos for Static Image Action Recognition
Yiyi Zhang, Li Niu,∗ Ziqi Pan, Meichao Luo, Jianfu Zhang, Dawei Cheng, Liqing Zhang∗
MoE Key Lab of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
{yi95yi, ustcnewly, panziqi ai, luomcmxg, c.sis, dawei.cheng}@sjtu.edu.cn, zhang-lq@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

man 2016; Mobahi, Collobert, and Weston 2009). Moreover, deep action image recognition approaches (Zhang et
al. 2016; Gao, Xiong, and Grauman 2018) generally require
CNN models pretrained on large-scaled labeled datasets
(e.g., ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009)) to obtain advanced visual representations of static images, while the collection
of such datasets is very expensive and time-consuming. Instead, unsupervised visual representation learning is gaining momentum and attracting many researchers (Zhang,
Isola, and Efros 2017; Doersch, Gupta, and Efros 2015;
Noroozi and Favaro 2016; Gidaris, Singh, and Komodakis
2018; Jayaraman and Grauman 2016; Fernando et al. 2017;
Misra, Zitnick, and Hebert 2016; Lee et al. 2017).

Abstract
Static image action recognition, which aims to recognize action based on a single image, usually relies on expensive human labeling effort such as adequate labeled action images
and large-scale labeled image dataset. In contrast, abundant
unlabeled videos can be economically obtained. Therefore,
several works have explored using unlabeled videos to facilitate image action recognition, which can be categorized into
the following two groups: (a) enhance visual representations
of action images with a designed proxy task on unlabeled
videos, which falls into the scope of self-supervised learning;
(b) generate auxiliary representations for action images with
the generator learned from unlabeled videos. In this paper,
we integrate the above two strategies in a uniﬁed framework,
which consists of Visual Representation Enhancement (VRE)
module and Motion Representation Augmentation (MRA)
module. Speciﬁcally, the VRE module includes a proxy task
which imposes pseudo motion label constraint and temporal
coherence constraint on unlabeled videos, while the MRA
module could predict the motion information of a static action image by exploiting unlabeled videos. We demonstrate
the superiority of our framework based on four benchmark
human action datasets with limited labeled data.

1

In this paper, we focus on static image action recognition with minimum supervision, i.e., only a few labeled action images and no pretrained CNN model. Despite the difﬁculty of this task, we humans are able to recognize the action in static images even after seeing only a few labeled
action images, because our visual cortex can hypothesize
motion signals from static image (Schmid et al. 2013). Inspired by neuropsychology, several works have attempted to
learn motion cues from unlabeled videos to help image action recognition, because a large amount of unlabeled videos
are freely available. These works can be divided into two research lines: (a) Enhance visual representations of action images with a proxy task based on unlabeled videos, which can
capture supervisory signals in unlabeled videos such as temporal coherence (Mobahi, Collobert, and Weston 2009; Hadsell, Chopra, and LeCun 2006a; Jayaraman and Grauman
2016) and temporal order (Misra, Zitnick, and Hebert 2016;
Lee et al. 2017; Srivastava, Mansimov, and Salakhutdinov
2015). This group of approaches are located in the realm of
self-supervised learning, in which the main task is image action recognition and different proxy tasks are designed based
on unlabeled videos; (b) Generate auxiliary representations
for action images with the generator learned from unlabeled
videos. For example, future visual representation and optical ﬂow map are generated from action images in (Vondrick,
Pirsiavash, and Torralba 2016) and (Gao, Xiong, and Grauman 2018; Walker, Gupta, and Hebert 2015) respectively.

Introduction

Video action recognition has achieved competitive performance (Tran et al. 2015; Carreira and Zisserman 2017), but
analyzing videos is computationally expensive. As an alternative approach, static image action recognition is becoming
an active research topic (Sharma, Jurie, and Schmid 2012;
Zheng et al. 2012; Mezghiche, Melkemi, and Foufou 2014;
Vondrick, Pirsiavash, and Torralba 2016; Zhang et al. 2016;
Gao, Xiong, and Grauman 2018).
However, image action recognition usually requires a
large number of labeled action images. Although some image action datasets such as Pascal VOC (Everingham et al.
2010) and Stanford40 (Yao et al. 2011) are available, but
they can only cover a limited number of action categories. In
reality, not all categories have ample training samples, especially for those ”long-tail” catgories (Jayaraman and Grau∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

One question is whether the above two research lines can
be uniﬁed to fully exploit unlabeled videos. In this work,
12918

