The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Solving Set Cover and Dominating Set via Maximum Satisﬁability
Zhendong Lei, Shaowei Cai∗
State Key Laboratory of Computer Science, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Computer and Control Engineering, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
leizd@ios.ac.cn, shaoweicai.cs@gmail.com

Ansótegui, Bonet, and Levy 2013; Narodytska and Bacchus 2014; Martins, Manquinho, and Lynce 2014; Ansótegui
and Gabàs 2017) and incomplete solvers (Cai et al. 2014;
2016; Luo et al. 2017; Lei and Cai 2018). Due to the success of these works, there has been much interest in solving
combinatorial optimization problems by this kind of logical
language (Demirovic and Musliu 2017; Jiang et al. 2018;
Demirovic, Musliu, and Winter 2019).
In real world, WPMS solvers are usually used for solving
problems from some speciﬁc domain. Each speciﬁc problem
has its own characteristics which are important for designing algorithms. However, previous WPMS solvers are usually developed for general purpose and do not exploit the
feature of the instances from speciﬁc domains. In our opinion, exploiting these features in WPMS solving would lead
to more effective solvers for WPMS from speciﬁc domains.
In this paper, we propose a WPMS solver to solve two
closely related NP hard combinatorial optimization problems of importance, namely Set Cover Problem (SCP) and
Dominating Set Problem (DSP). SCP has many applications,
from crew scheduling in railway and mass-transit companies to job assignment in manufacturing and service location (Caprara et al. 1997; Bautista and Pereira 2006). DSP
also ﬁnds valuable applications in many ﬁelds (Hedetniemi
et al. 2003; Aoun et al. 2006; Chalupa 2018). For example,
Shen and Li (Shen and Li 2010) solve the multi-document
problem by encoding this problem to DSP.
Many works have been done to solve SCP and DSP over
the years. For SCP, there are complete algorithms (Caprara,
Toth, and Fischetti 2000), genetic algorithm (Beasley and
Chu 1996), simulated annealing (Jacobs and Brusco 1995)
and local search algorithm (Gao, Weise, and Li 2014). For
DSP, there are ant colony optimization (ACO) (Jovanovic et
al. 2010), swarm intelligence algorithm (Nitash and Singh
2014) and local search algorithm (Wang et al. 2018).
In this work, we formulate SCP and DSP into WPMS
and design a speciﬁc local search algorithm (denoted as
DomSAT) to solve them. The new algorithm contains three
phases: construction, local search and recovery. The main
contributions of this paper are as follows:
First, based on the features of such WPMS instances,
we propose three reduction rules to simplify the instances.

Abstract
The Set Covering Problem (SCP) and Dominating Set Problem (DSP) are NP-hard and have many real world applications. SCP and DSP can be encoded into Maximum Satisﬁability (MaxSAT) naturally and the resulting instances share a
special structure. In this paper, we develop an efﬁcient local
search solver for MaxSAT instances of this kind. Our algorithm contains three phrase: construction, local search and
recovery. In construction phrase, we simplify the instance
by three reduction rules and construct an initial solution by
a greedy heuristic. The initial solution is improved during
the local search phrase, which exploits the feature of such
instances in the scoring function and the variable selection
heuristic. Finally, the corresponding solution of original instance is recovered in the recovery phrase. Experiment results
on a broad range of large scale instances of SCP and DSP
show that our algorithm signiﬁcantly outperforms state of the
art solvers for SCP, DSP and MaxSAT.

Introduction
Many combinatorial optimization problems that arise in the
real world are difﬁcult to solve partly because they present
computational challenges. One of the most effective approach to solve such problems is to ﬁrst model them in a
mathematical or logical language, and then solve them by
applying a suitable algorithm. This paper is concerned with
developing a practical algorithm to solve two optimization
problems modelled in a particular logical language, Maximum Satisﬁability (MaxSAT) .
Given a propositional formula expressed in the Conjunctive Normal Form (CNF), Satisﬁability (SAT) concerns
about satisfying all clauses. MaxSAT is an optimization version of SAT, and its most general form contains both hard
clauses and weighted soft clauses. Such a MaxSAT problem is referred to as weighted Partial MaxSAT (WPMS),
where the goal is to ﬁnd an assignment that satisﬁes all the
hard clauses and maximize the total weight of satisﬁed soft
clauses.
There is a remarkable number of algorithms for (W)PMS
including complete solvers (Davies and Bacchus 2011;
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1569

