The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

MemCap: Memorizing Style Knowledge for Image Captioning
Wentian Zhao,1 Xinxiao Wu,1∗ Xiaoxun Zhang2
1

Lab. of IIT, School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China
2
Alibaba Group
{wentian zhao, wuxinxiao}@bit.edu.cn, xiaoxun.zhang@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

Factual: The plate has a sandwich
with many large french fries.
Positive: A plate of delicious food
including French fries.
Negative: A plate of disgusting food
found at a diner.

Generating stylized captions for images is a challenging task
since it requires not only describing the content of the image accurately but also expressing the desired linguistic style
appropriately. In this paper, we propose MemCap, a novel
stylized image captioning method that explicitly encodes the
knowledge about linguistic styles with memory mechanism.
Rather than relying heavily on a language model to capture
style factors in existing methods, our method resorts to memorizing stylized elements learned from training corpus. Particularly, we design a memory module that comprises a set
of embedding vectors for encoding style-related phrases in
training corpus. To acquire the style-related phrases, we develop a sentence decomposing algorithm that splits a stylized sentence into a style-related part that reﬂects the linguistic style and a content-related part that contains the visual content. When generating captions, our MemCap ﬁrst
extracts content-relevant style knowledge from the memory
module via an attention mechanism and then incorporates the
extracted knowledge into a language model. Extensive experiments on two stylized image captioning datasets (SentiCap and FlickrStyle10K) demonstrate the effectiveness of our
method.

Figure 1: An example of factual image description and stylized image description. The style related words are colored
in red.
integrate factual image content and suitable style-related
phrases. However, some style-related information can not
be directly perceived from the image since such information
is not visually grounded. Under such circumstances, human
beings can still describe the image with desired styles, owing to the ability of association empowered by their prior
knowledge. For instance, when someone is asked to write a
positive sentence for the image shown in Figure. 1, he might
express that the food is delicious according to the association between the positive expression “delicious” and the
noun “food” in prior knowledge, although the actual taste of
the food is not shown in the image. Inspired by this, we explore how to learn the knowledge about linguistic styles and
how to utilize such knowledge for stylized image captioning in a reasonable way, imitating the language expressing
procedure of human beings.
In this paper, we propose a MemCap method for stylized
image captioning. It ﬁrst memorizes the knowledge concerned with phrases that reﬂect the linguistic style, referred
to as style knowledge, and then incorporates such knowledge
into textual descriptions. To be speciﬁc, we design a style
memory module to encode the style knowledge learned from
the training corpus via a set of embedding vectors. However, it is difﬁcult to learn the style knowledge since contentrelated phrases and style-related phrases usually co-exist in a
stylized sentence. To separate the style-related phrases from
training corpus, we develop an algorithm, referred to as sentence decomposing algorithm, to split a stylized sentence
into style-related part and content-related part in an unsuper-

Introduction
The research on image captioning has made remarkable
progress in recent years. Most existing image captioning
models (Vinyals et al. 2015) (Karpathy and Fei-Fei 2015)
(Anderson et al. 2018) focus on generating accurate descriptions, while ignoring the linguistic style of the sentences.
Ideally, a practical image captioning model should not only
describe the visual content accurately, but also be able to
incorporate speciﬁc linguistic style into sentences appropriately. Such stylized image captioning model is particularly
valuable in many scenarios, including generating attractive
image or video titles for better recommendation, or automatically writing image descriptions that are interesting for
children in early education.
For generating high-quality stylized captions conditioned
on an input image, it is signiﬁcantly important to effectively
∗

Corresponding author: Xinxiao Wu
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12984

