The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Simple Pose: Rethinking and Improving a
Bottom-up Approach for Multi-Person Pose Estimation
Jia Li,1 Wen Su,2 Zengfu Wang3∗
2

1
Department of Automation, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
Faculty of Mechanical Engineering and Automation, Zhejiang Sci-Tech University, Hangzhou, China
3
Institute of Intelligent Machines, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei, China
jialee@mail.ustc.edu.cn, wensu@zstu.edu.cn, zfwang@ustc.edu.cn

keypoints are grouped to form multiple human poses based
on the inferred connection information.
Top-down approaches, e.g. (Papandreou et al. 2017; Sun
et al. 2019; Li et al. 2019), usually have complicated structures and low performance-cost ratios. Compared with them,
the bottom-up approaches, e.g. (Newell, Huang, and Deng
2017; Kreiss, Bertoni, and Alahi 2019), can be more efﬁcient
in inference and independent of human detectors. However,
they have to group the keypoints correctly. And the keypoint
grouping (paring or association in other words) can be a
big challenge, resulting in another bottleneck for real-time
usage (Pishchulin et al. 2016; Iqbal and Gall 2016). CMUPose (Cao et al. 2017), PersonLab (Papandreou et al. 2018)
and PifPaf (Kreiss, Bertoni, and Alahi 2019) use the greedy
parsing algorithm to group detected keypoints into individual poses and break through the bottleneck to some extent.
It is worth mentioning that the approach proposed by (Cao
et al. 2017) (referred to as CMU-Pose here for convenience)
is the ﬁrst bottom-up approach to perform the task of multiperson pose estimation in the wild with high accuracy, and
almost in real time. Our approach is mainly inspired by this
work but is more intuitive yet more powerful. Hence, CMUPose is selected to be the baseline approach in this work.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized
as follows: (1) we rethink the encoding of joint association, which is named as Part Afﬁnity Fields (PAFs) (Cao
et al. 2017), and propose a simpliﬁed yet more reasonable
one, which we call body parts, (2) we present an improved
stacked hourglass network with attention mechanisms to
generate high-res and high-quality heatmaps, (3) we design
a novel loss to help the network learn “hard” samples, and
(4) we develop the greedy keypoint assignment algorithm.

Abstract
We rethink a well-known bottom-up approach for multiperson pose estimation and propose an improved one. The improved approach surpasses the baseline signiﬁcantly thanks
to (1) an intuitional yet more sensible representation, which
we refer to as body parts to encode the connection information between keypoints, (2) an improved stacked hourglass
network with attention mechanisms, (3) a novel focal L2 loss
which is dedicated to “hard” keypoint and keypoint association (body part) mining, and (4) a robust greedy keypoint assignment algorithm for grouping the detected keypoints into
individual poses. Our approach not only works straightforwardly but also outperforms the baseline by about 15% in average precision and is comparable to the state of the art on the
MS-COCO test-dev dataset. The code and pre-trained models
are publicly available on our project page1 .

Introduction
The problem of multi-person pose estimation aims at recognizing and localizing the anatomical keypoints (or body
joints) of all persons in a given image. Considerable progress
has been made in this ﬁeld, beneﬁting from the development
of more powerful convolutional neural networks (CNNs),
such as ResNet (He et al. 2016) and DenseNet (Huang et
al. 2017), and more representative benchmarks, such as MSCOCO (Lin et al. 2014).
Existing approaches tackling this problem can be divided into two categories: top-down and bottom-up. The
top-down approaches, e.g. (Chen et al. 2018; Papandreou
et al. 2017; Sun et al. 2019), usually employ a state-ofthe-art (SOTA) detector, such as SSD (Liu et al. 2016),
to capture all the persons from the image ﬁrst. Then, the
cropped persons are resized and fed into the SOTA pose estimator designed for a single person, e.g. (Wei et al. 2016;
Newell, Yang, and Deng 2016; Chen et al. 2018). In contrast,
the bottom-up approaches, e.g. (Papandreou et al. 2018;
Kreiss, Bertoni, and Alahi 2019), directly infer the keypoints
and the connection information between keypoints of all persons in the image without a human detector. Afterwards, the

Related Work and Rethinking
Single Person Pose Estimation
Classical approaches tackling the problem of person pose
estimation are mainly based on the pictorial structures (Fischler and Elschlager 1973; Andriluka, Roth, and Schiele
2009) or the graphical models (Chen and Yuille 2014).
They usually formulate this problem as a tree-structured or
graphical model problem and detect the keypoints based
on hand-crafted features (Chen et al. 2018). Recently, the

∗
Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://github.com/jialee93/Improved-Body-Parts

11354

