The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

FDN: Feature Decoupling Network for Head Pose Estimation
Hao Zhang,1 Mengmeng Wang,1 Yong Liu,1∗ Yi Yuan2
1

Institute of Cyber-Systems and Control, Zhejiang University, China
2
NetEase Fuxi AI Lab
{zjucsezh, mengmengwang}@zju.edu.cn, yongliu@iipc.zju.edu.cn, yuanyi@corp.netease.com

Abstract

Feature Decoupling Module
yaw

Head pose estimation from RGB images without depth information is a challenging task due to the loss of spatial information as well as large head pose variations in the wild.
The performance of existing landmark-free methods remains
unsatisfactory as the quality of estimated pose is inferior. In
this paper, we propose a novel three-branch network architecture, termed as Feature Decoupling Network (FDN), a more
powerful architecture for landmark-free head pose estimation
from a single RGB image. In FDN, we ﬁrst propose a feature decoupling (FD) module to explicitly learn the discriminative features for each pose angle by adaptively recalibrating its channel-wise responses. Besides, we introduce a crosscategory center (CCC) loss to constrain the distribution of the
latent variable subspaces and thus we can obtain more compact and distinct subspaces. Extensive experiments on both
in-the-wild and controlled environment datasets demonstrate
that the proposed method outperforms other state-of-the-art
methods based on a single RGB image and behaves on par
with approaches based on multimodal input resources.

GAP

GAP

GA

rol
l

P

pit
ch

Cross-category Center Loss

Figure 1: Overview of our FDN. The feature decoupling
(FD) module is proposed to achieve the decoupled features
of yaw, pitch, and roll, respectively, from the identical feature map input. GAP denotes global average pooling.
a large extent and get rid of the limitation of devices. Nevertheless, such two-stage methods incur extra error and computation caused by landmark detection process which can
not be neglected.
To tackle these problems, landmark-free methods (Ranjan, Patel, and Chellappa 2017; Ranjan et al. 2017) choose
to regress three pose angles directly using features extracted
from CNN. However, all these landmark-free methods regard head pose estimation as a straightforward regression
or regression with classiﬁcation problem under the assumption that the identical feature is applicable for the predictions
of all three angles. Though existing landmark-free methods
have achieved convincing performance in this manner, using
identical feature is inappropriate as it still suffers from three
main disadvantages. First, the feature subspaces of different
angles are hybrid and non-separable, which leads to degradation of performance as features of yaw, pitch and roll have
complementary but not identical information. Second, the
exclusive features of each angle are not highlighted and are
underutilized, which restricts the model from learning discriminative features for each angle. Third, it is inconsistent
with human behavior as we will not focus on the same areas
twice when asked to judge different pose angles (e.g., yaw
angle vs. pitch angle) respectively from the same image.

Introduction
Facial analysis is one of the most studied topics in the past
decades and plentiful methods have been proposed for various 2D facial problems, such as face detection, face recognition and face alignment. In recent years, 3D facial analysis
has received more and more attention. Being an important
basic of the nonverbal communication of humans, 3D head
pose estimation can be utilized for human-computer interaction, human attention modelling, group behavior analysis,
etc.
Since head pose estimation is a 3D problem, early methods (Martin, Van De Camp, and Stiefelhagen 2014; Meyer
et al. 2015) using depth images can achieve high estimation performance. However, their applications are primarily
limited by device, i.e., RGB-D cameras. Recently, with the
breakthrough of deep convolutional neural networks (CNN),
accurate facial landmark detection methods (Zhu et al. 2016;
Bulat and Tzimiropoulos 2017) promote the performance of
landmark-based head pose estimation from RGB images to
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12789

