The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Spatiotemporally Constrained Action Space
Attacks on Deep Reinforcement Learning Agents
Xian Yeow Lee,1 Sambit Ghadai,1 Kai Liang Tan,1 Chinmay Hegde,2 Soumik Sarkar1∗
1

Department of Mechanical Engineering, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011
2
Tandon School of Engineering, New York University, Brooklyn, NY 11201
{xylee, sambitg, kailiang, soumiks}@iastate.edu, chinmay.h@nyu.edu

A root cause of these safety concerns is that in certain applications, the inputs to an RL system can be accessed and
modiﬁed adversarially to cause the RL agent to take suboptimal (or even harmful) actions. This is especially true
when deep neural networks (DNNs) are used as key components (e.g., to represent policies) of RL agents. Recently,
a wealth of results in the ML literature demonstrated that
DNNs can be fooled to misclassify images by perturbing
the input by an imperceptible amount (Goodfellow, Shlens,
and Szegedy 2015) or by introducing speciﬁc natural looking attributes (Joshi et al. 2019). Such adversarial perturbations have also demonstrated the impacts of attacks on an
RL agent’s state space as shown by (Huang et al. 2017).
Besides perturbing the RL agent’s state space, it is also
important to consider adversarial attacks on the agent’s action space, which in engineering systems, represents physically manipulable actuators. We note that (model-based) actuator attacks have been studied in the cyber-physical security community, including vulnerability of continuous systems to discrete time attacks (Kim et al. 2016); theoretical characteristics of undetectable actuator attacks (Ayas
and Djouadi 2016); and “defense” schemes that re-stabilizes
a system when under actuation attacks (Huang and Dong
2018). However, the issue of adversarial attacks on a RL
agent’s action space has relatively been ignored in the DRL
literature. In this work, we present a suite of novel attack
strategies on a RL agent’s action space.
Our contributions:

Abstract
Robustness of Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) algorithms towards adversarial attacks in real world applications
such as those deployed in cyber-physical systems (CPS) are
of increasing concern. Numerous studies have investigated
the mechanisms of attacks on the RL agent’s state space.
Nonetheless, attacks on the RL agent’s action space (corresponding to actuators in engineering systems) are equally
perverse, but such attacks are relatively less studied in the
ML literature. In this work, we ﬁrst frame the problem as
an optimization problem of minimizing the cumulative reward of an RL agent with decoupled constraints as the budget
of attack. We propose the white-box Myopic Action Space
(MAS) attack algorithm that distributes the attacks across the
action space dimensions. Next, we reformulate the optimization problem above with the same objective function, but with
a temporally coupled constraint on the attack budget to take
into account the approximated dynamics of the agent. This
leads to the white-box Look-ahead Action Space (LAS) attack algorithm that distributes the attacks across the action
and temporal dimensions. Our results showed that using the
same amount of resources, the LAS attack deteriorates the
agent’s performance signiﬁcantly more than the MAS attack.
This reveals the possibility that with limited resource, an adversary can utilize the agent’s dynamics to malevolently craft
attacks that causes the agent to fail. Additionally, we leverage
these attack strategies as a possible tool to gain insights on
the potential vulnerabilities of DRL agents.

Introduction

1. We formulate a white-box Myopic Action Space (MAS)
attack strategy as an optimization problem with decoupled constraints.

The spectrum of Reinforcement Learning (RL) applications
ranges from engineering design and control (Lee et al. 2019;
Tan et al. 2019) to business (Hu et al. 2018) and creative
design (Peng et al. 2018). As RL-based frameworks are increasingly deployed in real-world, it is imperative that the
safety and reliability of these frameworks are well understood. While any adversarial inﬁltration of these systems
can be costly, the safety of DRL systems deployed in cyberphysical systems (CPS) such as industrial robotic applications and self-driving vehicles are especially safety and lifecritical.

2. We extend the formulation above by coupling constraints
to compute a non-myopic attack that is derived from the
agent’s state-action dynamics and develop a white-box
Look-ahead Action Space (LAS) attack strategy. Empirically, we show that LAS crafts a stronger attack than
MAS using the same budget.
3. We illustrate how these attack strategies can be used to
understand a RL agent’s vulnerabilities.

∗

Corresponding Author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4. We present analysis to show that our proposed attack
algorithms leveraging projected gradient descent on the
4577

