The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Exploratory Navigation and Selective Reading
Natwar Modani,1∗ Paridhi Maheshwari,1∗ Harsh Deshpande,2†
Saurab Sirpurkar,3† Diviya,4† Somak Aditya1
1

Adobe Research, 2 Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay
Indian Institute of Technology, Madras, 4 Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee
{nmodani, parimahe, saditya}@adobe.com, {hdeshpande5998, 13sau7, diviya7297}@gmail.com
3

Abstract
Navigating a collection of documents can be facilitated by obtaining a human-understandable concept hierarchy with links
to the content. This is a non-trivial task for two reasons. First,
deﬁning concepts that are understandable by an average consumer and yet meaningful for a large variety of corpora is
hard. Second, creating semantically meaningful yet intuitive
hierarchical representation is hard, and can be task dependent.
We present out system NAVIGATION . AI which automatically
processes a document collection, induces a concept hierarchy using Wikipedia and presents an interactive interface that
helps user navigate to individual paragraphs using concepts.

Introduction
When looking for information on a topic, one might not have
a clear search goal and hence, a well-formed search query.
Consider a US citizen who wants to understand the stand of
the presidential candidates on various issues. Transcripts of
the presidential debates are easily available, and the citizens
can read it to form their opinion. However, there are multiple
lengthy debates and understanding these requires signiﬁcant
effort from the reader. An alternative is to read a news media
analysis, but it is not guaranteed to cover all aspects of the
debate adequately and may be biased. Moreover, it may not
be any shorter or easier to read/understand. Another example
is of a student completing a research project. While they may
ﬁnd several relevant documents, understanding and organizing the information is a challenging task. In such situations,
the ability to ﬁrst understand the information content of documents (exploratory navigation), and then read the parts of
deeper interest (selective reading) would be desirable.
We present our technology NAVIGATION .AI, that decomposes the documents into semantic units and assigns concise, human understandable concepts to each of them. We
use Wikipedia article titles as concepts, and employ GramSchmidt orthonormalization to reduce redundancy amongst
concepts and eliminate irrelevant ones. We then ﬁnd a subset of labels which adequately represent the documents un-

Figure 1: A subset of detected semantic concepts from 2016
presidential debate transcripts. Green nodes denote parent
concepts and blue denotes leaves. Clicking on the node displays the associated paragraphs sequentially.
der consideration with a given number of labels. We leverage
DBPedia (Auer et al. 2007), a structured knowledge base for
Wikipedia, to ﬁnd common ancestors of applicable labels to
further reduce the required number of labels.
An interesting use-case for our framework is to explore
the 2016 presidential debate transcripts. Looking at the
tool’s output for Donald Trump’s statements in 2016 debates, the top topics in his mind seem to be: border control, jobs, tough foreign policies against ISIS-Syria etc. On
the other hand, the most important topics for Hillary Clinton seem to be social security, jobs, election and women’s
issues. We observe that the “dispute” concept (Figure 1) naturally groups many of the disputed topics that both leaders
talk about. Navigating to the “dispute” bubble for Trump and
Clinton, we observe that Trump talks about “Border Control” whereas Clinton discusses about “Immigration Law”
and “Immigration to the US”. Reading the associated paragraphs reveals that Hillary Clinton is talking about families
and children being separated from each other because of the
legal structure, whereas Trump talks about sending back the
criminals - posing contrasting stance on immigration.

∗

These authors contributed equally
Work done while at Adobe
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

13632

