The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

FairyTED: A Fair Rating Predictor for TED Talk Data
Rupam Acharyya,1 Shouman Das,1 Ankani Chattoraj,1 Md. Iftekhar Tanveer2
1

University of Rochester, 2 Comcast Applied AI Research
racharyy@cs.rochester.edu, shouman.das@rochester.edu,
achattor@ur.rochester.edu, mdiftekhar tanveer@comcast.com

essay grading (Alikaniotis, Yannakoudakis, and Rei 2016;
Taghipour and Ng 2016) etc.
To solve such decision making problems, machine learning algorithms are trained on massive datasets that are usually collected in the wild. Due to difﬁculties in the manual curation or adjustment over large dataset, it is likely
that the data capture unwanted bias towards the underrepresented group based on race, gender or ethnicity. Such bias
results in unfair decision making systems, leading to unwanted and often catastrophic consequences to human life
and society. For example, the recognition rates of pedestrians in autonomous vehicles are reported to be not equally accurate for all groups of people (Wilson, Hoffman, and Morgenstern 2019). Matthew et al. (Kay, Matuszek, and Munson 2015) showed that societal bias gets reﬂected in the machine learning algorithms through biased dataset and causes
representational harm for occupations. Face recognition has
been found to be not as effective for people with different
skin tones. Dark-skinned females have 43 times higher detection error than light-skinned males (Buolamwini and Gebru 2018).
In this work, we propose a predictive framework that tackles the issue of designing a fair prediction system from biased data. As an application scenario, we choose the problem of fair rating prediction in the TED talks. TED talks
cover a wide variety of topics and inﬂuence audience by educating and inspiring them. In addition, it consists of speakers
from a diverse community with imbalances in the age, gender and ethnic attributes. The ratings are provided by spontaneous visitors to the TED talk website. A machine learning
algorithm trained solely from the audience ratings will have
a possibility of the predicted rating being biased by sensitive
attributes of the speakers.
It is a challenging problem because human behavior is
driven by numerous factors and hence have huge variability. It is difﬁcult to know the way these factors interact
among each other. In addition, uncovering the true interaction model may not be feasible and often expensive. Even
though the sharing platforms such as YouTube, Massive
Open Online Courses (MOOC), or ted.com make it possible
to collect a large amount of observational data, these platforms do not correct for bias and unfair ratings.

Abstract
With the recent trend of applying machine learning in every
aspect of human life, it is important to incorporate fairness
into the core of the predictive algorithms. We address the
problem of predicting the quality of public speeches while
being fair with respect to sensitive attributes of the speakers,
e.g. gender and race. We use the TED talks as an input repository of public speeches because it consists of speakers from a
diverse community and has a wide outreach. Utilizing the theories of Causal Models, Counterfactual Fairness and stateof-the-art neural language models, we propose a mathematical framework for fair prediction of the public speaking quality. We employ grounded assumptions to construct a causal
model capturing how different attributes affect public speaking quality. This causal model contributes in generating counterfactual data to train a fair predictive model. Our framework
is general enough to utilize any assumption within the causal
model. Experimental results show that while prediction accuracy is comparable to recent work on this dataset, our predictions are counterfactually fair with respect to a novel metric
when compared to true data labels. The FairyTED setup not
only allows organizers to make informed and diverse selection of speakers from the unobserved counterfactual possibilities but it also ensures that viewers and new users are not
inﬂuenced by unfair and unbalanced ratings from arbitrary
visitors to the ted.com website when deciding to view a talk.

1

Introduction

In recent times, artiﬁcial intelligence is being used in consequential decision making. Governments make use of it
in criminal justice system to predict recidivism (Brennan,
Dieterich, and Ehret 2009; Tollenaar and Van der Heijden 2013) which affects the decision about bail, sentencing and parole. Various ﬁrms are also using machine learning algorithms to examine and ﬁlter resumes of job applicants (Nguyen and Gatica-Perez 2016; Chen et al. 2017a;
Naim et al. 2016) which is crucial for the growth of a company. Machine learning algorithms are also being used to
evaluate human’s social skills such as presentation performance (Chen et al. 2017b; Tanveer, Liu, and Hoque 2015),
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
338

