The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference (IAAI-20)

Question Quality Improvement: Deep Question
Understanding for Incident Management in Technical Support Domain
Anupama Ray,1 Csaba Hadhazi,2 Pooja Aggarwal,1 Gargi Dasgupta,1 Amit Paradkar3
1

IBM Research, India, 2 IBM Hungary, 3 IBM T. J. Watson Research Center, Hawthorne

this impacts the user experience of a free-text box where
the expectation is to describe in free natural language the
problem at hand. A more intelligent way would be to automatically discover what the user has already typed in and
nudge them to enter the next most relevant information to
add. The challenge here is to understand the relevant pieces
of information supplied and those missing from the numerous human edits (text addition/deletion) made on a free text
box. Instead, we focus on prompting the user to enter relevant next info, thereby creating a unique user experience.
In this paper we present a system that understands the user
query and reﬂects the understanding as extractions of important attributes on a gamiﬁed User Interface (UI). This creates
inquisitiveness in users that an intelligent system is trying to
understand their query, in turn, motivating them to help the
system. Thus, they add or edit their query to make it complete or more informative. The system relies on grammatical
structure based extractions on deep-parse based slot grammars and predicate argument structures (McCord 1990). The
extracted attributes appear as check-marks on the UI with a
progress bar indicating the quality or strength of the question as shown in Figure 5. This linguistic based gamiﬁcation
happens in real-time to provide users instant feedback and
improves their experience without the burden of mandatory
form-ﬁlling.

Abstract
Technical support domain involves solving problems from
user queries through various channels: voice, web and chat,
and is both time-consuming and labour intensive. The textual queries in web or chat mode are unstructured and often
incomplete. This affects information retrieval and increases
the difﬁculty level for agents to solve it. Such cases require
multiple rounds of interaction between user and agent/chatbot
in order to better understand the user query. This paper
presents a deployed system called Question Quality Improvement (QQI), that aims to improve the quality of user utterance by understanding and extracting important parts of an
utterance and gamifying the user interface, prompting them
to enter the remaining relevant information. QQI is guided
by an ontology designed for the technical support domain
and uses co-reference resolution and deep parsing to understand the sentences. Using the syntactics and semantics in the
deep parse tree structure various attributes in the ontology are
extracted. The system has been in production for over two
years supporting around 800 products resulting in a reduction in the time-to-resolve cases by around 29%, leading to
huge cost savings. QQI being a core natural language understanding and metadata extraction technology, directly affects
more than 8K tickets everyday. These cases are submitted after 50K edits done on the case based on QQI feedback. QQI
outputs are used by other technologies such as search and retrieval, case routing for automated dispatch, case-difﬁcultyprediction, and by the chatbots supported in each product
page.

1

1.1

Challenges

Understanding user queries have various challenges such as
ﬁnding entities and important domain speciﬁc attributes to
be able to solve the issue. The main attributes that we are
trying to extract from query or prompt the user to enter in the
query are: Symptom, Activity, Action, and Advise. These attributes could often be overlapping, for example: symptom
and activity co-occur several times. The other challenges
are presence of long blocks of machine generated text (error messages/logs pasted, or stack traces etc) which are very
difﬁcult to parse given the structure. Bad parse leads to no
output annotation for these machine generated text snippets.
For understanding an unstructured text query and extracting structured attributes, it is important to be able to resolve
co-references, extract relationships between entities and attributes, understand text in colloquial or chat language with

Introduction

Problem solving in technical support domain requires understanding of user queries, so that agents can resolve the case
via debugging at their end. For many debugging scenarios,
agents rely on search tools (Gupta et al. 2018) for ﬁnding
appropriate answers from internal and external knowledge
sources. In the quest to improve the search results, the quality of the input question plays a very important role. Studies
show that poor quality of user questions affects the downstream search accuracy. One way to guarantee the question
quality is to mandate ﬁlling in pre-deﬁned forms. However,
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13196

