The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Synchronous Speech Recognition and
Speech-to-Text Translation with Interactive Decoding
Yuchen Liu,1,2∗ Jiajun Zhang,1,2 Hao Xiong,4 Long Zhou,1,2
Zhongjun He,4 Hua Wu,4 Haifeng Wang,4 Chengqing Zong1,2,3
1

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, CAS
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
4
Baidu Inc., No. 10, Shangdi 10th Street, Beijing, China
{yuchen.liu, jjzhang, long.zhou, cqzong}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
{xionghao05, hezhongjun, wu hua, wanghaifeng}@baidu.com

Abstract

Recognize

Speech-to-text translation (ST), which translates source language speech into target language text, has attracted intensive
attention in recent years. Compared to the traditional pipeline
system, the end-to-end ST model has potential beneﬁts of
lower latency, smaller model size, and less error propagation.
However, it is notoriously difﬁcult to implement such a model
without transcriptions as intermediate. Existing works generally apply multi-task learning to improve translation quality by jointly training end-to-end ST along with automatic
speech recognition (ASR). However, different tasks in this
method cannot utilize information from each other, which
limits the improvement. Other works propose a two-stage
model where the second model can use the hidden state from
the ﬁrst one, but its cascade manner greatly affects the efﬁciency of training and inference process. In this paper, we
propose a novel interactive attention mechanism which enables ASR and ST to perform synchronously and interactively
in a single model. Speciﬁcally, the generation of transcriptions and translations not only relies on its previous outputs
but also the outputs predicted in the other task. Experiments
on TED speech translation corpora have shown that our proposed model can outperform strong baselines on the quality
of speech translation and achieve better speech recognition
performances as well.

1

Translate

everything

is

different

now

ѴϨ
xianzai

ϣܷ
yiqie
෈

Ё
dou

Ϥӎ
butong

T=3

T=4

๜
T=1

T=2

Figure 1: An example of an English speech recognition and
the corresponding translation in Chinese, where the outputs
in two tasks can interact with each other.
rapidly and shown promising performances (Weiss et al.
2017; Bérard et al. 2018; Bansal et al. 2018; Jia et al. 2019;
Sperber et al. 2019).
Despite the advantages, it is notoriously difﬁcult to implement an end-to-end ST model which does not use transcriptions as intermediate, and its performance is generally
limited. Previous studies resort to pretraining or multi-task
learning to improve the translation quality. They either apply a pretrained encoder trained on ASR data, or jointly
train with ASR to obtain a better acoustic model, or with
MT to acquire a better language model (Weiss et al. 2017;
Anastasopoulos and Chiang 2018b; Bérard et al. 2018;
Bansal et al. 2018). However, the basic unit shared between
different tasks is module parameters. Different tasks in this
method cannot utilize information from each other. To alleviate this ﬂaw, several studies propose analogous two-stage
model (Kano, Sakti, and Nakamura 2017; Anastasopoulos
and Chiang 2018a; Sperber et al. 2019). In this model, decoder in the ﬁrst stage performs recognition and generates a
hidden state with which the second decoder conducts translation. Although the translation quality can be improved
with additional information from the ﬁrst decoder, the second decoder needs to wait until the complete transcription
is recognized, greatly limiting the efﬁciency of training and
inference process. In addition, this model can only make the
translation process utilize information from recognition process, but cannot for the other direction.

Introduction

Speech-to-text translation (hereinafter referred to as speech
translation) aims to translate a speech in source language
into a text in target language, which can help people efﬁciently communicate with each other in different languages.
The traditional approach is a pipeline system composed of
an automatic speech recognition (ASR) model and a text machine translation (MT) model. In this approach, two models
are independently trained and tuned, leading to the problem
of time delay, parameter redundancy, and error propagation.
In contrast, end-to-end ST model has potential advantages
to alleviate these problems. Recent works have emerged
∗
This work is done while Yuchen Liu is doing research intern
at Baidu Inc.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8417

