The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Knowledge Transfer Framework for Differentially Private Sparse Learning
Lingxiao Wang, Quanquan Gu
Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles
{lingxw, qgu}@cs.ucla.edu

the modern high-dimensional setting where the problem dimension can increase with the number of observations, all
these empirical risk minimization algorithms fail. A common and effective approach to address these issues is to assume the model has a certain structure such as sparse structure or low-rank structure. In this paper, we consider highdimensional models with sparse structure. Given a dataset
S = {(xi , yi )}ni=1 , where xi ∈ Rd and yi ∈ R are the input vector and response of the i-th example, our goal is to
estimate the underlying sparse parameter vector θ ∗ ∈ Rd ,
which has s∗ nonzero entries, by solving the following 2 norm regularized optimization problem with the sparsity
constraint

Abstract
We study the problem of estimating high dimensional models
with underlying sparse structures while preserving the privacy of each training example. We develop a differentially
private high-dimensional sparse learning framework using
the idea of knowledge transfer. More speciﬁcally, we propose
to distill the knowledge from a “teacher” estimator trained
on a private dataset, by creating a new dataset from auxiliary
features, and then train a differentially private “student” estimator using this new dataset. In addition, we establish the
linear convergence rate as well as the utility guarantee for our
proposed method. For sparse linear regression and sparse logistic regression, our method achieves improved utility guarantees compared with the best known results (Kifer, Smith
and Thakurta 2012; Wang and Gu 2019). We further demonstrate the superiority of our framework through both synthetic
and real-world data experiments.

1

min L̄S (θ) := LS (θ) + λθ22 /2

θ∈Rd

n
−1

subject to θ0 ≤ s,
(1.1)

where LS (θ) := n
i=1 (θ; xi , yi ) is the empirical loss
on the training data, (θ; xi , yi ) is the loss function deﬁned
on the training example (xi , yi ), λ ≥ 0 is a regularization
parameter, θ0 counts the number of nonzero entries in θ,
and s controls the sparsity of θ. The reason we add an extra
2 regularizer to (1.1) is to ensure the strong convexity of
the objective function without making any assumption on
the data.
In order to achieve differential privacy for sparse learning, a line of research (Kifer, Smith, and Thakurta 2012;
Thakurta and Smith 2013; Jain and Thakurta 2014; Talwar, Thakurta, and Zhang 2015; Wang and Gu 2019) studied differentially private learning problems in the highdimensional setting, where the problem dimension can be
larger than the number of observations. For example, (Jain
and Thakurta 2014) provided a differentially private algorithm with the dimension independent utility guarantee.
However, their approach only considers the case when the
underlying parameter lies in a simplex. For sparse linear regression, (Kifer, Smith, and Thakurta 2012; Thakurta and
Smith 2013) proposed a two-stage approach to ensure differentially privacy. In detail, they ﬁrst estimate the support
set of the sparse model parameter vector using some differentially private model selection algorithm, and then estimate the parameter vector with its support restricted to
the estimated subset using the objective perturbation ap-

Introduction

In the Big Data era, sensitive data such as genomic data
and purchase history data, are ubiquitous, which necessitates learning algorithms that can protect the privacy of
each individual data record. A rigorous and standard notion for privacy guarantees is differential privacy (Dwork
et al. 2006). By adding random noise to the model parameters (output perturbation), some intermediate steps of the
learning algorithm (gradient perturbation), or the objective
function of learning algorithms (objective perturbation), differentially private algorithms ensure that the trained models
can learn the statistical information of the population without leaking any information about the individuals. In the
last decade, a surge of differentially private learning algorithms (Chaudhuri and Monteleoni 2009; Chaudhuri, Monteleoni, and Sarwate 2011; Kifer, Smith, and Thakurta 2012;
Bassily, Smith, and Thakurta 2014; Talwar, Thakurta, and
Zhang 2015; Zhang et al. 2017; Wang, Ye, and Xu 2017;
Wang, Gaboardi, and Xu 2018; Jayaraman et al. 2018;
Wang et al. 2019) for empirical risk minimization have been
developed. However, most of these studies only consider the
classical setting, where the problem dimension is ﬁxed. In
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6235

