The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Relation Extraction Exploiting Full Dependency Forests
Lifeng Jin,1∗† Linfeng Song,2† Yue Zhang,3,4 Kun Xu,2 Wei-yun Ma,5* Dong Yu2
1

The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA
2
Tencent AI Lab, Bellevue, WA, USA
3
Institute of Advanced Technology, Westlake Institute for Advanced Study
4
School of Engineering, Westlake Universtiy
5
Academia Sinica

Abstract
Dependency syntax has long been recognized as a crucial
source of features for relation extraction. Previous work considers 1-best trees produced by a parser during preprocessing.
However, error propagation from the out-of-domain parser
may impact the relation extraction performance. We propose
to leverage full dependency forests for this task, where a
full dependency forest encodes all possible trees. Such representations of full dependency forests provide a differentiable connection between a parser and a relation extraction model, and thus we are also able to study adjusting the
parser parameters based on end-task loss. Experiments on
three datasets show that full dependency forests and parser
adjustment give signiﬁcant improvements over carefully designed baselines, showing state-of-the-art or competitive performances on biomedical or newswire benchmarks.

1

Figure 1: (a) 1-best dependency tree and (b) 3-dimensional
full dependency forest for a biomedical sentence. Associated
mentions are in different colors. Phrase “calcium modulated
cyclases” are broken in the 1-best tree, because “modulated”
and “calcium” are erroneously treated as the sentence main
verb and a modiﬁer of the main subject, respectively.

Introduction

As a central task in automatically extracting information, relation extraction (Chinchor, 1998) aims to determine the relation between a pair of entity mentions. It has been shown
to be useful to general-purpose natural language understanding and other downstream tasks, such as knowledge-base
completion (Surdeanu et al., 2012; Riedel et al., 2013) and
KBQA (Yih et al., 2015; Xu et al., 2016; Yu et al., 2017).
In the biomedical domain, it can help doctors make accurate
decisions by mining supportive or contradictory evidences
from recently published research articles (Quirk and Poon,
2017; Peng et al., 2017). This is important as there are thousands of new medical articles released everyday, making it
impossible to track them manually.
Syntactic features have been shown useful for relation extraction. Early work utilized surface features (Mooney and
Bunescu, 2006) or shallow syntactic information (e.g. baseNP chunks) (Zhou et al., 2005). Subsequent research (Culotta and Sorensen, 2004; Bunescu and Mooney, 2005; Jiang
and Zhai, 2007; Zhou et al., 2007; Nguyen, Moschitti, and
Riccardi, 2009) suggested using syntax trees for better capturing long-range dependencies (e.g. via kernel functions).

Recent work (Xu et al., 2015; Liu et al., 2015; Miwa and
Bansal, 2016; Zhang, Qi, and Manning, 2018; Fu, Li, and
Ma, 2019) adopting neural models also saw improvements
when incorporating syntactic information into the models.
In addition to the news domain, syntax is also crucial for
relation extraction in biomedical domain (Quirk and Poon,
2017; Peng et al., 2017; Song et al., 2018), and one important reason is that biomedical sentences usually contain
more domain-speciﬁc words (e.g. new medicines, molecules
and gene IDs) than newswire text. These words introduce
more data sparsity, hindering the effectiveness of surface
features. Compared with sequential surface-level structures,
syntax helps to model word-to-word relations by drawing
direct connections between distant yet syntactically related
words, and thus capturing informative structural knowledge
than surface features.
Existing syntax-based relation extraction models, however, can suffer from two major issues. First, they take the
1-best trees generated during preprocessing, and thus error
propagation is introduced because of parsing mistakes. This

∗

Work done when L. Jin and W. Ma were at Tencent AI Lab.
Equal contribution
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

8034

