The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

JEC-QA: A Legal-Domain Question Answering Dataset
Haoxi Zhong,∗1 Chaojun Xiao,∗1 Cunchao Tu,1 Tianyang Zhang,2 Zhiyuan Liu,†1 Maosong Sun1
1
Department of Computer Science and Technology
Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
2
Beijing Powerlaw Intelligent Technology Co., Ltd., China
zhonghaoxi@yeah.net, {xcjthu, tucunchao}@gmail.com, zty@powerlaw.ai, {lzy, sms}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

Knowledge-Driven Question: Which of the following
belong to the “property” of Civil Law?
Option:
× A. Trademark. × B. The star on the sky.
× C. Gold teeth.  D. Fish in the pond.

We present JEC-QA, the largest question answering dataset in
the legal domain, collected from the National Judicial Examination of China. The examination is a comprehensive evaluation of professional skills for legal practitioners. College
students are required to pass the examination to be certiﬁed
as a lawyer or a judge. The dataset is challenging for existing question answering methods, because both retrieving relevant materials and answering questions require the ability
of logic reasoning. Due to the high demand of multiple reasoning abilities to answer legal questions, the state-of-the-art
models can only achieve about 28% accuracy on JEC-QA,
while skilled humans and unskilled humans can reach 81%
and 64% accuracy respectively, which indicates a huge gap
between humans and machines on this task. We will release
JEC-QA and our baselines to help improve the reasoning ability of machine comprehension models. You can access the
dataset from http://jecqa.thunlp.org/.

Case-Analysis Question: Alice owed Bob 3,000 yuan.
Alice proposed to pay back with 10,000 yuan of counterfeit money. Bob agreed and accepted it. Which
crimes did Alice commit?
Option:
 A. Crime of selling counterfeit money.
× B. Crime of using counterfeit money.
× C. Crime of embezzlement.
× D. Alice did not constitute a crime.

Table 1: Two typical examples of KD-questions and CAquestions in LQA. All examples we show in the paper are
translated from Chinese for illustration.

Introduction
Legal Question Answering (LQA) aims to provide explanations, advice or solutions for legal issues. A qualiﬁed
LQA system can not only provide a professional consulting service for unskilled humans but also help professionals to improve work efﬁciency and analyze real cases more
accurately, which makes LQA an important NLP application in the legal domain. Recently, many researchers attempt to build LQA systems with machine learning techniques (Fawei et al. 2018) and neural network (Do et al.
2017). Despite these efforts in employing advanced NLP
models, LQA is still confronted with the following two major challenges. The ﬁrst is that there is less qualiﬁed LQA
dataset which limits the research. The second is that the
cases and questions in the legal domain are very complex
and rigorous. As shown in Table 1, most questions in LQA
can be divided into two typical types: the knowledge-driven
questions (KD-questions) and case-analysis questions (CAquestions). KD-questions focus on the understanding of spe-

ciﬁc legal concepts, while CA-questions concentrate more
on the analysis of real cases. Both types of questions require
sophisticated reasoning ability and text comprehension ability, which makes LQA a hard task in NLP.
To push forward the development of LQA, we present
JEC-QA in this paper, the largest and more challenging LQA
dataset. JEC-QA collects questions from the National Judicial Examination of China (NJEC) and websites for the examination. NJEC is the legal professional certiﬁcation examination for those who want to be a lawyer or a judge in
China. Every year, only around 10% of participants can pass
the exam, proving it difﬁcult even for skilled humans.
There are three main properties of JEC-QA: (1) JECQA contains 26,365 multiple-choice questions in total, with
four options for each question. The number of questions in
JEC-QA is 50 times larger than the previous largest LQA
dataset (Kim et al. 2016). (2) JEC-QA provides a database
including all the legal knowledge required by the examination. The database is collected from the National Uniﬁed
Legal Professional Qualiﬁcation Examination Counseling
Book and Chinese legal provisions. (3) JEC-QA provides
extra labels for questions, including the type of questions
(KD-questions or CA-questions) and the reasoning abilities

∗
Indicates equal contribution. The order is determined by dice
rolling.
†
Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9701

