The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Semantics-Aligned Representation Learning for Person Re-Identiﬁcation
Xin Jin,1∗ Cuiling Lan,2† Wenjun Zeng,2 Guoqiang Wei,1 Zhibo Chen1†

University of Science and Technology of China1 Microsoft Research Asia2
{jinxustc, wgq7441}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {culan, wezeng}@microsoft.com, chenzhibo@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Person re-identiﬁcation (reID) aims to match person images
to retrieve the ones with the same identity. This is a challenging task, as the images to be matched are generally semantically misaligned due to the diversity of human poses
and capture viewpoints, incompleteness of the visible bodies
(due to occlusion), etc. In this paper, we propose a framework that drives the reID network to learn semantics-aligned
feature representation through delicate supervision designs.
Speciﬁcally, we build a Semantics Aligning Network (SAN)
which consists of a base network as encoder (SA-Enc) for reID, and a decoder (SA-Dec) for reconstructing/regressing the
densely semantics aligned full texture image. We jointly train
the SAN under the supervisions of person re-identiﬁcation
and aligned texture generation. Moreover, at the decoder, besides the reconstruction loss, we add Triplet ReID constraints
over the feature maps as the perceptual losses. The decoder
is discarded in the inference and thus our scheme is computationally efﬁcient. Ablation studies demonstrate the effectiveness of our design. We achieve the state-of-the-art performances on the benchmark datasets CUHK03, Market1501,
MSMT17, and the partial person reID dataset Partial REID.

1

‫ܣ‬

‫ܣ‬

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Challenges in person reID: (a) Spatial misalignment; (b) Inconsistency of the visible body regions/semantics.
in Figure 1 (a) shows, the spatial position A which corresponds to person leg in the ﬁrst image corresponds to person
abdomen in the second image. (2) Inconsistency of visible
body regions/semantics: since a person is captured through
a 2D projection, only a portion of the 3D surface of a person is visible/projected in an image. The visible body regions/semantics across images are not consistent. As shown
in Figure 1(b), front side of a person is visible in one image
and invisible in another one.
Alignment: Deep learning methods can deal with such
diversities and misalignment to some extent but it is not
enough. In recent years, many approaches explicitly exploit
human pose/landmark information to achieve coarse alignment and they have demonstrated their superiority for person reID (Su et al. 2017; Zheng et al. 2017; Yao et al.
2017; Li et al. 2017; Zhao et al. 2017; Wei et al. 2017;
Suh et al. 2018). During the inference, these part detection
sub-networks are usually required which increases the computational complexity. Besides, the body-part alignment is
coarse and there is still spatial misalignment within the parts
(Zhang et al. 2019). To achieve ﬁne-granularity spatial alignment, based on estimated dense semantics (Güler, Neverova,
and Kokkinos 2018), Zhang et al. warp the input person image to a canonical UV coordinate system to have densely
semantics aligned images as inputs for reID (Zhang et al.
2019). However, the invisible body regions result in many
holes in the warped images and thus the inconsistency of

Introduction

Person re-identiﬁcation (reID) aims to identify/match persons in different places, times, or camera views. There are
large variations in terms of the human poses, capturing
view points, incompleteness of the bodies (due to occlusion). These result in semantics misalignment across 2D
images which makes reID challenging (Shen et al. 2015;
Varior et al. 2016; Subramaniam, Chatterjee, and Mittal
2016; Su et al. 2017; Zheng et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2017;
Yao et al. 2017; Li et al. 2017; Zhao et al. 2017; Wei et
al. 2017; Zheng, Zheng, and Yang 2018; Ge et al. 2018;
Suh et al. 2018; Qian et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2019).
Semantics misalignment can be interpreted from two aspects. (1) Spatial semantics misalignment: the same spatial
position across images may correspond to different semantics of human body or even different objects. As the example
∗

This work was done when Xin Jin was an intern at MSRA.
Corresponding Author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

11173

