The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Light Multi-Segment Activation for Model Compression
Zhenhui Xu,1∗ Guolin Ke,2∗ Jia Zhang,2 Jiang Bian,2 Tie-Yan Liu2
1

Peking University, 2 Microsoft Research
zhenhui.xu@pku.edu.cn, {guolin.ke, jia.zhang, jiang.bian, tie-yan.liu}@microsoft.com

and storage cost but can endure slightly-reduced model1 accuracy.
Consequently, many studies have been paying attention
to producing compact and fast NN models with maintaining acceptable model performance. In detail, there are two
active directions investigated model compression through
pruning (LeCun, Denker, and Solla 1990; Hassibi and Stork
1993; Han et al. 2015; Li et al. 2016; Frankle and Carbin
2019) or quantizing (Courbariaux, Bengio, and David 2015;
Rastegari et al. 2016; Mellempudi et al. 2017) the trained
large NN models into squeezed ones with trimmed redundancy but preserved accuracy. More recently, increasing
efforts explored Knowledge Distillation (Hinton, Vinyals,
and Dean 2015) to obtain compact NN models by training
them with the supervision from well-trained larger NN models (Polino, Pascanu, and Alistarh 2018; Wang et al. 2018;
Mishra and Marr 2018; Hubara et al. 2017; Luo et al. 2016;
Wu et al. 2016; Zhu et al. 2016; Sau and Balasubramanian
2016). Compared with directly training a compressed model
from scratch merely using the ground truth, the supervision in terms of soft distributed representations on the output layer of the large teacher model can even signiﬁcantly
enhance the effectiveness of the resulting compact student
model. In practice, nevertheless, it is quite difﬁcult to produce the compressed student model that can yield similar
effectiveness to the complex teacher model, essential due to
the limited expressiveness ability of the compressed one in
terms of the strictly-restricted parameter size.
Intuitively, to enhance the power of the compressed
model, it is necessary to increase its expressiveness ability.
However, traditional approaches to introduce more layers or
hidden units into the model can easily violate the strict restrictions on the model size. Fortunately, besides the neuron
number, the nonlinear transformation, in terms of the activation, within the NN model plays an equally-important role
in reﬂecting the expressiveness ability. As pointed out by
(Montufar et al. 2014), an NN model that uses multi-layer
ReLU or other piecewise linear activation as the activation is
still essentially a complex piecewise linear function. Moreover, the number of linear regions produced by an NN model
depends on not only its model size but also its activations.

Abstract
Model compression has become necessary when applying
neural networks (NN) into many real application tasks that
can accept slightly-reduced model accuracy but with strict
tolerance to model complexity. Recently, Knowledge Distillation, which distills the knowledge from well-trained and
highly complex teacher model into a compact student model,
has been widely used for model compression. However, under
the strict requirement on the resource cost, it is quite challenging to make student model achieve comparable performance with the teacher one, essentially due to the drasticallyreduced expressiveness ability of the compact student model.
Inspired by the nature of the expressiveness ability in NN,
we propose to use multi-segment activation, which can signiﬁcantly improve the expressiveness ability with very little
cost, in the compact student model. Speciﬁcally, we propose a
highly efﬁcient multi-segment activation, called Light Multisegment Activation (LMA), which can rapidly produce multiple linear regions with very few parameters by leveraging
the statistical information. With using LMA, the compact student model is capable of achieving much better performance
effectively and efﬁciently, than the ReLU-equipped one with
same model complexity. Furthermore, the proposed method
is compatible with other model compression techniques, such
as quantization, which means they can be used jointly for better compression performance. Experiments on state-of-the-art
NN architectures over the real-world tasks demonstrate the
effectiveness and extensibility of the LMA.

Introduction
Neural Network (NN) has become a widely-used model in
many real-world tasks, such as image classiﬁcation, translation, speech recognition, etc. In the meantime, the increasing size and complexity of the advanced NN models have
raised a critical challenge (Wang et al. 2018) in applying
them into many real application tasks, which can accept appropriate performance drop with very extremely-limited tolerance to high model complexity. Running NN models on
mobile devices and embedded systems are emerging examples that make every effort to avoid expensive computation
∗
Equal Contribution. This work was done while the ﬁrst author
was visiting Microsoft Research.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Unless otherwise stated, the term “model” used in this paper
refers to the Neural Network model.

6542

