The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Improved Subsampled Randomized Hadamard Transform for Linear SVM
Zijian Lei

Liang Lan

Department of Computer Science,
Hong Kong Baptist University,
Hong Kong SAR, China
cszjlei@comp.hkbu.edu.hk

Department of Computer Science,
Hong Kong Baptist University,
Hong Kong SAR, China
lanliang@comp.hkbu.edu.hk

et al. 1999) etc. However, these traditional dimensionality reduction methods are computationally expensive which
makes them not suitable for big data. Recently, random projection (Bingham and Mannila 2001) that projects a highdimensional feature vector x ∈ Rd into a low-dimensional
 ∈ Rr (r  d) using a random orthonormal mafeature x
 = RT x. Since random projectrix R ∈ Rd×r . Namely, x
tion methods are (1) computationally efﬁcient while maintaining accurate results; (2) simple to implement in practice; and (3) easy to analyze (Mahoney and others 2011;
Xu et al. 2017), they have attracted signiﬁcant research attentions in recent years.

Abstract
Subsampled Randomized Hadamard Transform (SRHT), a
popular random projection method that can efﬁciently project
a d-dimensional data into r-dimensional space (r  d)
in O(dlog(d)) time, has been widely used to address the
challenge of high-dimensionality in machine learning. SRHT
works by rotating the input data matrix X ∈ Rn×d by Randomized Walsh-Hadamard Transform followed with a subsequent uniform column sampling on the rotated matrix. Despite the advantages of SRHT, one limitation of SRHT is
that it generates the new low-dimensional embedding without considering any speciﬁc properties of a given dataset.
Therefore, this data-independent random projection method
may result in inferior and unstable performance when used
for a particular machine learning task, e.g., classiﬁcation.
To overcome this limitation, we analyze the effect of using
SRHT for random projection in the context of linear SVM
classiﬁcation. Based on our analysis, we propose importance
sampling and deterministic top-r sampling to produce effective low-dimensional embedding instead of uniform sampling SRHT. In addition, we also proposed a new supervised
non-uniform sampling method. Our experimental results have
demonstrated that our proposed methods can achieve higher
classiﬁcation accuracies than SRHT and other random projection methods on six real-life datasets.

Classiﬁcation is one of the fundamental machine learning tasks. In the era of big data, huge amounts of highdimensional data become common in a wide variety of
applications. As the dimensionality of the data for reallife classiﬁcation tasks has increased dramatically in recent
years, it is essential to develop accurate and efﬁcient classiﬁcation algorithms for high-dimensional data.
One of the most popular methods to address the highdimensionality challenge is dimensionality reduction. It allows the classiﬁcation problems to be efﬁciently solved in
a lower dimensional space. Popular dimensionality reduction methods includes Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
(Jolliffe 2011), Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) (Mika

The theoretical foundation of random projection is the
Johnson-Lindenstrauss Lemma (JL lemma) (Johnson, Lindenstrauss, and Schechtman 1986). JL lemma proves that
in Euclidean space, high-dimensional data can be randomly
projected into lower dimensional space while the pairwise
distances between all data points are preserved with a high
probability. Based on the JL lemma, several different ways
are proposed for constructing the random matrix R: (1)
Gaussian Matrix (Dasgupta and Gupta 1999): each entry
in R is generated from a Gaussian distribution with mean
equals to 0 and variance equals to d1 ; (2) Achlioptas matrix (Achlioptas 2003): each entry in R is generated from
{−1, 0, 1} from a discrete distribution. This method generates a sparse random matrix R. Therefore it requires less
memory and computation cost; (3) sparse embedding matrix (or called count sketch matrix) (Clarkson and Woodruff
2017) and its similar variant feature hashing (Weinberger et
al. 2009; Freksen, Kamma, and Larsen 2018): for each row
R, only one column is randomly selected and assign either 1
or −1 with probability 0.5 to this entry; and (4) Subsampled
Randomized Hadamard Transform (SRHT) (Tropp 2011):
It uses a highly structured matrix R for random projection.
The procedure of SRHT can be summarized as follows: It
ﬁrst rotates the input matrix X ∈ Rn×d (n is the number of
samples, d is the dimensionality of the data) by Randomized
Walsh-Hadamard Transform and then uniformly sampling r
columns from the rotated matrix. More details of SRHT will
be discussed in next section.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Although random projection methods have attracted a
great deal of research attention in recent years (Sarlos

Introduction

4519

