The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Coarse-to-Fine Adaptive Network for Appearance-Based Gaze Estimation
Yihua Cheng,1 Shiyao Huang,2 Fei Wang,2 Chen Qian,2 Feng Lu1,3,4∗
1

State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, SCSE, Beihang University, China
2
SenseTime Co., Ltd. 3 Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
4
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data-Based Precision Medicine, Beihang University, China
{yihua c, lufeng}@buaa.edu.cn, {huangshiyao, wangfei, qianchen}@sensetime.com

Abstract

&RDUVHJUDLQHG

Human gaze is essential for various appealing applications.
Aiming at more accurate gaze estimation, a series of recent
works propose to utilize face and eye images simultaneously.
Nevertheless, face and eye images only serve as independent
or parallel feature sources in those works, the intrinsic correlation between their features is overlooked. In this paper we
make the following contributions: 1) We propose a coarseto-ﬁne strategy which estimates a basic gaze direction from
face image and reﬁnes it with corresponding residual predicted from eye images. 2) Guided by the proposed strategy,
we design a framework which introduces a bi-gram model
to bridge gaze residual and basic gaze direction, and an attention component to adaptively acquire suitable ﬁne-grained
feature. 3) Integrating the above innovations, we construct a
coarse-to-ﬁne adaptive network named CA-Net and achieve
state-of-the-art performances on MPIIGaze and EyeDiap.

&RDUVHWRILQH
&11

݃௕
%DVLF'

݃௕

݃

݃௥
&11

݃௥

5HVLGXDO

)LQHJUDLQHG

2XWSXW݃ ൌ ݃௕ ൅ ݃௥

Figure 1: The process of coarse-to-ﬁne strategy. We extract
coarse-grained feature from face image to estimate basic
gaze direction gb and extract ﬁne-grained feature from eye
images to estimate gaze residual gr . We use gr to reﬁne gb
and acquire the outputted gaze direction g.

Introduction

a network to estimate gaze directions from eye images. Afterwards face images are put forward (Zhang et al. 2017a).
Recently, methods simultaneously utilizing face and eye images achieve even better results (Chen and Shi 2018). Nevertheless, previous methods treat face and eye images only
as independent or parallel feature sources, thus neglecting
their intrinsic relationship at the level of feature granularity.
In fact, eye image provide ﬁne-grained feature focusing on
gaze, while face image supplies coarse-grained feature with
richer information.
To make full use of the feature relationship between face
and eyes, we propose a coarse-to-ﬁne strategy in this paper, which achieve state-of-the-art performances on the most
common benchmarks. The core idea of proposed coarse-toﬁne strategy is to estimate a basic gaze direction from
face image and reﬁne it with corresponding residual predicted from eye images. Speciﬁcally, since face image carries richer information than eye images, we utilize it to estimate an approximation of gaze direction. Then we extract
ﬁne-grained feature from eye images to reﬁne the basic gaze
direction and ﬁnally acquire coarse-to-ﬁne gaze direction.
As shown in Figure 1, we ﬁrst design a CNN to extract coarse-grained feature from face image and predict the
basic gaze direction. Next, another CNN is set up to extract the ﬁne-grained feature from eye images and generate

Human gaze implicates important cues for applications such
as saliency detection (Alshawi, Long, and AlRegib 2018),
human-computer interaction (Zhang, Sugano, and Bulling
2017) and virtual reality (Patney et al. 2016).
Gaze estimation methods can be divided into modelbased methods and appearance-based methods. Modelbased methods generally achieve accurate gaze estimation
with dedicated devices, but are mostly limited to laboratory
environment due to short working distance (typically within
60cm) and high failure rate in the wild. Appearance-based
methods attract much attention recently, they require only a
webcam to capture images and directly learn the mapping
from images to gaze directions. As human eye appearance
can be inﬂuenced by various factors in the wild such as head
pose, CNN-based methods are proposed and signiﬁcantly
outperform classical methods thanks to CNN’s superior ability in learning very complex mapping functions.
CNN-based methods estimate gaze directions from face
or eye images. Zhang et al. (Zhang et al. 2015) ﬁrst propose
∗

Feng Lu is the Corresponding Author.
This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation
of China (NSFC) under Grant 61972012.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10623

