The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

HDDL: An Extension to PDDL for Expressing Hierarchical Planning Problems
Daniel Höller,1 Gregor Behnke,1 Pascal Bercher,1∗ Susanne Biundo,1
Humbert Fiorino,2 Damien Pellier,2 Ron Alford3
1

Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Ulm University, 89081 Ulm, Germany
2
University Grenoble Alpes, LIG, F-38000 Grenoble, France
3
The MITRE Corporation, McLean, Virginia, USA
{daniel.hoeller, gregor.behnke, susanne.biundo}@uni-ulm.de, pascal.bercher@alumni.uni-ulm.de
{humbert.ﬁorino, damien.pellier}@imag.fr
ralford@mitre.org
Höller, and Biundo 2018a; Schreiber et al. 2019); and some,
like the one by Shivashankar, Alford, and Aha (2017) deﬁne
an entirely new type of hierarchical planning problems.
Even systems restricted to the maybe best-known and
most basic hierarchical formalism, Hierarchical Task Network (HTN) planning, do not share a common input language, though the differences between the input languages
are sometimes rather small. To the best of our knowledge, the hierarchical language introduced for the ﬁrst International Planning Competition (IPC) by McDermott et
al. (1998) is not supported by any recent system.
The lack of a common language has several consequences
for the ﬁeld. First, it makes comparison between systems
tedious due to the translation process. It has been identiﬁed as main problem for a hierarchical track at the IPC
2020 (Behnke et al. 2019). Second – and even more important – it makes the use of hierarchical planning from a practical perspective laborious, because it is not possible to model
a problem at hand and try which system performs best on
it. Selecting the system in beforehand requires much insight
into the systems. A common input language would make the
comparison of systems easier, it could foster a common set
of supported features and result in a common benchmark set.
In this paper, we propose the Hierarchical Domain Deﬁnition Language (HDDL) as common input language for hierarchical planning problems. It is widely based on the input
language of PANDA, the framework underlying the planning systems by Bercher et al. (2017), Höller et al. (2018;
2019), and Behnke, Höller, and Biundo (2018a; 2019a;
2019b), i.e. there is a large set of planners based on (1)
search in plan space, (2) progression search and (3) a translation to SAT already supporting HDDL. It is deﬁned as an
extension of the STRIPS fragment (language level 1) of the
PDDL2.1 deﬁnition (Fox and Long 2003). To concentrate
on a set of features shared by many systems, we restricted
the language to basic HTN planning. However, we hope that
this is just the starting point for further language extensions
similar to the ﬁrst PDDL version in classical planning.
HDDL will be the standard input language for the track
on hierarchical planning at the IPC 2020. The corresponding website1 provides supplementary material like grammar

Abstract
The research in hierarchical planning has made considerable
progress in the last few years. Many recent systems do not
rely on hand-tailored advice anymore to ﬁnd solutions, but
are supposed to be domain-independent systems that come
with sophisticated solving techniques. In principle, this development would make the comparison between systems easier (because the domains are not tailored to a single system
anymore) and – much more important – also the integration
into other systems, because the modeling process is less tedious (due to the lack of advice) and there is no (or less)
commitment to a certain planning system the model is created for. However, these advantages are destroyed by the lack
of a common input language and feature set supported by
the different systems. In this paper, we propose an extension
to PDDL, the description language used in non-hierarchical
planning, to the needs of hierarchical planning systems.

1

Introduction

Much progress has recently been made in hierarchical planning (Bercher, Alford, and Höller 2019). Novel systems
based on the traditional, search-based techniques have been
introduced (Bit-Monnot, Smith, and Do 2016; Shivashankar,
Alford, and Aha 2017; Bercher et al. 2017; Höller et al.
2018; 2019), but also new techniques like the translation
to STRIPS/ADL (Alford, Kuter, and Nau 2009; Alford et
al. 2016a). Others have been revisited, e.g. the translation
to propositional logic (Behnke, Höller, and Biundo 2018a;
2018b; 2019a; 2019b; Schreiber et al. 2019). In contrast to
many earlier systems, these systems can be considered to be
domain-independent, they do not rely on hand-tailored advice to solve problems, but only on their solving techniques.
Even though the systems share the basic idea of being hierarchical planning approaches, the feature set supported by
the different systems is manifold. Bit-Monnot, Smith, and
Do (2016) focus, e.g., on advanced support for temporal
planning, but lack the support for recursion; several systems
are restricted to models that do not include partial ordering between tasks (Alford, Kuter, and Nau 2009; Behnke,
∗
Pascal Bercher is now at the College of Engineering and Computer Science, the Australian National University.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

9883

ipc-2020.hierarchical-task.net

