The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Order Matters: Semantic-Aware Neural
Networks for Binary Code Similarity Detection
Zeping Yu,1∗ Rui Cao,1∗ Qiyi Tang,1 Sen Nie,1 Junzhou Huang,2 Shi Wu1†
1

Tencent Security Keen Lab, Shanghai, China
2
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
{zepingyu, ruicho}@foxmail.com, {dodgetang, snie, joehhuang, shiwu}@tencent.com

; int __fastcall _freading(FILE_0 *fp)
public __freading
__freading proc near
fp = rdi
; FILE_0 *
; __unwind {
mov edx, [fp]
mov eax, edx
and eax, 8
jnz short loc_776A0

Abstract
Binary code similarity detection, whose goal is to detect similar binary functions without having access to the source code,
is an essential task in computer security. Traditional methods usually use graph matching algorithms, which are slow
and inaccurate. Recently, neural network-based approaches
have made great achievements. A binary function is ﬁrst represented as an control-ﬂow graph (CFG) with manually selected block features, and then graph neural network (GNN)
is adopted to compute the graph embedding. While these
methods are effective and efﬁcient, they could not capture
enough semantic information of the binary code. In this paper we propose semantic-aware neural networks to extract the
semantic information of the binary code. Specially, we use
BERT to pre-train the binary code on one token-level task,
one block-level task, and two graph-level tasks. Moreover,
we ﬁnd that the order of the CFG’s nodes is important for
graph similarity detection, so we adopt convolutional neural network (CNN) on adjacency matrices to extract the order information. We conduct experiments on two tasks with
four datasets. The results demonstrate that our method outperforms the state-of-art models.

[0, 3, 1, 0, 34, 3, 0, 0]

[0, 3, 0, 0, 17, 2, 1, 0]

[1, 2, 0, 0, 13, 1, 0, 1]
and edx, 804h
jnz short locret_776A5

xor eax, eax
cmp qword ptr [fp+18h], 0
setnz al
retn

[0, 1, 1, 0, 4, 0, 1, 1]

[0, 3, 0, 0, 13, 2, 1, 0]

loc_776A0:
mov eax, 1

locret_776A5:
retn
; } // starts at 77680
__freading endp

Figure 1: An example of a control ﬂow graph (CFG) and its
manually selected block features.

score and reduce loss. (Xu et al. 2017) has shown that Gemini outperforms traditional methods in terms of accuracy and
speed.
Even though neural network-based models have achieved
a lot, there are several important things that have not been
taken into consideration. Firstly, as shown in Figure 1, each
block is represented as a low-dimensional embedding with
manually selected features, which will cause the loss of
much semantic information. Secondly, the order of the nodes
plays an important role in representing binary functions,
while previous approaches did not design methods to extract it. To solve these two problems, we propose an overall
framework with three components: semantic-aware modeling, structural-aware modeling, and order-aware modeling.
In semantic-aware modeling, we use NLP models to extract the semantic information of the binary code. The tokens
in the CFG blocks are regarded as words, and the blocks are
regarded as sentences. In previous works, (Massarelli et al.
2019) uses word2vec model to train the token embeddings
in the block, and then uses attention mechanism to obtain
the block embedding. (Zuo et al. 2018) borrows an idea from
neural machine translation (NMT) to learn the semantic relationship between cross-platform binary codes. In this paper,
we adopt BERT (Devlin et al. 2018) to pre-train the tokens
and blocks. Same as BERT, we mask the tokens to pre-train
on the masked language model task (MLM), and extract all
the neighboring blocks to pre-train on the adjacency node
prediction task (ANP). Instead of learning token embeddings and block embeddings separately, our method could

Introduction
Binary code similarity detection is used for detecting
whether two given binary functions are similar. It has many
computer security applications, including code clone detection, vulnerability discovery, malware detection, etc. Traditional efforts adopt graph matching algorithm (Liu et al.
2006) to compute the similarity of two functions. However,
these graph matching-based methods are very slow, and may
be hard to adapt to different applications. Recently, a neural network-based method called Gemini (Xu et al. 2017)
has shown great advantages. Figure 1 (left) is an example
of a CFG, Gemini ﬁrst transform it into an attributed CFG
with manually selected features (right) in each block. Then
Structure2vec (Dai, Dai, and Song 2016) is used to produce
the graph embeddings. At last a siamese architecture could
be added on the binary functions to compute the similarity
∗

Equal contribution
Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

1145

