The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Identiﬁability from a Combination of Observations and Experiments
Sanghack Lee, Juan D. Correa, Elias Bareinboim
Causal Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory
Department of Computer Science
Columbia University, USA
{sl4712, j.d.correa}@columbia.edu, eb@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract

X1
X2

We study the problem of causal identiﬁcation from an arbitrary collection of observational and experimental distributions, and substantive knowledge about the phenomenon under investigation, which usually comes in the form of a causal
graph. We call this problem g-identiﬁability, or gID for short.
In this paper, we introduce a general strategy to prove nongID based on thickets and hedgelets, which leads to a necessary and sufﬁcient graphical condition for the corresponding
decision problem. We further develop a procedure for systematically computing the target effect, and prove that it is sound
and complete for gID instances. In other words, the failure
of the algorithm in returning an expression implies that the
target effect is not computable from the available distributions. Finally, as a corollary of these results, we show that
do-calculus is complete for the task of g-identiﬁability.

1

X1

W

X1
X2

W

X2
W

Y
(a)

X1
W

Y
(b)

X2

Y
(c)

Y
(d)

Figure 1: Px1 ,x2 (y) can be identiﬁed from Px1 (V) and
Px2 (V) in (a) and (b), but not in (c) and (d). Differences
among the causal diagrams are highlighted in red.
Shpitser and Pearl 2006; Huang and Valtorta 2006). Despite the generality of such results, it’s the case that in some
real-world applications the quantity Px (y) is not identiﬁable
from the observational data and the causal diagram. On an
alternative thread in the literature, causal effects (Px (y)) are
obtained directly through controlled experimentation (Fisher
1951). In the biomedical sciences, for instance, considerable
resources are spent every year by the FDA, the NIH, and
others, in supporting large-scale, systematic, and controlled
experimentation, which comes under the rubric of Randomized Controlled Trials. Despite all the inferential power entailed by this approach, there are real-world settings where
controlling the variables in X is not feasible.
In this paper, we note that these two approaches can be
seen as extremes in a spectrum of possible research designs, which can be combined to solve natural, albeit nontrivial, causal inference problems. This generalized setting
has been investigated in the literature under the rubric of zidentiﬁability (zID, for short) (Bareinboim and Pearl 2012).
Unlike zID, gID does not assume the availability of an observational distribution. Furthermore, zID assumed that experiments on every possible subset of Z ⊂ V are available, yet
in many practical situations, however, it may be unfeasible
to intervene simultaneously on some set of variables, while
other set may not be intervened on separately. gID relaxes
this assumption by considering an arbitrary combination of
observational or experimental distributions over V in identifying an unconditional causal quantities.
Consider the causal graphs in Fig. 1, where Y represents
cardiovascular disease, W blood pressure, X1 taking an an-

Introduction

One of the main tasks in the empirical sciences and datadriven disciplines is to infer cause and effect relationships
from a combination of observations, experiments, and substantive knowledge about the phenomenon under investigation. Causal relations are deemed desirable and valuable for
constructing explanations and for contemplating novel interventions that were never experienced before (Pearl 2000;
Spirtes, Glymour, and Scheines 2001; Bareinboim and Pearl
2016; Pearl and Mackenzie 2018).
In one line of investigation, this task is formalized through
the question of whether the effect that an intervention on
a set of variables X will have on another set of outcome
variables Y, denoted by Px (y), can be uniquely computed
from the probability distribution P over the observed variables V and a causal diagram G. This is known as the problem of identiﬁcation (Pearl 1995; 2000; Bareinboim and
Pearl 2016), and has received great attention in the literature, starting with a number of sufﬁcient conditions (Spirtes,
Glymour, and Scheines 2001; Galles and Pearl 1995; Pearl
and Robins 1995), and culminating in a complete graphical and algorithmic characterization (Tian and Pearl 2002;
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13677

