The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Eigenvalue Normalized Recurrent Neural Networks for Short Term Memory
Kyle Helfrich, Qiang Ye
Mathematics Department, University of Kentucky
Lexington, Kentucky 40509, United States
{kyle.helfrich, qye3}@uky.edu

weight matrix such as the unitary evolution RNN (uRNN)
(Arjovsky, Shah, and Bengio 2016), Full-Capacity uRNN
(Wisdom et al. 2016), EUNN (Jing et al. 2016), oRNN
(Mhammedi et al. 2017), scoRNN (Helfrich, Willmott, and
Ye 2018; Maduranga, Helfrich, and Ye 2019), Spectral
RNN (Zhang, Lei, and Dhillon 2018), nnRNN (Kerg et
al. 2019), and EXPRNN (Lezcano-Casado 2019; LezcanoCasado and Martinez-Rubio 2019). There is also work using unitary matrices in GRUs such as the GORU (Jing et al.
2017). For other work addressing the vanishing/exploding
gradient problem, see (Henaff, Szlam, and LeCun 2016;
Le, Jaitly, and Hinton 2015; Wolter and Yao 2018).

Abstract
Several variants of recurrent neural networks (RNNs) with orthogonal or unitary recurrent matrices have recently been developed to mitigate the vanishing/exploding gradient problem
and to model long-term dependencies of sequences. However,
with the eigenvalues of the recurrent matrix on the unit circle, the recurrent state retains all input information which
may unnecessarily consume model capacity. In this paper,
we address this issue by proposing an architecture that expands upon an orthogonal/unitary RNN with a state that is
generated by a recurrent matrix with eigenvalues in the unit
disc. Any input to this state dissipates in time and is replaced
with new inputs, simulating short-term memory. A gradient
descent algorithm is derived for learning such a recurrent matrix. The resulting method, called the Eigenvalue Normalized
RNN (ENRNN), is shown to be highly competitive in several
experiments.

1

In spite of the promises shown in recent work, orthogonal/unitary RNNs still have some shortcomings. While an
orthogonal RNN allows propagation of information over
many time steps, it has an undesirable effect that all input information may be retained in all future states. Unlike
gated architectures, orthogonal RNNs lack “forget” mechanisms (Jing et al. 2017) to discard unwanted information.
This consumes model capacity, making it difﬁcult to efﬁciently model sequences with both long and short-term dependency.

Introduction

Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are a type of deep neural network that are designed to handle sequential data. The
underlying dynamical system carries temporal information
from one time step to another and captures potential dependencies among the terms of a sequence. Like other deep neural networks, the weights of an RNN are learned by gradient
descent. For the input at a time step to affect the output at
a later time step, the gradients must back-propagate through
each step. Since a sequence can be quite long, RNNs are
prone to suffer from vanishing or exploding gradients as described in (Bengio, Frasconi, and Simard 1993) and (Pascanu, Mikolov, and Bengio 2013). One consequence of this
well-known problem is the difﬁculty of the network to model
input-output dependency over a large number of time steps.
There have been many different architectures that are designed to mitigate this problem. The most popular RNN
architectures such as LSTMs (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) and GRUs (Cho et al. 2014), incorporate a gating mechanism to explicitly retain or discard information.
More recently, several different RNNs have been developed to maintain either a unitary or orthogonal recurrent

In this paper, we expand upon the orthogonal/unitary
RNN architecture by incorporating a dissipative state to
model short-term dependencies. We call this model the
Eigenvalue Normalized RNN (ENRNN). Inspired by the
work on the Spectral Normalized Generative Adversarial
Network (SN-GAN) (Miyato et al. 2018), we construct a recurrent matrix with its spectral radius (i.e. the largest absolute value of the eigenvalues) less than 1 through normalizing another parametric matrix by its spectral radius. A gradient descent algorithm is also derived that maintains this
spectral radius property. Any input to this state will dissipate
in time with repeat multiplication by the recurrent matrix
and will be replaced with new input information, emulating
a short-term memory state. This state can be concatenated
with another state with an orthogonal/unitary recurrent matrix to form an RNN that has a long and short-term memory
component to efﬁciently model long sequences. The resulting architecture falls within the existing framework of the
basic RNN and is shown to be highly competitive in several
experiments.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4115

