The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

M3ER: Multiplicative Multimodal Emotion
Recognition using Facial, Textual, and Speech Cues
Trisha Mittal,1 Uttaran Bhattacharya,1 Rohan Chandra,1 Aniket Bera,1 Dinesh Manocha1
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park, USA
{trisha, uttaranb, rohan, ab, dm}@cs.umd.edu
Project URL: https://gamma.umd.edu/m3er

Abstract
We present M3ER, a learning-based method for emotion
recognition from multiple input modalities. Our approach
combines cues from multiple co-occurring modalities (such
as face, text, and speech) and also is more robust than other
methods to sensor noise in any of the individual modalities. M3ER models a novel, data-driven multiplicative fusion method to combine the modalities, which learn to emphasize the more reliable cues and suppress others on a persample basis. By introducing a check step which uses Canonical Correlational Analysis to differentiate between ineffective and effective modalities, M3ER is robust to sensor noise.
M3ER also generates proxy features in place of the ineffectual modalities. We demonstrate the efﬁciency of our network through experimentation on two benchmark datasets,
IEMOCAP and CMU-MOSEI. We report a mean accuracy of
82.7% on IEMOCAP and 89.0% on CMU-MOSEI, which,
collectively, is an improvement of about 5% over prior work.

1

Figure 1: Multimodal Perceived Emotion Recognition: We
use multiple modalities to perform perceived emotion prediction. Our approach uses a deep learning model along with
a multiplicative fusion method for emotion recognition. We
show results on two datasets, IEMOCAP and CMU-MOSEI
both of which have face, speech and text as the three input
modalities. Above is one sample point extracted from the
IEMOCAP dataset.

Introduction

The perception of human emotions plays a vital role in our
everyday lives. People modify their responses and behaviors
based on their perception of the emotions of those around
them. For example, one might cautiously approach a person they perceive to be angry, whereas they might be more
forthcoming when approaching a person they perceive to
be happy and calm. Given the importance of emotion perception, emotion recognition from sensor data is important
for various applications, including human-computer interaction (Cowie et al. 2001), surveillance (Clavel et al. 2008),
robotics, games and entertainment, and more. In this work,
we address the problem of perceived emotion recognition
rather than recognition of the actual emotional state.
One of the primary tasks in developing efﬁcient AI systems for perceiving emotions is to combine and collate information from the various modalities by which humans express emotion. These modalities include, but are not limited
to, facial expressions, speech and voice modulations, written
text, body postures, gestures, and walking styles. Many researchers have advocated combining more than one modality to infer perceived emotion for various reasons, including:

(a) Richer information: Cues from different modalities can
augment or complement each other, and hence lead to
more sophisticated inference algorithms.
(b) Robustness to Sensor Noise: Information on different
modalities captured through sensors can often be corrupted due to signal noise, or be missing altogether
when the particular modality is not expressed, or cannot be captured due to occlusion, sensor artifacts, etc.
We call such modalities ineffectual. Ineffectual modalities are especially prevalent in in-the-wild datasets.
However, multimodal emotion recognition comes with
its own challenges. At the outset, it is important to decide which modalities should be combined and how. Some
modalities are more likely to co-occur than others, and therefore are easier to collect and utilize together. For example, some of the most popular benchmark datasets on multiple modalities, such as IEMOCAP (Busso et al. 2008) and
CMU-MOSEI (Zadeh et al. 2018b), contain commonly cooccurring modalities of facial expressions with associated
speech and transcribed text. With the growing number of

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1359

