The Tenth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (EAAI-20)

Minecraft as a Platform for Project-Based Learning in AI
Sameer Singh
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Irvine
sameer@uci.edu

projects that cover a reasonable subset of approaches and
domains, existing courses instead focus on a single environment or domain, such as robotics, games, computer vision,
text, etc. Although these projects are beneﬁcial for technical
training in problem-solving, they ignore the open-ended and
exploratory component of project-based learning, a crucial
part of applying AI to the real-world: which part of a given
scenario would beneﬁt from machine learning or AI?
To support a wide variety of open-ended projects in AI and
machine learning, we propose to use Minecraft for projectbased learning of AI. The sandbox nature of Minecraft provides a dynamic, open-ended environment, additionally supported by the Malmo library that allows programmatic sensing and control at multiple levels of granularity. The combination of Minecraft and Malmo provides the opportunity for
the students to design problems that cover a wide spectrum of
AI and machine learning techniques, at an appropriate level
of challenge. We will describe our design of an undergraduate AI projects course to use Malmo/Minecraft, and brieﬂy
mention some of the projects the students proposed, covering
themes that ranged from navigation, instruction following,
object detection, combat, and music/image generation.

Abstract
Undergraduate courses that focus on open-ended, projectbased learning teach students how to deﬁne concrete goals,
transfer conceptual understanding of algorithms to code, and
evaluate/analyze/present their solution. However, AI, along
with machine learning, is getting increasingly varied in terms
of both the approaches and applications, making it challenging
to design project courses that span a sufﬁciently wide spectrum
of AI. For these reasons, existing AI project courses are restricted to a narrow set of approaches (e.g. only reinforcement
learning) or applications (e.g. only computer vision).
In this paper, we propose to use Minecraft as the platform
for teaching AI via project-based learning. Minecraft is an
open-world sandbox game with elements of exploration, resource gathering, crafting, construction, and combat, and is
supported by the Malmo library that provides a programmatic
interface to the player observations and actions at various levels of granularity. In Minecraft, students can design projects to
use approaches like search-based AI, reinforcement learning,
supervised learning, and constraint satisfaction, on data types
like text, audio, images, and tabular data. We describe our experience with an open-ended, undergraduate AI projects course
using Minecraft that includes 82 different projects, covering
themes that ranged from navigation, instruction following,
object detection, combat, and music/image generation.

Minecraft, and Malmo
Minecraft is an open-world sandbox game with elements of
exploration, resource gathering, crafting, construction, and
combat. We select it as a platform for AI projects primarily
because of how open it is; we want the students to imagine
the many possibilities of AI and machine learning in environments that attempt to mimic our own. Even though it is a
game, the environment itself is quite complex and dynamic,
with lots of possible actions and inputs, thus making it quite
complex as a platform for AI. Using Minecraft also makes
it much more attractive and accessible to a diverse group of
students, especially since it transcends beyond the violence
and aggression associated with traditional computer games.
Malmo (Johnson et al. 2016) is an AI experimentation
platform built on top of Minecraft, providing programmatic
access to the in-game player via a loop that supports observations and actions. In particular, Malmo provides the player
agent observations that include: (1) grid view of the environment, (2) raw pixels of the agent’s view, (3) objects and

Introduction
Project-based learning (Markham 2011; McManus and
Costello 2019) is an effective pedagogical tool to train students via open-ended, hands-on team projects. These projects
not only hone technical skills, by training the students to
identify, design, and implement appropriate solutions, but
also encourage self-conﬁdence and creativity (they need to
deﬁne their own project), and provide invaluable leadership
and social/team-working experience. However, designing a
project-based course for artiﬁcial intelligence is challenging.
AI is increasingly spanning a large number of different technical approaches, such as supervised learning, reinforcement
learning, search-based techniques, and Bayesian methods,
and application domains, such as text, images, simulated environments, and time series. Since it is difﬁcult to design
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13504

