The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Training-Time-Friendly Network for Real-Time Object Detection∗
Zili Liu,1,2 Tu Zheng,1,2 Guodong Xu,1,2 Zheng Yang,2 Haifeng Liu,1 Deng Cai1,2,3
1

State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
Fabu Inc., Hangzhou, China
3
Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Institute of Frontier Technologies, Hangzhou, China
{zililiuzju, zhengtuzju}@gmail.com, yangzheng@fabu.ai, {memoiry, haifengliu, dcai}@zju.edu.cn

Therefore, this type of network is typically not suitable for
real-time applications.
To speed up the inference, researchers strive to simplify
the detection head and post-processing while retaining accuracy (Liu et al. 2016; Redmon and Farhadi 2018). In a recent study named CenterNet (Zhou, Wang, and Krähenbühl
2019), the inference time is further shortened — almost the
same as the time consumed by the backbone network. However, all these networks inevitably require long training time.
This is because these networks are difﬁcult to train due to
the simpliﬁcation, making them heavily dependent on the
data augmentation and long training schedule. For example,
CenterNet needs 140-epochs training on public dataset MS
COCO (Lin et al. 2014). In contrast, the ﬁrst type of network
usually requires 12 epochs.
In this work, we focus on shortening the training time
while retaining state-of-the-art real-time detection performances. Previous study (Goyal et al. 2017) has reported that
a larger learning rate can be adopted if the batch size is
larger, and they follow a linear relationship under most conditions. We notice that encoding more training samples from
annotated boxes is similar to increasing the batch size. Since
the time spent on encoding features and calculating losses is
negligible compared with that of feature extraction, we can
safely attain faster convergence basically without additional
overhead. In contrast, CenterNet, which merely focuses on
the object center for size regression, loses the opportunity to
utilize the information near the object center. This design is
conﬁrmed to be the main reason for the slow convergence
according to our experiments.
To shorten the training time, we propose a novel approach
using Gaussian kernels to encode training samples for both
localization and regression. It allows the network to make
better use of the annotated boxes to produce more supervised signals, which provides the prerequisite for faster convergence. Speciﬁcally, a sub-area around the object center is
constructed via the kernel, and then dense training samples
are extracted from this area. Besides, the Gaussian probabilities are treated as the weights of the regression samples to
emphasize those samples near the object center. We further
apply appropriate normalization to take advantage of more
information provided by large boxes and retain the infor-

Abstract
Modern object detectors can rarely achieve short training
time, fast inference speed, and high accuracy at the same
time. To strike a balance among them, we propose the
Training-Time-Friendly Network (TTFNet). In this work, we
start with light-head, single-stage, and anchor-free designs,
which enable fast inference speed. Then, we focus on shortening training time. We notice that encoding more training
samples from annotated boxes plays a similar role as increasing batch size, which helps enlarge the learning rate and accelerate the training process. To this end, we introduce a novel
approach using Gaussian kernels to encode training samples.
Besides, we design the initiative sample weights for better information utilization. Experiments on MS COCO show that
our TTFNet has great advantages in balancing training time,
inference speed, and accuracy. It has reduced training time by
more than seven times compared to previous real-time detectors while maintaining state-of-the-art performances. In addition, our super-fast version of TTFNet-18 and TTFNet-53
can outperform SSD300 and YOLOv3 by less than one-tenth
of their training time, respectively. The code has been made
available at https://github.com/ZJULearning/ttfnet.

Introduction
Accuracy, inference speed, and training time of object detectors have been widely concerned and continuously improved. However, little work can strike a good balance
among them. Intuitively, detectors with faster inference
speed should have a shorter training time. Nevertheless, in
fact, most real-time detectors require longer training time
than non-real-time ones. The high-accuracy detectors can be
roughly classiﬁed into one of the two types — those suffer
from slow inference speed, and those require a large amount
of training time.
The ﬁrst type of networks (Ren et al. 2015; Lin et al.
2017b; Tian et al. 2019) generally rely on the heavy detection head or complex post-processing. Although these designs are beneﬁcial for accuracy improvement and fast convergence, they signiﬁcantly slow down the inference speed.
∗

Deng Cai is the corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11685

