The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Unifying View on Individual Bounds and
Heuristic Inaccuracies in Bidirectional Search
Vidal Alcázar

Pat Riddle, Mike Barley

vidal.alcazar@riken.jp
Riken AIP, Tokyo, Japan

{pat, barley}@cs.auckland.ac.nz
University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand

Abstract

Reducing the depth of the search is not the only advantage of Bi-HS. Kaindl and Kainz (1997) showed how consistent heuristics can be strengthened by checking how inaccurate they are for nodes in the opposite direction. Naively
strengthening them renders them inconsistent, and so far no
general method has been widely used in this context.
Another algorithm that uses heuristic inaccuracies is
BAE∗ (Sadhukhan 2013), which adds the estimated error to
the target and the heuristic inaccuracy to the source. This
value, the total accumulated error, is used both as a criterion
to keep consistency (as it depends only on one direction,
unlike Kaindl and Kainz’s) and to compute a global lower
bound. Nevertheless, the relationship to Kaindl and Kainz’s
methods is unclear, and the empirical evaluation is limited.
An important observation is that both approaches provide global lower bounds. In this paper we delve deeper into
the lower-bound framework that modern Bi-HS algorithms
use and propose the use of individual lower bounds. These
bounds allow integrating recent approaches and the use of
heuristic inaccuracies in a simple and general way. Furthermore, bound propagation techniques like those of Shperberg
et.al. (2019b) can be also seen as a usage of individual lower
bounds, with a straightforward way to exploit global bounds
for individual nodes too. Empirical results show that, by
using heuristic inaccuracies, a substantial increase in performance can be obtained. In fact, we observe that using
heuristic inaccuracies allows expanding fewer than half of
the necessarily-expanded nodes of near-optimal algorithms,
which again emphasizes the importance of the theoretical
implications of our approach.
The contributions of this paper are organized by sections:
ﬁrst, we extend the lower-bound framework, introducing the
concepts of individual bounds, delayed nodes and relative
minimum node values, and proposing a ﬁxpoint computation for the latter; then, Kaindl and Kainz’s work is integrated into the framework by creating new bounds, which
solves its problematic aspects and ﬁnally allows using it to
its full potential. Afterwards, Sadhukhan’s work is also generalized as an individual bound and linked to the bounds created in the previous section; ﬁnally, we present experiments
that show a substantial improvement over the state of the art,
and outline future lines of research.

In the past few years, new very successful bidirectional
heuristic search algorithms have been proposed. Their key
novelty is a lower bound on the cost of a solution that includes
information from the g values in both directions. Kaindl and
Kainz (1997) proposed measuring how inaccurate a heuristic is while expanding nodes in the opposite direction, and
using this information to raise the f value of the evaluated
nodes. However, this comes with a set of disadvantages and
remains yet to be exploited to its full potential. Additionally,
Sadhukhan (2013) presented BAE∗ , a bidirectional best-ﬁrst
search algorithm based on the accumulated heuristic inaccuracy along a path. However, no complete comparison in regards to other bidirectional algorithms has yet been done, neither theoretical nor empirical. In this paper we deﬁne individual bounds within the lower-bound framework and show how
both Kaindl and Kainz’s and Sadhukhan’s methods can be
generalized thus creating new bounds. This overcomes previous shortcomings and allows newer algorithms to beneﬁt
from these techniques as well. Experimental results show a
substantial improvement, up to an order of magnitude in the
number of necessarily-expanded nodes compared to state-ofthe-art near-optimal algorithms in common benchmarks.

Introduction
Front-to-end bidirectional heuristic search (Bi-HS) was proposed by Pohl (1969) shortly after A∗ was presented (Hart,
Nilsson, and Raphael 1968). However, Bi-HS was never
much better empirically than either A∗ or blind bidirectional
search, and pathologically expanded nodes that blind bidirectional search would not expand despite being more informed (Barker and Korf 2015). Recently, though, the idea
of delaying the expansion of nodes with high g addressed
this problem partially (Holte et al. 2017; Shaham et al. 2017;
2018) or totally (Barley et al. 2018; Shperberg et al. 2019b).
Also, a theoretical analysis on how the g values of nodes
from both sides interact (Eckerle et al. 2017) led to the development of algorithms with strong theoretical properties,
like NBS’s near-optimality (Chen et al. 2017) — meaning
that NBS will never expand more than twice the number of
necessarily-expanded nodes of any other Bi-HS algorithm.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2327

