The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Deep Model-Based Reinforcement Learning via
Estimated Uncertainty and Conservative Policy Optimization
Qi Zhou, HouQiang Li, Jie Wang∗
University of Science and Technology of China
zhouqida@mail.ustc.edu.cn
{lihq, jiewangx}@ustc.edu.cn

Thus, compared to model-free methods, model-based algorithms can learn more quickly but tend to learn suboptimal
policies after plenty of trials.
Early model-based methods achieve impressing results
using simple models, like linear models (Bagnell and
Schneider 2001; Levine et al. 2016) and Gaussian processes
(Kuss and Rasmussen 2004; Deisenroth and Rasmussen
2011). However, these methods have difﬁculties in highdimensional and non-linear environments due to the limited
expressiveness of models. Recent methods use neural network models for better performance, especially for complicate tasks (Punjani and Abbeel 2015; Nagabandi et al. 2018).
Some methods further characterize the uncertainty in models via neural network ensembles (Rajeswaran et al. 2017;
Kurutach et al. 2018), or Bayesian neural networks (Depeweg et al. 2017). Although the uncertainty in models improves the performance of model-based methods, recent research shows that these methods still struggle to achieve
the comparable asymptotic performance to state-of-the-art
model-free methods robustly (Wang et al. 2019).
Inspired by previous work that improves model-free algorithms via uncertainty-aware exploration (O’Donoghue et al.
2018), we propose a theoretically-motivated algorithm to estimate the uncertainty in Q-values and apply it to the exploration of model-based reinforcement learning. Moreover, we
propose to optimize the policy conservatively by encouraging a large probability of performance improvement, which
is also informed by the estimated uncertainty. Thus, we use
the uncertainty in Q-values to enhance both exploration and
policy optimization in our model-based algorithm.
Our contributions consist of three parts.
First, we derive an upper bound of the uncertainty in Qvalues and present an algorithm to estimate it. Our bound is
tighter than previous work (O’Donoghue et al. 2018), and
our algorithm is feasible for deep model-based reinforcement learning, while many previous methods only focus on
model-free cases (Osband et al. 2016; 2017), or assume simple models (Dearden, Friedman, and Andre 1999).
Second, we propose to optimize the policy conservatively
based on an estimated probability of performance improvement, which is estimated via the uncertainty in Q-values and
is useful to prevent the overﬁtting to the biased models.

Abstract
Model-based reinforcement learning algorithms tend to
achieve higher sample efﬁciency than model-free methods.
However, due to the inevitable errors of learned models,
model-based methods struggle to achieve the same asymptotic performance as model-free methods. In this paper, We
propose a Policy Optimization method with Model-Based
Uncertainty (POMBU)—a novel model-based approach—
that can effectively improve the asymptotic performance using the uncertainty in Q-values. We derive an upper bound of
the uncertainty, based on which we can approximate the uncertainty accurately and efﬁciently for model-based methods.
We further propose an uncertainty-aware policy optimization
algorithm that optimizes the policy conservatively to encourage performance improvement with high probability. This can
signiﬁcantly alleviate the overﬁtting of policy to inaccurate
models. Experiments show POMBU can outperform existing state-of-the-art policy optimization algorithms in terms of
sample efﬁciency and asymptotic performance. Moreover, the
experiments demonstrate the excellent robustness of POMBU
compared to previous model-based approaches.

1

Introduction

Model-free reinforcement learning has achieved remarkable
success in sequential decision tasks, such as playing Atari
games (Mnih et al. 2015; Hessel et al. 2018) and controlling robots in simulation environments (Lillicrap et al. 2016;
Haarnoja et al. 2018). However, model-free approaches require large amounts of samples, especially when using powerful function approximators, like neural networks. Therefore, the high sample complexity hinders the application
of model-free methods in real-world tasks, not to mention data gathering is often costly. In contrast, modelbased reinforcement learning is more sample efﬁcient, as
it can learn from the interactions with models and then
ﬁnd a near-optimal policy via models (Kocijan et al. ;
Deisenroth and Rasmussen 2011; Levine and Abbeel 2014;
Nagabandi et al. 2018). However, these methods suffer from
errors of learned models, which hurt the asymptotic performance (Schneider 1997; Abbeel, Quigley, and Ng 2006).
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6941

