The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Stochastic Derivative-Free Optimization Method
with Importance Sampling: Theory and Learning to Control
Adel Bibi,1 El Houcine Bergou,1,2 Ozan Sener,3 Bernard Ghanem,1 Peter Richtárik1,4
1

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
2
MaIAGE, INRA, Université Paris-Saclay
3
Intel Labs
4
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology
{adel.bibi, houcine.bergou, bernard.ghanem, peter.richtarik}@kaust.edu.sa, ozan.sener@intel.com
Torczon 2003) setting. That is, we assume that the derivatives of f are numerically impractical to obtain, unreliable
(e.g., noisy function evaluations (Chen 2015)), or not available at all. In typical DFO applications, evaluations of f
are possible through runs/simulations of some black-box
software only. Optimization problems of this type appear
in many applications, including computational medicine
(Marsden, Feinstein, and Taylor 2008), ﬂuid-dynamics (Allaire 2001; Haslinger and Mäckinen 2003), localization
(Marsden et al. 2004; 2007) and continuous control (Mania,
Guy, and Recht 2018; Salimans et al. 2017).
Literature on DFO methods for solving (1) has a long
history. Some of the ﬁrst approaches were based on deterministic direct search (DDS) (Hooke and Jeeves 1961).
Subsequently, additional variants of DDS, including randomized approaches, were proposed in (Matyas 1965; Karmanov 1974a; 1974b; Baba 1981; Dorea 1983; Sarma 1990).
However, complexity bounds for deterministic direct search
methods have only been established recently by the works
of (Vicente 2013; Garmanjani and Vicente 2013; Konečný
and Richtárik 2014; Dodangeh and Vicente 2016). Recently,
complexity bounds have also been derived for randomized methods (Diniz-Ehrhardt, Martinez, and Raydan 2008;
Stich, Muller, and Gartner 2013; Gratton et al. 2015). For
instance, the work of (Diniz-Ehrhardt, Martinez, and Raydan 2008; Gratton et al. 2015) imposes a decrease condition on whether to accept or reject a step of a set of random directions. Moreover, (Nesterov and Spokoiny 2017;
Dvurechensky, Gasnikov, and Gorbunov 2018) derived new
complexity bounds for accelerated random search.
More recently, Bergou et. al. proposed a new randomized
direct search method called Stochastic Three Points (STP)
method. STP, in each iteration k, generates a random search
direction sk according to a certain probability law, then compares the objective function at three points: current iterate
xk , a point x+ = xk + αk sk in the direction of sk and a
point x− = xk − αk sk in the direction of −sk . The method
then chooses the best of these three points as the new iterate:

Abstract
We consider the problem of unconstrained minimization of a
smooth objective function in Rn in a setting where only function evaluations are possible. While importance sampling is
one of the most popular techniques used by machine learning practitioners to accelerate the convergence of their models when applicable, there is not much existing theory for this
acceleration in the derivative-free setting. In this paper, we
propose the ﬁrst derivative free optimization method with importance sampling and derive new improved complexity results on non-convex, convex and strongly convex functions.
We conduct extensive experiments on various synthetic and
real LIBSVM datasets conﬁrming our theoretical results. We
test our method on a collection of continuous control tasks on
MuJoCo environments with varying difﬁculty. Experiments
show that our algorithm is practical for high dimensional continuous control problems where importance sampling results
in a signiﬁcant sample complexity improvement.

Introduction
In this paper, we consider the optimization problem
min f (x),

(1)

x∈Rn

where f : Rn → R is a “smooth” but not necessarily convex
function, bounded from below and it achieves its global minimum at some x∗ ∈ Rn . In particular, we enforce throughout
the paper the following smoothness assumption:
Assumption 1. The objective function f has coordinatewise Lipschitz gradient, with Lispchitz constants
L1 , . . . , Ln > 0. Moreover, f is bounded from below
by f (x∗ ) ∈ R. That is, f satisﬁes
f (x∗ ) ≤ f (x + tei ) ≤ f (x) + ∇i f (x)t +

Li 2
t
2

for all x ∈ Rn and t ∈ R, where ∇i f (x) is the ith partial
derivative of f at x.

xk+1 = arg min{f (xk ), f (x+ ), f (x− )}.

DFO. We consider the Derivative-Free Optimization (DFO)
(Conn, Scheinberg, and Vicente 2009; Kolda, Lewis, and

Notation: As for the notations, E [·] denotes the expectation operator. The standard inner product is deﬁned as
x, y = x y. We also denote the 1 -norm and 2 -norm by

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3275

