The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Strongly Budget Balanced Auctions for Multi-Sided Markets
Rica Gonen

Erel Segal-Halevi

The Open University of Israel
ricagonen@gmail.com

Ariel University, Ariel, Israel
erelsgl@gmail.com

port. They can also be made individually rational (IR) — no
agent loses from participating in the auction.
More recently, there has been increased attention on auctions for two-sided markets, in which the set of agents is
partitioned into buyers and sellers. As opposed to the onesided setting, where the auctioneer initially holds the items,
in the two-sided setting the items are initially held by the
set of sellers. The sellers express valuations for the items
they hold, and are assumed to act rationally and strategically.
Thus, the auctioneer is tasked with deciding which buyers
and sellers should trade and with what prices.
The growing interest in two-sided markets can be attributed to various important applications. Examples range
from selling display-advertising on ad exchange platforms,
the US FCC spectrum license reallocation, and stock exchanges. However, little work has been done so far on the
next level of generalization, i.e., multi-sided markets.
In two-sided markets, a further important requirement is
strong budget-balance (SBB), which states that monetary
transfers happen only among the agents in the market. This
means that buyers and sellers are allowed to trade without
leaving the auctioneer any share of their gains and without the auctioneer adding money into the market. A weaker
version of SBB, often considered in the literature, is weak
budget-balance (WBB). WBB only requires the auctioneer
not to add money to the market. The problem with weak
budget-balance is that the surplus of the auctioneer might
consume most of the gain-from-trade, leaving little gain for
the actual traders. This might drive traders away from the
market.1 Note that, in bilateral trade settings, VCG is usually not even WBB except in special cases (Guo et al. 2013).
For double-sided auctions, the impossibility theorem of

Abstract
In two-sided markets, Myerson and Satterthwaite’s impossibility theorem states that one can not maximize the gainfrom-trade while also satisfying truthfulness, individualrationality and no deﬁcit. Attempts have been made to circumvent Myerson and Satterthwaite’s result by attaining
approximately-maximum gain-from-trade: the double-sided
auctions of McAfee (1992) is truthful and has no deﬁcit, and
the one by Segal-Halevi et al. (2016) additionally has no surplus — it is strongly-budget-balanced. They consider two categories of agents — buyers and sellers, where each trade set
is composed of a single buyer and a single seller.
The practical complexity of applications such as supply chain
require one to look beyond two-sided markets. Common requirements are for: buyers trading with multiple sellers of different or identical items, buyers trading with sellers through
transporters and mediators, and sellers trading with multiple
buyers. We attempt to address these settings.
We generalize Segal-Halevi et al. (2016)’s strongly-budgetbalanced double-sided auction setting to a multilateral market where each trade set is composed of any number of agent
categories. Our generalization reﬁnes the notion of competition in multi-sided auctions by introducing the concepts of
external competition and trade reduction. We also show an
obviously-truthful implementation of our auction using multiple ascending prices.
Full version, including omitted proofs and simulation experiments, is available at https://arxiv.org/abs/1911.08094.

1

Introduction

Mechanism design for one-sided markets has been investigated for several decades in economics and in computer science. It aims to ﬁnd an efﬁcient (high social welfare) allocation of a set of items to a set of agents, while ensuring that
truthfully reporting the input data is the best strategy for the
agents. The Vickrey-Clarke-Groves (VCG) auction (Vickrey
1961; Clarke 1971; Groves 1973) is a pillar of mechanism
design. VCG auctions maximize the social welfare of the
agents. They are dominant-strategy truthful (DST) — each
agent’s dominant strategy is to truthfully report its preferences to the auction, regardless of what the other agents re-

1
The following “trick” can be used to convert any WBB auction to an SBB auction: before the auction starts, remove a random
trader from the market; after the auction ends, give that trader all
the surplus (if any). We do not support this trick since it might
induce agents who have nothing to do with the auction (e.g. “sellers” with nothing to sell or “buyers” with no money) to come to
the market, only because of the chance to win all the surplus. Like
Colini-Baldeschi et al. (2017), we focus on direct-trade auctions
— auctions that give/take money only to/from agents who actually
participate in the trade.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1998

