The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

D-Agree: Crowd Discussion Support
System Based on Automated Facilitation Agent
Takayuki Ito, Shota Suzuki, Naoko Yamaguchi,
Tomohiro Nishida, Kentaro Hiraishi, Kai Yoshino
Nagoya Institute of Technology, Gokiso, Showaku, Nagoya 466-8555, Japan
{ito.takayuki, nishida.tomohiro, yamaguchi.naoko}@nitech.ac.jp

human facilitators caused by the difﬁculty of facilitating
crowd-scale online discussions. Such discussions often have
over a thousand opinions that are posted simultaneously.
Many discussion threads become tangled with overlapping
opinions. Such elements are characteristic problems for online discussions that are not seen in ordinary face-to-face
discussion workshops.
Figure 1 outlines D-agree. D-agree is one of the web forum systems where participants can submit their opinions
as texts. An automated facilitation agent extracts the discussion structure from the texts posted in discussions by people.
We adopted IBIS (Issue-Based Information System) structure (Kunz and Rittel 1970) as an ideal discussion framework because our aim is to lead discussions through which
people can clarify issues, ideas, and debate merits/demerits.
IBIS effectively constructs such discussions.
Based on the extracted structure, the facilitation agent
posts facilitation messages about the discussion so that the
on-going discussion covers enough ideas, merits and demerits.

Abstract
Large-scale online discussion platforms are receiving great
attention as potential next-generation methods for smart
democratic citizen platforms. One of the studies clariﬁed the
critical problem faced by human facilitators caused by the
difﬁculty of facilitating large-scale online discussions. In this
demonstration, we present our current implementation of Dagree, a crowd-scale discussion support system based on an
automated facilitation agent. We conducted a large-scale social experiment with Nagoya local government. The results
demonstrate that the agent worked well compared with human facilitators.

D-agree: Crowd Discussion Support System
based on Automated Facilitation Agent
Outline
Discussion

Issue
extraction

Discussion structure
Issue
Idea

Idea/Position
extraction
Question
mediation

Pros/Cons

Automated Facilitation Agent

Idea
Pros/Cons

We developed automated facilitation agent software that observes the posted texts, extracts their semantic discussion
structures, generates facilitation messages, and posts them
to the discussion system. The software also ﬁlters inappropriate posts.
The facilitation agent consists of two parts: a discussion
structure extraction/visualization mechanism and an observing and posting mechanism. To extract the discussion structure, we utilize argumentation mining technologies(Stab and
Gurevych 2017) with BiLSTM , which ﬁrst captures meaningful sentences and then important words that are IBIS
components: issues, ideas, pros, and cons. After that, it identiﬁes the relations among these IBIS components and uniﬁes
these relations and components into one discussion structure.
By using the extracted structure, the observing and posting mechanism posts facilitation messages. It has around
200 facilitation rules, which have been carefully collated after consultation with professional facilitators. By matching
the rules and the obtained structure, facilitation messages are

Arguments
extraction

Figure 1: Outline of D-agree
Crowd-scale discussion platforms are receiving great attention as potential next-generation methods for democratic
citizen platforms (Malone 2018). Such platforms require
support functions that can efﬁciently achieve a consensus, reasonably integrate ideas, and discourage ﬂaming.
One system called COLLAGREE (Ito 2018) was employed
for a large-scale experiment with Nagoya City, Japan. In
their large-scale experiments, human facilitators promoted
crowd-scale online discussions. They conducted more than
30 experiments and clariﬁed the critical problems faced by
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13614

