The Tenth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (EAAI-20)

Geospatial Clustering for Balanced and Proximal Schools
Subhodip Biswas, Fanglan Chen, Andreea Sistrunk, Sathappan Muthiah, Zhiqian Chen,
Nathan Self, Chang-Tien Lu, Naren Ramakrishnan
Discovery Analytics Center
Department of Computer Science, Virginia Tech
{subhodip, fanglanc, sistrunk, sathap1, czq, nwself, ctlu, naren}@vt.edu

In the US, public schools operate through school districts,
geographical units for the local administration of schools,
which are usually demarcated by the boundaries of a city
or a county. Within a district, school boundaries are formed
around each school property by aggregating smaller areas,
called student planning areas (SPAs), into larger regions,
called school attendance zones (SAZs), such that the areas
inside a region are geographically contiguous. To delineate
the SAZs, school planners consider factors such as population
balance, compactness, proximity, stability, spatial contiguity
and demographics, among others. These criteria are often
conﬂicting in nature so ﬁnding the right balance between
them becomes crucial to the planning process. An objective
treatment of the school redistricting problem by a data-driven
model can assist school planners by providing them with
automated plans, from which planners can adapt their own
plans in the way they see ﬁt for equitable distribution of
educational resources.

Abstract
Public school boundaries are redrawn from time to time to
ensure effective functioning of school systems. This process,
also called school redistricting, is non-trivial due to (1) the
presence of multiple design criteria such as capacity utilization, proximity and travel time which are hard for planners to
consider simultaneously, (2) the ﬁxed locations of schools with
widely differing capacities that need to be balanced, (3) the
spatial nature of the data and the need to preserve contiguity in
school zones, and (4) the difﬁculty in quantifying local factors
that may arise. Motivated by these challenges and the intricacy
of the process, we propose a geospatial clustering algorithm
called GeoKmeans for assisting planners in designing school
boundaries such that students are assigned to proximal schools
while ensuring effective utilization of school capacities. The algorithm operates on polygonal geometries and connects them
into geographically contiguous school boundaries while balancing problem-speciﬁc constraints. We evaluate our approach
on real-world data of two rapidly growing school districts in
the US. Results indicate the efﬁcacy of our approach in designing boundaries. Additionally, a case study is included to
demonstrate the potential of GeoKmeans to assist planners in
drawing boundaries.

Motivated by this, we view the process of school redistricting through the lens of spatially-constrained clustering
(Miller and Han 2009), also called regionalization (Duque,
Ramos, and Suriñach 2007), and devise a geospatial clustering algorithm called GeoKmeans for solving it. The proposed
method is based on the K-means approach (MacQueen 1967)
but differs in the following aspects: (1) Geospatial data: Conventional point-based modeling does not apply to school
boundaries since the data consists of polygonal (areal) spatial
objects which have richer representations. Our method leverages the structural and topological information contained
within these geospatial features. (2) Constrained assignment.
Unlike K-means, which assigns data points to the nearest
cluster, our method performs a series of checks to ensure
that problem-speciﬁc constraints, such as capacity balance,
compactness and spatial contiguity, are satisﬁed during assignment. (3) Restrictive search and weighing. The need to
ensure the presence of one school per cluster induces restriction on feasible clustering conﬁgurations. Additionally, since
the boundary of the cluster will form the SAZ of the school it
contains, its centroid cannot deviate too far from the school’s
location. Otherwise students may have to travel unacceptably far to reach their assigned schools. To ensure this, we
incorporate an adaptive weighing mechanism.

Introduction
The last decade has seen rapid advancement in geographical information systems (GIS) frameworks for dealing with
geospatial data. They are integral to the operation of modern
economies and play a key role in urban planning, transportation, logistics, distribution services, policy making and policy
implementation (Burrough et al. 2015). Complementary GIS
data can provide a rich source of information for researchers,
planners and policymakers to study, analyze and make decisions upon. Despite its ubiquity and utility, GIS has seen
slow adoption among school planners. Recent works have
highlighted the promise of using geospatial context for studying school district boundaries (Yoon and Lubienski 2018). In
fact, the operation of a school district generates a vast amount
of geospatial data that can be analyzed to answer important
questions regarding the long-term planning and design of
school boundaries (Kelly 2019).
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13415

