The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Independence Promoted Graph Disentangled Networks
Yanbei Liu,1 Xiao Wang,2∗ Shu Wu,3 Zhitao Xiao1
1

School of Life Sciences, Tiangong University
School of Computer Science, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
3
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing, National Laboratory
of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{liuyanbei, xiaozhitao}@tjpu.edu.cn, xiaowang@bupt.edu.cn, shu.wu@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
2

Despite the remarkable performance, the existing graph
convolutional networks generally learn node representations by absorbing the node’s neighborhood as a perceptual
whole, and the representations they have learned are prone
to over-smoothing faced by a deep GCNs (Li, Han, and Wu
2018). Yet graphs are usually formed by highly complex interactions of many latent factors. For example, a person in
a social network usually connects with others for various
reasons (e.g., hobby, education and work), hence it simultaneously contains several partial information from its neighbors. Generally speaking, latent factors can take into account
the nuances between the different parts of the neighborhood
and make node representations more informative. Furthermore, latent factors can enable to discover the underlying
structures in graph data, such as neighborhood and community. Therefore, how to learn representations that capture desired latent factors behind a graph is of great importance for
GCNs.

Abstract
We address the problem of disentangled representation learning with independent latent factors in graph convolutional
networks (GCNs). The current methods usually learn node
representation by describing its neighborhood as a perceptual
whole in a holistic manner while ignoring the entanglement of
the latent factors. However, a real-world graph is formed by
the complex interaction of many latent factors (e.g., the same
hobby, education or work in social network). While little effort has been made toward exploring the disentangled representation in GCNs. In this paper, we propose a novel Independence Promoted Graph Disentangled Networks (IPGDN)
to learn disentangled node representation while enhancing the
independence among node representations. In particular, we
ﬁrstly present disentangled representation learning by neighborhood routing mechanism, and then employ the HilbertSchmidt Independence Criterion (HSIC) to enforce independence between the latent representations, which is effectively
integrated into a graph convolutional framework as a regularizer at the output layer. Experimental studies on realworld graphs validate our model and demonstrate that our
algorithms outperform the state-of-the-arts by a wide margin
in different network applications, including semi-supervised
graph classiﬁcation, graph clustering and graph visualization.

However, disentangling the latent factors behind a graph
has two main challenges. One is how to learn node disentangled representations which need extract the different
parts of its neighborhood but not the whole. Yet graph has
numerous nodes and an unusually complex network structure. The other is how to encourage independence among
the learned latent factors. Taking social networks as an example, although “roommate” and “classmate” are two different factors that lead people to connect each other, the
former is obviously a subset of the latter, hence they are
not sufﬁciently diversiﬁed and will inevitably result in redundant representations. We argue that the representations
of latent factors should be good and different. Yet the relationship between these factors is usually very complicated
and nonlinear, and the solution needs to be differentiable so
as to support end-to-end training in GCNs. So it is of very
importance to encourage independence among the learned
latent factors. We notice that Ma et al. (Ma et al. 2019) presented a disentangled graph convolutional network to learn
disentangled node representations. However, they only consider the disentangled representation learning while neglecting the independence of the latent factors. Therefore, how to
learn representations that disentangle the latent factors with
desired independence property remains largely unexplored

Introduction
Graph with a set of objects and their relationships is a signiﬁcant kind of data structure, which has been adopted in
various areas such as social networks (Hamilton, Ying, and
Leskovec 2017) and protein-protein interaction networks
(Fout et al. 2017). Graph convolutional networks (GCNs),
as a typical deep learning technique on graph data, have
attracted considerable attentions (Defferrard, Bresson, and
Vandergheynst 2016; Kipf and Welling 2017). GCNs extend
the traditional convolution operation to graph and it learns
the node representation by propagating its neighbor information on graph. With the learned node representations, we
can perform various tasks on graphs such as node clustering, classiﬁcation and link prediction (Zhang, Cui, and Zhu
2018; Wu et al. 2019)
∗

Corresponding author, Xiao Wang, xiaowang@bupt.edu.cn.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4916

