The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Unicoder-VL: A Universal Encoder for
Vision and Language by Cross-Modal Pre-Training
Gen Li,1∗ Nan Duan,2 Yuejian Fang,1† Ming Gong,3 Daxin Jiang3
1

School of Software & Microelectronics, Peking University, Beijing, China
2
Natural Language Computing, Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China
3
STCA NLP Group, Microsoft, Beijing, China
ligen.li@pku.edu.cn, fangyj@ss.pku.edu.cn, {nanduan, migon, djiang}@microsoft.com

and machine reading comprehension (Rajpurkar et al. 2016).
Pre-trained with language modeling, such models can learn
general knowledge from large-scale corpus ﬁrst, and then
transfer them to downstream tasks with simple ﬁne-tuning
layers.
However, these two types of pre-trained models cannot
well handle a cross-modal task directly, if its natural language inputs are long sequences (such as questions), rather
than short phrases (such as tags). The reason is two-fold. On
one hand, as ImageNet covers categorical labels only, the
resulting models cannot deal with long sequences. This is
why most such tasks, e.g. visual question answering (VQA)
(Antol et al. 2015), visual commonsense reasoning (VCR)
(Zellers et al. 2019) and image retrieval (Karpathy and FeiFei 2015), still need additional fusion layers to model interaction between visual and linguistic contents. On the other
hand, existing NLP pre-trained models can handle long natural language sequences very well. But none of them is
trained with visual contents directly.
Motivated by these, we propose a Universal encoder for
Vision and Language, short for Unicoder-VL, a universal
encoder based on a multi-layer Transformer (Vaswani et
al. 2017), which aims to learn joint representations of vision and language (especially for long sequences) in a pretraining manner. Inspired by BERT and some recent crosslingual pre-trained models. such as XLM (Lample and Conneau 2019) and Unicoder (Huang et al., 2019), a crossmodal pre-training framework is designed to model the relationships between visual and linguistic contents and learn
their joint representations. We use large-scale image-caption
pairs in Unicoder-VL training, as such annotations are easy
to collect from web, with relatively good quality. Three
pre-trained tasks are employed, including Masked Language
Modeling(MLM), Masked Object Classiﬁcation(MOC) and
Visual-linguistic Matching(VLM). The ﬁrst two tasks learn
context-aware representations for input tokens based on linguistic and visual contents jointly. The last task tries to predict whether an image and a text describe each other.
As the ﬁrst step along this new pre-training direction, we
evaluate Unicoder-VL on image-text retrieval tasks. From
experiments we can see that, by adding a simple ﬁne-tuning
layer, Unicoder-VL achieves state-of-the-art results on both

Abstract
We propose Unicoder-VL, a universal encoder that aims
to learn joint representations of vision and language in a
pre-training manner. Borrow ideas from cross-lingual pretrained models, such as XLM (Lample and Conneau 2019)
and Unicoder (Huang et al. 2019), both visual and linguistic contents are fed into a multi-layer Transformer (Vaswani
et al. 2017) for the cross-modal pre-training, where three
pre-trained tasks are employed, including Masked Language
Modeling(MLM), Masked Object Classiﬁcation(MOC) and
Visual-linguistic Matching(VLM). The ﬁrst two tasks learn
context-aware representations for input tokens based on linguistic and visual contents jointly. The last task tries to predict whether an image and a text describe each other. After
pretraining on large-scale image-caption pairs, we transfer
Unicoder-VL to caption-based image-text retrieval and visual commonsense reasoning, with just one additional output layer. We achieve state-of-the-art or comparable results
on both two tasks and show the powerful ability of the crossmodal pre-training.

Introduction
In recent years, pre-trained models have made great progress
in both computer vision (CV) and natural language processing (NLP) communities.
In CV, pre-trained models, such as VGG (Simonyan and
Zisserman 2014) and ResNet (He et al. 2016), are usually
trained based on CNN using ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009),
whose training objective is to predict the categorical label of
a given image. For downstream tasks, such as image classiﬁcation, image retrieval (Karpathy and Fei-Fei 2015) (Lee et
al. 2018) and object detection (Ren et al. 2015), the resulting
models can extract feature representations for input images,
which will be further used in following task-speciﬁc models.
In NLP, pre-trained models, such as BERT (Devlin et al.
2018), XLNet (Yang et al. 2019) and RoBERTa (Liu et al.
2019), have achieved state-of-the-art performances in many
NLP tasks as well, such as sentiment analysis (Socher et
al. 2013), natural language inference (Bowman et al. 2015),
∗

Work is done during an internship at Microsoft Research Asia.
Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

11336

