The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Progressive Feature Polishing Network for Salient Object Detection
Bo Wang,1,2 Quan Chen,2 Min Zhou,2 Zhiqiang Zhang,2 Xiaogang Jin,1 Kun Gai2
1
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University 2 Alibaba Group
wangbo060@zju.edu.cn, {chenquan.cq, yunqi.zm, zhang.zhiqiang, jingshi.gk}@alibaba-inc.com, jin@cad.zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Feature matters for salient object detection. Existing methods mainly focus on designing a sophisticated structure to incorporate multi-level features and ﬁlter out cluttered features.
We present Progressive Feature Polishing Network (PFPN),
a simple yet effective framework to progressively polish the
multi-level features to be more accurate and representative.
By employing multiple Feature Polishing Modules (FPMs)
in a recurrent manner, our approach is able to detect salient
objects with ﬁne details without any post-processing. A FPM
parallelly updates the features of each level by directly incorporating all higher level context information. Moreover,
it can keep the dimensions and hierarchical structures of the
feature maps, which makes it ﬂexible to be integrated with
any CNN-based models. Empirical experiments show that our
results are monotonically getting better with increasing number of FPMs. Without bells and whistles, PFPN outperforms
the state-of-the-art methods signiﬁcantly on ﬁve benchmark
datasets under various evaluation metrics. Our code is available at: https://github.com/chenquan-cq/PFPN.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Figure 1: Illustration of results with progressively polished features. (a) Original images. (f) Ground truth. (b)-(e)
Saliency maps predicted by PFPN with T = 0 ∼ 3 FPMs,
respectively.

Introduction
Salient object detection, which aims to extract the most attractive regions in an image, is widely used in computer vision tasks, including video compression (Guo and Zhang
2010), visual tracking (Borji et al. 2012), and image retrieval (Cheng et al. 2017).
Beneﬁtting from the hierarchical structure of CNN, deep
models can extract multi-level features that contain both
low-level local details and high-level global semantics. To
make use of detailed and semantic information, a straightforward integration of the multi-level context information
with concatenation or element-wise addition of different
level features can be applied. However, as the features
can be cluttered and inaccurate at some levels, this kind
of simple feature integrations tends to get suboptimal results. Therefore, most recent attractive progress focuses on
designing a sophisticated integration of these multi-level
features. We point out the drawbacks of current methods
in three folds. First, many methods (Zhang et al. 2018b;

Liu, Han, and Yang 2018) employ the U-Net (Ronneberger,
Fischer, and Brox 2015) like structure in which the information ﬂow from high level to low level during feature aggregation, while BMPM (Zhang et al. 2018a) uses a bidirectional message passing between consecutive levels to incorporate semantic concepts and ﬁne details. However, these
integrations, performed indirectly among multi-level features, may be deﬁcient because of the incurred long-term
dependency problem (Bengio et al. 1994). Second, other
works (Zhuge, Zeng, and Lu 2019; Zhang et al. 2018a;
Hou et al. 2017) recursively reﬁne the predicted results
in a deep-to-shallow manner to supplement details. However, predicted saliency maps have lost the rich information and the capability of reﬁnement is limited. Furthermore,
although valuable human priors can be introduced by designing sophisticated structures to incorporate multi-level

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12128

