The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning Light Field Angular Super-Resolution via a Geometry-Aware Network
Jing Jin,1∗ Junhui Hou,1 Hui Yuan,2 Sam Kwong1
1

City University of Hong Kong, 2 Shandong University

Abstract
The acquisition of light ﬁeld images with high angular resolution is costly. Although many methods have been proposed
to improve the angular resolution of a sparsely-sampled light
ﬁeld, they always focus on the light ﬁeld with a small baseline, which is captured by a consumer light ﬁeld camera. By
making full use of the intrinsic geometry information of light
ﬁelds, in this paper we propose an end-to-end learning-based
approach aiming at angularly super-resolving a sparselysampled light ﬁeld with a large baseline. Our model consists of two learnable modules and a physically-based module. Speciﬁcally, it includes a depth estimation module for
explicitly modeling the scene geometry, a physically-based
warping for novel views synthesis, and a light ﬁeld blending
module speciﬁcally designed for light ﬁeld reconstruction.
Moreover, we introduce a novel loss function to promote the
preservation of the light ﬁeld parallax structure. Experimental
results over various light ﬁeld datasets including large baseline light ﬁeld images demonstrate the signiﬁcant superiority
of our method when compared with state-of-the-art ones, i.e.,
our method improves the PSNR of the second best method up
to 2 dB in average, while saves the execution time 48×. In addition, our method preserves the light ﬁeld parallax structure
better.

Figure 1: Comparisons of the execution time (in second) and
reconstruction quality (PSNR/SSIM) of different methods.
Here, a sparse light ﬁeld containing 2 × 2 views of spatial
resolution 512 × 512 is super-resolved to a high angular resolution light ﬁeld containing 7 × 7 views. The PSNR/SSIM
value refers to the average over 48 light ﬁelds with a disparity range of [−4, 4]. Our method produces the highest reconstruction quality while takes less time than all other methods
except one.

Introduction
Light ﬁeld images provide rich information of 3D scenes by
recording not only the intensity but also the direction of light
rays. Conventional light ﬁeld acquisition methods include
camera array (Wilburn et al. 2005) and computer-controlled
gantry (Vaish and Adams 2008), which sample the light
ﬁeld at different viewpoints through single or multiple exposures. Due to the increase of hardware complexity, it is
very costly to obtain high angular resolution using these systems. Recently, commercial light ﬁeld cameras (Lytro 2016;
Raytrix 2016) attract a lot of attention because of their portability. However, the limitation of sensor resolution leads to

an inevitable trade-off between the spatial and angular resolution of the captured light ﬁeld images.
To mitigate this problem, many studies have been devoted to the light ﬁeld angular super-resolution. Particularly,
inspired by the great success of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012;
Dong et al. 2014), many learning-based methods have been
proposed to enable light ﬁeld angular super-resolution from
an extremely small set of views (Kalantari, Wang, and Ramamoorthi 2016; Yeung et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2018b;
Wu et al. 2017; 2019). They always focus on the reconstruction of light ﬁelds captured by commercial light ﬁeld cameras, where the baseline of the input views is very small.
These methods can be roughly classiﬁed into two categories: non-depth based and depth based. When the baseline of the input views increases, methods without modeling the scene depth (Yeung et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2018b;

∗

This work was supported in part by the Hong Kong
RGC Early Career Scheme under Grant 9048123 (CityU
21211518), and in part by the Huawei Innovative Research Program under Grant 9231332. Corresponding author: Junhui Hou
(jh.hou@cityu.edu.hk)
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11141

