The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Logo-2K+: A Large-Scale Logo Dataset for Scalable Logo Classiﬁcation
Jing Wang,1 Weiqing Min,2 Sujuan Hou,1 Shengnan Ma,1 Yuanjie Zheng,1
Haishuai Wang,3 Shuqiang Jiang2
1

School of Information Science and Engineering, Shandong Normal University
2
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Fairﬁeld University
{2018020875, 201711030133}@stu.sdnu.edu.cn, {minweiqing, sqjiang}@ict.ac.cn, hsj1985@126.com,
zhengyuanjie@gmail.com, hwang@fairﬁeld.edu
Liao et al. 2017), trademark infringement detection, product
recommendation and intelligent transportation.
Traditional methods for logo classiﬁcation rely on handcrafted features and keypoint-based detectors (S. Romberg
2013). Recently deep learning has been used for logo
classiﬁcation for its superior performance with end-to-end
pipeline automation (Hoi et al. 2015; Bianco et al. 2017;
Fehérvári and Appalaraju 2019). One standard approach is
that one image is fed into one deep neural object detector
(e.g., fast R-CNN (Girshick 2015)) and one Logo classiﬁer
outputs its prediction, where the ImageNet trained CNN is
ﬁne-tuned on FlickrLogos-32 (Romberg et al. 2011) dataset.
However, such methods suffer from the lack of a big quality
logo dataset, leading to lower generalization ability of these
models. Although some datasets like WebLogo-2M (Su,
Gong, and Zhu 2017) and PL2K (Fehérvári and Appalaraju
2019) are large, WebLogo-2M is very noisy for its unsupervised annotation while the recent proposed PL2K is not
publicly available.
To address these problems, we introduce a new logo
dataset, Logo-2K+ for logo classiﬁcation. Compared with
existing public available datasets, such as FlickrLogos-32,
Logo-2K+ has three distinctive characteristics: (1) Largescale. It consists of 167,140 images with a total number
of 2,341 categories. (2) High-coverage. To our knowledge,
Logo-2K+ consists of 2,341 categories and has the highest
coverage of the logo categorical space. (3) High-diversity.
The logo images are collected from different websites. There
are different types of logo images with different logo appearance, scale and background. Figure. 1 shows some samples.
Furthermore, we propose a Discriminative Region Navigation and Augmentation Network (DRNA-Net) to ﬁrst localize informative logo regions, and then explores the potential of data augmentation for region-oriented data augmentation. The proposed DRNA-Net consists of four subnetworks: the navigator sub-network navigates the model to
focus on informative regions. For each region, the teacher
sub-network evaluates its probability belonging to groundtruth class to select the most informative ones. Regionoriented data augmentation subnetwork is mainly used to
augment these selected regions via both region cropping and
region dropping. The scrutinizer sub-network extracts and

Abstract
Logo classiﬁcation has gained increasing attention for its various applications, such as copyright infringement detection,
product recommendation and contextual advertising. Compared with other types of object images, the real-world logo
images have larger variety in logo appearance and more complexity in their background. Therefore, recognizing the logo
from images is challenging. To support efforts towards scalable logo classiﬁcation task, we have curated a dataset, Logo2K+, a new large-scale publicly available real-world logo
dataset with 2,341 categories and 167,140 images. Compared
with existing popular logo datasets, such as FlickrLogos-32
and LOGO-Net, Logo-2K+ has more comprehensive coverage of logo categories and larger quantity of logo images.
Moreover, we propose a Discriminative Region Navigation
and Augmentation Network (DRNA-Net), which is capable of discovering more informative logo regions and augmenting these image regions for logo classiﬁcation. DRNANet consists of four sub-networks: the navigator sub-network
ﬁrst selected informative logo-relevant regions guided by the
teacher sub-network, which can evaluate its conﬁdence belonging to the ground-truth logo class. The data augmentation sub-network then augments the selected regions via
both region cropping and region dropping. Finally, the scrutinizer sub-network fuses features from augmented regions and
the whole image for logo classiﬁcation. Comprehensive experiments on Logo-2K+ and other three existing benchmark
datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of proposed method.
Logo-2K+ and the proposed strong baseline DRNA-Net are
expected to further the development of scalable logo image recognition, and the Logo-2K+ dataset can be found at
https://github.com/msn199959/Logo-2k-plus-Dataset.

Introduction
Logo classiﬁcation (Chen, Leung, and Gao 2003; Hoi et al.
2015; Bianco et al. 2017; Fehérvári and Appalaraju 2019)
aims to recognize the logo name of an input image, and
can be viewed as a special case of image recognition from
a computer vision perspective. It has been a well-studied
subject for decades for its various real-world commercial
applications, such as brand retrieval (Joly and Buisson
2009), brand monitoring (Liu, Dzyabura, and Mizik 2018;
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6194

