The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

‘Watch the Flu’: A Tweet Monitoring Tool
for Epidemic Intelligence of Inﬂuenza in Australia
Brian Jin,*♠ Aditya Joshi,*♠ Ross Sparks,♠ Stephen Wan,♠ Cécile Paris,♠ C Raina MacIntyre♣
♠

♣

CSIRO Data61, Sydney, Australia
The Kirby Institute, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia
{ﬁrstname.lastname}@csiro.au, r.macintyre@unsw.edu.au

Abstract
‘Watch The Flu’ is a tool that monitors tweets posted in Australia for symptoms of inﬂuenza. The tool is a unique combination of two areas of artiﬁcial intelligence: natural language
processing and time series monitoring, in order to assist public health surveillance. Using a real-time data pipeline, it deploys a web-based dashboard for visual analysis, and sends
out emails to a set of users when an outbreak is detected. We
expect that the tool will assist public health experts with their
decision-making for disease outbreaks, by providing them insights from social media.

Epidemic intelligence is an area of public health surveillance that deals with early identiﬁcation and assessment of
potential health hazards (Paquet et al. 2006). This could
be done using ofﬁcial information sources such as health
records, or unofﬁcial sources such as social media (Joshi
et al. 2019b). In this demonstration, we present the ﬁrst
version of ‘Watch The Flu’, a near-real-time tool for social media-based epidemic intelligence. It currently monitors tweets posted in Australia for symptoms of inﬂuenza.
Inﬂuenza is a syndrome (i.e., a collection of symptoms) that
results in an acute respiratory infection (https://www.who.
int/inﬂuenza/en/). We monitor seven symptoms of inﬂuenza
(namely, cold, vomiting, upset stomach, cough, headache,
fever and diarrhoea) over six states of Australia (New South
Wales, Victoria, Queensland, Western Australia, South Australia and Tasmania). Past work using search query statistics to predict inﬂuenza infection counts has been criticised
for over-estimating the counts (Lazer et al. 2014). Therefore,
our tool does not predict infection counts. Instead, it endeavours to signal outbreaks of individual symptoms as indicated
by an unexpectedly high number of tweets reporting them.
‘Watch the Flu’ is expected to assist health professionals and
public health experts by providing them insights from tweets
in a region. The tool generates two kinds of outputs: emails
that are sent when an alert is ﬂagged and a dashboard that
can be consulted on an ongoing basis.

Figure 1: Architecture

Figure 2: Screenshot of the Web-based Dashboard.

Architecture
The architecture is shown in Figure 1 and described hereafter. The tool reads from a real-time database of tweets
posted in Australia (‘tweet selector’), and performs a four
step process to detect the alerts. The ﬁrst step (‘location predictor’) assigns a tweet to one of the six states of Australia
while the latter three are based on our architecture for social
media-based epidemic intelligence (Joshi et al. 2019c). Programming languages used to implement each step are indicated in brackets in the Figure. ElasticSearch, Apache Kafka
and NodeJS run on Docker.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13616

