The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Deterministic Value-Policy Gradients
Qingpeng Cai,∗1 Ling Pan,∗2 Pingzhong Tang2
1

Alibaba Group
IIIS, Tsinghua University
qingpeng.cqp@alibaba-inc.com, pl17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, kenshin@tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Fairbank 2008) compute the policy gradient through back
propagation of the reward along a trajectory predicted by
the learned model, which enables better sample efﬁciency.
However, to the best of our knowledge, existing works of
deterministic value gradient methods merely focus on ﬁnite
horizon, which are too myopic and can lead to large bias.
Stochastic value gradient (SVG) methods (Heess et al. 2015)
use the re-parameterization technique to optimize the stochastic policies. Among the class of SVG algorithms, although
SVG(1) studies inﬁnite-horizon problems, it only uses onestep rollout, which limits its efﬁciency. Also, it suffers from
the high variance due to the importance sampling ratio and
the randomness of the policy.
In this paper, we study the setting with inﬁnite horizon,
where both state transitions and policies are deterministic.
(Heess et al. 2015) gives recursive Bellman gradient equations of deterministic value gradients, but the gradient lacks
of theoretical guarantee as the DPG theorem does not hold in
this deterministic transition case. We prove that the gradient
indeed exists for a certain set of discount factors. We then
derive a closed form of the value gradients.
However, the estimation of the deterministic value gradients is much more challenging. The difﬁculty of the computation of the gradient mainly comes from the dependency
of the gradient of the value function over the state. Such
computation may involve inﬁnite times of the product of the
gradient of the transition function and is hard to converge.
Thus, applying the Bellman gradient equation recursively
may incur high instability.
To overcome these challenges, we use model-based approaches to predict the reward and transition function. Based
on the theoretical guarantee of the closed form of the value
gradients in the setting, we propose a class of deterministic
value gradients DVG(k) with inﬁnite horizon, where k denotes the number of rollout steps. For each choice of k, we
use the rewards predicted by the model and the action-value
at k + 1 step to estimate of the value gradients over the state,
in order to reduce the instability of the gradient of the value
function over the state. Different number of rollout steps
maintains a trade-off between the accumulated model bias
and the variance of the gradient over the state. The deterministic policy gradient estimator can be viewed as a special case

Abstract
Reinforcement learning algorithms such as the deep deterministic policy gradient algorithm (DDPG) has been widely used
in continuous control tasks. However, the model-free DDPG
algorithm suffers from high sample complexity. In this paper
we consider the deterministic value gradients to improve the
sample efﬁciency of deep reinforcement learning algorithms.
Previous works consider deterministic value gradients with
the ﬁnite horizon, but it is too myopic compared with inﬁnite
horizon. We ﬁrstly give a theoretical guarantee of the existence of the value gradients in this inﬁnite setting. Based on
this theoretical guarantee, we propose a class of the deterministic value gradient algorithm (DVG) with inﬁnite horizon,
and different rollout steps of the analytical gradients by the
learned model trade off between the variance of the value gradients and the model bias. Furthermore, to better combine the
model-based deterministic value gradient estimators with the
model-free deterministic policy gradient estimator, we propose
the deterministic value-policy gradient (DVPG) algorithm. We
ﬁnally conduct extensive experiments comparing DVPG with
state-of-the-art methods on several standard continuous control benchmarks. Results demonstrate that DVPG substantially
outperforms other baselines.

Introduction
(Silver et al. 2014) propose the deterministic policy gradient
(DPG) algorithm that aims to ﬁnd an optimal deterministic
policy that maximizes the expected long-term reward, which
lowers the variance when estimating the policy gradient, compared to stochastic policies (Sutton et al. 2000). (Lillicrap et
al. 2015) further combine deep neural networks with DPG to
improve the modeling capacity, and propose the deep deterministic policy gradient (DDPG) algorithm. It is recognized
that DDPG has been successful in robotic control tasks (Gu
et al. 2016) and dynamic mechanism design (Tang 2017;
Cai et al. 2018). Despite the effectiveness of DDPG in these
tasks, it suffers from the high sample complexity problem
(Schulman et al. 2015).
Deterministic value gradient methods (Werbos 1990;
Nguyen and Widrow 1990; Jordan and Rumelhart 1992;
∗

The ﬁrst two authors contributed equally to this work.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3316

