The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Balancing the Tradeoff between Proﬁt and
Fairness in Rideshare Platforms during High-Demand Hours
Vedant Nanda,1,2 Pan Xu,3 Karthik Abinav Sankararaman,1,4
John P. Dickerson,1 Aravind Srinivasan1
1

University of Maryland, College Park, 2 Max Planck Institute for Software Systems
3
New Jersey Institute of Technology, New Jersey, 4 Facebook
{vedant, john, srin}@cs.umd.edu, pxu@njit.edu, karthikabinavs@gmail.com
Bei and Zhang 2018; Dickerson et al. 2018b; 2018a). The
second considers the spatial-temporal pricing aspects of
rideshare, e.g., (Ma, Fang, and Parkes 2019; Bimpikis, Candogan, and Saban 2017; Kanoria and Qian 2019; Banerjee,
Freund, and Lykouris 2017; Banerjee, Johari, and Riquelme
2016). The third focuses on applying reinforcement-learning
approaches to planning and matching problems in rideshare
see, e.g., (Xu et al. 2018; Lin et al. 2018).

Abstract
Rideshare platforms, when assigning requests to drivers, tend
to maximize proﬁt for the system and/or minimize waiting
time for riders. Such platforms can exacerbate biases that
drivers may have over certain types of requests. We consider
the case of peak hours when the demand for rides is more
than the supply of drivers. Drivers are well aware of their advantage during the peak hours and can choose to be selective about which rides to accept. Moreover, if in such a scenario, the assignment of requests to drivers (by the platform)
is made only to maximize proﬁt and/or minimize wait time
for riders, requests of a certain type (e.g., from a non-popular
pickup location, or to a non-popular drop-off location) might
never be assigned to a driver. Such a system can be highly
unfair to riders. However, increasing fairness might come at
a cost of the overall proﬁt made by the rideshare platform.
To balance these conﬂicting goals, we present a ﬂexible, nonadaptive algorithm, NAdap, that allows the platform designer
to control the proﬁt and fairness of the system via parameters α and β respectively. We model the matching problem
as an online bipartite matching where the set of drivers is ofﬂine and requests arrive online. Upon the arrival of a request,
we use NAdap to assign it to a driver (the driver might then
choose to accept or reject it) or reject the request. We formalize the measures of proﬁt and fairness in our setting and show
that by using NAdap, the competitive ratios for proﬁt and
fairness measures would be no worse than α/e and β/e respectively. Extensive experimental results on both real-world
and synthetic datasets conﬁrm the validity of our theoretical lower bounds. Additionally, they show that NAdap under
some choice of (α, β) can beat two natural heuristics, Greedy
and Uniform, on both fairness and proﬁt. Code is available at:
https://github.com/nvedant07/rideshare-fairness-peak/.

1

In all the aforementioned prior work, the objective is either to maximize the total proﬁt of the system or minimize
the waiting time of riders (or a combination thereof). However, both of these objectives are global in that they do not
ensure sub-group level fairness (e.g., riders of a particular
protected class being systematically underserved). Consider
a scenario during peak hours when there is increased demand for rides, thus, giving the drivers a bargaining advantage to drop rides. Typical criteria used by drivers to reject
riders include riders’ starting/ending location, trip length,
gender, race and age. Recently, it has been reported that
drivers also reject riders based on attributes such as gender, race and disability either intentionally or unintentionally, see, e.g., (Laurence 2019; Cook 2019; Grifﬁn 2019).
Houser (2018) reported that “black passengers using ridehailing apps have to wait an average of 1 minute and 43 seconds longer than white counterparts and are 4% more likely
to have drivers cancel on them.”
Thus, current rideshare platforms can enable and amplify prejudices in society. To counter this, current rideshare
apps implement the following measures:1 (1) Riders’ photo
and destination are hidden from the driver until they accept/reject the request; (2) Penalty is imposed if drivers
cancel a certain number of trips after initially accepting
them (e.g., drivers’ account getting temporarily deactivated).
However, drivers devise new strategies to avoid the restrictions imposed by the above measures. It was reported (Paul
2018) that some Uber drivers bypass the limitation imposed
by (1) by starting the trip moments before picking up a passenger to see where the passenger is going. In some other
cases, drivers get around the limitation imposed by (2) by
intentionally delaying the pickup, thus forcing the rider to

Introduction

Rideshare platforms have received signiﬁcant attention in
both the computer science and operations research communities. The following are the three main categories of
research. The ﬁrst studies matching policy design in the
rideshare setting (i.e., matching riders and drivers), e.g.,
(Zhao et al. 2019; Ashlagi et al. 2019; Lowalekar, Varakantham, and Jaillet 2018; Tong et al. 2016b; 2016a; 2017;
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
See, for example, §4A “Sharing Between Users” in Lyft’s privacy policy found at https://www.lyft.com/privacy.

2210

