The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Policy Search by Target Distribution Learning for Continuous Control
Chuheng Zhang

Yuanqi Li

Jian Li

IIIS, Tsinghua University
zhangchuheng123@live.com

IIIS, Tsinghua University
timezerolyq@gmail.com

IIIS, Tsinghua University
lapordge@gmail.com

tion on the state-action space to avoid destructively large updates, i.e., the probability distributions over the action space
of the old and new policies conditioned on a state should not
vary too much.
Inﬂuenced by the policy improvement theorem, several
effective algorithms have been proposed in the literature.
TRPO (Schulman et al. 2015a) and ACKTR (Wu et al. 2017)
both update the policy subject to a constraint in the stateaction space (trust region). ACER (Wang et al. 2017) adopts
a trust region optimization method that clips the policy gradient in the state-action space to constrain the policy update. PPO (Schulman et al. 2017) designs a clipped surrogate objective that approximates the regularization. PPO has
been proven to be quite effective and is relatively simpleto-implement, thus becomes a quite popular method. In a
very simple environment (see Section 3), we observe some
weakness of PPO in our experiment: when the policy is neardeterministic, the gradient may explode which leads to instability. Moreover, PPO performs multiple epochs of minibatch updates on the same samples to fully utilize the samples. We observe signiﬁcant performance degradation when
increasing the sample reuse (see Section 6).
We propose a new policy search method, called target distribution learning (TDL), that improves the policy over iterations. In each iteration, the action distribution conditioned
on each encountered state is produced by the policy network.
The actions are drawn from these distributions and used to
interact with the environment. Then, TDL proposes better
action distributions (called target distributions) to optimize
the performance measure and updates the policy network to
approach the target distributions.
The contributions of our work are summarized as follows:

Abstract
It is known that existing policy gradient methods (such as
vanilla policy gradient, PPO, A2C) may suffer from overly
large gradients when the current policy is close to deterministic, leading to an unstable training process. We show that
such instability can happen even in a very simple environment. To address this issue, we propose a new method, called
target distribution learning (TDL), for policy improvement in
reinforcement learning. TDL alternates between proposing a
target distribution and training the policy network to approach
the target distribution. TDL is more effective in constraining
the KL divergence between updated policies, and hence leads
to more stable policy improvements over iterations. Our experiments show that TDL algorithms perform comparably to
(or better than) state-of-the-art algorithms for most continuous control tasks in the MuJoCo environment while being
more stable in training.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms can be broadly divided into value-based methods and policy search methods. When applied to continuous control tasks, value-based
methods, such as (Mnih et al. 2015; Schaul et al. 2015;
Wang et al. 2016; Van Hasselt, Guez, and Silver 2016; Dabney et al. 2018), need additional treatments to convert the
learned value function to executable policies (Gu et al. 2016;
Novati and Koumoutsakos 2019). On the other hand, policy search methods directly improve a policy for continuous
control. Among others, policy gradient-based methods have
been shown to be quite effective in searching good policies, e.g., (Williams 1992; Sutton, Barto, and others 1998;
Silver et al. 2014; Lillicrap et al. 2015; Mnih et al. 2016).
These methods ﬁrst compute the gradient of the performance
measure with respect to the parameters of the policy network
and then update the parameters via stochastic gradient ascent. In order to ensure that the policy improves in terms of
the performance measure over the iterations, the policy improvement theorem (Kakade and Langford 2002) suggests
that the policy update should not be too large over one iteration. Speciﬁcally, policy improvement requires a regulariza-

1. (Section 3) We show experimentally that PPO (even combined with some commonly used remedies) suffers from
an instability issue during the training even in a very simple environment.
2. (Section 4) We propose a new policy improvement
method TDL that retains the simplicity of PPO while
avoids the instability issue. We also propose three algorithms based on TDL, all of which set target distributions within a trust region and thus ensure the policy improvement. We provide theoretical guarantee that

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6770

