The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Attention-Based View Selection Networks for Light-Field Disparity Estimation
Yu-Ju Tsai,1 Yu-Lun Liu,1,2 Ming Ouhyoung,1 Yung-Yu Chuang1
1
National Taiwan University, 2 MediaTek
{r06922009, yulunliu}@cmlab.csie.ntu.edu.tw, {ming, cyy}@csie.ntu.edu.tw

Abstract
This paper introduces a novel deep network for estimating
depth maps from a light ﬁeld image. For utilizing the views
more effectively and reducing redundancy within views, we
propose a view selection module that generates an attention map indicating the importance of each view and its potential for contributing to accurate depth estimation. By exploring the symmetric property of light ﬁeld views, we enforce symmetry in the attention map and further improve accuracy. With the attention map, our architecture utilizes all
views more effectively and efﬁciently. Experiments show that
the proposed method achieves state-of-the-art performance in
terms of accuracy and ranks the ﬁrst on a popular benchmark
for disparity estimation for light ﬁeld images.

Attention
module

Introduction

Attention map

Disparity
CNN

Figure 1: The light ﬁeld image contains repetitive and redundant information among views. For utilizing views more
effectively and efﬁciently for depth estimation, we design an
attention-based view selection module to help the disparity
estimation network determine how to weigh views’ contributions according to the properties of the input scene. With
the attention map, the disparity CNN can predict the disparity map using the input views more adaptively. This ﬁgure
shows that different attention maps could be generated for
different scenes for better adapting to their characteristics.

Light ﬁeld cameras collect and record light from different directions in the scene. With the light ﬁeld images captured by
light ﬁeld cameras, users are empowered with the capability to change the focal plane or viewpoint even after image
shooting. The modern hand-held light ﬁeld camera is often
equipped with a micro-lens array which is placed one focal
length away from the image plane of the sensor. With this
structure, the measurements captured by the 2D sensor can
be converted into a multi-view image with different viewpoints. The multi-view image offers several advantages over
a conventional image captured by a regular camera. First, we
can change the viewpoint to the scene and refocus on the object we want to see clearly in the scene for creating the effect
of “Depth-of-Field. ” Second, light ﬁeld cameras have faster
shooting speeds than conventional cameras because there is
less need to focus before taking a picture. Third, the use of
a larger aperture enables us to take better photographs under low-light environments. Finally, light ﬁeld cameras also
implicitly record the depth information which enables many
interesting applications.
Although light ﬁeld cameras record depth information implicitly, extracting depth information from light ﬁeld images could be challenging because the baseline between subaperture images is very narrow, and the spatial and angu-

lar resolutions within the image sensor are restricted by the
hardware design. Several methods have been proposed to
address these challenges in extracting accurate depth information from light ﬁeld images. These methods often have
to make a balance between computation overhead and accuracy. Conventional methods such as stereo matching can
obtain depth maps of sufﬁcient quality while suffering from
heavy computation costs. At the same time, due to the narrow baseline, the resultant depth map could contain noise
which causes problems in applications. Recently, several
deep neural networks have been proposed for striking a better balance between accuracy and computation overhead.
However, they often use only a subset of images for reducing
computation and do not fully utilize the information within
the light ﬁeld.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12095

