The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

PresentationTrainer: Oral Presentation
Support System for Impression-Related Feedback
Shengzhou Yi,1 Hiroshi Yumoto,2 Xueting Wang,1 Toshihiko Yamasaki1
1

Department of Information and Communication Engineering, The University of Tokyo
2
P&I Information Engineering Co., Ltd. Innovation Business Headquarters
1
{yishengzhou, xt wang, yamasaki}@hal.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp
2
yumoto@pandi.co.jp

Abstract





 


In order to support the pratice of oral presentation, we developed PresentationTrainer which includes (1) a presentation impression prediction system and (2) a presentation slide
analysis system. For the presentation impression prediction
system, we proposed two methods, using Support Vector Machine and Markov Random Field, or using multimodal neural
network, to predict audiences’ impressions for speech videos.
For the slide analysis system, we used Convolutional Neural
Network and Global Average Pooling to evaluate the design
of slides. We then used Class Activation Mapping to provide
visual feedback for showing which areas should be modiﬁed.






























Oral presentation is the most standard format to express
ideas or introduce products in many scences. However, there
are few efﬁcient tools that can automatically evaluate the
presentation. We developed PresentationTrainer, which includes a presentation impression prediction system and a
presentation slide analysis system, to evaluate presenters’
performance and provide impression-related feedback.
In (Yamasaki et al. 2015) and (Yi, Wang, and Yamasaki
2019), we respectively used statistical machine learning
and deep learning to predict the impressions, a presentation
could give to the audiences. In (Oyama and Yamasaki 2019),
we proposed a method to evaluate slides and to provide a visual feedback to tell presenters which areas of their slides are
better to be modiﬁed in order to make a better impression.













Figure 1: Continous impression prediction
let Allocation, skipgram, and surface-level features. We averaged the vector of all words as document embedding. We
extracted the acoustic feature by using openSMILE.
We used SVM to predict the impression labels with only
one type of document embedding or only acoustic feature
at a time. We then used MRF to consider the correlations
between different features and even different impressions to
relabel the results of SVMs. However, this method can only
predict the impressions for complete presentation videos.

Multimodal Neural Network
We used a multimodal neural network to provide presenters
with continuous feedback (Figure 1). We used skip-gram for
word embedding, and input the word vectors in each sentence to Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) in order to get
sentence-level linguistic features. We extracted the acoustic
features of audio segments, corresponding to each sentence.
We took out audio segments and transfered it into frequency
domain by Short-Term Fourier Transform. We then used
Convolutional Neural Network to extract the deep feature
from audio spectrograms as segmental acoustic features.
After we got the sentence-level features, we used an attention mechanism for feature fusion. We then used LSTM
to consider the correlations between sentences and predicted
audiences’ impressions on each sentence. According to the
prediction results, the presenters can understand which sentences may leave bad impressions and need to be modiﬁed.

Presentation Impression Prediction System
We proposed two methods to predict the audiences’ impressions based on linguistic feature as well as acoustic feature. One method used Support Vector Machine (SVM) and
Markov Random Field (MRF), and the other method used a
multimodal neural network and an attention mechanism.

SVM-MRF
We extracted linguistic feature and acoustic feature from the
captions and the audio data, respectively. For the linguistic
feature, we used multiple word embedding methods, including Bag-of-words, Latent Semantic Indexing, Latent Dirichc 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13644

