The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Weakly Supervised Sequence Tagging from Noisy Rules
Esteban Safranchik, Shiying Luo, Stephen H. Bach
Department of Computer Science
Brown University
Providence, RI, USA
{esteban safranchik, shiying luo, stephen bach}@brown.edu

tagging, an important class of structured prediction problems in which each element in an input sequence is tagged
with a class.
Sequence tagging arises in many natural language processing applications, such as named entity recognition
(NER), semantic role labeling, text chunking, supersense
tagging, sentence compression, and frame target prediction, as well as other areas like activity recognition in
video (Choi, Shahid, and Savarese 2011) and time-series
tagging. In this work, we focus on NER because it is a
critical component of many natural language processing
pipelines—including relation extraction, text summarization, and question answering—and the difﬁculty of collecting labeled data sets for a wide variety of entity types has
motivated much work on NER with less resources for supervision (Jiao et al. 2006; Mann and McCallum 2010;
Fries et al. 2017; Shang et al. 2018b). We also show that
our methods apply to semantic role labeling.
Replacing hand-labeled training data for sequence tagging with rule-labeled data introduces several challenges.
First, rules have unknown accuracy, and it is not apparent
how to resolve conﬂicting votes. Second, the tags of the
elements have statistical dependencies across the sequence
that should be taken into account when resolving conﬂicts.
Third, it is often natural for users to have separate heuristics
about what tag an element should have from how far that decision should propagate to neighboring tags. For example, in
an NER task, the token ‘Inc.’ is probably part of an organization, but separate heuristics are useful to decide how many
preceding tokens also have that tag. Multiple such rules are
challenging to integrate because they tie tags together that
have not yet been inferred.
Work so far on learning from multiple noisy rules has
sidestepped these issues by focusing on i.i.d. classiﬁcation.
For structured prediction tasks like sequence tagging, prior
work (Fries et al. 2017; Ratner et al. 2019) has converted
tasks to classiﬁcation by ﬁrst generating candidate spans
from the sequence and independently labeling each candidate. This approach is unsatisfying because it either (1) limits users to tasks where effective candidate generators already exist, or (2) signiﬁcantly increases the human effort required. Candidate generators require much more effort than

Abstract
We propose a framework for training sequence tagging models with weak supervision consisting of multiple heuristic
rules of unknown accuracy. In addition to supporting rules
that vote on tags in the output sequence, we introduce a new
type of weak supervision, called linking rules, that vote on
how sequence elements should be grouped into spans with
the same tag. These rules are an alternative to candidate span
generators that require signiﬁcantly more human effort. To
estimate the accuracies of the rules and combine their conﬂicting outputs into training data, we introduce a new type
of generative model, linked hidden Markov models (linked
HMMs), and prove they are generically identiﬁable (up to
a tag permutation) without any observed training labels. We
ﬁnd that linked HMMs provide an average 7 F1 point boost
on benchmark named entity recognition tasks versus generative models that assume the tags are i.i.d. Further, neural sequence taggers trained with these structure-aware generative
models outperform comparable state-of-the-art approaches to
weak supervision by an average of 2.6 F1 points.

1

Introduction

The expense of collecting large, hand-labeled datasets for
machine learning has long motivated the search for alternative sources of supervision. Recent work has studied learning from weak supervision in the form of multiple, possibly
conﬂicting rules that label training data with unknown accuracy (Ratner et al. 2017). The key idea in these approaches
is to statistically model the true label for a classiﬁcation task
as a latent variable and learn the parameters that relate the
heuristic votes to that label. A discriminative model such
as a neural network is then trained on the estimated labels,
in order to generalize beyond the rules. While successful
for classiﬁcation tasks (Fries et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2019;
Bach et al. 2019), there is a fundamental limitation: all
of these techniques and applications model the predictions
as independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.). However,
many prediction tasks are structured, meaning that multiple
interdependent outputs must be predicted simultaneously. In
this work, we address this limitation in the case of sequence
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5570

