The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

DATA-GRU: Dual-Attention Time-Aware Gated
Recurrent Unit for Irregular Multivariate Time Series
Qingxiong Tan,1 Mang Ye,1 Baoyao Yang,1 Si-Qi Liu,1 Andy Jinhua Ma,2
Terry Cheuk-Fung Yip,3 Grace Lai-Hung Wong,3 Pong C. Yuen1∗

1

Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China
3
Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
{csqxtan, mangye, byyang, siqiliu, pcyuen}@comp.hkbu.edu.hk,
{andyjinhuama, terryfungyip}@gmail.com, wonglaihung@cuhk.edu.hk
2

Abstract

Missing values
Base Excess

Due to the discrepancy of diseases and symptoms, patients
usually visit hospitals irregularly and different physiological
variables are examined at each visit, producing large amounts
of irregular multivariate time series (IMTS) data with missing
values and varying intervals. Existing methods process IMTS
into regular data so that standard machine learning models
can be employed. However, time intervals are usually determined by the status of patients, while missing values are
caused by changes in symptoms. Therefore, we propose a
novel end-to-end Dual-Attention Time-Aware Gated Recurrent Unit (DATA-GRU) for IMTS to predict the mortality
risk of patients. In particular, DATA-GRU is able to: 1) preserve the informative varying intervals by introducing a timeaware structure to directly adjust the inﬂuence of the previous
status in coordination with the elapsed time, and 2) tackle
missing values by proposing a novel dual-attention structure
to jointly consider data-quality and medical-knowledge. A
novel unreliability-aware attention mechanism is designed to
handle the diversity in the reliability of different data, while a
new symptom-aware attention mechanism is proposed to extract medical reasons from original clinical records. Extensive
experimental results on two real-world datasets demonstrate
that DATA-GRU can signiﬁcantly outperform state-of-the-art
methods and provide meaningful clinical interpretation.

Free Calcium
Glucose
pCO2
pH

pO2

Time

6

7
sit
Vi

sit
Vi

5
sit
Vi

Vi
sit
Vi 3
sit
4

2
sit
Vi

Vi

sit

1

PT

Figure 1: Illustration of irregular multivariate time series
(IMTS). The time intervals between successive visits vary
signiﬁcantly from each other. Meanwhile, certain physiological variables are not examined at some visits, causing
missing values.

a certain symptom disappears, corresponding variables are
no longer examined, resulting in missing values. The varying time intervals between successive visits and missing
values raise two key challenges in using IMTS to achieve
accurate mortality risk prediction results. In addition, these
properties provide valuable information in improving prediction performance since they usually reﬂect the health status and symptoms of patients.
Machine learning methods have been successfully applied in many areas, e.g., speech recognition (Afouras et
al. 2018), computer version (Ye et al. 2019a; 2019b; 2019c;
Fu et al. 2019), natural language processing (Camburu et al.
2018), energy prediction (Yuan et al. 2017; 2015; Kang et
al. 2017). The state-of-the-art sequence modeling methods
are recurrent neural networks (RNNs) (Chung et al. 2014;
Pang et al. 2019; Gao et al. 2019). The major limitation of
standard RNN is that it is designed for data with constant
intervals (Baytas et al. 2017), which cannot handle the irregular time-series data. Most clinical prediction methods
convert IMTS into equally spaced by discretizing the time
axis into non-overlapping intervals with a hand-designed interval (Tan et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2018; Tan et al. 2018;
Che et al. 2017; Lipton, Kale, and Wetzel 2016). Then missing values are ﬁlled via imputation methods. However, when

Introduction
The widely-used electronic health records (EHR) produces
a large quantity of health data, providing valuable opportunities to develop advanced machine learning methods to
improve healthcare service (Shickel et al. 2017; Liu et al.
2018a). One important task is to predict the mortality risk
of patients based on their historical EHR data. Accurate prediction results help doctors evaluate early treatment effects
and design effective treatment plans (Liu et al. 2018b).
This task is challenging since EHR data consists of irregular multivariate time series (IMTS), as illustrated in Fig.1.
At different stages of diseases, patients visit hospitals under
varying intervals due to the dynamics of health status. Moreover, different physiological variables are examined at different visits because of the changes in symptoms, e.g., when
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
930

