The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

An Empirical Study of Content
Understanding in Conversational Question Answering
Ting-Rui Chiang, Hao-Tong Ye, Yun-Nung Chen
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan
{r07922052, r08922065}@csie.ntu.edu.tw, y.v.chen@ieee.org

lieved to be important materials for research about conversational question answering.
This work focuses on investigating how well the performance of a model on these two benchmark datasets reﬂects
its capability of comprehension. If higher performance on
these datasets does not necessarily imply better conversation comprehension, then further investigation must be done
when models claim their better understanding performance.
However, it has not been well investigated by any of the
prior work (Choi et al. 2018; Huang, Choi, and tau Yih 2019;
Zhu, Zeng, and Huang 2018; Yeh and Chen 2019).
In this paper, we further analyze whether the recent
models achieving competitive performance rely on content
comprehension. It is motivated by the fact that the position of the answer to the previous question is widely utilized in many of previous conversational question answering models, such as BiDAF-with-ctx (Seo et al. 2016) and
FlowQA (Huang, Choi, and tau Yih 2019). Those models
leverage the datasets’ property that answers or rationals can
always be found as a span of the given passage. Thus those
models can access the informative content provided by the
position information. Models are expected to learn to understand the conversation based on its content. However, it is
not clear whether the models rely on the previous conversation content or merely the position information.
The goal of this paper is to investigate the above two
questions and to guide the future research on conversational
question answering. We focus on recent open-sourced models, including FlowQA (Huang, Choi, and tau Yih 2019),
BERT (Devlin et al. 2019), and SDNet (Zhu, Zeng, and
Huang 2018). Similar to Sankar et al. (2019), we design a
set of experiments consisting of different training settings
to address the ﬁrst question and different testing settings
to address the second question. The results express some
concerns about conversational QA models: 1) Higher performance on QuAC and CoQA does not necessarily imply
better content comprehension. 2) Models trained on QuAC
show the tendency of heavily relying on the previous answers’ positions rather than their textual content. By pointing out these issues, some potential hazards may be avoided
in the future research. Furthermore, our presented experiments can serve as an analysis tool for conversational ques-

Abstract
With a lot of work about context-free question answering systems, there is an emerging trend of conversational question
answering models in the natural language processing ﬁeld.
Thanks to the recently collected datasets, including QuAC
and CoQA, there has been more work on conversational question answering, and recent work has achieved competitive
performance on both datasets. However, to best of our knowledge, two important questions for conversational comprehension research have not been well studied: 1) How well can the
benchmark dataset reﬂect models’ content understanding? 2)
Do the models well utilize the conversation content when answering questions? To investigate these questions, we design
different training settings, testing settings, as well as an attack to verify the models’ capability of content understanding on QuAC and CoQA. The experimental results indicate
some potential hazards in the benchmark datasets, QuAC and
CoQA, for conversational comprehension research. Our analysis also sheds light on both what models may learn and
how datasets may bias the models. With deep investigation
of the task, it is believed that this work can beneﬁt the future
progress of conversation comprehension. The source code is
available at https://github.com/MiuLab/CQA-Study.

1

Introduction

Answering questions in the conversational manner has become an important task for machine reading comprehension.
There are two benchmark conversational question answering
datasets, QuAC (Choi et al. 2018) and CoQA (Reddy, Chen,
and Manning 2019). Different from traditional machine
reading comprehension (Rajpurkar et al. 2016; Nguyen et al.
2016; Rajpurkar, Jia, and Liang 2018) whose questions are
context-free, questions and answers in QuAC and CoQA are
collected in a conversational manner. Same as original machine reading comprehension, questions related to a given
passage are asked. However, questions may be also related
to the given conversational history, and should be answered
accordingly. Such conversational setting is regarded as more
practical because people tend to seek for information in a
conversational way. QuAC and CoQA also feature many linguistic phenomena unique to conversations, so they are bec 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7578

