The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

ODSS: Efﬁcient Hybridization for Optimal Coalition Structure Generation
Narayan Changder,1 Samir Aknine,2 Sarvapali Ramchurn,3 Animesh Dutta1
1

National Institute of Technology Durgapur, India. 2 LIRIS, Lyon 1 University, France. 3 University of Southampton,UK.
narayan.changder@gmail.com, samir.aknine@univ-lyon1.fr, sdr1@soton.ac.uk, animesh@cse.nitdgp.ac.in

3. we show that ODSS 1 delays the overlapping of IDP and
IP operations by dividing the whole subspace of CSG into
two disjoint sets: IDPSET and IPSET. In the ﬁrst stage,
each set is assigned to IDP and IP. ODSS performs better
by up to 54.15% on benchmark inputs.

Abstract
Coalition Structure Generation (CSG) is an NP-complete
problem that remains difﬁcult to solve on account of its complexity. In this paper, we propose an efﬁcient hybrid algorithm for optimal coalition structure generation called ODSS.
ODSS is a hybrid version of two previously established algorithms IDP (Rahwan and Jennings 2008) and IP (Rahwan et
al. 2009). ODSS minimizes the overlapping between IDP and
IP by dividing the whole search space of CSG into two disjoint sets of subspaces and proposes a novel subspace shrinking technique to reduce the size of the subspace searched by
IP with the help of IDP. When compared to the state-of-the-art
against a wide variety of value distributions, ODSS is shown
to perform better by up to 54.15% on benchmark inputs.

1

4. hence, this paper advances the state-of-the-art by providing a novel hybridization method.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Sections 2 and
3 describe the optimal CSG problem and the ODP-IP algorithm. Section 4 shows the limitations of ODP-IP. Section 5
delineates the new techniques used in the ODSS algorithm,
while sections 6 and 7 describe the empirical evaluation and
draw some conclusions.

Introduction

2

Coalition formation involves the coming together of collectives of agents to achieve both their individual and common
goals. It is a key concept in multi-agent systems. Coalition
formation can be applied to many real-world problems such
as task allocation (Shehory and Kraus 1998), and to logistics
applications (Sandhlom and Lesser 1997).
Various algorithms have been proposed to solve the CSG
problem. (Michalak et al. 2016) proposed a hybrid version
of IDP (Rahwan and Jennings 2008) and IP (Rahwan et al.
2009) called ODP-IP and showed empirically that it is faster
than other algorithms. The Inclusion-Exclusion algorithm
proposed by (Björklund, Husfeldt, and Koivisto 2009) was
tested in practice by (Michalak et al. 2016) and the authors
found that the growth rate resembles O(6n ).
The ODP-IP algorithm is the fastest exact algorithm for
the CSG problem to date. However, as we show in this paper,
ODP-IP struggles to cope with speciﬁc types of inputs which
undermine its hybridization approach. Speciﬁcally:

CSG problem formulation

Let A be the set of agents A = {a1 , a2 , . . . , an }, n the
number of agents in A. We denote any coalition C =
{a1 , a2 , . . . , al } as a coalition of agents, where l ≤ n. Let
v be a characteristic function, where v assigns a real value
v(C) to each coalition C. Formally, v : 2A → R.
A coalition structure (CS) over A is a partitioning of A
into a set of disjoint coalitions {C1 , C2 , . . . , Ck }, where k =
|CS|. In other words, {C1 , C2 , . . . , Ck } satisﬁes the following
constraints: 1) Ci , Cj = ∅ , i, j ∈ {1, 2, . . . , k}. 2) Ci ∩ Cj =
k

Ci = A.
∅, for all i = j. 3)
i=1

Deﬁnition 1 Given a characteristic function v which maps
each coalition C to a utility value, the value of any coalition
 structure CS = {C1 , C2 , . . . , Ck } is deﬁned by v(CS) =
Ci ∈CS (v(Ci )).
The optimal solution of CSG is a coalition structure CS ∗ ∈
ΠA , where ΠA denotes the set of all coalition structures
over A. Thus, CS ∗ = arg maxCS∈ΠA v(CS). The CSG problem is then the problem of ﬁnding such CS ∗ . Note that
{a1 , a2 , . . . , an } and {1, 2, . . . , n} are used interchangeably
throughout this paper.

1. we show that many operations in ODP-IP involve redundant searches by IDP and IP. Hence, both IDP and IP perform many duplicated operations.
2. we deﬁne a new technique to reduce the size of the subspace searched by IP with the help of IDP.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
ODSS stands for Overlapping, Dividing the subspace, and
Subspace Shrinking.

7079

