The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Federated Learning for Vision-and-Language Grounding Problems
Fenglin Liu,1 Xian Wu,3 Shen Ge,3 Wei Fan,3 Yuexian Zou1,2∗
1

ADSPLAB, School of ECE, Peking University, Shenzhen, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
Tencent, Beijing, China
{fenglinliu98, zouyx}@pku.edu.cn, {kevinxwu, shenge, davidwfan}@tencent.com

Despite the impressive results, most of the existing deep
learning based frameworks focus on individual tasks. If
these problems are considered together, different knowledge
from different tasks could be learned jointly, and there are
high chances to promote the performance of each task. To
achieve this goal, a multi-task learning framework has been
proposed for vision-and-language grounding tasks (Li et al.
2018; 2017). However, some approaches are trained under
the condition of sharing all downstream task data, which
may cause data leakage. For example, Li et al. (2018) requires a question-answer pair and an identical image as input
to train the visual question answering and visual question
generation tasks together. This approach won’t work when
cross-task datasets are different.

Abstract
Recently, vision-and-language grounding problems, e.g., image captioning and visual question answering (VQA), has attracted extensive interests from both academic and industrial
worlds. However, given the similarity of these tasks, the efforts to obtain better results by combining the merits of their
algorithms are not well studied. Inspired by the recent success
of federated learning, we propose a federated learning framework to obtain various types of image representations from
different tasks, which are then fused together to form ﬁnegrained image representations. The representations merge
useful features from different vision-and-language grounding
problems, and are thus much more powerful than the original
representations alone in individual tasks. To learn such image representations, we propose the Aligning, Integrating and
Mapping Network (aimNet). The aimNet is validated on three
federated learning settings, which include horizontal federated learning, vertical federated learning, and federated transfer learning. Experiments of aimNet-based federated learning
framework on two representative tasks, i.e., image captioning
and VQA, demonstrate the effective and universal improvements of all metrics over the baselines. In image captioning,
we are able to get 14% and 13% relative gain on the taskspeciﬁc metrics CIDEr and SPICE, respectively. In VQA, we
could also boost the performance of strong baselines by up to
3%.

In recent years, federated learning (McMahan et al. 2017;
Konecný et al. 2016a; 2016b; Yang et al. 2019) has been
proposed as an alternative machine learning setting. The
goal is to train a high quality centralized model based on
datasets that are distributed across multiple clients without sharing the clients’ data. For the vision-and-language
grounding tasks, inspired by the success of federated learning, we can treat each of them as an individual client, enabling the design of a federated learning framework with a
centralized model. Such design establishes a bond among
different tasks to learn various types of knowledge, with the
advantage to improve the performance of each downstream
task while preventing data leakage.

Introduction
Recently, there is a surge of research interests in vision-andlanguage grounding tasks such as image captioning (Chen
et al. 2015) and visual question answering (VQA) (Antol
et al. 2015). In image captioning, an intelligence system
takes an image as input and generates a description in natural language form. VQA is a more challenging problem
that takes an extra question into account and requires the
model to give an answer depending on both the image and
the question. The deep neural networks (Xu et al. 2015;
Anderson et al. 2018; Kim, Jun, and Zhang 2018) have
achieved great success in advancing the state-of-the-arts of
image captioning and VQA.

In this paper, we mainly study on two representative
vision-and-language grounding tasks, i.e., image captioning and VQA. We bridge the gap between these two tasks
with a federated learning framework (McMahan et al. 2017),
which allows the sharing of the obtained ﬁne-grained image representations instead of direct task data. To this end,
we design an aimNet as the centralized model in the federated learning framework, which consists of an aligning
module, an integrating module and a mapping module, the
sketch of which are shown in Figure 1. The aligning module builds aligned image representations by conducting mutual attention (Liu et al. 2019b) over the extracted visual
and textual features. The resulting image representations
form a clearer semantic description of salient image regions,
beneﬁting the downstream tasks (Su et al. 2019; Liu et al.

∗

Corresponding Author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11572

