The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

IVFS: Simple and Efﬁcient Feature
Selection for High Dimensional Topology Preservation
Xiaoyun Li, Chengxi Wu, Ping Li
Cognitive Computing Lab
Baidu Research
10900 NE 8th ST. Bellevue WA, 98004, USA
{lixiaoyun996, wuchenxi2013, pingli98}@gmail.com

into clusters using the spectrum of pairwise similarity graph.
Multi-cluster Feature Selection (MCFS) (Cai, Zhang, and
He 2010) considers combining spectral embedding and l1 regularized regression by assuming a multi-clustered structure of the data.
Although ﬁlter methods are fast to implement, the performance can sometimes be unsatisfactory. In recent years,
many learning-based embedded feature selection methods
are proposed. The idea of most embedded approaches is to
optimize a selection (or weight) matrix with some sparsity
regularization. The objective function can be designed to
achieve similarity preservation. For instance, Similarity Preserving Feature Selection (SPFS) (Zhao et al. 2013) learns a
linear transformation W by minimizing
min XW (XW )T − S2F + λW 2,1 ,
(1)

Abstract
Feature selection is an important tool to deal with high dimensional data. In unsupervised case, many popular algorithms aim at maintaining the structure of the original data.
In this paper, we propose a simple and effective feature selection algorithm to enhance sample similarity preservation
through a new perspective, topology preservation, which is
represented by persistent diagrams from the context of computational topology. This method is designed upon a uniﬁed
feature selection framework called IVFS, which is inspired by
random subset method. The scheme is ﬂexible and can handle cases where the problem is analytically intractable. The
proposed algorithm is able to well preserve the pairwise distances, as well as topological patterns, of the full data. We
demonstrate that our algorithm can provide satisfactory performance under a sharp sub-sampling rate, which supports efﬁcient implementation of our proposed method to large scale
datasets. Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of
the proposed feature selection scheme.

W

where X is the data, S is the sample similarity matrix and
W is weight matrix. Features with largest row l2 norm of W
are selected. SPFS mainly considerss preserving similarity
globally. An improved version of SPFS is called Global and
Local Structure Preservation Feature Selection (GLSPFS)
(Liu et al. 2014), whose objective modiﬁes (1) as

Introduction
High dimensional data becomes more and more common in
machine learning applications, e.g., computer vision, natural language processing and gene selection. In many cases,
the curse of dimensionality leads to costly computation and
a less comprehensible model. Therefore, feature selection is
one of the standard data preprocessing methods. The most
widely used approach is ﬁlter method, where each feature
is individually assigned a score according to some statistical measure, and those with highest scores are selected. Supervised ﬁlter methods include t-test (Guyon and Elisseeff
2003), mutual information (Peng, Long, and Ding 2005),
correlation (Yu and Liu 2003), etc. Meanwhile, there are
many unsupervised ﬁlter algorithms based on similarity and
manifold preservation. LaplacianScore algorithm (He, Cai,
and Niyogi 2006) are proposed to choose features according
to a nearest neighbor graph. Features that are smoothest on
the graph are regarded as most capable to represent the local
manifold structure of full data. Spectral Feature Selection
(SPEC) (Zhao and Liu 2007) aims at separating the samples

min XW (XW )T − S2F + μ · tr(W T X T LXW ) + λW 2,1 ,
W

where L is a locality representation graph. This way, local
structure is also considered. Other unsupervised embedded
algorithms include NDFS (Li et al. 2012), RUFS (Qian and
Zhai 2013), FSASL (Du and Shen 2015), SOGFS (Nie, Zhu,
and Li 2016), AHLFS (Zhu et al. 2017), UPFS (Li et al.
2018b), DGUFS (Guo and Zhu 2018), etc.
Typically, existing similarity preserving feature selection
schemes face two major challenges:
• High dimensionality. As will be shown in our experiments, many methods actually perform not as good in
high dimensions in terms of distance preserving, possibly due to lack of consideration of feature interactions, or
huge number of parameters to optimize. This may result
in non-robust or unstable solutions.
• Large sample size. In most of the embedded methods introduced above (GLSPFS, SOGFS, etc.), the algorithm involves (repeatedly) matrix decomposition and/or inverse,
which runs very slowly with large sample size.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4747

