The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Deception through Half-Truths
Andrew Estornell, Sanmay Das, Yevgeniy Vorobeychik
Computer Science & Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis
{aestornell, sanmay, yvorobeychik}@wustl.edu

Grosu 2011; Pawlick and Zhu 2015), for example, advertising an incorrect conﬁguration of computing devices (e.g.,
a Windows machine advertising as Linux) (Schlenker et al.
2018), or warning that there may be inspections when no
inspectors are present (Xu et al. 2016). We take a different perspective. Speciﬁcally, we start with a decision-maker
(the principal) who makes decisions under uncertainty based
on limited evidence. To formalize this setting, we consider
a two-stage dynamic Bayes network in which the principal
observes a partial realization of the ﬁrst stage, and makes a
prediction (i.e., derives a posterior) about the second stage.
We study the extent to which such a decision-maker is susceptible to deception through half-truths—that is, through
an adversarial masking of a subset of ﬁrst-stage variables,
with the assumption that the principal is oblivious to the adversarial nature of this masking (for example, the individual
is unaware, or fails to take into account, that it is performed
adversarially).
While it may at ﬁrst blush be puzzling how a rational
Bayesian observer would be oblivious to the presence of
an adversary, situations of this kind in fact abound. Consider algorithmic trading as one example. When order book
information became available, it gave rise to numerous sophisticated machine learning methods aiming at taking advantage of this additional information (Nevmyvaka, Feng,
and Kearns 2006; Nevmyvaka and Kearns 2013). However,
many such approaches proved to be vulnerable to order book
spooﬁng attacks (Wang, Wellman, and Vorobeychik 2018).
Another example is autonomous driving. Despite a number of illustrations of attacks on state-of-the-art sophisticated AI-based perception algorithms (Boloor et al. 2019;
Eykholt et al. 2018; Sharif et al. 2016; Vorobeychik and
Kantarcioglu 2018), standard autonomous driving stacks,
such as Autoware (Foundation ) and Apollo (Baidu ) are
largely devoid of any techniques for robust perception.
Our ﬁrst observation is that in our setting half-truths (that
is, adversarial masking of observations) can lead to arbitrarily wrong beliefs. This is self-evident with lies, but surprising when we can only mask observations. However, we
show that the problem of optimally choosing such a mask
is extremely hard: in general, it is inapproximable to any
polynomial factor. Next, we study an important restricted
family of Bayes networks in which transition probabilities
of nodes depend on the sum of the parents. This is a nat-

Abstract
Deception is a fundamental issue across a diverse array of
settings, from cybersecurity, where decoys (e.g., honeypots)
are an important tool, to politics that can feature politically
motivated “leaks” and fake news about candidates. Typical
considerations of deception view it as providing false information. However, just as important but less frequently studied
is a more tacit form where information is strategically hidden
or leaked. We consider the problem of how much an adversary can affect a principal’s decision by “half-truths”, that is,
by masking or hiding bits of information, when the principal
is oblivious to the presence of the adversary. The principal’s
problem can be modeled as one of predicting future states
of variables in a dynamic Bayes network, and we show that,
while theoretically the principal’s decisions can be made arbitrarily bad, the optimal attack is NP-hard to approximate,
even under strong assumptions favoring the attacker. However, we also describe an important special case where the
dependency of future states on past states is additive, in which
we can efﬁciently compute an approximately optimal attack.
Moreover, in networks with a linear transition function we
can solve the problem optimally in polynomial time.

1

Introduction

For better or for worse, deception is ubiquitous. It can be
benign, but just as often deception is used to deliberately
mislead. Commonly, the means of deception can be viewed
as outright lies or misinformation. This is certainly the case
with fake news and false advertising, as well as phishing
emails, and it is also the case for honeypots, even though
here deception is used to help network security, rather than
for a nefarious purpose. However, a more subtle means of
deception involves strategically hiding information. For example, misleading advertising about a drug may omit important information about its side-effects, and we may effectively protect a system against classes of attacks by strategically deciding what is public about it, such as a Windows
computer publicizing a Safari browser, but not the OS, to
make it appear it’s running Mac OS X.
Theoretical studies of deception typically leverage games
of incomplete information, where deception takes the form
of signaling misinformation about private state (Carroll and
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10110

