The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

ReCO: A Large Scale Chinese
Reading Comprehension Dataset on Opinion
Bingning Wang, Ting Yao, Qi Zhang, Jingfang Xu, Xiaochuan Wang
Sogou Inc.
Beijing, 100084, China
{wangbingning, yaoting, qizhang, xujingfang, wxc}@sogou-inc.com

et al. 2017), NarrativeQA (Kociský et al. 2018), etc. Based
on these large scale datasets, a lot of deep learning based
models have been built, such as BiDAF (Seo et al. 2017),
QANet (Yu et al. 2018), etc. These models behave very well
in MRC and some of them even surpass human performance.
However, despite the various types and relatively large
scale, we found there are two main challenges previous
MRC datasets has not been addressed:
1) The MRC context in most previous datasets are
limit to the relatively long document or paragraph,
which contains much irrelevant information to the question. Therefore, the comprehension process is sometimes reduced to the retrieval process (Sugawara et al. 2018), an
MRC system could perform very well by merely ﬁnding the
relevant sentences in a paragraph. For example, in SQuAD
and NewsQA, the model’s performance did not downgrade
when only provided the sentence containing the ground
truth answer (Weissenborn, Wiese, and Seiffe 2017; Min et
al. 2018). In NarrativeQA (Kociský et al. 2018) or NaturalQuestions (Kwiatkowski et al. 2019) where the context
passage is very long, the answer selection became the dominant factor for ﬁnal result (Alberti, Lee, and Collins 2019;
Kwiatkowski et al. 2019). The answer generation of MRC,
which requires deep understanding of the text, has not been
throughout evaluated.
2) Most previous MRC datasets are focus on factoid
questions such as who, when, where, etc., so the candidate
answers are limited to certain types such as person, time,
position. Therefore, this kind of question does not require a
complex understanding of language but merely recognizing
the entity type could solve it properly. Sugawara et al. (2018)
show that only using the ﬁrst several tokens of the questions
could achieve a signiﬁcant improvement over random selection in many MRC datasets. This makes the reasoning process of machine learning methods built upon these datasets
questionable (Jia and Liang 2017).
In this paper, we present ReCO, a large scale humancurated Chinese reading comprehension dataset focusing on
opinion questions. In ReCO, the questions are real-world
queries issued to search engine1 . These queries are sampled
and further ﬁltered such that each query is a valid question

Abstract
This paper presents the ReCO, a human-curated Chinese
Reading Comprehension dataset on Opinion. The questions
in ReCO are opinion based queries issued to commercial
search engine. The passages are provided by the crowdworkers who extract the support snippet from the retrieved documents. Finally, an abstractive yes/no/uncertain answer was
given by the crowdworkers. The release of ReCO consists of
300k questions that to our knowledge is the largest in Chinese reading comprehension. A prominent characteristic of
ReCO is that in addition to the original context paragraph,
we also provided the support evidence that could be directly
used to answer the question. Quality analysis demonstrates
the challenge of ReCO that it requires various types of reasoning skills such as causal inference, logical reasoning, etc.
Current QA models that perform very well on many question answering problems, such as BERT (Devlin et al. 2018),
only achieves 77% accuracy on this dataset, a large margin
behind humans nearly 92% performance, indicating ReCO
present a good challenge for machine reading comprehension. The codes, dataset and leaderboard will be freely available at https://github.com/benywon/ReCO.

Introduction
Machine reading comprehension (MRC), the ability to read
the text and answer questions, has become one of the mainstreams in current natural language understanding (NLU) researches. Compared to other types of QA, MRC provided
with only one document so the statistical information such
as the number of answer occurrences could not be utilized,
thus it requires a deeper understanding of the text. MRC has
become an important part in many natural language processing applications, such as information retrieval (Nishida et al.
2018), event extraction (Ramamoorthy and Murugan 2018)
and relation extraction (Levy et al. 2017).
One of the major contributions of the dramatic progress in
MRC is the development of large scale corpus. Since the release of primal MCTest (Richardson, Burges, and Renshaw
2013), a great amount of datasets have been proposed, such
as SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al. 2016; Rajpurkar, Jia, and Liang
2018), CNN/Daily Mail (Hermann et al. 2015), RACE (Lai
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

9146

https://www.sogou.com/

