The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Seq2Sick: Evaluating the Robustness of
Sequence-to-Sequence Models with Adversarial Examples
Minhao Cheng,1 Jinfeng Yi,2 Pin-Yu Chen,3 Huan Zhang,1 Cho-Jui Hsieh1
1

Department of Computer Science, UCLA, 2 JD AI Research,3 IBM Research
{mhcheng, huanzhang, chohsieh}@cs.ucla.edu, yijinfeng@jd.com, pin-yu.chen@ibm.com

in a discrete space, and word-level manipulations may signiﬁcantly change the meaning of the text. In this scenario,
an adversary should change as few words as possible, and
hence this limitation induces a sparse constraint on wordlevel changes. Likewise, attacking a classiﬁer should also be
much easier than attacking a model with sequence outputs.
This is because different from the classiﬁcation problem that
has a ﬁnite set of discrete class labels, the output space of sequences may have an almost inﬁnite number of possibilities.
If we treat each sequence as a label, a targeted attack needs
to ﬁnd a speciﬁc one over an enormous number of possible
labels, leading to a nearly zero volume in search space. This
may explain why most existing works on adversarial attack
focus on the image classiﬁcation task, since its input space
is continuous and its output space is ﬁnite.
In this paper, we study a harder problem of crafting adversarial examples for sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) models (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014). This problem is challenging since it combines both aforementioned difﬁculties,
i.e., discrete inputs and sequence outputs with an almost inﬁnite number of possibilities. We choose this problem not
only because it is challenging, but also because seq2seq
models are widely used in many safety and security sensitive applications, e.g., machine translation (Bahdanau, Cho,
and Bengio 2014), text summarization (Rush, Chopra, and
Weston 2015), and speech recognition (Chan et al. 2016),
thus measuring its robustness becomes critical. Speciﬁcally,
we aim to examine the following questions in this study:
1. Is it possible to slightly modify the inputs of seq2seq models while signiﬁcantly change their outputs?
2. Are seq2seq models more robust than the well-evaluated
CNN-based image classiﬁers?
We provide an afﬁrmative answer to the ﬁrst question by
developing an effective adversarial attack framework called
Seq2Sick. It is an optimization-based framework that aims
to learn an input sequence that is close enough to the original sequence (in terms of distance metrics in word embedding spaces or sentiment classiﬁcation) while leads to the
desired outputs with high conﬁdence. To address the challenges caused by the discrete input space, we propose to use
the projected gradient descent method combined with group
lasso and gradient regularization. To address the challenges

Abstract
Crafting adversarial examples has become an important technique to evaluate the robustness of deep neural networks
(DNNs). However, most existing works focus on attacking
the image classiﬁcation problem since its input space is continuous and output space is ﬁnite. In this paper, we study the
much more challenging problem of crafting adversarial examples for sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) models, whose
inputs are discrete text strings and outputs have an almost inﬁnite number of possibilities. To address the challenges caused
by the discrete input space, we propose a projected gradient
method combined with group lasso and gradient regularization. To handle the almost inﬁnite output space, we design
some novel loss functions to conduct non-overlapping attack
and targeted keyword attack. We apply our algorithm to machine translation and text summarization tasks, and verify
the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm: by changing less
than 3 words, we can make seq2seq model to produce desired outputs with high success rates. We also use an external
sentiment classiﬁer to verify the property of preserving semantic meanings for our generated adversarial examples. On
the other hand, we recognize that, compared with the wellevaluated CNN-based classiﬁers, seq2seq models are intrinsically more robust to adversarial attacks.

Introduction
Adversarial attack on deep neural networks (DNNs) aims
to slightly modify the inputs of DNNs and mislead them to
make wrong predictions (Szegedy et al. 2013; Goodfellow,
Shlens, and Szegedy 2014). This task has become a common approach to evaluate the robustness of DNNs – generally speaking, the easier an adversarial example can be generated, the less robust the DNN model is. However, models
designed for different tasks are not born equal: some tasks
are strictly harder to attack than others. For example, attacking an image is much easier than attacking a text string, since
image space is continuous and the adversary can make arbitrarily small changes to the input. Therefore, even if most
of the pixels of an image have been modiﬁed, the perturbations can still be imperceptible to humans when the accumulated distortion is small. In contrast, text strings live
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3601

