The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning Student Networks with Few Data
Shumin Kong,1 Tianyu Guo,1,2 Shan You,3 Chang Xu1
1

2

School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney, Australia
Key Laboratory of Machine Percepton (MOE), CMIC, School of EECS, Peking University, China
3
SenseTime Research, China
{shumin.kong, c.xu}@sydney.edu.au, tianyuguo@pku.edu.cn, youshan@sensetime.com

edge devices, such as mobile phones, tablets and wearable
watches.
To minimize the resource required by deep neural networks, several techniques to directly compress existing
trained networks are investigated, such as vector quantization (Gong et al. 2014), hash encoding (Chen et al. 2015),
weight matrices decomposition (Denton et al. 2014) and using unlabeled data (Tang et al. 2019). Others attempt to design efﬁcient architectures to accelerate the inference speed,
such as ResNeXt (Xie et al. 2017), Xception network (Chollet 2017) and MobileNets (Howard et al. 2017). Besides
these approaches, teacher-student learning paradigm serves
as a complementary scheme to obtain light and efﬁcient neural networks. By treating the pre-trained huge networks as
teacher networks, the target small network is thus viewed as
the student network and can be guided by the teacher network. Ba and Caruana took a straightforward approach by
directly minimizing the Euclidean distance between the feature maps generated from the teacher and student networks.
The widely-used knowledge distillation method. Hinton,
Vinyals, and Dean made a leap forward by introducing a loss
to encourage the student network to learn from the softened
outputs of the teacher network. Others also attempt to further boost the performance by using multiple teachers (You
et al. 2017) or investigating feature layers, such as FitNet (Romero et al. 2015) and activation boundary loss (Heo
et al. 2019).
Current teacher-student learning algorithms usually assume that the complete dataset for training teacher network
is also available for the learning of the student network. In
real-world scenarios, however, users may only have a few
data at hand. For instance, due to the consideration of commercial proﬁts or data privacy, many applications do not
open their large training dataset completely but only supply
a fraction for veriﬁcation purposes. The limited data usually
induce severe over-ﬁtting issues during the learning of the
student network. Another example can be an off-line speech
recognition network. In this case, a generic speech recognition network can be trained on a data center, which will
be used as a teacher. Then, the end-user can provide a few
samples of his or her own speech to train the student network. The resulting student network would be small enough
to run on a mobile device while maintaining the high-quality
of the teacher network. The combination of beneﬁts from

Abstract
Recently, the teacher-student learning paradigm has drawn
much attention in compressing neural networks on low-end
edge devices, such as mobile phones and wearable watches.
Current algorithms mainly assume the complete dataset for
the teacher network is also available for the training of the student network. However, for real-world scenarios, users may
only have access to part of training examples due to commercial proﬁts or data privacy, and severe over-ﬁtting issues
would happen as a result. In this paper, we tackle the challenge of learning student networks with few data by investigating the ground-truth data-generating distribution underlying these few data. Taking Wasserstein distance as the measurement, we assume this ideal data distribution lies in a
neighborhood of the discrete empirical distribution induced
by the training examples. Thus we propose to safely optimize the worst-case cost within this neighborhood to boost
the generalization. Furthermore, with theoretical analysis, we
derive a novel and easy-to-implement loss for training the student network in an end-to-end fashion. Experimental results
on benchmark datasets validate the effectiveness of our proposed method.

Introduction
In recent years, computer vision research has rapidly advanced due to the success of deep neural networks. The
image classiﬁcation performance on large-scale datasets
(e.g., ImageNet) has been constantly refreshed by various
convolutional neural networks (CNNs), such as AlexNet
(Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012), VGGNet (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014), Inception (Szegedy et al.
2015) and ResNet (He et al. 2016). Language models, such
as GPT (Radford et al. 2019), BERT(Devlin et al. 2018) and
(Wang, Li, and Smola 2019) has achieved superhuman performance on large textual dataset.
However, to achieve the outstanding classiﬁcation performance, these networks usually have a large volume of parameters and signiﬁcant resource consumption. For example, to achieve a top-1 error rate of 22.16%, AlexNet requires more than 232 million parameters and more than 700
million multiplications to implement the prediction. This
computational demand limits their application on low-end
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4469

