The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Understanding the Semantic Content of Sparse
Word Embeddings Using a Commonsense Knowledge Base
Vanda Balogh

Gábor Berend

University of Szeged
bvanda@inf.u-szeged.hu

University of Szeged
MTA-SZTE RGAI, Szeged
berendg@inf.u-szeged.hu

Dimitrios I. Diochnos

György Turán

University of Oklahoma
diochnos@ou.edu

University of Illinois at Chicago
MTA-SZTE RGAI, Szeged
gyt@uic.edu
embeddings improves interpretability (Faruqui et al. 2015b;
Subramanian et al. 2018).
In order to perform a systematic study, we consider several methods to generate sparse word embeddings from
dense embeddings for the purposes of the experiments. One
family of word embeddings is obtained by sparse coding
(Berend 2017), another family is obtained by clustering, and
a third family is obtained by greedily choosing almost orthogonal bases.
Another important problem, also receiving much attention
is to combine word embeddings and knowledge bases. Such
a combination has the potential to improve performance on
downstream tasks. The information contained in a knowledge base can be incorporated into a word embedding in different ways either during (Iacobacci, Pilehvar, and Navigli
2015; Osborne, Narayan, and Cohen 2016) or after (Faruqui
et al. 2015a; Glavaš and Vulić 2018) the construction of the
word embeddings.
A knowledge base provides different tools to explore the
semantic content of directions, and thus of the basis vectors
(also referred to as semantic atoms) in sparse word embeddings. These tools include concepts contained in a knowledge base and notions of semantic relatedness that can be
derived from a knowledge base (Feng et al. 2017). The former can be simple or composite concepts, the latter can be
relatedness notions based on graph distances and edge labels, e.g., using spreading activation, label propagation or
random walks.
Knowledge bases give a principled computational approach for the two problems on word embeddings mentioned above (interpretability and knowledge bases), by providing explicit “meanings” with quantiﬁable validity, which
capture the implicit coherence of groups of words in general. We focus on commonsense knowledge bases, in particular on ConceptNet (Speer and Havasi 2012), as commonsense knowledge seems to be a fundamental problem where
progress coming from such a combination of statistical and
symbolic approaches could be relevant.
In this paper we report recent results on a systematic
study of explicit connections between word embeddings and
knowledge bases. We make our source code for reproducing

Abstract
Word embeddings have developed into a major NLP tool
with broad applicability. Understanding the semantic content
of word embeddings remains an important challenge for additional applications. One aspect of this issue is to explore
the interpretability of word embeddings. Sparse word embeddings have been proposed as models with improved interpretability. Continuing this line of research, we investigate
the extent to which human interpretable semantic concepts
emerge along the bases of sparse word representations. In order to have a broad framework for evaluation, we consider
three general approaches for constructing sparse word representations, which are then evaluated in multiple ways. We
propose a novel methodology to evaluate the semantic content of word embeddings using a commonsense knowledge
base, applied here to the sparse case. This methodology is
illustrated by two techniques using the ConceptNet knowledge base. The ﬁrst approach assigns a commonsense concept
label to the individual dimensions of the embedding space.
The second approach uses a metric, derived by spreading activation, to quantify the coherence of coordinates along the
individual axes. We also provide results on the relationship
between the two approaches. The results show, for example,
that in the individual dimensions of sparse word embeddings,
words having high coefﬁcients are more semantically related
in terms of path lengths in the knowledge base than the ones
having zero coefﬁcients.

1

Introduction

Word embeddings have developed into a major tool in NLP
applications. An important problem – receiving much attention in the past years – is to study, and possibly improve,
the interpretability of word embeddings. As interpretability is a many-faceted notion which is hard to formalize,
the evaluation of interpretability can take different forms.
One approach is intrusion detection (Faruqui et al. 2015b;
Murphy, Talukdar, and Mitchell 2012), where human evaluators test the coherence of groups of words found using word
embeddings. A basic observation is that sparsity of word
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7399

