The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Towards Scalable Multi-Domain
Conversational Agents: The Schema-Guided Dialogue Dataset
Abhinav Rastogi, Xiaoxue Zang, Srinivas Sunkara, Raghav Gupta, Pranav Khaitan
Google Research, Mountain View, California, USA
{abhirast, xiaoxuez, srinivasksun, raghavgupta, pranavkhaitan}@google.com

for multi-domain modeling have shown promise, both for
end-to-end and modular systems involving dialogue state
tracking and policy learning. This line of work has been
facilitated by the release of multi-domain dialogue corpora
such as MultiWOZ (Budzianowski et al. 2018), M2M (Shah
et al. 2018) and FRAMES (El Asri et al. 2017).
However, existing datasets for multi-domain task-oriented
dialogue do not sufﬁciently capture a number of challenges
that arise with scaling virtual assistants in production. These
assistants need to support a large (Kim et al. 2018), constantly increasing number of services over a large number of
domains. In comparison, existing public datasets cover few
domains. Furthermore, they deﬁne a single static API per domain, whereas multiple services with overlapping functionality, but heterogeneous interfaces, exist in the real world.
To highlight these challenges, we introduce the SchemaGuided Dialogue (SGD) dataset1 , which is, to the best of our
knowledge, the largest public task-oriented dialogue corpus.
It exceeds existing corpora in scale, with over 16000 dialogues in the training set spanning 26 services belonging to
16 domains (more details in Table 1). Further, to adequately
test the models’ ability to generalize in zero-shot settings,
the evaluation sets contain unseen services and domains. The
dataset is designed to serve as an effective testbed for intent
prediction, slot ﬁlling, state tracking and language generation, among other tasks in large-scale virtual assistants.
We also propose the schema-guided paradigm for taskoriented dialogue, advocating building a single uniﬁed dialogue model for all services and APIs. Using a service’s
schema as input, the model would make predictions over
this dynamic set of intents and slots present in the schema.
This setting enables effective sharing of knowledge among
all services, by relating semantically similar concepts across
APIs, and allows the model to handle unseen services and
APIs. Under the proposed paradigm, we present a novel architecture for multi-domain dialogue state tracking. By using large pre-trained models like BERT (Devlin et al. 2019),
our model can generalize to unseen services and is robust
to API changes, while achieving competitive results on the
original and updated MultiWOZ datasets (Eric et al. 2019).

Abstract
Virtual assistants such as Google Assistant, Alexa and Siri
provide a conversational interface to a large number of services and APIs spanning multiple domains. Such systems
need to support an ever-increasing number of services with
possibly overlapping functionality. Furthermore, some of
these services have little to no training data available. Existing
public datasets for task-oriented dialogue do not sufﬁciently
capture these challenges since they cover few domains and
assume a single static ontology per domain. In this work, we
introduce the the Schema-Guided Dialogue (SGD) dataset,
containing over 16k multi-domain conversations spanning 16
domains. Our dataset exceeds the existing task-oriented dialogue corpora in scale, while also highlighting the challenges
associated with building large-scale virtual assistants. It provides a challenging testbed for a number of tasks including
language understanding, slot ﬁlling, dialogue state tracking
and response generation. Along the same lines, we present a
schema-guided paradigm for task-oriented dialogue, in which
predictions are made over a dynamic set of intents and slots,
provided as input, using their natural language descriptions.
This allows a single dialogue system to easily support a large
number of services and facilitates simple integration of new
services without requiring additional training data. Building
upon the proposed paradigm, we release a model for dialogue state tracking capable of zero-shot generalization to
new APIs, while remaining competitive in the regular setting.

1

Introduction

Virtual assistants help users accomplish tasks including but
not limited to ﬁnding ﬂights, booking restaurants and, more
recently, navigating user interfaces, by providing a natural
language interface to services and APIs on the web. The recent popularity of conversational interfaces and the advent of
frameworks like Actions on Google and Alexa Skills, which
allow developers to easily add support for new services, has
resulted in a major increase in the number of application domains and individual services that assistants need to support,
following the pattern of smartphone applications.
Consequently, recent work has focused on scalable dialogue systems that can handle tasks across multiple application domains. Data-driven deep learning based approaches
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
The dataset has been released at github.com/google-researchdatasets/dstc8-schema-guided-dialogue

8689

