The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Event-Driven Continuous Time Bayesian Networks
Debarun Bhattacharjya,† Karthikeyan Shanmugam,† Tian Gao,†
Nicholas Mattei,§ Kush R. Varshney,† Dharmashankar Subramanian†
†

Research AI, IBM T. J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA
Department of Computer Science, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA, USA
{debarunb, tgao, krvarshn, dharmash}@us.ibm.com
Karthikeyan.Shanmugam2@ibm.com, nsmattei@tulane.edu

§

• Health – a diabetic patient’s blood glucose level and mental
well-being are inﬂuenced by events such as insulin intake,
meals and physical activity.
• Finance – stock prices for a set of companies in an industry
are affected by natural events such as disasters or political
events such as trade deals.
• Social Impact – social services such as counseling sessions
and classes have an impact on a person’s level of education,
employment, and well-being.

Abstract
We introduce a novel event-driven continuous time Bayesian
network (ECTBN) representation to model situations where a
system’s state variables could be inﬂuenced by occurrences of
events of various types. In this way, the model parameters and
graphical structure capture not only potential “causal” dynamics of system evolution but also the inﬂuence of event occurrences that may be interventions. We propose a greedy search
procedure for structure learning based on the BIC score for
a special class of ECTBNs, showing that it is asymptotically
consistent and also effective for limited data. We demonstrate
the power of the representation by applying it to model paths
out of poverty for clients of CityLink Center, an integrated
social service provider in Cincinnati, USA. Here the ECTBN
formulation captures the effect of classes/counseling sessions
on an individual’s life outcome areas such as education, transportation, employment and ﬁnancial education.

Event datasets are sequences of labels on a time line where
each label indicates the type of event. For example, labeled
time stamps of medication, exercise, and meals would indicate events that could be relevant for a patient’s health outcomes. To capture the inﬂuence of events on state variables,
we introduce a new model – event-driven continuous time
Bayesian networks (ECTBNs) – where, in addition to state
variables driving transitions of other state variables, a time
stamped event history could inﬂuence the time to transition
as well as the probability of transition of state variables.
Including events in the scope of the model requires a fundamental extension to CTBNs and cannot be reduced to an
expanded CTBN with proxy state variables for events. This
is because the intensity function that determines time to next
transition in a CTBN only depends on the current conﬁguration of parent state variables; it does not depend on when the
conﬁguration of these state variables attained their current
conﬁguration. However, when event sequences inﬂuence the
intensity functions of state transitions, their previous times of
occurrence could matter, making the inﬂuence non-Markov
because it does not only depend on the current state.
As an example, consider the case where the frequency of
meals in the recent history affects transitions of a patient’s
blood sugar levels. This is illustrated in the sketch in Figure 1(a) where a blood sugar state variable with two states is
inﬂuenced by exercise and meal events. Even if the events
were modeled as state variables and the sequences of events
were tracked with memory, the intensity function would be
unable to capture the notion that only the number of meals
within a certain time window matters.

Introduction
Real-world decision situations often involve uncertainties
that interact with each other in a way that requires modeling
complex dynamic inter-dependencies. The uncertain variables of interest of a system can be modeled as state variables
whose evolution is captured by some dynamic process. In
many cases, state variables are only observed at irregular
epochs in time, unlike time series models.
A continuous-time Bayesian network (CTBN) (Nodelman,
Shelton, and Koller 2002) representation handles modeling
joint trajectories of a system’s state variables where irregular state variable transitions are modeled as homogeneous
Markov processes. While CTBNs offer a simple way to
model the dynamics of such transitions, they are only suitable
when a dynamical system is observed in an isolated context.
There are many scenarios that have the following added complexity: external occurrences of events could inﬂuence the
manner in which the system evolves. In this paper, we consider modeling situations where occurrences of various types
of events inﬂuence evolution of a set of state variables, or
synonymously system variables. We provide a small set of
potential applications where external events occurring irregularly over time could affect the evolution of a system:

Contributions. In this paper we make three major interrelated contributions: (1) we introduce a novel, interpretable
yet analytically sophisticated graphical model that captures

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3259

