The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Safe Linear Stochastic Bandits
Kia Khezeli, Eilyan Bitar
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA
{kk839, eyb5}@cornell.edu

There are a variety of real-world applications that might
beneﬁt from the design of stagewise-safe online learning algorithms (Khezeli and Bitar 2017; Li et al. 2019; Sui et
al. 2015). Most prominently, clinical trials have long been
used as a motivating application for the multi-armed bandit
(Berry and Pearson 1985) and linear bandit (Dani, Hayes,
and Kakade 2008) frameworks. However, as pointed out by
(Villar, Bowden, and Wason 2015): “Despite this apparent
near-perfect ﬁt between a real-world problem and a mathematical theory, the MABP has yet to be applied to an actual
clinical trial.” One could argue that the ability to provide a
learning algorithm that is guaranteed to be stagewise safe
has the potential to facilitate the utilization of bandit models and algorithms in clinical trials. More concretely, consider the possibility of using the linear bandit framework to
model the problem of optimizing a combination of d candidate treatments for a speciﬁc health issue. In this context,
an “arm” represents a mixture of treatments, the “unknown
reward vector” encodes the effectiveness of each treatment,
and the “reward” represents a patient’s response to a chosen
mixture of treatments. In terms of the safety threshold, it is
natural to select the “baseline arm” to be the (possibly suboptimal) combination of treatments possessing the largest
reward known to date. As it is clearly unethical to prescribe a
treatment that may degrade a patient’s health, the stagewise
safety constraint studied in this paper can be interpreted as a
requirement that a patient’s response to a chosen treatment
must be arbitrarily close to that of the baseline treatment, if
not better.

Abstract
We introduce the safe linear stochastic bandit framework—
a generalization of linear stochastic bandits—where, in each
stage, the learner is required to select an arm with an expected
reward that is no less than a predetermined (safe) threshold
with high probability. We assume that the learner initially has
knowledge of an arm that is known to be safe, but not necessarily optimal. Leveraging on this assumption, we introduce a
learning algorithm that systematically combines known safe
arms with exploratory arms to safely expand the set of safe
arms over time, while facilitating safe greedy exploitation in
subsequent stages. In addition to ensuring the satisfaction of
the safety constraint at every stage of play, the proposed algorithm is √
shown to exhibit an expected regret that is no more
than O( T log(T )) after T stages of play.

1

Introduction

We investigate the role of safety in constraining the design of learning algorithms within the classical framework
of linear stochastic bandits (Dani, Hayes, and Kakade 2008;
Rusmevichientong and Tsitsiklis 2010; Abbasi-Yadkori, Pál,
and Szepesvári 2011). Speciﬁcally, we introduce a family
of safe linear stochastic bandit problems where—in addition to the typical goal of designing learning algorithms that
minimize regret—we impose a constraint requiring that an
algorithm’s stagewise expected reward remains above a predetermined safety threshold with high probability at every
stage of play. In the proposed framework, we assume that a
“safe” baseline arm is initially known, and consider a class
of safety thresholds that are deﬁned as ﬁxed cutbacks on the
expected reward of the known baseline arm. Accordingly,
an algorithm that is deemed to be safe cannot induce stagewise rewards that dip below the baseline reward by more
than a ﬁxed amount. Critically, the assumption of a known
baseline arm—and the limited capacity for exploration implied by the class of safety thresholds considered—can be
leveraged on to initially guide the exploration of allowable
arms by playing combinations of the baseline arm and exploratory arms in a manner that expands the set of safe arms
over time, while simultaneously preserving safety at every
stage of play.

1.1

Contributions

In this paper, we propose a new learning algorithm that is
tailored to the safe linear bandit framework. The proposed
algorithm, which we call the Safe Exploration and Greedy
Exploitation (SEGE) algorithm, is shown to exhibit nearoptimal expected regret, while guaranteeing the satisfaction
of the proposed safety constraint at every stage of play.
Initially, the SEGE algorithm performs safe exploration by
combining the baseline arm with a random exploratory arm
that is constrained by an “exploration budget” implied by
the stagewise safety constraint. Over time, the proposed algorithm systematically expands the family of safe arms in
this manner to include new safe arms with expected rewards
that exceed the baseline reward level. Exploitation under

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10202

