The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning Long- and Short-Term User Literal-Preference with
Multimodal Hierarchical Transformer Network for Personalized Image Caption
Wei Zhang,1,2∗ Yue Ying,1 Pan Lu,3 Hongyuan Zha4
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University
2
Key Laboratory of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Ministry of Education, Shanghai
3
Departments of Statistics and Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles
4
School of Computational Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology
{zhangwei.thu2011, yingyue2011, lupantech}@gmail.com, zha@cc.gatech.edu
Abstract

Starting the day with some
fruit.

Personalized image caption, a natural extension of the standard image caption task, requires to generate brief image descriptions tailored for users’ writing style and traits, and is
more practical to meet users’ real demands. Only a few recent studies shed light on this crucial task and learn static user
representations to capture their long-term literal-preference.
However, it is insufﬁcient to achieve satisfactory performance due to the intrinsic existence of not only long-term
user literal-preference, but also short-term literal-preference
which is associated with users’ recent states. To bridge this
gap, we develop a novel multimodal hierarchical transformer
network (MHTN) for personalized image caption in this paper. It learns short-term user literal-preference based on users’
recent captions through a short-term user encoder at the low
level. And at the high level, the multimodal encoder integrates target image representations with short-term literalpreference, as well as long-term literal-preference learned
from user IDs. These two encoders enjoy the advantages of
the powerful transformer networks. Extensive experiments on
two real datasets show the effectiveness of considering two
types of user literal-preference simultaneously and better performance over the state-of-the-art models.

User 1
Recent Captions
CNN Extractor

Multimodal hierarchical
transformer

Generated Captions

Seriously strawberries are the
best fruit ever.

User 2

Recent Captions
CNN Extractor

Multimodal hierarchical
transformer

Generated Captions

Figure 1: The sketch of personalized image caption with
multimodal hierarchical transformer and users’ recent captions. The two real examples are gotten from Instagram.
ated captions are not tailored for individual users. In other
words, through the above pipeline, the generated caption of
the same image keeps always the same for different users
who would like to manually write the captions or mark their
lives with photo annotation. Actually, each user has its own
literal-preference depending on different writing styles and
user states. For example, as shown in Figure 1, the two images are much the same, with strawberries in a plate. However, the captions provided by User 1 and User 2 are apparently different, for User 1 has an objective statement of his
breakfast, while user 2 expresses his love to strawberries.
As such, it is more practical to conduct personalized image
caption to meet users’ real demands.
Regarding to this task, only a few pioneering studies investigate the impact of user literal-preference in generating
effective personalized captions (Park, Kim, and Kim 2017;
Wang et al. 2018; Long, Yang, and Xu 2019; Shuster et al.
2019; Park, Kim, and Kim 2019). They rely on users’ active vocabularies and self-descriptions (e.g., tags), as well as
their unique IDs to learn latent user representations. They
are further integrated with visual representations to generate
ﬁnal captions. Since the user representations are associated

Introduction
Inspired by the success of learning multi-modal representations in recent years, image caption (Karpathy and Li 2015;
Xu et al. 2015) has become a hotspot for scientiﬁc and industrial exploration, aiming at generating natural language
descriptions for target images. It ﬁnds a wide range of applications such as the reduction of heavy manual cost of writing descriptions for tens of thousands of images and the promotion of visual understanding for machines. Typically, the
pipeline for this task involves the following two most fundamental components: a visual understanding module (e.g.,
convolutional neural network (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and
Hinton 2012)) and a language-oriented decoder (e.g., recurrent neural network (RNN) (Mikolov et al. 2010)).
Despite the remarkable progress in the traditional image
caption task, there is an intrinsic limitation that the gener∗

Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9571

