The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Information Elicitation Mechanisms for Statistical Estimation
Yuqing Kong,1 Grant Schoenebeck,2 Biaoshuai Tao,2 Fang-Yi Yu2∗
1

CFCS, Computer Science Dept., Peking University, 2 University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
yuqkong.kong@pku.edu.cn, {schoeneb, bstao, fayu}@umich.edu

participation, and this is especially important when a representative sample is desired. However, rewarding users can
create perverse incentives that lead to inaccurate reports, especially when the answers cannot be veriﬁed by the system.
For example, agents may agree to participate due to the ﬂat
fee but then not take the time to report accurately or hide
information due to privacy concerns.
This work develops systems to facilitate accurate statistical estimates by rewarding honest reporting—even when the
information cannot be directly veriﬁed (peer prediction)—
and then aggregating the results. In fact, we will see that
often the aggregation and the reward go hand-in-hand: accurate rewards are produced by aggregating the information of
other agents, but the truthfulness of the other agents relies on
these accurate rewards. This creates a certain “full-pipeline”
solution that integrates information elicitation and aggregation into a single process.
We consider two fundamental statistical estimation problems: mean estimation and linear regression. In the mean
estimation problem, the signal space is Rd . Each agent i can
choose to access a signal si ∈ Rd which is drawn from an
unknown Gaussian distribution. The mean of the Gaussian
is unknown to the agents but believed to be drawn from a
commonly known Gaussian prior distribution known to the
agents, but not the mechanism. The mechanism’s goal is
to estimate the mean of the distribution by motivating each
agent i to report some information about si truthfully.
For the linear regression problem, each agent i has a feature/attribute vector φ(xi ) ∈ Rd+1 of a point xi which is
publicly known, and has access to a private signal yi ∈ R.
The yi point is from an unknown linear function applied to
φ(xi ) plus some Gaussian error. While the linear function
is not known, it is selected from some common prior. The
mechanism’s goal is to estimate the linear function by motivating each agent i to report some information about yi
truthfully. Due to the space limit, all our results for the linear
regression problem are deferred to the full version. However,
the key technical ideas are all present in the mean estimation
problem.

Abstract
We study learning statistical properties from strategic agents
with private information. In this problem, agents must be incentivized to truthfully reveal their information even when
it cannot be directly veriﬁed. Moreover, the information reported by the agents must be aggregated into a statistical estimate. We study two fundamental statistical properties: estimating the mean of an unknown Gaussian, and linear regression with Gaussian error. The information of each agent is
one point in a Euclidean space.
Our main results are two mechanisms for each of these problems which optimally aggregate the information of agents in
the truth-telling equilibrium:
• A minimal (non-revelation) mechanism for large populations — agents only need to report one value, but that value
need not be their point.
• A mechanism for small populations that is non-minimal —
agents need to answer more than one question.
These mechanisms are “informed truthful” mechanisms
where reporting unaltered data (truth-telling) 1) forms a strict
Bayesian Nash equilibrium and 2) has strictly higher welfare
than any oblivious equilibrium where agents’ strategies are
independent of their private signals. We also show a minimal
revelation mechanism (each agent only reports her signal) for
a restricted setting and use an impossibility result to prove the
necessity of this restriction.
We build upon the peer prediction literature in the singlequestion setting; however, most previous work in this area
focuses on discrete signals, whereas our setting is inherently
continuous, and we further simplify the agents’ reports.

1

Introduction

Traditional statistical estimation approaches assume inputs
are given and produce an output. However, increasingly, inputs must be obtained by eliciting information from a diverse set of users. In this new environment, gathering inputs
can be at least as important and difﬁcult as the computation itself. In many settings, users must be rewarded for their
∗

Grant Schoenebeck, Biaoshuai Tao, and Fang-Yi Yu are
pleased to acknowledge the support of the National Science Foundation AitF #1535912 and CAREER #1452915.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Challenges for continuous signal spaces The signal
spaces in the above two problems are both continuous,
2095

