The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

The Impact of Selﬁshness in Hypergraph Hedonic Games
Alessandro Aloisio,1,2 Michele Flammini,2 Cosimo Vinci2
1

University of L’Aquila, L’Aquila, Italy
Gran Sasso Science Institute, L’Aquila, Italy
alessandro.aloisio@univaq.it, michele.ﬂammini@gssi.it, cosimo.vinci@gssi.it
2

which each couple of agents is associated to a weight determining their level of appreciation for being together, and
the overall utility of each agent is simply the sum of the
individual values she assigns to the members of her own
coalition. Such games can be suitably described by undirected weighted graphs, in which nodes represent agents,
and weighted edges represent couples of agents with their
appreciation. Besides their nice property of being succinctly
representable, SASHGs attracted research attention because
they are able to capture several realistic coalition formation
scenarios. However, they cannot handle other real life situations in which coalitions are worth if they reach some critical mass, as in the formation of political parties. Indeed,
several politicians may be mutually incompatible, but forming coalitions with more than two people can increase the
success of each member; thus, we need subsets of more than
two people with positive weight together with edges having
negative weights (which model the level of incompatibility
of each couple of politicians). Another example comes from
team formation, where one has to form groups of workers
that have the set of abilities required to perform some tasks,
without which the group is unsuccessful. In this case we
need to associate a positive weight to each group of workers
able to perform a task when working together, and a weight
to each edge modelling the level of compatibility of each
couple of workers.

Abstract
We consider a class of coalition formation games that can be
succinctly represented by means of hypergraphs and properly
generalizes symmetric additively separable hedonic games.
More precisely, an instance of hypegraph hedonic game consists of a weighted hypergraph, in which each agent is associated to a distinct node and her utility for being in a given
coalition is equal to the sum of the weights of all the hyperedges included in the coalition. We study the performance
of stable outcomes in such games, investigating the degradation of their social welfare under two different metrics, the
k-Nash price of anarchy and k-core price of anarchy, where
k is the maximum size of a deviating coalition. Such prices
are deﬁned as the worst-case ratio between the optimal social welfare and the social welfare obtained when the agents
reach an outcome satisfying the respective stability criteria.
We provide asymptotically tight upper and lower bounds on
the values of these metrics for several classes of hypergraph
hedonic games, parametrized according to the integer k, the
hypergraph arity r and the number of agents n. Furthermore,
we show that the problem of computing the exact value of
such prices for a given instance is computationally hard, even
in case of non-negative hyperedge weights.

Introduction
In several real-life scenarios arising from economics, politics, and sociology, we assist to phenomena of coalition
formation, in which each person, denoted as agent, forms
coalitions with other agents to get some beneﬁt, experiencing a utility that depends on the particular set of agents
she joins to. A simple and efﬁcient model that formally describes such phenomena is that of hedonic games (Drèze
and Greenberg 1980; Banerjee, Konishi, and Sönmez 2001;
Bogomolnaia and Jackson 2002), which constitute an interesting class of general coalition formation games, in which
agents mind only their coalitions, regardless of how the others aggregate. In hedonic games, we have a ﬁnite set of
agents, each in turn having a preference order on all the possible coalitions containing her.
A very interesting class of hedonic games is that of symmetric additively separable hedonic games (SASHGs), in

In light of the above examples (and many others), the
graph structure of SASHGs may be not sufﬁcient to describe
several real-life phenomena of coalition formation. To cope
with this issue, we consider a superclass of SASHGs that,
while maintaining a succinct representation, can capture the
above more general scenarios. Namely, we focus on the class
of r-hypergraph hedonic games (r-HHGs or simply HHGs),
in which each subset of at most r ≥ 1 agents is associated to
a weight determining the level of liking for being a group included in the same coalition, and the utility of each agent is
the sum of the values she assigns to the groups in her coalition. Such games can be completely described by weighted
hypergraphs, in which again nodes represent agents, while
weighted hyperedges represent groups of agents with their
valuation. As already observed, r-HHGs are a generalization of SASHGs, and a proper subclass of synchronization

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1766

