The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Discriminative Sentence Modeling for Story Ending Prediction
Yiming Cui,1,2 Wanxiang Che,1 Wei-Nan Zhang,1 Ting Liu,1 Shijin Wang,2,3 Guoping Hu2
1

Research Center for Social Computing and Information Retrieval (SCIR), Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
2
State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence, iFLYTEK Research, China
3
iFLYTEK AI Research (Hebei), Langfang, China
{ymcui, car, wnzhang, tliu}@ir.hit.edu.cn
{ymcui, sjwang3, gphu}@iﬂytek.com

Abstract

[Story]
Gina’s new pencils were gone.
And she knew a boy named Dave had taken them.
She decided she would confront him to get them back.
She marched to his desk and begin yelling.

Story Ending Prediction is a task that needs to select an appropriate ending for the given story, which requires the machine to understand the story and sometimes needs commonsense knowledge. To tackle this task, we propose a new neural network called Diff-Net for better modeling the differences of each ending in this task. The proposed model could
discriminate two endings in three semantic levels: contextual representation, story-aware representation, and discriminative representation. Experimental results on the Story Cloze
Test dataset show that the proposed model siginiﬁcantly outperforms various systems by a large margin, and detailed ablation studies are given for better understanding our model.
We also carefully examine the traditional and BERT-based
models on both SCT v1.0 and v1.5 with interesting ﬁndings
that may potentially help future studies.

[Real Ending]
Gina was very angry.
[Fake Ending]
Gina was very calm.
Figure 1: An example of the Story Cloze Test dataset.

Previous works mainly focus on analyzing linguistic
styles (Schwartz et al. 2017), introducing external knowledge (Lin, Sun, and Han 2017), exploiting large-scale unlabeled training data (Wang, Liu, and Zhao 2017) etc. In
recent research, Cai, Tu, and Gimpel (2017) propose a
fully end-to-end neural network model and achieve competitive performance as previous feature-based approaches.
Chaturvedi, Peng, and Roth (2017) proposed the hidden
coherence model for effectively combining several aspect
models which signiﬁcantly outperform traditional ensemble
approaches. Even though various efforts have been made in
this task, most of them ignore the importance of better modeling endings, as two endings may both plausible, and we
should pick a better one through comparisons.
To this end, we propose to address the comparisons of
two endings and design an effective neural network instead
of feature engineering or sophisticated reasoning rules. As
shown in Figure 1, the two candidate endings are quite similar except for the last word, which is the dominant component of representing the sentiment of the whole sentence.
Inspired by this, we propose to model the different part of
two endings for better identifying the real ending. We propose Diff-Net to model the differences between real and fake
endings on different levels in the neural network, including
contextual representation, story-aware representation, and
discriminative representation. The main contributions are as
follows.

Introduction
To read and comprehend human language is an important
task in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI). Machine Reading Comprehension (MRC) aims to comprehend the given context
and answer the related questions, which is a challenging
task in NLP and received extensive attention. Owing to the
availability of various large-scale datasets, we have seen
rapid progress on the related neural network approaches
(Hermann et al. 2015; Kadlec et al. 2016; Cui et al. 2016;
Wang and Jiang 2016; Seo et al. 2016; Cui et al. 2017;
Dhingra et al. 2017).
Story Ending Prediction is closely related to the machine reading comprehension, which aims to comprehend
stories and predict the real ending, requiring world knowledge and commonsense. Mostafazadeh et al. (2016) introduced a dataset for this purpose. The dataset consists of a
large-scale unlabeled training data consisting ﬁve-sentence
commonsense stories (which forms ROCStories dataset) and
labeled validation/test data, which we call Story Cloze Test
(SCT). Figure 1 shows an example of SCT dataset, where
the story is composed of four sentences along with one real
and fake ending options, respectively.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We propose a novel neural network called Diff-Net for
7602

