The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

POP ≡ POCL, Right? Complexity Results for
Partial Order (Causal Link) Makespan Minimization
Pascal Bercher,∗ Conny Olz
Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Ulm University, Germany
pascal.bercher@anu.edu.au
conny.olz@uni-ulm.de

investigating the computational complexity of plan optimizations (Olz and Bercher 2019; Aghighi and Bäckström
2017; Nakhost and Müller 2010; Bäckström 1998; Fink and
Yang 1992) and in practice by providing algorithms for optimizing a given plan (Muise, Beck, and McIlraith 2016;
Say, Cire, and Beck 2016; Siddiqui and Haslum 2015;
Chrpa, Kilani, and Balyo 2014; Nakhost and Müller 2010;
Do and Kambhampati 2003; Fink and Yang 1992).
Many algorithms that produce partially ordered plans in
the ﬁrst place (Vidal and Geffner 2006; Younes and Simmons 2003; Penberthy and Weld 1992; McAllester and
Rosenblitt 1991) as well as those that infer them from sequential plans (Siddiqui and Haslum 2015) rely on causal
links, which explicitly represent causal dependencies between actions. As it turns out, plans with these links, socalled POCL plans, have slightly different properties than
those without, which are called PO plans. Yet, it’s often
assumed that both kinds of plans are equivalent, i.e., that
the solution criteria based on PO vs. POCL plans are interchangeable, which is not correct. We clarify this and explain why in some cases it might become problematic. For
this, we (re-)make aware of literature and examples that illustrate these differences. As ﬁrst technical contribution, we
prove that these two kinds of plans can be transformed into
each other in polynomial time without incurring undesired
increases in the makespan. Our second line of technical contributions is the provision of several novel complexity results related to the PO and POCL makespan optimization
problem. Most importantly, we show that optimizing a plan’s
makespan by deordering it, i.e, by removing ordering constraints and changing causal links, is NP-complete.

Abstract
We study PO and POCL plans with regard to their makespan
– the execution time when allowing the parallel execution
of causally independent actions. Partially ordered (PO) plans
are often assumed to be equivalent to partial order causal
link (POCL) plans, where the causal relationships between
actions are explicitly represented via causal links. As a ﬁrst
contribution, we study the similarities and differences of PO
and POCL plans, thereby clarifying a common misconception about their relationship: There are PO plans for which
there does not exist a POCL plan with the same orderings.
We prove that we can still always ﬁnd a POCL plan with the
same makespan in polynomial time. As another main result
we prove that turning a PO or POCL plan into one with minimal makespan by only removing ordering constraints (called
deordering) is NP-complete. We provide a series of further
results on special cases and implications, such as reordering,
where orderings can be changed arbitrarily.

Introduction
Although most of today’s planning systems produce sequential (i.e., totally ordered) solutions, many applications also
use partially ordered ones. Thus, there are many application
scenarios that take such a sequential plan as an input and
generate a partially ordered one (Aghighi and Bäckström
2017). Such a partial order, which represents an up to exponential set of sequential plans, can be exploited in many
ways, for instance to obtain higher ﬂexibility when it comes
to plan execution (Muise, Beck, and McIlraith 2016; 2013;
Muise, McIlraith, and Beck 2011). One of their main applications is temporal planning (Coles et al. 2010; Vidal and
Geffner 2006), where the execution time of a plan needs to
be optimized. The partial order is here a natural representation, as parallel execution of independent actions can be
exploited. By doing so, one is usually interested in a plan’s
optimal makespan – the time needed to execute a partially
ordered plan.
Optimizing sequential or partially ordered plans has thus
been investigated by many researchers – both in theory by

Formal Framework
We consider the problem of optimizing the makespan of a
given (solution) plan. We choose STRIPS as the underlying formalism. Here, a planning problem P is given by a
tuple (V, A, sI , g), where V is a ﬁnite set of propositional
state variables, sI ∈ 2V is the initial state, and g ⊆ V
the goal description. A is a ﬁnite set of actions, each being
a tuple (prec, add , del ) consisting of its precondition, add,
and delete list, prec, add , del ⊆ V . For an action a ∈ A,
we also write prec(a), add (a), and del (a) to refer to these

∗
Pascal Bercher is now at the College of Engineering and Computer Science, the Australian National University
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9785

