The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Framework for Engineering Human/Agent Teaming Systems
Rick Evertsz, John Thangarajah
RMIT University, Melbourne, Australia
{rick.evertsz, john.thagarajah}@rmit.edu.au

simulations are very resource intensive. To overcome this,
we are investigating the creation of the white force as a collection of human/agent teams, where a combination of humans and artiﬁcial autonomous agents work together collaboratively to drive the training scenarios. In these training scenarios, the tactics are typically pre-deﬁned and well
understood. More generally, humans use pre-deﬁned tactics in many team-oriented domains, for example in sports,
emergency management and air-combat tactics. Pre-deﬁned
tactics are most effective in contexts where time is limited
and there are commonalities that allow the tactics to be reapplied successfully. The tactics must be familiar to the team
members and this reduces the communications overhead because there is no need to explain the course of action.

Abstract
The increasing capabilities of autonomous systems offer the
potential for more effective teaming with humans. Effective
human/agent teaming is facilitated by a mutual understanding of the team objective and how that objective is decomposed into team roles. This paper presents a framework for
engineering human/agent teams that delineates the key human/agent teaming components, using TDF-T diagrams to
design the agents/teams and then present contextualised team
cognition to the human team members at runtime. Our hypothesis is that this facilitates effective human/agent teaming by enhancing the human’s understanding of their role in
the team and their coordination requirements. To evaluate this
hypothesis we conducted a study with human participants using our user interface for the StarCraft strategy game, which
presents pertinent, instantiated TDF-T diagrams to the human at runtime. The performance of human participants in the
study indicates that their ability to work in concert with the
non-player characters in the game is signiﬁcantly enhanced
by the timely presentation of a diagrammatic representation
of team cognition.

With this in mind, our research on human/agent teams addresses how to engineer multi-agent systems so that the human can be incorporated as an effective member of the team.
In particular, our stakeholders are interested in applications
where the human is a peer rather than a supervisor of the
agents. We have focused on using diagrammatic methods of
representing and presenting the team’s structure and decision making so that the human can see a visual overview of
their role in the team, what goals they should be tackling at
any given time, and the extent to which their activities need
to synchronise with teammates. For the representation, we
investigated the application of TDF-T (Evertsz, Thangarajah, and Papasimeon 2017) to the wider problem of engineering human/agent teams. We explored how to contextualise the TDF-T design diagrams by determining which aspects to instantiate and present to the human at runtime. Our
hypothesis was that such contextualised diagrammatic representations of team cognition can signiﬁcantly enhance the
human’s ability to collaborate with the peer agents.

Introduction
Recent advances in autonomy have resulted in artiﬁcial
agents that can tackle roles that were previously only feasible for humans. Many applications require humans to
work together as a team, and the potential for autonomous
agents to become part of such teams has led to research into
the problems of human/agent teams. Human/agent teams
present a broad range of challenges, including: (i) sharing situation awareness between human and artiﬁcial team
members (Miller et al. 2014), (ii) explainable agency (Langley et al. 2017), (iii) explainable planning (Fox, Long, and
Magazzeni 2017), and (iv) designing teams to better support
human/agent teams (Gao, Cummings, and Solovey 2016).
The work described here is part of a long-term air domain
training simulation program. These simulations, for years,
have relied on human support personnel (known as the white
force) to take on various roles in the scenarios (e.g. wingmen or hostile entities). The white force typically outnumbers the trainees by a wide margin, and so these training

This paper makes the following contributions: (i) the important human/agent teaming parameters are identiﬁed, including how to design models to support human/agent teaming; (ii) a novel, contextualised diagrammatic approach is
proposed for the runtime presentation of team behaviour to
the human; and (iii) the effectiveness of the approach is evaluated with users in the context of a human/agent real-time
strategy game.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2477

