The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference (IAAI-20)

GRACE: Generating Summary Reports
Automatically for Cognitive Assistance in Emergency Response
M Arif Rahman,1 Sarah M. Preum,1 Ronald Williams,2 Homa Alemzadeh,2 John A. Stankovic1
1

Department of Computer Science, 2 Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Virginia
{mir6zw, preum, rdw, ha4d, jas9f}@virginia.edu

nett et al. 2011). Such manual errors can be attributed to the
following factors. First, unfavorable circumstances such as
getting a call at 2 AM as well as multitasking activities at the
scene create adversarial conditions for the ﬁrst-responders.
Second, as responders try to remember the events from the
scene, their recall of the events is often not 100% accurate. Finally, most emergency scenes demand dynamic information ﬂow, such as changing vitals, changing medication dosage, etc. which makes the task of post-incident form
ﬁlling accurately even more difﬁcult. Discussions with ﬁrst
responders indicate that automatic form ﬁlling followed by
only needing to check the forms would be a tremendous aid
in their jobs.
At ﬁrst, with the availability of accurate transcription
tools and the current state of NLP research, this may seem
like a simple task. However, this is not true, as many challenges must be overcome. These challenges include:

Abstract
EMS (emergency medical service) plays an important role in
saving lives in emergency and accident situations. When ﬁrst
responders, including EMS providers and ﬁreﬁghters, arrive
at an incident, they communicate with the patients (if conscious), family members and other witnesses, other ﬁrst responders, and the command center. The ﬁrst responders utilize a microphone and headset to support these communications. After the incident, the ﬁrst responders are required to
document the incident by ﬁlling out a form. Today, this is performed manually. Manual documentation of patient summary
report is time-consuming, tedious, and error-prone. We have
addressed these form ﬁlling problems by transcribing the audio from the scene, identifying the relevant information from
all the conversations, and automatically ﬁlling out the form.
Informal survey of ﬁrst responders indicate that this application would be exceedingly helpful to them. Results show
that we can ﬁll out a model summary report form with an
F1 score as high as 94%, 78%, 96%, and 83% when the data
is noise-free audio, noisy audio, noise-free textual narratives,
and noisy textual narratives, respectively.

1

Introduction

Emergency Medical Service (EMS) responders communicate extensively with many different stakeholders in emergency scenarios to ensure that the correct measures are
taken and adverse outcomes are minimized. While communicating, the severity of the scene as well as the condition of the injured patients are often mentioned. State-ofthe-art technologies such as omni-directional microphones,
noise-canceling microphones, headphones, the global positioning system (GPS) and other devices aid the communication and recovery procedure. Currently, a textual narrative
of the scene as well as a summary report for the patients
are created afterward. These reports often lack critical details that are collected from the scene in real-time, but forgotten. Research shows that in the USA, 13.6% of the time
mistakes are made while inputting information into the summary forms. Mistakes happen in the form of inputting wrong
information, forgetting to include a correct piece of information and misplacing data in the wrong ﬁeld of a form (Bur-

(i) domain-speciﬁc concept extraction that is unique for
emergency response when compared to current medical
and clinical oriented ontologies, as the specialized vocabulary used by ﬁrst responders limits the applicability
of current solutions;
(ii) semantic inference from EMS data, e.g., negation detection, temporal expression detection, and value association for accurate information extraction;
(iii) minimizing the effects of noisy environments and noisy
data, missing data, homophones, and other realistic
speech issues on information extraction;
(iv) deep inference of EMS text, including, (a) distinguishing patient-related information from scene and unrelated
information in the conversations and (b) chronological
ordering of information since the scene is not always
narrated linearly.
We developed GRACE (Generating Summary Reports
Automatically for Cognitive Assistance in Emergency Response) to solve the above-mentioned challenges. We have
collaborated with a regional ambulance agency to get access
to 8,000 textual narratives of real EMS scenarios. We also
developed 119 simulated audio versions of a subset of the
narratives with and without noise to evaluate the variation of
the performance of GRACE in presence of noise in speech

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13356

