The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Accelerating Column Generation via Flexible Dual
Optimal Inequalities with Application to Entity Resolution
Vishnu Suresh Lokhande,1,3 Shaofei Wang,2 Maneesh Singh,3 Julian Yarkony3
1

University of Wisconsin-Madison
2
University of Pennsylvania
3
Verisk Computational and Human Intelligence Laboratory

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a new optimization approach to
Entity Resolution. Traditional approaches tackle entity resolution with hierarchical clustering, which does not beneﬁt from a formal optimization formulation. In contrast, we
model entity resolution as correlation-clustering, which we
treat as a weighted set-packing problem and write as an integer linear program (ILP). In this case, sources in the input
data correspond to elements and entities in output data correspond to sets/clusters. We tackle optimization of weighted set
packing by relaxing integrality in our ILP formulation. The
set of potential sets/clusters can not be explicitly enumerated,
thus motivating optimization via column generation. In addition to the novel formulation, we also introduce new dual
optimal inequalities (DOI), that we call ﬂexible dual optimal
inequalities, which tightly lower-bound dual variables during
optimization and accelerate column generation. We apply our
formulation to entity resolution (also called de-duplication of
records), and achieve state-of-the-art accuracy on two popular benchmark datasets. Our F-DOI can be extended to other
weighted set-packing problems.

1

Figure 1: Entity Resolution posed as MWSP: Given a structured (tabular) data, we study the problem of entity resolution where we group rows representing the same real-world
entity into the same cluster. Entity Resolution can be viewed
as a node-clustering problem over a graph. In the example
used in this ﬁgure, we identify similar rows with identical
colored dots and then tranform it into a graph with nodes
representing the entities/rows and edges represented some
measure of similarity between between the nodes. Nodes
that are not connected are understood to represent distict
rows in the table.
Traditional Approaches Entity resolution has been studied using different clustering approaches (Saeedi, Peukert,
and Rahm 2017). It is common to transform entity resolution to a graph problem and run a clustering algorithms on
top of it as depicted in Figure 1. The popular clustering algorithms developed to attack entity resolution are ConCom,
where the algorithm is based on computing the connected
components of the input graph. Center clustering sequentially adds edges from a priority queue and either assigns
the nodes to a cluster or tags them as a center (Hassanzadeh
and Miller 2009). Star clustering (Aslam, Pelekhov, and Rus
2004), in a similar way, prioritizes in adding those nodes to a
cluster that have the highest degree. Correlation Clustering
(Bansal, Blum, and Chawla 2004), which forms the backbone of our method, has also been studied for entity resolution problem. However, the lengthy and numerous iterations
to converge made it difﬁcult for entity resolution problems
(Saeedi, Peukert, and Rahm 2017).

Introduction

In this paper we study the problem of entity resolution. Entity resolution aims to eliminate redundant information from
multiple sources of data. This task plays a key role in information integration, natural language understanding, information processing on the World-Wide Web all of which
are core areas of AI (Konda et al. 2016).
The Problem Setup Given a dataset of observations each
associated with up to one object, entity resolution aims to
pack (or partition) the observations into groups called hypothesis (or entities) such that there is a bijection from hypotheses to unique entities in the dataset. We are provided a
set of observations called records, where each record is associated with a subset of ﬁelds (for example: name, social
security number, phone number etc). We seek to partition
the observations into hypothesis so that: (1) all observations
of any real world entity are associated with exactly one selected hypothesis; (2) each selected hypothesis is associated
with observations of exactly one real world entity.

Entity Resolution as MWSP Contrary to previous works,
we propose to tackle entity resolution as an optimization

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 

Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1593

