The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Nice Invincible Strategy for the Average-Payoff IPD
Shiheng Wang,1 Fangzhen Lin2
2

HKUST-Xiaoi Robot Joint Lab
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
1,2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
swangbv@cse.ust.hk, ﬂin@cs.ust.hk
1,2

if they decide to cooperate, hence the dilemma. There is
no controversy about what a rational agent should do when
playing the PD. However, if the game is repeated indeﬁnitely
or inﬁnitely, it is not clear which if any strategy is the best. In
fact, it is easy to see that there is no one best strategy against
all other possible ones (Axelrod and Hamilton 1981).

Abstract
The Iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma (IPD) is a well-known
benchmark for studying the long term behaviours of rational
agents. Many well-known strategies have been studied, from
the simple tit-for-tat (TFT) to more involved ones like zero
determinant and extortionate strategies studied recently by
Press and Dyson. In this paper, we consider what we call invincible strategies. These are ones that will never lose against
any other strategy in terms of average payoff in the limit. We
provide a simple characterization of this class of strategies,
and show that invincible strategies can also be nice. We discuss its relationship with some important strategies and generalize our results to some typical repeated 2x2 games. It’s
known that experimentally, nice strategies like the TFT and
extortionate ones can act as catalysts for the evolution of cooperation. Our experiments show that this is also the case for
some invincible strategies that are neither nice nor extortionate.

Researchers from diverse disciplines have used the IPD to
study the emergence of cooperation among unrelated agents.
Robert Axelrod (Axelrod and Hamilton 1981) was the ﬁrst
to run some computer tournaments on iterated prisoner’s
dilemma. Remarkably the simple Tit-For-Tat (TFT) strategy was the winner. In 2012 (Press and Dyson 2012) dramatically changed people’s understanding of this game by
deriving what they called zero determinant (ZD) strategies.
Among them, of particular interests are what they called extortionate strategies that can enforce an extortionate linear
relation between the players’ scores. We will show that extortionate strategies are invincible, in the sense that no strategies can have a higher average payoff when they play against
them for inﬁnite rounds.

Introduction
The Iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma is a classic benchmark used
to study rational agents’ long term behavior. It involves two
agents playing repeatedly the Prisoner’s Dilemma (PD). In
the PD, each player can choose between Cooperate (C) and
Defect (D). If both choose C, they receive a payoff of R
(rewards); If both choose D, they receive a payoff of P
(penalty); If one chooses C and the other D, the defector
receives a payoff of T (temptation to defect) and the cooperator receives a payoff of S (sucker’s payoff). The assumptions are T > R > P > S and 2R > T + S > 2P . Table 1
gives a normal form representation of this game (Rapoport
and Chammah 1965).

In this paper we deﬁne the class of invincible strategies, and show that they can be characterized by three simple conditions. Such invincible strategies can also be nice,
which is never the ﬁrst to defect. This result is then used
to discuss its relationship with extortionate strategy (Press
and Dyson 2012), Akin’s good strategy (Akin 2016) and
other related works (Hilbe, Traulsen, and Sigmund 2015;
Hao, Li, and Zhou 2018).
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We ﬁrst introduce iterated prisoner’s dilemma and brieﬂy review some
known results about it, especially the ones about memoryone strategies. We then formally deﬁne the class of invincible strategies, proving that they can be characterized by
three simple conditions. We then relate them to Press and
Dyson’s extortionate and ZD strategies, as well as Akin’s
good strategies. We next consider generalizing our results to
some other repeated 2x2 games, report some experimental
results about invincible strategies and ﬁnally conclude the
paper with some concluding remarks.

Table 1: Prisoner’s Dilemma
C
D

C
(R,R)
(T,S)

D
(S,T)
(P,P)

The proﬁle (D, D) is the dominant Nash equilibrium of
this game. But both players receive a higher payoff of R
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2268

