The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Sparsity-Inducing Binarized Neural Networks
Peisong Wang,∗ Xiangyu He,* Gang Li, Tianli Zhao, Jian Cheng†
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{peisong.wang, xiangyu.he, jcheng}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
BNN Forward

Binarization of feature representation is critical for Binarized
Neural Networks (BNNs). Currently, sign function is the
commonly used method for feature binarization. Although
it works well on small datasets, the performance on ImageNet remains unsatisﬁed. Previous methods mainly focus on
minimizing quantization error, improving the training strategies and decomposing each convolution layer into several
binary convolution modules. However, whether sign is the
only option for binarization has been largely overlooked. In
this work, we propose the Sparsity-inducing Binarized Neural Network (Si-BNN), to quantize the activations to be either
0 or +1, which introduces sparsity into binary representation. We further introduce trainable thresholds into the backward function of binarization to guide the gradient propagation. Our method dramatically outperforms current state-ofthe-arts, lowering the performance gap between full-precision
networks and BNNs on mainstream architectures, achieving
the new state-of-the-art on binarized AlexNet (Top-1 50.5%),
ResNet-18 (Top-1 59.7%), and VGG-Net (Top-1 63.2%). At
inference time, Si-BNN still enjoys the high efﬁciency of
exclusive-not-or (xnor) operations.

BNN Backward 1

1

-1

1
-1

Si-BNN Backward

Si-BNN Forward 1

ߠ -ߩȟ
ߠ

ߠ

ߠ +ȟ

Figure 1: Forward and backward functions for BNN and SiBNN. Our approach utilizes sparse representation instead of
dense predictions in previous methods. Both θ and Δ are
trainable parameters to adaptively deactivate activations and
gradients. ρ ∈ [0, 1] is the hyperparameter, which allows
more gradients propagate through activated neurons (i.e., +1
neurons in forward propagation).

Previous BNNs (Courbariaux and Bengio 2016) mainly
use sign as the quantization function to turn activations into
either −1 or +1. Moving forward along this line, XNORNet (Rastegari et al. 2016) further introduces a full-precision
scale factor to minimize binarization error. Using this strategy, XNOR-Net ﬁrst applies binarized convolutional neural
networks to ImageNet classiﬁcation.
Different from previous works, we start from the following question, whether sign function is optimal for network
binarization? As the name of “binary” implies, there are
only two states in BNNs. From the viewpoint of least square,
the simple and commonly used sign function becomes the
natural choice for binarization. Therefore, this question has
been largely overlooked by previous works, which signiﬁcantly affects the performance of BNNs.
The answer to the above question is not that straightforward. To ﬁnd a better binarization function, there are several characteristics that should be satisﬁed: 1) The dot product of two binary vectors x and y can be implemented efﬁciently using bit-operations, since the ultimate goal of BNNs

Introduction
Quantizing deep neural networks to the extremely low bit
is an interesting yet challenging problem. There have been
many good efforts to approximate full precision weights using 1-bit representation (Courbariaux, Bengio, and David
2015; Rastegari et al. 2016; Hu, Wang, and Cheng 2018).
Furthermore, recent methods show that 2-bit activation and
binary/ternary weight quantization can achieve promising
results on ImageNet (Cai et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2018).
However, the grand challenge, constraining both the weights
and activations to 1 bit, has been overcome only on small
datasets, such as MNIST and CIFAR-10 (Courbariaux and
Bengio 2016). A better binary feature representation is of
central importance in training binary neural networks on
large-scale datasets.
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
†

The corresponding author.
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12192

