The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Control Flow Graph Embedding Based on
Multi-Instance Decomposition for Bug Localization
Xuan Huo, Ming Li, Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
{huox, lim, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

To alleviate the burden of developers, various effective
models for bug localization have been proposed (Gay et
al. 2009; Zhou, Zhang, and Lo 2012; Ye, Bunescu, and
Liu 2014; Huo, Li, and Zhou 2016). Most existing methods treat the source code as natural language by representing
both bug reports and source ﬁles based on traditional feature
representations, and correlate their relevance by measuring
similarity in the same feature space. For example, (Gay et
al. 2009) represented both source code and bug reports using the vector space model (VSM), where the similarities
between buggy source ﬁles and bug reports are computed
for bug localization. (Zhou, Zhang, and Lo 2012) proposed
a revised vector space model (rVSM), where similar historical bug reports information is exploited to improve the
bug localization results obtained by measuring the similarity between bug reports and source ﬁles. Recently, to overcome the difference between natural and programming languages, Huo et al. (2016) proposed a uniﬁed framework
that employs different convolutional neural networks to extract features from bug reports and source code respectively.
The uniﬁed features are further enhanced by exploiting the
sequential nature of source code via combining a LSTM
model (Huo and Li 2017), which is proved effective in modeling source code and improving the performance of locating buggy source ﬁles.

Abstract
During software maintenance, bug report is an effective way
to identify potential bugs hidden in a software system. It is
a great challenge to automatically locate the potential buggy
source code according to a bug report. Traditional approaches
usually represent bug reports and source code from a lexical
perspective to measure their similarities. Recently, some deep
learning models are proposed to learn the uniﬁed features by
exploiting the local and sequential nature, which overcomes
the difﬁculty in modeling the difference between natural and
programming languages. However, only considering local
and sequential information from one dimension is not enough
to represent the semantics, some multi-dimension information such as structural and functional nature that carries additional semantics has not been well-captured. Such information beyond the lexical and structural terms is extremely vital
in modeling program functionalities and behaviors, leading to
a better representation for identifying buggy source code. In
this paper, we propose a novel model named CG-CNN, which
is a multi-instance learning framework that enhances the uniﬁed features for bug localization by exploiting structural and
sequential nature from the control ﬂow graph. Experimental
results on widely-used software projects demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed CG-CNN model.

Introduction
As software systems grow rapidly, the scale of software
project becomes larger and more complex, leading to increasing in difﬁculty to identify software bugs before its
formal release due to the inadequate testing resources and
tight development schedule. Thus software systems are often shipped with bugs.
Therefore, developers usually facilitate fast and efﬁcient
identiﬁcation and ﬁxing of bugs in a released software system based on bug reports. Bug reports, which are documents written in natural language specifying the situations
in which the software fails to behave as it is expected or follow the technical requirements of the system. Unfortunately,
many projects often receive more bug reports than what they
can handle. To resolve each report, developers usually need
to spend much time and effort.

However, previous models have not fully extracted semantics from source code, since the structural and functional nature of the programming language have not been
well-captured, which may cause the loss of semantic information from the source code. Huo et al. (2016) designed
a model based on convolutional neural network to generate high-level semantics based on the relationships among
local statements, and the model in Huo et al. (2017) was
built to exploit the sequential nature of source code. However, only modeling the local and sequential nature of source
code are not enough, programming language contains more
complex structure that involved multi-dimension information, such as “branch” and “loop” structure, which carries
more structural and functional information. For example, a
branching structure “if-then-else” deﬁnes two parallel groups of statements. Each group of statements interacts
with the context before and after the branching block and

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4223

