The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Order-Free Learning Alleviating Exposure Bias in Multi-Label Classiﬁcation
Che-Ping Tsai, Hung-Yi Lee
Speech Processing and Machine Learning Laboratory,
National Taiwan University∗
{r06922039, hungyilee}@ntu.edu.tw

Wang et al. (2016) propose the CNN-RNN architecture to
capture both image-label relevance and semantic label dependency in multi-label image classiﬁcation. Nam et al.
(2017) and Yang et al. (2018b) show that state-of-the-art
multi-label text classiﬁcation results can be achieved by using a sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) architecture to encode
input text sequences and decode labels sequentially.
However, this kind of RNN-based decoder suffers from
several problems. First, these models are trained using maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) on target label sequences,
which relies on a predeﬁned ordering of labels. Previous
studies (Vinyals, Bengio, and Kudlur 2016; Yang et al.
2018a) show that ordering has a signiﬁcant impact on the
performance. This issue also appears in the PCC, It is addressed by ensemble averaging (Read et al. 2011; Cheng,
Hüllermeier, and Dembczynski 2010), ensemble pruning (Li
and Zhou 2013), pre-analysis of the label dependencies by
Bayes nets (Sucar et al. 2014) and integrating beam search
with training to determine a suitable tag ordering (Kumar et
al. 2013). However, these approaches rely on training multiple models to ensemble or determine a proper order, which
is computationally expensive.
Although Nam et al. (2017) and Yang et al. (2018b)
compare several ordering strategies and suggest ordering
positive labels by frequency directly in descending order
(from frequent to rare labels), it is unnatural to impose a
strict order on labels, which may break down label correlations in a chain. Furthermore, we ﬁnd that this kind of model
tends to overﬁt to label combinations and shows poor generalization ability.
Second, during training, the RNN-based models are always conditioned on correct preﬁxes; during inference, however, the preﬁxes are generated by the RNN-based model,
yielding a problem known as exposure bias (Ranzato et al.
2015) in seq2seq learning. The error may propagate as the
model might be in a part of the state space that it has not seen
during training (Senge, Del Coz, and Hüllermeier 2014).
In this paper, we propose a novel learning algorithm for
RNN-based decoders on multi-label classiﬁcation not rely
on a predeﬁned label order. The proposed approach is inspired by optimal completion distillation (OCD) (Sabour,
Chan, and Norouzi 2018), a training procedure for optimiz-

Abstract
Multi-label classiﬁcation (MLC) assigns multiple labels to
each sample. Prior studies show that MLC can be transformed
to a sequence prediction problem with a recurrent neural network (RNN) decoder to model the label dependency. However, training a RNN decoder requires a predeﬁned order of
labels, which is not directly available in the MLC speciﬁcation. Besides, RNN thus trained tends to overﬁt the label
combinations in the training set and have difﬁculty generating unseen label sequences. In this paper, we propose a new
framework for MLC which does not rely on a predeﬁned label order and thus alleviates exposure bias. The experimental
results on three multi-label classiﬁcation benchmark datasets
show that our method outperforms competitive baselines by a
large margin. We also ﬁnd the proposed approach has a higher
probability of generating label combinations not seen during
training than the baseline models. The result shows that the
proposed approach has better generalization capability.

Introduction
Multi-label classiﬁcation (MLC) is a fundamental but challenging problem in machine learning with applications such
as text categorization (Yang et al. 2018b), sound event detection (Gemmeke et al. 2017; Yu et al. 2018), and image
classiﬁcation (Tsai and Lee 2018). In contrast to single-label
classiﬁcation, multi-label predictors must not only relate labels with the corresponding instances, but also exploit the
underlying label structures. Take for instance the text classiﬁcation dataset RCV1 (Lewis et al. 2004), which uses a
hierarchical tree structure between labels.
Recent studies show that MLC can be transformed to a sequence prediction problem by probabilistic classiﬁer chains
(PCC)(Read et al. 2011; Cheng, Hüllermeier, and Dembczynski 2010; Dembczynski, Waegeman, and Hüllermeier
2012). PCC models the joint probabilities of output labels
with the use of the chain rule and predicts labels based on
previously generated output labels. Furthermore, PCC can
be replaced by a RNN decoder to model label correlation.
∗
This work was ﬁnancially supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6038

