The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Binarized Neural Architecture Search
Hanlin Chen,1 Li’an Zhuo,1 Baochang Zhang,1∗
Xiawu Zheng,2 Jianzhuang Liu,4 David Doermann,3 Rongrong Ji2
4

1
Beihang University, 2 Xiamen University, 3 University at Buffalo
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{hlchen, bczhang}@buaa.edu.cn

a more efﬁcient search without compromising the performance of DARTS (Xu et al. 2019).
Although the network optimized by DARTS or its variants has a smaller model size than traditional light models,
the searched network still suffers from an inefﬁcient inference process due to the complicated architectures generated
by multiple stacked full-precision convolution operations.
Consequently, the adaptation of the searched network to an
embedded device is still computationally expensive and inefﬁcient. Clearly the problem requires further exploration to
overcome these challenges.
One way to address these challenges is to transfer the
NAS to a binarized neural architecture search (BNAS),
by exploring the advantages of binarized neural networks
(BNNs) on memory saving and computational cost reduction. Binarized ﬁlters have been used in traditional convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to compress deep models (Rastegari et al. 2016a; Courbariaux et al. 2016; Courbariaux, Bengio, and David 2015; Xu, Boddeti, and Savvides 2016), showing up to 58-time speedup and 32-time
memory saving. In (Xu, Boddeti, and Savvides 2016), the
XNOR network is presented where both the weights and inputs attached to the convolution are approximated with binary values. This results in an efﬁcient implementation of
convolutional operations by reconstructing the unbinarized
ﬁlters with a single scaling factor. In (Gu et al. 2019), a projection convolutional neural network (PCNN) is proposed
to realize BNNs based on a simple back propagation algorithm. In our BNAS framework, we re-implement XNOR
and PCNN for the effectiveness validation. We show that
the BNNs obtained by BNAS can outperform conventional
models by a large margin. It is a signiﬁcant contribution
in the ﬁeld of BNNs, considering that the performance of
conventional BNNs are not yet comparable with their corresponding full-precision models in terms of accuracy.
The search process of our BNAS consists of two steps.
One is the operation potential ordering based on partiallyconnected DARTs (PC-DARTs) (Xu et al. 2019) which
serves as a baseline for our BNAS. It is further sped up with
a second operation reduction step guided by a performancebased strategy. In the operation reduction step, we prune one
operation at each iteration from one-half of the operations

Abstract
Neural architecture search (NAS) can have a signiﬁcant impact in computer vision by automatically designing optimal
neural network architectures for various tasks. A variant, binarized neural architecture search (BNAS), with a search
space of binarized convolutions, can produce extremely compressed models. Unfortunately, this area remains largely unexplored. BNAS is more challenging than NAS due to the
learning inefﬁciency caused by optimization requirements
and the huge architecture space. To address these issues,
we introduce channel sampling and operation space reduction into a differentiable NAS to signiﬁcantly reduce the cost
of searching. This is accomplished through a performancebased strategy used to abandon less potential operations. Two
optimization methods for binarized neural networks are used
to validate the effectiveness of our BNAS. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed BNAS achieves a performance comparable to NAS on both CIFAR and ImageNet
databases. An accuracy of 96.53% vs. 97.22% is achieved
on the CIFAR-10 dataset, but with a signiﬁcantly compressed
model, and a 40% faster search than the state-of-the-art PCDARTS.

Introduction
Neural architecture search (NAS) have attracted great attention with remarkable performance in various deep learning tasks. Impressive results have been shown for reinforcement learning (RL) based methods (Zoph et al. 2018;
Zoph and Le 2016), for example, which train and evaluate
more than 20, 000 neural networks across 500 GPUs over 4
days. Recent methods like differentiable architecture search
(DARTs) reduce the search time by formulating the task in
a differentiable manner (Liu, Simonyan, and Yang 2018).
DARTS relaxes the search space to be continuous, so that the
architecture can be optimized with respect to its validation
set performance by gradient descent, which provides a fast
solution for effective network architecture search. To reduce
the redundancy in the network space, partially-connected
DARTs (PC-DARTs) was recently introduced to perform
∗

Baochang Zhang is the corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10526

