The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Look One and More: Distilling Hybrid Order
Relational Knowledge for Cross-Resolution Image Recognition
Shiming Ge,1 Kangkai Zhang,1,2 Haolin Liu,1,2 Yingying Hua,1,2
Shengwei Zhao,1,2 Xin Jin,3∗ Hao Wen4
1

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Department of Cyber Security, Beijing Electronic Science and Technology Institute, 4 CloudWalk Technology Co., Ltd
{geshiming, zhangkangkai, liuhaolin, huayingying, zhaoshengwei}@iie.ac.cn, jinxin@besti.edu.cn, wenhao@cloudwalk.cn
2

Abstract
In spite of great success in many image recognition tasks
achieved by recent deep models, directly applying them to
recognize low-resolution images may suffer from low accuracy due to the missing of informative details during resolution degradation. However, these images are still recognizable for subjects who are familiar with the corresponding
high-resolution ones. Inspired by that, we propose a teacherstudent learning approach to facilitate low-resolution image
recognition via hybrid order relational knowledge distillation.
The approach refers to three streams: the teacher stream is
pretrained to recognize high-resolution images in high accuracy, the student stream is learned to identify low-resolution
images by mimicking the teacher’s behaviors, and the extra
assistant stream is introduced as bridge to help knowledge
transfer across the teacher to the student. To extract sufﬁcient
knowledge for reducing the loss in accuracy, the learning of
student is supervised with multiple losses, which preserves
the similarities in various order relational structures. In this
way, the capability of recovering missing details of familiar low-resolution images can be effectively enhanced, leading to a better knowledge transfer. Extensive experiments on
metric learning, low-resolution image classiﬁcation and lowresolution face recognition tasks show the effectiveness of our
approach, while taking reduced models.

Figure 1: Our motivation. When subjects are more familiar
with high-resolution images, they can recognize the corresponding low-resolution images well. Thus, by mimicking
this capability in recognizing an low-resolution image, we
should let the model see more corresponding images.

drop in accuracy may happen when directly deploying these
models on recognizing low-resolution images that are difﬁcult to annotate but widely encountered in real-world applications, such as surveillance faces in the wild (Li et al.
2019) and thumbnail images in the Internet. To meet realworld requirements, it is necessary to explore an economic
yet feasible solution that can address a key challenge: how
to convert an existing complex image recognition model into
an efﬁcient one that still works effectively on low-resolution
images?
As shown in Fig. 1, low-resolution images can be recognizable for subjects that are familiar with the corresponding high-resolution images. Intuitively, it is helpful
to improve the recognition capacity of a subject by showing more similar or different images as well as more information about their relationships. Thus, the knowledge
from high-resolution images can help the extraction of discriminative features for effective recognition. Inspired by
that, many models have been proposed to recognize lowresolution images, and can be grouped into two categories:

1 Introduction
With the rapid development of deep learning, recent deep
models have proven success in many image recognition
tasks. For example, the ResNet model (He et al. 2016)
has achieved a high top-5 accuracy of 96.43% on ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009) object classiﬁcation task, while
VGGFace2 (Cao et al. 2018) model gived a 99.63% accuracy in face veriﬁcation task on LFW benchmark (Huang et
al. 2007) and ArcFace (Deng et al. 2019) reached 98.35%
rank-1 accuracy in face identiﬁcation task on the challenging MegaFace benchmark (Kemelmacher Shlizerman et al.
2016). These successes may arise from that deep models
with massive parameters provide an effective way to extract rich knowledge from large-scale data. However, a sharp
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10845

