The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Distance-Based Equilibria in Normal-Form Games
Erman Acar

Reshef Meir

Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
erman.acar@vu.nl

Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa, Israel
reshefm@ie.technion.ac.il

ple, following a Trembling-hand perfect strategy, which appears to be the foremost central notion of equilibrium reﬁnements, can be claimed to be a “super-rational” behavior rather than bounded rational (Aumann 1997). Recently,
Trembling-hand perfect equilibrium regained strong attention in machine learning research as well (Farina et al. 2018;
Farina, Gatti, and Sandholm 2018).
In this work, we suggest a model for an agent inspired by
early work in AI on uncertainty and reasoning (see the work
by Halpern (Halpern 2017)), and some recent works on speciﬁc games (such as voting (Conitzer, Walsh, and Xia 2011;
Meir, Lev, and Rosenschein 2014; Lev et al. 2019) and routing (Meir and Parkes 2015)), and look at its very foundations; normal-form games, from the lenses of this model.
Our model is distance-based, in the sense that at any given
action proﬁle, a set of “possible proﬁles” (that are close
to the actual proﬁle) is constructed w.r.t. a metric, without
assigning them any particular single probability. Then, the
agent determines her action using one of the many available
rationales for decision making under strict uncertainty, e.g.,
considering the worst case (Wald 1939) or trying to minimize regret (Savage 1951; Hyaﬁl and Boutilier 2004).
The intuition of such setting is due to imprecision caused
by limitations in observations (of the agent), and the ”closeness” of signals (imposed by the environment) which causes
perceptual indistinguishability that comes with it. 1 Intuitively, to capture such notions formally, one can employ
a distance-based model. Note also that such model can be
considered as a bounded rationality model, as it limits the
agent’s reasoning about the other agents’ strategies.
It is ﬂexible in the sense that potentially different distance
metrics and decision rules can be plugged into the model, to
ﬁt speciﬁc games or types of behavior. Once we ﬁx our behavioral model though, it naturally induces a notion of equilibrium, which is an action proﬁle where no agent is inclined
to change her action.
In biased games (Caragiannis, Kurokawa, and Procaccia
2014), a subclass of penalty games (Deligkas, Fearnley, and
Spirakis 2016)), players are equipped with a non-linear utility function; this is due to an additional bias term (or penalty)

Abstract
We propose a simple uncertainty modiﬁcation for the agent
model in normal-form games; at any given strategy proﬁle,
the agent can access only a set of “possible proﬁles” that
are within a certain distance from the actual action proﬁle.
We investigate the various instantiations in which the agent
chooses her strategy using well-known rationales e.g., considering the worst case, or trying to minimize the regret, to
cope with such uncertainty. Any such modiﬁcation in the behavioral model naturally induces a corresponding notion of
equilibrium; a distance-based equilibrium. We characterize
the relationships between the various equilibria, and also their
connections to well-known existing solution concepts such
as Trembling-hand perfection. Furthermore, we deliver existence results, and show that for some class of games, such
solution concepts can actually lead to better outcomes.

Introduction
Decision making under uncertainty is a key issue both in
game theory and in artiﬁcial intelligence. Whereas models
of strict uncertainty, or absence of unique priors are common
at the outset of those ﬁelds (Gilboa and Schmeidler 1989;
Dow and Werlang 1994; Halpern 2017; Gilboa, Postlewaite,
and Schmeidler 2008; Potyka et al. 2016), probabilistic
and Bayesian models still have become dominant, albeit
due to different reasons. In AI, the use of probabilities often leads to better performance in a wide variety of tasks
(e.g. Bayesian networks for debugging and information retrieval (Heckerman, Mamdani, and Wellman 1995), MonteCarlo methods for robot localization (Thrun et al. 2001), and
many more). In game theory, probabilities are used ﬁrst and
foremost because they allow for clean modeling, and in particular the use of von Neumann-Morgenstern utilities with
all the rich theory that they support.
Several solution concepts suggested in the behavioral
game theory literature tackled the problem of imperfect rationality (e.g., Cognitive hierarchy (Camerer, Ho, and Chong
2004), Quantal response (McKelvey and Palfrey 1995),
Trembling-hand perfect equilibria (Selten 1975) and others), yet many of these still assume that agents optimize
or approximate their expected utility over some distribution, which is not very cognitively plausible. For exam-

1

For instance, see random error (Cohen 1998). Note that these
discussions also took place in philosophy and epistemology e.g.,
”distant trees” argument (Williamson 1992).

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1750

