The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Fair Procedures for Fair Stable Marriage Outcomes
Nikolaos Tziavelis,1 Ioannis Giannakopoulos,2 Rune Quist Johansen,3
Katerina Doka,2 Nectarios Koziris,2 Panagiotis Karras4
1

Northeastern University, 2 National Technical University of Athens, 3 Aalborg University, 4 Aarhus University

The set of stable matchings in a real-world market is
large (Hassidim, Romm, and Shorrer 2017). Still, the GaleShapley algorithm yields one that is most preferred by
the one side and least preferred by the other (McVitie
and Wilson 1971). Arguably, many societal applications require a stable matching that compromises among the two
sides (Gusﬁeld and Irving 1989; Roth and Sotomayor 1990;
Romero-Medina 2005). For example, in a health care market, each surgeon may have preferences for which anesthetist to work with, and vice versa; ensuring a sense of fairness among the two sides may lead to better performance
and societal outcomes (Romero-Medina 2005). Thus, the
problem of ﬁnding a stable matching making a good compromise among the two sides is worth studying (Roth 2018).

Abstract
Given a two-sided market where each agent ranks those on
the other side by preference, the stable marriage problem calls
for ﬁnding a perfect matching such that no pair of agents prefer each other to their matches. Recent studies show that the
number of stable solutions can be large in practice. Yet the
classical solution to the problem, the Gale-Shapley (GS) algorithm, assigns an optimal match to each agent on one side,
and a pessimal one to each on the other side; such a solution may fare well in terms of equity only in highly asymmetric markets. Finding a stable matching that minimizes the sex
equality cost, an equity measure expressing the discrepancy
of mean happiness among the two sides, is strongly NP-hard.
Extant heuristics either (a) oblige some agents to involuntarily abandon their matches, or (b) bias the outcome in favor of
some agents, or (c) need high-polynomial or unbounded time.
We provide the ﬁrst procedurally fair algorithms that output
equitable stable marriages and are guaranteed to terminate in
at most cubic time; the key to this breakthrough is the monitoring of a monotonic state function and the use of a selective
criterion for accepting proposals. Our experiments with diverse simulated markets show that: (a) extant heuristics fail
to yield high equity; (b) the best solution found by the GS
algorithm can be very far from optimal equity; and (c) our
procedures stand out in both efﬁciency and equity, even when
compared to a non-procedurally fair approximation scheme.

1

A popular way to measure the goodness of compromise,
or equity, among the two sides is the sex equality cost (Gusﬁeld and Irving 1989); yet the problem of optimizing that
measure is NP-hard (Kato 1993); no known algorithm offers a theoretical approximation guarantee with respect to
optimality. An approximation algorithm (Iwama, Miyazaki,
and Yanagisawa 2010) provides a guarantee only with respect to Gale-Shapley algorithm’s solutions. Besides, by
this algorithm, some agents have to involuntarily forgo their
match in an already stable matching for a less preferable
one, so that the whole community moves to another stable
matching. A local-search heuristic (Viet et al. 2016a) shares
this involuntary character. Proposed voluntary procedures
either bias their result in favor of some agents (Ma 1996;
Aldershof, Carducci, and Lorenc 1999), or bear no theoretical guarantee to terminate in ﬁnite time (Everaere, Morge,
and Picard 2013; Gelain et al. 2013; Giannakopoulos et al.
2015), or need high-polynomial time (Dworczak 2016). To
date, no voluntary and unbiased procedure is guaranteed to
reach a stable matching in less than quartic time.

Introduction

The stable marriage (or matching) problem (SMP) calls
for each agent on two sides to ﬁnd a match on the other
side. Eventually, there should be no pair of agents that
would rather be matched to each other than to their allocated matches. Each agent holds a preference list for members of the opposite side. Gale and Shapley (1962) showed
that a stable solution can be found in quadratic time. The
problem ﬁnds application in several two-sided markets, including those among doctors and hospitals (Roth 1984;
2008), students and schools (Teo, Sethuraman, and Tan
2001), or sailors and vessels (Liebowitz and Simien 2005).
Roth and Shapley shared the 2012 Nobel Memorial Prize in
Economic Sciences for that work among others.

We develop the ﬁrst, to our knowledge, voluntary and unbiased procedures that are theoretically guaranteed to reach
a stable marriage in cubic time. These procedures monitor a
monotonic state function to enforce progression and apply a
selective criterion for accepting match proposals when facing difﬁculty. Our thorough experimental study shows that
our procedures outperform others in terms of equity and efﬁciency over diverse preference distributions.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7269

