The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Doctor2Vec: Dynamic Doctor
Representation Learning for Clinical Trial Recruitment
Siddharth Biswal,1,2 Cao Xiao,1 Lucas M. Glass,1 Elizabeth Milkovits,1 Jimeng Sun2
1

2

Analytic Center of Excellence, IQVIA, Cambridge, USA
Computational Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA

a wider range of health analytic tasks. For example, identifying the right doctors to conduct the trials site selection so as to improve the chance of completion of the trials (Hurtado-Chong et al. 2017) and doctor recommendation
for patients (Xu et al. 2018).
In this work, we focus on studying the clinical trial
recruitment problem using doctor representation learning.
Current standard practice calculates the median enrollment
rate 1 for a therapeutic area as the predicted enrollment success rate for all participating doctors, which is often inaccurate. In addition, some develop a multi-step manual
matching process for site selection which is labor-intensive
(Hurtado-Chong et al. 2017; Potter et al. 2011). Recently,
deep neural networks were applied on site selection tasks
via static medical concept embedding using only frequent
medical codes and simple term matching to trials (Gligorijevic et al. 2019). Despite the success, two challenges remain
open.

Abstract
Massive electronic health records (EHRs) enable the success
of learning accurate patient representations to support various
predictive health applications. In contrast, doctor representation was not well studied despite that doctors play pivotal
roles in healthcare. How to construct the right doctor representations? How to use doctor representation to solve important health analytic problems? In this work, we study the
problem on clinical trial recruitment, which is about identifying the right doctors to help conduct the trials based on
the trial description and patient EHR data of those doctors.
We propose Doctor2Vec which simultaneously learns 1) doctor representations from EHR data and 2) trial representations from the description and categorical information about
the trials. In particular, Doctor2Vec utilizes a dynamic memory network where the doctor’s experience with patients are
stored in the memory bank and the network will dynamically
assign weights based on the trial representation via an attention mechanism. Validated on large real-world trials and
EHR data including 2,609 trials, 25K doctors and 430K patients, Doctor2Vec demonstrated improved performance over
the best baseline by up to 8.7% in PR-AUC. We also demonstrated that the Doctor2Vec embedding can be transferred
to beneﬁt data insufﬁciency settings including trial recruitment in less populated/newly explored country with 13.7%
improvement or for rare diseases with 8.1% improvement in
PR-AUC.

1. Existing works do not capture the time-evolving patterns
of doctors experience and expertise encoded in EHR data
of patients that the doctor have seen;
2. Existing works learn a static doctor representation. However, in practice given a trial for a particular disease,
the doctor’s experience of relevant diseases are more important. Hence the doctor representation should change
based on the corresponding trial representation.

Introduction

To ﬁll the gap, we propose Doctor2Vec which simultaneously learns 1) doctor representations from longitudinal
patient EHR data and 2) trial embedding from the multimodal trial description. In particular, Doctor2Vec leverages
a dynamic memory network where the representations of patients seen by the doctor are stored as memory while trial
embedding serves as queries for retrieving from the memory. Doctor2Vec has the following contributions.

The rapid growth of electronic health record (EHR) data and
other health data enables the training of complex deep learning models to learn patient representations for disease diagnosis (Choi et al. 2018; 2016; Xiao, Choi, and Sun 2018),
risk prediction (Xiao et al. 2018), patient subtyping (Baytas
et al. 2017; Che et al. 2017), and medication recommendation (Shang et al. 2019b; 2019a). However, almost all existing works focus on modeling patients. Deep neural networks
for doctor representation learning are lacking.
Doctors play pivotal roles in connecting patients and treatments, including recruiting patients into clinical trials for
drug development and treating and caring for their patients.
Thus an effective doctor representation will better support

1. Patient embedding as a memory for dynamic doctor
representation learning. We represent doctors’ evolving
experience based on the representations from the doctors’
patients. The patient representations are stored as a memory for dynamic doctor representation extraction.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Enrollment rate of a doctor is the number of patients enrolled
by a doctor to the trial.

557

