The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Neural Approximate Dynamic Programming for On-Demand Ride-Pooling
Sanket Shah, Meghna Lowalekar, Pradeep Varakantham
School of Information Systems, Singapore Management University
{sankets, pradeepv}@smu.edu.sg, meghnal.2015@phdcs.smu.edu.sg

from reducing emissions and trafﬁc congestion compared to
Taxi/car on-Demand (ToD) services (e.g., UberX, Lyft), it
beneﬁts all the stakeholders involved: (a) Individual passengers have reduced costs as these are shared by overlapping
passengers; (b) Vehicles make more money per trip as multiple passengers (or passenger groups) are present; (c) For
the centralized entity (like Uber, Lyft etc.) more customer
requests can be satisﬁed with the same number of vehicles.
Underlying these on-demand ride-pooling services is the
Ride-Pool Matching Problem (RMP) (Alonso-Mora et al.
2017; Bei and Zhang 2018; Lowalekar, Varakantham, and
Jaillet 2019). The objective in the RMP is to assign groups of
user requests to vehicles that can serve them, online, subject
to predeﬁned quality constraints (e.g., the detour delay for
a customer cannot be more than 10 minutes) in such a way
that a quality metric is maximised (e.g., revenue). The RMP
reduces to the taxi/car-on-demand (ToD) problem when the
capacity, i.e., the maximum number of simultaneous passengers (with different origin and destination pairs) that can be
served by a vehicle, is 1. In this paper, we consider the most
general version of the RMP, in which batches of requests are
assigned to vehicles of arbitrary capacity, and present a solution that can scale to practical use-cases involving thousands
of locations and vehicles.
Past research in solving RMP problems can be categorized along four threads. Past work along the ﬁrst thread
employs traditional planning approaches to model the RMP
as an optimisation problem (Ropke and Cordeau 2009;
Ritzinger, Puchinger, and Hartl 2016; Parragh, Doerner, and
Hartl 2008). The problem with this class of approaches
is that they don’t scale to on-demand city-scale scenarios.
The second thread consists of approaches that make the
best greedy assignments (Ma, Zheng, and Wolfson 2013;
Tong et al. 2018; Huang et al. 2014; Lowalekar, Varakantham, and Jaillet 2019; Alonso-Mora et al. 2017). While
these scale well, they are myopic and, as a result, do not
consider the impact of a given assignment on future assignments. The third thread, consists of approaches that use Reinforcement Learning (RL) to address the myopia associated with approaches from the second category for the ToD
problem (Xu et al. 2018; Lin et al. 2018; Li et al. 2019;
Wang et al. 2018; Verma et al. 2017). Past RL work for the
ToD problem cannot be extended to solve the RMP, however,
because it relies heavily on the assumption that vehicles can

Abstract
On-demand ride-pooling (e.g., UberPool, LyftLine, GrabShare) has recently become popular because of its ability to
lower costs for passengers while simultaneously increasing
revenue for drivers and aggregation companies (e.g., Uber).
Unlike in Taxi on Demand (ToD) services – where a vehicle is assigned one passenger at a time – in on-demand
ride-pooling, each vehicle must simultaneously serve multiple passengers with heterogeneous origin and destination
pairs without violating any quality constraints. To ensure near
real-time response, existing solutions to the real-time ridepooling problem are myopic in that they optimise the objective (e.g., maximise the number of passengers served) for
the current time step without considering the effect such an
assignment could have on assignments in future time steps.
However, considering the future effects of an assignment that
also has to consider what combinations of passenger requests
can be assigned to vehicles adds a layer of combinatorial
complexity to the already challenging problem of considering future effects in the ToD case.
A popular approach that addresses the limitations of myopic
assignments in ToD problems is Approximate Dynamic Programming (ADP). Existing ADP methods for ToD can only
handle Linear Program (LP) based assignments, however, as
the value update relies on dual values from the LP. The assignment problem in ride pooling requires an Integer Linear Program (ILP) that has bad LP relaxations. Therefore,
our key technical contribution is in providing a general ADP
method that can learn from the ILP based assignment found
in ride-pooling. Additionally, we handle the extra combinatorial complexity from combinations of passenger requests
by using a Neural Network based approximate value function
and show a connection to Deep Reinforcement Learning that
allows us to learn this value-function with increased stability
and sample-efﬁciency. We show that our approach easily outperforms leading approaches for on-demand ride-pooling on
a real-world dataset by up to 16%, a signiﬁcant improvement
in city-scale transportation problems.

1

Introduction

On-demand ride-pooling, exempliﬁed by UberPool, LyftLine, GrabShare, etc., has become hugely popular in major
cities with 20% of all Uber trips coming from their ridepool offering UberPool (Heath 2016; Gessner 2019). Apart
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
507

