The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Bayesian Approach for Estimating Causal Effects from Observational Data
Johan Pensar

Topi Talvitie

Antti Hyttinen

Mikko Koivisto

Dept. of Math. and Stat.
University of Helsinki
johan.pensar@helsinki.ﬁ

Dept. of Computer Science
University of Helsinki
topi.talvitie@helsinki.ﬁ

HIIT & Dept. of CS
University of Helsinki
antti.hyttinen@helsinki.ﬁ

Dept. of Computer Science
University of Helsinki
mikko.koivisto@helsinki.ﬁ

Chen, Kumor, and Bareinboim 2017). Moreover, under
the assumption of causal sufﬁciency (i.e., absence of latent confounders), all causal effects can be identiﬁed by
back-door adjustment according to the known causal structure (Spirtes, Glymour, and Scheines 1993; Pearl 2009;
Greenland, Robins, and Pearl 1999).
However, when we do not have extensive knowledge about
the system under investigation in form of a causal graph, we
also have to make inferences on this graph structure from
the available data. From observational data alone, the causal
graph can in general only be identiﬁed up to its Markov
equivalence class. Several works study causal effects in the
light of the limited identiﬁability of causal structures (Entner,
Hoyer, and Spirtes 2013; Hyttinen, Eberhardt, and Järvisalo
2015; Perković et al. 2018; Jaber, Zhang, and Bareinboim
2018a; 2018b; Malinsky and Spirtes 2017).
More practical estimation methods are also available, when
causal sufﬁciency can be assumed. Speciﬁcally, the IDA algorithm estimates causal effects from linear Gaussian data
by backdoor adjustment over the graphs in the equivalence
class returned by the PC algorithm (Maathuis, Kalisch, and
Bühlmann 2009; Spirtes, Glymour, and Scheines 1993). For
a given graph, the causal effect between two variables is
estimated by linear regression, where the set of covariates
depends on the parents of the cause variable. Consequently,
since the parent set of a node typically varies within an equivalence class, a (multi)set of coefﬁcients is returned as the
causal effect estimate.
Although a set of coefﬁcients captures some of the uncertainty in the estimated effect, a lot of uncertainty remains unaccounted for. In particular, the accuracy hinges
on the structure learning step. In addition to the unoriented
edges within a Markov equivalence class, there may be several non-equivalent graphs that ﬁt the ﬁnite data set (almost) equally well, yet still yield very different causal effects estimates. Attempting to account for this uncertainty,
the original IDA method has been combined with various
resampling strategies, which associate the estimates with
frequentist measures of conﬁdence (Stekhoven et al. 2012;
Taruttis, Spang, and Engelmann 2015).
Here, we introduce a Bayesian approach for causal effect
estimation, which employs Bayesian model averaging to fully

Abstract
We present a novel Bayesian method for the challenging task
of estimating causal effects from passively observed data when
the underlying causal DAG structure is unknown. To rigorously capture the inherent uncertainty associated with the
estimate, our method builds a Bayesian posterior distribution
of the linear causal effect, by integrating Bayesian linear regression and averaging over DAGs. For computing the exact
posterior for all cause-effect variable pairs, we give an algorithm that runs in time O(3d d) for d variables, being feasible
up to 20 variables. We also give a variant that computes the
posterior probabilities of all pairwise ancestor relations within
the same time complexity, signiﬁcantly improving the fastest
previous algorithm. In simulations, our Bayesian method outperforms previous methods in estimation accuracy, especially
for small sample sizes. We further show that our method for
effect estimation is well-adapted for detecting strong causal
effects markedly deviating from zero, while our variant for
computing posteriors of ancestor relations is the method of
choice for detecting the mere existence of a causal relation.
Finally, we apply our method on observational ﬂow cytometry data, detecting several causal relations that concur with
previous ﬁndings from experimental data.

Introduction
Understanding the behaviour of a system under the inﬂuence
of interventions is the ultimate goal of many scientiﬁc studies.
As a result, the problem of estimating causal effects from
empirical data has received a lot of attention in a wide variety
of ﬁelds. In the most basic setting, we only have a passively
observed set of measurements over the variables of interest.
In this article, we propose a Bayesian method for estimating
causal effects from such data alone, that is, without the often
unavailable knowledge of the causal structure of the system.
If the causal structure is known, then do-calculus and
the ID algorithm can identify the causal effect whenever
it can be (non-parametrically) identiﬁed, even in the presence
of latent confounders (Shpitser and Pearl 2006; Tian and
Pearl 2002). When causal relations are restricted to be linear, more effects can be identiﬁed through more complicated
criteria (Tian 2004; van der Zander and Liskiewicz 2016;
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5395

