The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

TANet: Robust 3D Object Detection from Point Clouds with Triple Attention
Zhe Liu,1 Xin Zhao,2 Tengteng Huang,1 Ruolan Hu,1 Yu Zhou,1 Xiang Bai1∗
1

Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China, 430074
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, 100190
{m201772494, huangtengtng, huruolan, yuzhou, xbai}@hust.edu.cn, xzhao@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
2

Abstract
In this paper, we focus on exploring the robustness of the
3D object detection in point clouds, which has been rarely
discussed in existing approaches. We observe two crucial
phenomena: 1) the detection accuracy of the hard objects,
e.g., Pedestrians, is unsatisfactory, 2) when adding additional
noise points, the performance of existing approaches decreases rapidly. To alleviate these problems, a novel TANet is
introduced in this paper, which mainly contains a Triple Attention (TA) module, and a Coarse-to-Fine Regression (CFR)
module. By considering the channel-wise, point-wise and
voxel-wise attention jointly, the TA module enhances the crucial information of the target while suppresses the unstable cloud points. Besides, the novel stacked TA further exploits the multi-level feature attention. In addition, the CFR
module boosts the accuracy of localization without excessive
computation cost. Experimental results on the validation set
of KITTI dataset demonstrate that, in the challenging noisy
cases, i.e., adding additional random noisy points around each
object, the presented approach goes far beyond state-of-theart approaches. Furthermore, for the 3D object detection task
of the KITTI benchmark, our approach ranks the ﬁrst place on
Pedestrian class, by using the point clouds as the only input.
The running speed is around 29 frames per second.

PointPillars

Ground-truth

Ours

Prediction

Figure 1: Detection results for Pedestrians. The ﬁrst row
shows the corresponding 2D image. The second row demonstrates the 3D detection results produced by PointPillars and
our method, respectively. We highlight the missed and false
detection in PointPillars with red arrows.
SECOND (Yan, Mao, and Li 2018) and PointPillars (Lang
et al. 2019) convert the point clouds to the regular voxel grid
and apply a series of convolutional operations to 3D object
detection.
Although existing approaches have reported promising
detection accuracy, the performance is still unsatisfactory
in challenging cases, especially hard objects such as pedestrians. As shown in Fig. 1, PointPillars (Lang et al. 2018)
misses a pedestrian and provides a false positive object. We
reveal the intrinsic reasons from two aspects, 1) pedestrians have a smaller scale than cars, which makes fewer valid
points scanned on them through LiDAR. 2) pedestrians frequently appear in a variety of scenes, so various background
objects, such as trees, bushes, poles, etc., might be close to
the pedestrians, which results in enormous difﬁculty to recognize them correctly. Hence, detecting objects in the complex point clouds is still an extremely challenging task.
In this paper, we present a novel architecture named Triple
Attention Network (TANet), as shown in Fig 2. The straightforward motivation is that, in the cases of severe noises, a

Introduction
3D object detection in point clouds has a large number of
applications in real scenes, especially for autonomous driving and augmented reality. On the one hand, point clouds
provide reliable geometric structure information and precise
depth, while how to utilize such information effectively is an
essential issue. On the other hand, point clouds are usually
unordered, sparse, and unevenly distributed, which poses
great challenges for accurate object detection.
In recent years, several approaches based on point clouds
have been proposed in the 3D object detection community.
PointRCNN (Shi, Wang, and Li 2019) directly operates on
the raw point clouds, extracts the features by PointNets (Qi
et al. 2017a; 2017b) and then estimates ﬁnal results by twostage detection networks. VoxelNet (Zhou and Tuzel 2018),
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11677

