The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Deep Conservative Policy Iteration
Nino Vieillard, Olivier Pietquin, Matthieu Geist
Google Research, Brain Team

computing a sequence of deterministic greedy policies (as in
PI), CPI computes a sequence of stochastic policies that are
mixtures between consecutive greedy policies. While CPI has
inspired some recent algorithms, such as TRPO (Schulman et
al. 2015), it has never been implemented as such in practice,
nor experimented on large challenging environments. In this
paper, we propose a way to derive a practical algorithm from
CPI, using neural networks as approximation scheme and
relaxing the on-policy nature of CPI into off-policy learning
through a VI-like scheme. We call the resulting algorithm
Deep Conservative Policy Iteration, or DCPI (even if it is VIbased, to highlight the connection to CPI). It is speciﬁcally a
conservative variation of DQN, but the proposed approach
could be in principle applied to any pure-critic algorithm,
notably the many variations of DQN.
After a short background, we develop the approximation
steps that allow us to go from CPI to DCPI (Sec. 3), and
give a detailed description of DCPI (Sec. 4). We then discuss
some adaptive mixture rates in Sec. 5, inspired by the theory,
and present experimental results on Cartpole and Atari environments in Sec. 6. The Appendix can be found in the long
version of this paper (Vieillard, Pietquin, and Geist 2019).

Abstract
Conservative Policy Iteration (CPI) is a founding algorithm
of Approximate Dynamic Programming (ADP). Its core principle is to stabilize greediness through stochastic mixtures of
consecutive policies. It comes with strong theoretical guarantees, and inspired approaches in deep Reinforcement Learning
(RL). However, CPI itself has rarely been implemented, never
with neural networks, and only experimented on toy problems.
In this paper, we show how CPI can be practically combined
with deep RL with discrete actions, in an off-policy manner.
We also introduce adaptive mixture rates inspired by the theory. We experiment thoroughly the resulting algorithm on the
simple Cartpole problem, and validate the proposed method
on a representative subset of Atari games. Overall, this work
suggests that revisiting classic ADP may lead to improved and
more stable deep RL algorithms.

1

Introduction

We consider the Reinforcement Learning (RL) problem with
discrete actions, formalized with Markov Decision Processes
(MDP) (Puterman 1994). Approximate Dynamic Programming (ADP) is a standard approach to practically solve MDPs
when the state space is large. In this case, a popular – and
rather successful – approach is to approximate the value
function and/or the policy with function approximation, using techniques ranging from linear parametrization to deep
neural networks. Recently, several algorithms inspired by
ADP have shown unprecedented results on hard control tasks
by using deep neural networks, that provide a great power
of approximation. A lot of these algorithms can be seen as
instances or variations of ADP algorithms, notably Value
Iteration (VI) and Policy Iteration (PI). For example, Deep
Q-Network (DQN) (Mnih et al. 2015) can be related to VI,
while Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) (Haarnoja et al. 2018) or Trust
Region Policy Optimization (TRPO) (Schulman et al. 2015)
can be related to PI.
Conservative Policy Iteration (CPI) is a classic extension
of PI introduced by Kakade and Langford (2002). Its main
principle is to relax the improvement step in PI by being
conservative with respect to the previous policies: instead of

2

Background and notations

We classically frame RL with an inﬁnite horizon discounted
MDP, a tuple {S, A, P, r, γ} where S is the state space1 , A
the ﬁnite action space, P ∈ ΔS×A
the Markovian transition
S
kernel, r ∈ [−R, R]S×A a bounded reward function, and
γ ∈ (0, 1) a discount factor. A stochastic policy π associates
to each state s a distribution over actions π(·|s). We write
Pπ (s |s) = Ea∼π(·|s) [P (s |s, a)] for the stochastic kernel
associated to π, and rπ (s) = Ea∼π(·|s) [r(s, a)] the expected
discounting reward for starting in s and following π. The
value vπ ∈ RS of a policy is, for all s ∈ S,


∞



t
γ r(st , at )  s0 = s ,
vπ (s) = Eπ

t=0

where Eπ designates the expected value over all trajectories
produced by π. The value function of a policy is the unique

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
We assume it ﬁnite, for the ease of notations, but what we
present extends to the continuous case.

6070

