The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference (IAAI-20)

Clarity: Data-Driven Automatic Assessment of Product Competitiveness
Sheema Usmani, Mariana Bernagozzi, Yufeng Huang,
Michelle Morales, Amir Sabet Sarvestani, Biplav Srivastava
IBM Chief Analytics Ofﬁce,
Armonk, NY, USA 10504

Running Example

Abstract

Let us consider the competitive landscape for Product-A1 .
We ﬁrst determine the similar products which Product A
competes with. In this example, they are referred to as Products B, C, D and E. The selection of products for a marketplace is a business decision. The output of Clarity is visualized in Figure 1.
All the products are compared based on the Clarity Score,
which is a numerical value summarizing the online reviews
and contents. The Clarity Score for each product is displayed
through a visualization, as shown at the top part of Figure 1.
In the Figure 1, a ranking of the products are plotted
to provide a quantitative overview of the competitiveness
of the target products with respect to competitors over 12
months. Using different color schemes for different products, the ranking over the predeﬁned time period is displayed. In addition to the ranking, the width for each product
represents the normalized Clarity Score in that period. As we
can see in the chart, Product A has the highest score over the
time period considered, thus it was ranked ﬁrst throughout
the chart. However, the ranking could change dramatically
across time. For example, Product D (shown in orange) was
ranked third at the beginning of the time period, then it was
ranked at fourth in the following month, and then the ranking
changed again to second. With this information, the stakeholders of the target product can get a sense of how all the
players are performing in the market.
To shed light on which factors are contributing to the
Product’s score, more details about how the Clarity Score is
calculated for each product is showed in the bottom of Figure 1. For each product, the main contributors to the score
are the number of mentions and the overall Sentiment score.
The sentiment score is the aggregated value of the 5 drivers
of the product. As we can see, this gives a more granular
level of information of how the products are compared. For
example, although Product A has an overall higher score
than Product B, Product B receives a higher average Sentiment score in its price. However, Product B has a much
lower Compatibility driver score, which is the main contributor to its lower overall score.
Current users of Clarity use the score in their workﬂow

Competitive analysis is a critical part of any business. Product managers, sellers, and marketers spend time and resources
scouring through an immense amount of online and ofﬂine
content, aiming to discover what their competitors are doing
in the marketplace to understand what type of threat they pose
to their business’ ﬁnancial well-being. Currently, this process is time and labor-intensive, slow and costly. This paper
presents Clarity, a data-driven unsupervised system for assessment of products, which is currently in deployment in the
large IT company, IBM. Clarity has been running for more
than a year and is used by over 1,500 people to perform over
160 competitive analyses involving over 800 products. The
system considers multiple factors from a collection of online
content: numeric ratings by online users, sentiments of reviews for key product performance dimensions, content volume, and recency of content. The results and explanations
of factors leading to the results are visualized in an interactive dashboard that allows users to track their product’s performance as well as understand main contributing factors. Its
efﬁcacy has been tested in a series of cases across IBM’s portfolio which spans software, hardware, and services.

Introduction
Every business wants to know how their product/offering,
whether software, hardware or service, is doing in comparison to its competition. Many people are interested in competitive analysis, the primary being marketers, sellers, and
product managers. Currently, such users scan through the
large volume of online and ofﬂine content, aiming to understand what one’s competitors are doing in the marketplace for every product they have, to understand what type of
threats they may pose to the business’ ﬁnancial well-being.
This process is time and labor-intensive, error-prone, slow
and costly. Furthermore, as competition and feedback from
users continue to evolve, any analysis done previously needs
to be frequently updated to ensure accuracy.
To address this business need, we introduce an a deployed
system, called Clarity, which analyzes the competitive landscape of products in a marketplace continuously, without
supervision, as data gets updated over time. We now ﬁrst
preview the working of the system by providing a running
example, and then describe its details.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Due to business reasons, product names are anonymized in the
paper.

13204

