The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

ZoomNet: Part-Aware Adaptive Zooming Neural Network for 3D Object Detection
Zhenbo Xu,1 Wei Zhang,2 Xiaoqing Ye,2 Xiao Tan,2 Wei Yang,*1 Shilei Wen,2 Errui Ding,2
Ajin Meng,1 Liusheng Huang1
1

2

University of Science and Technology of China
Department of Computer Vision Technology (VIS), Baidu Inc., China
*
Corresponding Author. E-mail: qubit@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
3D object detection is an essential task in autonomous driving and robotics. Though great progress has been made, challenges remain in estimating 3D pose for distant and occluded objects. In this paper, we present a novel framework named ZoomNet for stereo imagery-based 3D detection. The pipeline of ZoomNet begins with an ordinary 2D
object detection model which is used to obtain pairs of leftright bounding boxes. To further exploit the abundant texture
cues in rgb images for more accurate disparity estimation, we
introduce a conceptually straight-forward module – adaptive
zooming, which simultaneously resizes 2D instance bounding boxes to a uniﬁed resolution and adjusts the camera intrinsic parameters accordingly. In this way, we are able to
estimate higher-quality disparity maps from the resized box
images then construct dense point clouds for both nearby and
distant objects. Moreover, we introduce to learn part locations as complementary features to improve the resistance
against occlusion and put forward the 3D ﬁtting score to
better estimate the 3D detection quality. Extensive experiments on the popular KITTI 3D detection dataset indicate
ZoomNet surpasses all previous state-of-the-art methods by
large margins (improved by 9.4% on APbv (IoU=0.7) over
pseudo-LiDAR). Ablation study also demonstrates that our
adaptive zooming strategy brings an improvement of over
10% on AP3d (IoU=0.7). In addition, since the ofﬁcial KITTI
benchmark lacks ﬁne-grained annotations like pixel-wise part
locations, we also present our KFG dataset by augmenting KITTI with detailed instance-wise annotations including pixel-wise part location, pixel-wise disparity, etc.. Both
the KFG dataset and our codes will be publicly available at
https://github.com/detectRecog/ZoomNet.

Figure 1: Comparisons between ZoomNet and existing
frameworks. Framework (a) performs 2D detection then infer 3D pose by 3D-2D geometry constraints. Framework
(b) estimates the disparity map to construct pseudo LiDAR,
then performs 3D detection models on pseudo LiDAR. By
contrast, our proposed ZoomNet, as shown in (c), performs
instance-level disparity estimation and analysis, yielding superior performance.

stereo cameras which are orders of magnitude cheaper than
LiDAR serve as a promising alternative and receive wide
attention in both academia and industry. Stereo cameras,
which work in a manner similar to human binocular vision,
can operate at a higher scanning rate and provide abundant
textures cues in high-resolution stereo images for distant objects.
Recent stereo imagery-based 3D detection frameworks
put great efforts to explore how stereo 3D information can
be effectively used and adapt existing 2d/3d detection models for plugging into their frameworks. As shown in Fig. 1a,
recent Stereo-RCNN (Li, Chen, and Shen 2019) ﬁrst adapts
the popular RPN (region proposal networks) for simultaneous 2d detection and box association. The concatenated
left-right RoI features are used to regress 2D key-points and
3D dimensions. Then, the 3D pose is estimated by solving

Introduction
Accurate 3D object detection is essential and indispensable
for many applications, such as robotics and autonomous
driving. Currently, leading 3D object detection methods
(Yang et al. 2019; Shi et al. 2019) for autonomous driving rely heavily on LiDAR (light detection and ranging)
data for acquiring accurate depth information. As LiDAR
is known to be expensive and has a relatively short perception range (typically around 100m for autonomous driving),
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12557

