The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Aggregated Gradient Langevin Dynamics
Chao Zhang,1,2∗ Jiahao Xie,1 Zebang Shen,3† Peilin Zhao,2 Tengfei Zhou,1 Hui Qian1
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
2
Tencent AI Lab, 3 University of Pennsylvania
{zczju, xiejh, zhoutengfei, qianhui}@zju.edu.cn, zebang@seas.upenn.edu, masonzhao@tencent.com

Teh 2011). While such scheme enjoys a signiﬁcantly reduced per-iteration cost, the mixture time, i.e., the total number of iterations required to achieve the correction from
an out-of-equilibrium conﬁguration to the target posterior
distribution, is increased, due to the extra variance introduced by the approximation (Dalalyan and Karagulyan 2017;
Dalalyan 2017b).
In recent years, efforts are made to design variancecontrol strategies to circumvent this slow convergence issue
in the SGLD In particular, borrowing ideas from variance
reduction methods in the optimization literature (Johnson
and Zhang 2013; Defazio, Bach, and Lacoste-Julien 2014;
Lei and Jordan 2017), the variance-reduced SGLD variants exploit the high correlations between consecutive iterates to construct unbiased aggregated gradient approximations with less variance, which leads to better mixture
time guarantees (Dubey et al. 2016; Zou, Xu, and Gu 2018b).
Among these methods, SAGA-LD and SVRG-LD (Dubey et
al. 2016) are proved to be the most effective ones when
high-quality samples are required (Chatterji et al. 2018;
Zou, Xu, and Gu 2019). While the nonasymptotic convergence guarantees for SVRG-LD and SAGA-LD have been
established, it is difﬁcult to seamlessly extend these analyses
to cover other Langevin dynamics based MCMC methods
with different efﬁcient gradient approximations.

Abstract
In this paper, we explore a general Aggregated Gradient
Langevin Dynamics framework (AGLD) for the Markov
Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling. We investigate the
nonasymptotic convergence of AGLD with a uniﬁed analysis for different data accessing (e.g. random access, cyclic
access and random reshufﬂe) and snapshot updating strategies, under convex and nonconvex settings respectively. It is
the ﬁrst time that bounds for I/O friendly strategies such as
cyclic access and random reshufﬂe have been established in
the MCMC literature. The theoretic results also indicate that
methods in AGLD possess the merits of both the low periteration computational complexity and the short mixture time.
Empirical studies demonstrate that our framework allows to
derive novel schemes to generate high-quality samples for
large-scale Bayesian posterior learning tasks.

1

Introduction

We focus on the Langevin dynamics based Markov Chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods for sampling the parameter
vector θ ∈ Rd from a target posterior distribution
p∗  p(θ|{zi }N
i=1 ) ∝ p(θ)

N


p(zi |θ),

(1)

i=1

• First of all, different delicate Lyapunov functions are
designed for SVRG-LD and SAGA-LD to prove the
nonasymptotic convergence to the stationary distribution.
Due to the different targets of optimization and MCMC,
the mixture-time analysis is not a simple transition of the
convergence rate analysis in optimization. The lack of a
uniﬁed perspective of these variance-reduced SGLD algorithms makes it difﬁcult to effectively explore other
variance-reduced estimators used in optimization (e.g.,
HSAG (Reddi et al. 2015)) for Langevin dynamics based
MCMC sampling. In particular, customized Lyapunov
functions need to be designed if new variance-reduced
estimators are adopted.

where p(θ) is some prior of θ, zi ’s are the data points observed, and p(zi |θ) is the likelihood function. The Langevin
dynamics Monte Carlo method (LMC) adopts the gradient
of log-posterior in an iterative manner to drive the distribution of samples to the target distribution efﬁciently (Roberts
and Stramer 2002; Roberts, Tweedie, and others 1996;
Mattingly, Stuart, and Higham 2002). To reduce the computational complexity for large-scale posterior learning
tasks, the Stochastic Gradient Langevin Dynamics method
(SGLD), which replaces the expensive full gradient with
the stochastic gradient, has been proposed (Welling and
∗
This work is done when Chao Zhang works as an intern in
Tencent AI Lab.
†
Corresponding Author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• Second, existing theoretical analysis relies heavily on the
randomness of the data accessing strategy to construct an
unbiased estimator of the true gradient. In practice, the
random access strategy entails heavy I/O cost, i.e., lots of
6746

