The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

HDK: Toward High-Performance Deep-Learning-Based Kirchhoff Analysis
Xinying Wang, Olamide Timothy Tawose, Feng Yan, Dongfang Zhao
University of Nevada
Reno, NV 89557, USA
{xinyingw, otawose}@nevada.unr.edu, {fyan, dzhao}@unr.edu

from exponential to polynomial, how to efﬁciently solve
them remains an open challenge to both the biomedical engineering and parallel computing communities.
Inspired by the recent advances in deep learning (DL), researchers started to seek non-analytic paradigms to estimate
the solution, e.g., training a convolutional neural network
(CNN) to accurately predict the unknown resistor distribution in an electrode array (Tan et al. 2019). This approach
demonstrated to be an effective means to “learn” the nonlinear function between inputs and outputs, as the error rate is
reported as low as 0.49%.
However, before the CNN-based approach can be practically adopted, one critical issue concerning performance must be addressed. Speciﬁcally, the CNN-based approach (Tan et al. 2019) simply simulates the input and output data for the neural network, assuming the training set
is known a priori, which is not the case in the real world.
In fact, it is one of the most challenging problems to efﬁciently obtain the training data set for an electrode array
due to the computational complexity of Kirchhoff nonlinear equations. As shown by Niu et al. (Niu et al. 2018a), a
commodity workstation took less than one minute to generate all the nonlinear equations for a 20×20 electrode array, but then the time increased to more than four hours for
a 100×100 electrode array—prohibitively slow in the practice. This is partly why in (Tan et al. 2019) authors simulated
tens of thousands of training data and tested it on a smallscale 16 × 15 electrode array1 . The slow performance has
signiﬁcantly hindered CNN-based Kirchhoff analysis from
being broadly adopted in real-world applications.
To overcome the above challenges, this paper proposes a
high-performance DL-based method for Kirchhoff analysis,
namely HDK. HDK employs two speciﬁc techniques to improve the performance of DL-based Kirchhoff analysis: (i)
early pruning of unqualiﬁed candidate inputs and (ii) parallelization of forward labelling. To retain the high accuracy of
the DL models, HDK also introduces random errors to augment the training set and at the same time applies dimension

Abstract
The Kirchhoff law is one of the most widely used physical laws in many engineering principles, e.g., biomedical engineering, electrical engineering, and computer engineering.
One challenge of applying the Kirchhoff law to real-world
applications at scale lies in the high, if not prohibitive, computational cost to solve a large number of nonlinear equations.
Despite recent advances in leveraging a convolutional neural
network (CNN) to estimate the solutions of Kirchhoff equations, the low performance is still signiﬁcantly hindering the
broad adoption of CNN-based approaches. This paper proposes a high-performance deep-learning-based approach for
Kirchhoff analysis, namely HDK. HDK employs two techniques to improve the performance: (i) early pruning of unqualiﬁed input candidates and (ii) parallelization of forward
labelling. To retain high accuracy, HDK also applies various
optimizations to the data such as randomized augmentation
and dimension reduction. Collectively, the aforementioned
techniques improve the analysis speed by 8× with accuracy
as high as 99.6%.

Introduction
In various disciplines such as medical engineering and
healthcare devices, scientists can only measure the endto-end electrical resistance values that are derived from
the complex, nonlinear transformation of individual resistances (Niu et al. 2018b). Nonetheless, the objective of many
domain-speciﬁc applications is to ﬁnd intrinsic resistance
values, and the orthodox approach is to solve the system of
large numbers of nonlinear equations formed according to
the Kirchhoff law (Kirchhoff Law 2019).
Solving a Kirchhoff-based system of nonlinear equations
poses two technical challenges: (i) the root of unknowns is
not unique because the unknowns appear at the denominators of the equations; (ii) the computation for ﬁnding the root
takes a long, sometimes prohibitive, time. For instance, Niu
et al. (Niu et al. 2018a) reported that forming the Kirchhoff
equations would take hundreds of days even for a smallscale 40 × 40 electrode array. Although (Niu et al. 2018a)
presented an algorithm to reduce the number of equations

1
In literature, an electrode array can be organized in a ring or
a grid topology. Of note, in (Tan et al. 2019), the array is organized as a 16-electrode ring, which is equivalent to a 16 × 15 twodimensional array referred to by (Niu et al. 2018a).

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
997

