The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Optimizing Discrete Spaces via Expensive
Evaluations: A Learning to Search Framework
Aryan Deshwal,1 Syrine Belakaria,1 Janardhan Rao Doppa,1 Alan Fern2
1

School of EECS, Washington State University
2
School of EECS, Oregon State University
{aryan.deshwal, syrine.belakaria, jana.doppa}@wsu.edu, alan.fern@oregonstate.edu

surrogate model over combinatorial structures. The second
challenge is, given such a surrogate model, to search through
the combinatorial space to identify the most promising next
structure to evaluate. Prior methods either employ relatively
simple surrogate models that admit tractable optimization
solvers for this search or use complex models with highlyheuristic search methods. Ideally, we would like an approach
that can work with more complex models while following a
more principled and effective search approach.
In this paper, we introduce a new learning-to-search (L2S)
framework, called L2S-DISCO, for selecting the sequence
of combinatorial structures to evaluate during optimization.
L2S-DISCO employs a combinatorial search procedure (e.g.,
local search with multiple restarts) guided by search control
knowledge (e.g., heuristic function to select good starting
states), and continuously improves the control knowledge
using machine learning. Our approach can be viewed as
online learning for hyper-heuristic search (Burke et al. 2013).
From this perspective, a primary contribution of this paper is
the ﬁrst application of hyper-heuristic search to BO.
Our search-based perspective allows us to directly tune the
search via learning during the optimization process and has
several potential advantages: 1) High ﬂexibility in deﬁning
search spaces over structures; 2) Easily handles domain constraints to search over “valid” structures; 3) Allows the incorporation of prior knowledge; and 4) Puts forth a new family
of BO-style approaches with many future instantiations to
explore in future work. We provide a concrete instantiation of
L2S-DISCO for local search based optimization by specifying the form of training data, and a rank learning formulation
to update the search heuristic for selecting promising starting
states. Experimental results on diverse benchmarks show the
efﬁcacy of L2S-DISCO on complex real-world problems.
Contributions. The key contributions of this paper include:

Abstract
We consider the problem of optimizing expensive black-box
functions over discrete spaces (e.g., sets, sequences, graphs).
The key challenge is to select a sequence of combinatorial
structures to evaluate, in order to identify high-performing
structures as quickly as possible. Our main contribution is to
introduce and evaluate a new learning-to-search framework for
this problem called L2S-DISCO. The key insight is to employ
search procedures guided by control knowledge at each step to
select the next structure and to improve the control knowledge
as new function evaluations are observed. We provide a concrete instantiation of L2S-DISCO for local search procedure
and empirically evaluate it on diverse real-world benchmarks.
Results show the efﬁcacy of L2S-DISCO over state-of-the-art
algorithms in solving complex optimization problems.

1

Introduction

Many scientiﬁc and engineering applications involve optimizing discrete spaces (e.g., sets, sequences, graphs) guided by
expensive black-box function evaluations. For example, in
the application of ﬁnding alloys with high creep-resistance,
we need to search over subsets of a given set of candidate
metals guided by physical lab experiments. Similarly, for
designing application-speciﬁc integrated circuits, we need to
search over candidate placements of processing elements and
communication links to optimize performance as measured
by expensive computational simulations.
There is very limited work on optimizing discrete spaces
via expensive evaluations as discussed in Section 3. A popular
and effective framework for optimizing expensive functions
is Bayesian optimization (BO) (Shahriari et al. 2016). The key
idea behind BO is to estimate a cheap surrogate model, e.g.,
a Gaussian Process (Rasmussen and Williams 2006), based
on observed outcomes, which can be used as guidance for
intelligently selecting the next evaluation points. Despite the
huge successes of BO (Snoek, Larochelle, and Adams 2012;
Thornton et al. 2013), current approaches focus primarily on
continuous optimization spaces and there is little principled
work on discrete spaces. The ﬁrst challenge in moving from
continuous spaces to discrete spaces is to deﬁne an effective

• A novel learning-to-search framework, L2S-DISCO, for
optimizing expensive functions over discrete spaces, which
integrates combinatorial-search with machine learning.
• A concrete instantiation of L2S-DISCO for local-search–
based optimization.
• An evaluation of L2S-DISCO over diverse real-world
benchmarks, showing advantages over the state-of-the-art.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3773

