The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Unsupervised Metric Learning with Synthetic Examples
†

Ujjal Kr Dutta,†,1 Mehrtash Harandi,*,2 C Chandra Sekhar†,3
Dept. of Computer Science and Eng., Indian Institute of Technology Madras, India
*
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Systems Eng., Monash University, Australia
1
ukd@cse.iitm.ac.in, 2 mehrtash.harandi@monash.edu, 3 chandra@cse.iitm.ac.in

Abstract

Input Space
{τi = (xia , xip , xin ), yτi = c}

Distance Metric Learning (DML) involves learning an embedding that brings similar examples closer while moving
away dissimilar ones. Existing DML approaches make use of
class labels to generate constraints for metric learning. In this
paper, we address the less-studied problem of learning a metric in an unsupervised manner. We do not make use of class
labels, but use unlabeled data to generate adversarial, synthetic constraints for learning a metric inducing embedding.
Being a measure of uncertainty, we minimize the entropy of
a conditional probability to learn the metric. Our stochastic
formulation scales well to large datasets, and performs competitive to existing metric learning methods.

ST : R2d → Rd

Learned Space

Rd

if c = 1, 2, 3
−
(si , s+
i , si )
if c = 4
+
(si , si )
if c = 5
(si , s−
i )

L T : Rd → Rl

Made to Rl
follow
angular
constraint
Brought
closer
Pushed
away

Figure 1: Illustration of our proposed approach SUML.

Xie et al. 2018), they make use of class labels to generate such constraints. In this paper, we address the following question: “How do we learn a metric, when there are no
class labels present?” This is an important problem, particularly in newer applications involving large datasets, where
obtaining class labels may be infeasible (e.g., invasive medical imaging techniques, 3D point cloud data, unsupervised
domain adaptation etc.).
Classically, learning of embeddings in an unsupervised
manner has been done in the context of manifold learning (Cox and Cox 2000; Tenenbaum, De Silva, and Langford 2000; He and Niyogi 2003; He et al. 2005), or diffusion processes (Donoser and Bischof 2013; Bai et al. 2017;
Iscen et al. 2017) that capture the intrinsic manifold structure
of the data. More recently, a few unsupervised feature learning approaches have been proposed (Dosovitskiy et al. 2016;
Li et al. 2016; Caron et al. 2018; Wu et al. 2018). However,
they ignore the basic semantic relationships among the examples and are not particularly designed for metric learning.
(Iscen et al. 2018) proposed an approach to mine hard constraints for unsupervised metric learning, and is considered
as a state-of-the-art.
In this paper, we propose a novel, unsupervised approach
to learn an embedding that induces a metric (Bellet, Habrard,
and Sebban 2015) in the learned space. We do not make use
of class labels to learn the metric, but rather sample random triplets from the unlabeled data. As illustrated in Figure 1, for each random triplet τi , we imagine an associated
hypothetical label yτi that represents all possible semantic
permutations of examples xia , xip and xin , present in τi . Depending on a possible value of yτi , we generate synthetic

Introduction
“Are two given examples similar (or dissimilar)?” This is a
crucial question in problems like classiﬁcation (Chen et al.
2018; Xie et al. 2018), clustering and retrieval (Duan et al.
2018; Wang et al. 2017), prevalent in machine learning and
computer vision. Distance Metric Learning (DML) aims
at learning a new embedding of the data such that similar examples are brought closer, while dissimilar examples
are moved further apart. The importance of DML is even
more crucial in challenging scenarios like Zero-Shot Learning (ZSL) (Xian et al. 2018; Oh Song et al. 2016), and FineGrained Visual Categorization (FGVC) (Qian et al. 2015).
For instance, in the ZSL setting, where test examples belong to classes not seen during training, DML is a preferred
choice over standard softmax-based classiﬁcation models.
This is because it aims at learning a generic notion of similarity among examples, as opposed to class-speciﬁc concepts.
To provide weak-supervision for learning a distance metric, DML approaches require constraints, that can be of
various types: pairs (Chen et al. 2018; Harandi, Salzmann,
and Hartley 2017; Xie et al. 2018; Koestinger et al. 2012;
Davis et al. 2007), triplets (Shi, Bellet, and Sha 2014;
Ye et al. 2017; Weinberger, Blitzer, and Saul 2006), tuples (Sohn 2016), or batches (Oh Song et al. 2016). Despite the success of state-of-the-art DML methods proposed
in the recent years (Duan et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2018;
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3834

