The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning Meta Model for Zero- and Few-Shot Face Anti-Spooﬁng
Yunxiao Qin,1,2 Chenxu Zhao,2∗ Xiangyu Zhu,3 Zezheng Wang,2 Zitong Yu,4
Tianyu Fu,5 Feng Zhou,2 Jingping Shi,1 Zhen Lei3
1

3

Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xian, China, 2 AIBEE, Beijing, China
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing, China
4
CMVS, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, 5 Winsense Technology Ltd, Beijing, China
qyxqyx@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, {cxzhao, zezhengwang, fzhou}@aibee.com, {xiangyu.zhu, zlei}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
zitong.yu@oulu.ﬁ, futianyu514@gmail.com, shijingping@nwpu.edu.cn
Abstract

 

1




 

 





Face anti-spooﬁng is crucial to the security of face recognition systems. Most previous methods formulate face antispooﬁng as a supervised learning problem to detect various
predeﬁned presentation attacks, which need large scale training data to cover as many attacks as possible. However, the
trained model is easy to overﬁt several common attacks and
is still vulnerable to unseen attacks. To overcome this challenge, the detector should: 1) learn discriminative features
that can generalize to unseen spooﬁng types from predeﬁned
presentation attacks; 2) quickly adapt to new spooﬁng types
by learning from both the predeﬁned attacks and a few examples of the new spooﬁng types. Therefore, we deﬁne face
anti-spooﬁng as a zero- and few-shot learning problem. In
this paper, we propose a novel Adaptive Inner-update Meta
Face Anti-Spooﬁng (AIM-FAS) method to tackle this problem through meta-learning. Speciﬁcally, AIM-FAS trains a
meta-learner focusing on the task of detecting unseen spoofing types by learning from predeﬁned living and spooﬁng
faces and a few examples of new attacks. To assess the proposed approach, we propose several benchmarks for zeroand few-shot FAS. Experiments show its superior performances on the presented benchmarks to existing methods in
existing zero-shot FAS protocols.





 

  





 


  

Figure 1: A zero- and few-shot FAS example. The train set
contains several predeﬁned living and spooﬁng types. The
test set contains several faces of new emerged living and
spooﬁng types. Zero-shot FAS is training the detector only
on the train set and testing it on the test set. Whereas, fewshot FAS utilizes both the train set and a few collected faces
(the blue box) for updating the detector.

Introduction

discriminate living and spooﬁng faces with numerous predeﬁned living and spooﬁng faces in a supervised way.
The detectors are satisfactory at detecting the predeﬁned
PAs due to their data-driven training manner. However,
when deployed in real scenarios, the FAS systems will encounter the following practical challenges.

Face recognition is a ubiquitous technology used in industrial applications and commercial products. However, face
recognition system is easy to be fooled by presentation attacks (PAs), such as printed face (print attack), face replay
on digital device (replay attack), face covered by a mask
(3D-mask attack), etc. As a result, face anti-spooﬁng (FAS)
system, which detects whether the presented face is live or
not, becomes essential to keep the recognition system safe.
Until now, researchers have proposed lots of hand-crafted
feature based (Boulkenafet, Komulainen, and Hadid 2016;
Gan et al. 2017; Lucena et al. 2017) and deep-learning
based methods(Lucena et al. 2017; Xu, Li, and Deng 2015;
Shao, Lan, and Yuen 2017) to discriminate spoof faces from
living faces. Most of them train the detector to learn how to

• A variety of application scenarios and unpredictable novel
PAs keep evolving. Data-driven models may give unpredictable results when faced with out-of-distribution living examples captured in new application scenarios and
spooﬁng examples with new PAs.
• When we adapt the anti-spooﬁng model to new attacks,
existing methods need to collect sufﬁcient samples for
training. However, it is expensive to collect labeled data
for every new attack since the spooﬁng keeps evolving.

∗

Corresponding Author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

To overcome these challenges, we propose that FAS
should be treated as an open set zero- and few-shot learn11916

