The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Modelling Sentence Pairs via Reinforcement Learning:
An Actor-Critic Approach to Learn the Irrelevant Words
Mahtab Ahmed, Robert E. Mercer
Department of Computer Science, University of Western Ontario
London, ON, Canada
mahme255@uwo.ca, mercer@csd.uwo.ca

al. 2017), (Cer et al. 2018). This is contrary to what humans do, we usually look at the key words of both sentences
while comparing them and ignore most of the irrelevant information. For example, while comparing the sentence “A
boy is lying in the snow and is making snow angels” with the
sentence “Two people wearing snowsuits are on the ground
making snow angels” for the natural language inference task,
we can just consider that whether the actors in both of these
sentences are “making snow angels” or not and take a decision based on that.
Almost all the sentence pair modelling architectures follow a uniform framework: represent the sentences to compare in some high dimensional space using an encoder and
compare these representations using a matching module.
The encoding section of these models can be classiﬁed into
four types: Bag of words based models which ignore the
ordering of the words, Recurrent and Convolutional neural network based models which take into consideration the
contexts surrounding each word, Transformer based models
where the complex attention module does the summarizing
and ﬁnally, the models that work on predeﬁned structures
like parse trees.
(Iyyer et al. 2015) and (Joulin et al. 2016) propose bag
of words type models where they ignore the word ordering
and instead rely on taking the average of word vectors followed by some linear projection layers. (Liu et al. 2015) also
ignore the structure as well as context but relies on an autoencoder to generate the representation by adapting domain
and sentiment supervision.
(Mueller and Thyagarajan 2016) use just one copy of an
LSTM to encode the entailment task sentences followed by
a Manhattan distance based similarity function for the inference. (Yang et al. 2016), (Conneau et al. 2017), and (Liu et
al. 2016) follow the same framework utilizing LSTM followed by a pooling block to summarize the representation
even more. (Tai, Socher, and Manning 2015) and (Socher
et al. 2013) utilize predeﬁned dependency as well as constituency tree structures and use tree based recurrent networks as the composition function to extract the representation. Furthermore, to get more powerful representations,
(Yao Zhou and Pan 2016) encode attention inside the dependency tree variant of tree LSTM whereas (Chen et al. 2017)

Abstract
Learning sentence representation is a fundamental task in
Natural Language Processing. Most of the existing sentence
pair modelling architectures focus only on extracting and using the rich sentence pair features. The drawback of utilizing all of these features makes the learning process much
harder. In this study, we propose a reinforcement learning
(RL) method to learn a sentence pair representation when
performing tasks like semantic similarity, paraphrase identiﬁcation, and question-answer pair modelling. We formulate
this learning problem as a sequential decision making task
where the decision made in the current state will have a strong
impact on the following decisions. We address this decision
making with a policy gradient RL method which chooses the
irrelevant words to delete by looking at the sub-optimal representation of the sentences being compared. With this policy, extensive experiments show that our model achieves on
par performance when learning task-speciﬁc representations
of sentence pairs without needing any further knowledge like
parse trees. We suggest that the simplicity of each task inference provided by our RL model makes it easier to explain.

Introduction
In natural language processing (NLP), most of the tasks require a transformation from an input space to some high
dimensional vector space where each dimension captures
some aspect of the underlying structure about the data.
Learning this kind of representation is a fundamental challenge in NLP and is extensively explored by many recent works (Bengio, Courville, and Vincent 2013), (Le and
Mikolov 2014). In order to make correct decisions, the wellstudied mainstream tasks, such as comparing a pair of sentences in terms of semantics or paraphrasing, depend heavily
on the quality of the learned representation of each sentence
since the comparison is made in this representation space
(Conneau et al. 2017), (Cer et al. 2018), (Mueller and Thyagarajan 2016) and (Tai, Socher, and Manning 2015).
Mainstream sentence pair comparing models look only at
the sentences being compared individually while overlooking the information they share between them (Conneau et
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7358

