The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Dataset for Low-Resource Stylized Sequence-to-Sequence Generation
Yu Wu,1 Yunli Wang,2 Shujie Liu1
1

2

Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
State Key Lab of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, China
{yuwu1, shujliu}@microsoft.com {wangyunli}@buaa.edu.cn

Informal
Input

Abstract
Low-resource stylized sequence-to-sequence (S2S) generation is in high demand. However, its development is hindered
by the datasets which have limitations on scale and automatic
evaluation methods. We construct two large-scale, multiplereference datasets for low-resource stylized S2S, the Machine
Translation Formality Corpus (MTFC) that is easy to evaluate
and the Twitter Conversation Formality Corpus (TCFC) that
tackles an important problem in chatbots. These datasets contain context to source style parallel data, source style to target
parallel data, and non-parallel sentences in the target style to
enable the semi-supervised learning. We provide three baselines, the pivot-based method, the teacher-student method,
and the back-translation method. We ﬁnd that the pivot-based
method is the worst, and the other two methods achieve the
best score on different metrics.

Informal
Output
Formal
Output

My laptop appears a windows 10 issue
Hi Bro! receiving any error codes when
trying to sync? any details with help us assist u.
Are you receiving any error codes when
you try to sync? Any details would help
us assist you better.

Table 1: An example of stylized chatbots. For ease description, we call the informal input as context.

extending the Grammarly’s Yahoo Answers Formality Corpus (GYAFC) (Rao and Tetreault 2018). Both datasets focus
on a speciﬁc style, formality, and consist of a large amount
of training data, as well as human-annotated, multiplereference test data. Speciﬁcally, the Twitter Conversation
Formality Corpus aims to teach an agent to respond humans
in a formal way. We prepare 1.7 million informal messageresponse pairs from Twitter, and 52,595 informal to formal
English text pairs borrowed from the GYAFC for training.
Regarding to model validation, we ask native speakers to
rewrite 2000 informal responses into formal style.
Although the stylized conversation has many potential applications in the real world, it is hard to evaluate (Liu et
al. 2016). Motivated by this, we further construct a easier
evaluate task, the Machine Translation Formality Corpus.
The MTFC consists of 15 million informal Chinese to informal English text pairs which are carefully ﬁltered from
the OpenSubtitle Dataset (Lison and Tiedemann 2016). The
informal to formal English text pairs are borrowed from the
GYAFC as well. For tuning and testing, we ask human annotators to create over 3,000 human-annotated informal Chinese to formal English pairs. For both datasets, we further
prepare large-scaled non-parallel formal sentences to enable
the training of semi-supervised methods (Sennrich, Haddow,
and Birch 2016a).
Since this task can be treated as a speciﬁc multilingual
machine translation problem, we employ three approaches
from low-resource machine translation as baselines: 1) the
pivot-based method (Cohn and Lapata 2007) that conducts
stylized S2S generation in a pipeline manner; 2) the teacherstudent model (Chen et al. 2017) that tackles the error propa-

Introduction
The S2S framework (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014) has
achieved great success in recent years. However, a surge of
tasks require S2S models to generate texts in a speciﬁc style
without abundant parallel data, such as formal response generation in chatbots, which is in high demand but does not
perform very well (Shum, He, and Li 2018). Table 1 shows
that replying formally is important for chatbots, especially
in the domains of customer service.
We investigate the low-resource stylized sequence-tosequence generation problem. Usually, context to targetstyle sentence pairs are unavailable, but adequate context
to source-style sentence pairs are easy to collect. For instance, informal conversational data can be acquired easily
on Twitter, but it is hard to ﬁnd informal message and formal response text pairs (Li et al. 2016b). With the context to
source-style sentence pairs, crowd-sourcing efforts can be
made to construct source-style to target-style sentence pairs.
In such a way, the context and target-style sentence is
connected with the help of source style sentence, which is
the main difference with the non-parallel style transfer task
(Shen et al. 2017).
With such assumptions, we introduce two benchmark
datasets, the Twitter Conversation Formality Corpus (TCFC)
and the Machine Translation Formality Corpus (MTFC) by
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9290

