The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Multimodal Structure-Consistent Image-to-Image Translation
Che-Tsung Lin,1,2 Yen-Yi Wu,1 Po-Hao Hsu,1 Shang-Hong Lai1,3
1

Department of Computer Science, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan
Intelligent Mobility Division, Mechanical and Mechatronics Systems Research Laboratories,
Industrial Technology Research Institute, Hsinchu, Taiwan
3
Microsoft AI R&D Center, Taipei, Taiwan
AlexLin@itri.org.tw, u106062542@m106.nthu.edu.tw, sheephow@gapp.nthu.edu.tw, lai@cs.nthu.edu.tw
2

Abstract
Unpaired image-to-image translation is proven quite effective in boosting a CNN-based object detector for a different
domain by means of data augmentation that can well preserve the image-objects in the translated images. Recently,
multimodal GAN (Generative Adversarial Network) models
have been proposed and were expected to further boost the
detector accuracy by generating a diverse collection of images in the target domain, given only a single/labelled image
in the source domain. However, images generated by multimodal GANs would achieve even worse detection accuracy
than the ones by a unimodal GAN with better object preservation. In this work, we introduce cycle-structure consistency
for generating diverse and structure-preserved translated images across complex domains, such as between day and night,
for object detector training. Qualitative results show that our
model, Multimodal AugGAN, can generate diverse and realistic images for the target domain. For quantitative comparisons, we evaluate other competing methods and ours by using the generated images to train YOLO, Faster R-CNN and
FCN models and prove that our model achieves signiﬁcant
improvement and outperforms other methods on the detection
accuracies and the FCN scores. Also, we demonstrate that our
model could provide more diverse object appearances in the
target domain through comparison on the perceptual distance
metric.

Figure 1: How our multimodal GAN helps an object detector adapt to a target domain: Our GAN model could provide structure-consistent translated images across complex
domains.

those of the training images. Taking the on-road object detection for example, one of the most complex domain shift is
between day and night because the object appearances such
as vehicles at daytime are very different from their counterparts at nighttime. As indicated by (Braun et al. 2018)
in pedestrian detection, training on daytime and testing on
night-time gives signiﬁcantly worse results than training and
testing on the same time-of-day. The reason that nighttime
vehicle datasets in real-driving scenario are scarce in public
domain is that the labeling cost at nighttime is signiﬁcantly
more expensive than that at daytime.
The successes of Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014) on image generation have
made rapid progress in this area. The generators in GANs
can map from noise vectors to realistic images. However, to
apply GAN for improving the robustness of an on-road object detection in terms of data augmentation, it is more practical to perform image-to-image translation for the labeled
data in the source domain to the target domain. This way,
the tedious data annotation could be signiﬁcantly mitigated.
Pix2Pix (Isola et al. 2017) could provide visually-plausible
images in the target domain if paired training data is available, which is not possible for on-road object detection.
Recently, unpaired image-to-image translation methods,

Introduction
Recent advances of object detection are driven by the success of two-stage detectors, (Girshick et al. 2014; Girshick
2015; Ren et al. 2015). While two-stage detectors are generally more accurate but slower, one-stage detectors (Redmon
et al. 2016; Redmon and Farhadi 2017; Liu et al. 2016) have
been proposed for real-time performance. These detectors
keep pushing the limits of object detection on benchmark
datasets, such as PASCAL VOC (Everingham et al. 2010)
and MSCOCO (Lin et al. 2014).
The generalization capability of CNN-based detectors is
way better than traditional machine learning approaches.
However, performance still drops signiﬁcantly when the
trained model is deployed in a new domain different from
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11490

