The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Scalable Variational Bayesian Kernel
Selection for Sparse Gaussian Process Regression
Tong Teng,1∗ Jie Chen,2∗ Yehong Zhang,1∗ Bryan Kian Hsiang Low1
1

Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Republic of Singapore
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, P. R. China
{tengtong, yehong, lowkh}@comp.nus.edu.sg, chenjie@szu.edu.cn

2

and Turner 2015; Hensman et al. 2015; Hoang, Hoang, and
Low 2015; 2016; 2017; Lázaro-Gredilla et al. 2010; Low et
al. 2015a; 2015b; Quiñonero-Candela and Rasmussen 2005;
Titsias 2009; Titsias and Lázaro-Gredilla 2013; Xu et al.
2014; Yu et al. 2019b). These SGPR models exploit a small
set of inducing variables or a spectral representation of the
kernel to derive a low-rank GP approximation for achieving
scalable training and prediction to big data.

Abstract
This paper presents a variational Bayesian kernel selection
(VBKS) algorithm for sparse Gaussian process regression
(SGPR) models. In contrast to existing GP kernel selection
algorithms that aim to select only one kernel with the highest model evidence, our VBKS algorithm considers the kernel as a random variable and learns its belief from data such
that the uncertainty of the kernel can be interpreted and exploited to avoid overconﬁdent GP predictions. To achieve
this, we represent the probabilistic kernel as an additional
variational variable in a variational inference (VI) framework
for SGPR models where its posterior belief is learned together with that of the other variational variables (i.e., inducing variables and kernel hyperparameters). In particular, we
transform the discrete kernel belief into a continuous parametric distribution via reparameterization in order to apply
VI. Though it is computationally challenging to jointly optimize a large number of hyperparameters due to many kernels being evaluated simultaneously by our VBKS algorithm,
we show that the variational lower bound of the log-marginal
likelihood can be decomposed into an additive form such
that each additive term depends only on a disjoint subset of
the variational variables and can thus be optimized independently. Stochastic optimization is then used to maximize the
variational lower bound by iteratively improving the variational approximation of the exact posterior belief via stochastic gradient ascent, which incurs constant time per iteration
and hence scales to big data. We empirically evaluate the performance of our VBKS algorithm on synthetic and massive
real-world datasets.

1

All the SGPR models mentioned above are either designed only for the widely-used squared exponential (SE)
kernel (Titsias and Lázaro-Gredilla 2013; Yu et al. 2019b)
or assume the kernel type to be speciﬁed by the user a priori. However, in the era of big data, it has become all but
impossible for non-experts to manually select an appropriate
kernel for a GP model since the underlying correlation structures of massive datasets are usually too complex to be captured by the commonly-used base kernels (e.g., SE and periodic kernels). Such an issue can be resolved by kernel selection algorithms (Duvenaud et al. 2013; Kim and Teh 2018;
Lu et al. 2018; Malkomes, Schaff, and Garnett 2016) which
are designed to automatically ﬁnd a kernel with the highest model evidence (e.g., marginal likelihood, Bayesian information criterion) given a dataset. These algorithms have
demonstrated success in improving the GP predictive performance over that of using the manually speciﬁed kernel. But,
selecting only one kernel with the highest model evidence
and ignoring the uncertainty of it being the true kernel may
result in overconﬁdent predictions, especially if other kernels yield similar model evidences (Hoeting et al. 1999).
This motivates the need to design and develop a Bayesian
kernel selection (BKS) algorithm that, instead of searching
for the best kernel, considers the kernel as a random variable
deﬁned over a kernel space and learns a belief of the probabilistic kernel from data such that the uncertainty of the kernel can be interpreted and exploited to avoid overconﬁdent
GP predictions, which is the focus of our work here.

Introduction

A Gaussian process regression (GPR) model is a kernelbased Bayesian nonparametric model that represents the correlation/similarity of the data using a kernel for performing nonlinear probabilistic regression. A limitation of such a
full-rank GPR model is its poor scalability to big data since
computing its predictive belief and learning the kernel hyperparameters incur cubic time in the data size. To overcome this limitation, a number of sparse GPR (SGPR) models have been proposed (Chen et al. 2012; 2013; 2015; Gal

Most existing BKS algorithms for GP models approximate the kernels using their spectral density representation and thus only work for stationary kernels (Benton et
al. 2019; Oliva et al. 2016; Wilson and Adams 2013). The
BKS algorithm of Malkomes and Garnett (2015) caters to
any kernel but is designed for the full-rank GPR model

∗

Equal contribution.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5997

