The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Why Attention? Analyze BiLSTM Deﬁciency and Its Remedies in the Case of NER
Peng-Hsuan Li,1 Tsu-Jui Fu,2 Wei-Yun Ma1
1
Academia Sinica, 2 UC Santa Barbara
{jacobvsdanniel, ma}@iis.sinica.edu.tw, tsu-juifu@ucsb.edu

only the leftmost hidden state of the backward LSTM are
used, and each of the endpoint hidden states sees and encodes the whole sentence. For computing sentence representations for sequence-labeling tasks such as NER, however, this becomes a limitation, as each token uses its own
midpoint hidden states, which do not model the patterns that
happen to cross past and future at this speciﬁc time step.

Abstract
BiLSTM has been prevalently used as a core module for NER
in a sequence-labeling setup. State-of-the-art approaches
use BiLSTM with additional resources such as gazetteers,
language-modeling, or multi-task supervision to further improve NER. This paper instead takes a step back and focuses
on analyzing problems of BiLSTM itself and how exactly
self-attention can bring improvements. We formally show the
limitation of (CRF-)BiLSTM in modeling cross-context patterns for each word – the XOR limitation. Then, we show
that two types of simple cross-structures – self-attention and
Cross-BiLSTM – can effectively remedy the problem. We
test the practical impacts of the deﬁciency on real-world NER
datasets, OntoNotes 5.0 and WNUT 2017, with clear and consistent improvements over the baseline, up to 8.7% on some
of the multi-token entity mentions. We give in-depth analyses of the improvements across several aspects of NER, especially the identiﬁcation of multi-token mentions. This study
should lay a sound foundation for future improvements on
sequence-labeling NER1 .

1

This paper explores two types of cross-structures to
help cope with the problem: Cross-BiLSTM-CNN and AttBiLSTM-CNN. Previous studies have tried to stack multiple LSTMs for sequence-labeling NER (Chiu and Nichols
2016). As they follow the trend of stacking forward and
backward LSTMs independently, the Baseline-BiLSTMCNN is only able to learn higher-level representations of
past or future per se. Instead, Cross-BiLSTM-CNN, which
interleaves every layer of the two directions, models crosscontext in an additive manner by learning higher-level representations of the whole context of each token. On the
other hand, Att-BiLSTM-CNN models cross-context in a
multiplicative manner by capturing the interaction between
past and future with a dot-product self-attentive mechanism (Conneau et al. 2017; Lin et al. 2017b).

Introduction

Named Entity Recognition (NER) is a core task for information extraction. Originally a structured prediction task,
NER has since been formulated as a task of sequential token labeling. BiLSTM-CNN uses a CNN to encode each
word and then uses bi-directional LSTMs to encode past
and future context respectively at each time step. With stateof-the-art empirical results, most regard it as a robust core
module for sequence-labeling NER (Ma and Hovy 2016;
Chiu and Nichols 2016; Aguilar et al. 2018; Akbik, Blythe,
and Vollgraf 2018; Clark et al. 2018).
However, each direction of BiLSTM only sees and encodes half of a sequence at each time step. For each token, the forward LSTM only encodes past context; the backward LSTM only encodes future context. For computing
sentence representations for tasks such as sentence classiﬁcation and machine translation, this is not a problem, as
only the rightmost hidden state of the forward LSTM and

Section 3 formulates the three Baseline, Cross, and AttBiLSTM-CNN models, with Section 3.3, 3.4 giving formal proof that patterns forming an XOR cannot be modeled by (CRF-)BiLSTM-CNN used in all previous work.
Cross-BiLSTM-CNN and Att-BiLSTM-CNN are shown to
have additive and multiplicative cross-structures respectively to deal with the problem. Section 4 evaluates practical effectiveness of the approaches on two challenging NER
datasets spanning a wide range of domains with complex,
noisy, and emerging entities. The cross-structures bring consistent improvements over the prevalently used BaselineBiLSTM-CNN without additional gazetteers, POS taggers, language-modeling, or multi-task supervision. The improved core module surpasses comparable bare-bone models
on OntoNotes 5.0 and WNUT 2017 by 1.4% and 4.6% respectively. Ablation experiments reveal that emerging, complex, confusing, and multi-token entity mentions beneﬁtted
much from the cross-structures, up to 8.7% on some of the
multi-token mentions. The in-depth entity-chunking analysis gives insights into how exactly self-attention helps real-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Source codes: https://github.com/jacobvsdanniel/cross-ner
8236

