The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Type-Aware Anchor Link Prediction across
Heterogeneous Networks Based on Graph Attention Network
Xiaoxue Li, Yanmin Shang,∗ Yanan Cao,† Yangxi Li,
Jianlong Tan, Yanbing Liu
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{lixiaoxue, shangyanmin, caoyanan, tanjianlong, liuyanbing}@iie.ac.cn, liyangxi@outlook.com

Abstract

‫்ܩ‬

‫ܩ‬ௌ
‫݌‬ଶ

Anchor Link Prediction (ALP) across heterogeneous networks plays a pivotal role in inter-network applications. The
difﬁculty of anchor link prediction in heterogeneous networks lies in how to consider the factors affecting nodes
alignment comprehensively. In recent years, predicting anchor links based on network embedding has become the main
trend. For heterogeneous networks, previous anchor link prediction methods ﬁrst integrate various types of nodes associated with a user node to obtain a fusion embedding vector
from global perspective, and then predict anchor links based
on the similarity between fusion vectors corresponding with
different user nodes. However, the fusion vector ignores effects of the local type information on user nodes alignment.
To address the challenge, we propose a novel type-aware anchor link prediction across heterogeneous networks (TALP),
which models the effect of type information and fusion information on user nodes alignment from local and global perspective simultaneously. TALP can solve the network embedding and type-aware alignment under a uniﬁed optimization
framework based on a two-layer graph attention architecture.
Through extensive experiments on real heterogeneous network datasets, we demonstrate that TALP signiﬁcantly outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.

‫݌‬ଶ

ܽଶ
‫݌‬ଷ

‫݌‬ଵ
ܽଵ

ܽଶ

‫݌‬ଵ

‫݌‬ସ

ܽଵ

ܿଶ
align

‫݌‬ଷ

ܿଵ
paper (p)
write/written

author (a)

publish/published

conference (c)
co-author

align

Figure 1: An example of anchor link prediction across heterogeneous networks

With the rise of network embedding, anchor link prediction based on embedding has become the mainstream trend.
Based on this trend, the core of existing anchor link prediction methods includes two parts: embedding and alignment.
The purpose of embedding part is to obtain the representation vectors of network nodes (accounts) based on network
embedding method for each network. The alignment part
obtains latent anchor links by estimating pairwise similarity between the embedding representation vectors of nodes
in different networks. According to whether the two parts
are treated separately, the existing methods can be divided
into two categories: uniﬁed framework approaches (Liu et
al. 2016; Shang et al. 2019) and two-stage approaches (Man
et al. 2016; Zhou et al. 2018). All the approaches in above
two categories are used to predict anchor links across homogeneous networks which contain only one type of nodes and
one type of edges.
In practice, however, heterogeneous networks are ubiquitous. At present, there are few methods for anchor link prediction in heterogeneous networks, especially based on network embedding (Wang et al. 2018; Feng et al. 2019). The
idea of anchor link prediction in heterogeneous networks is
the same as that in homogeneous networks, however, the difference is how to integrate various types of information into
the process of embedding and alignment. Previous methods
obtain the embedding vector (named fusion vector) of a user
node by fusing information of various types of nodes associated with it from global perspective. Then, anchor links

Introduction
Anchor Link Prediction (ALP) aims to recognize the accounts of the same natural person across different networks,
and the links between these accounts are anchor links (the
accounts are anchor nodes). Anchor links play a pivotal role
in inter-network applications, such as user proﬁle modeling
(Zhan et al. 2017) and recommendation (Fan et al. 2019;
Lu et al. 2016). In reality, these networks (such as social
networks, academic networks and movie recommendation
networks) are heterogeneous networks, which contain various types of nodes and edges. Predicting anchor link across
heterogeneous networks is a research hotspot in the industry
and academia at present.
∗

Corresponding author: Yanmin Shang
Corresponding author: Yanan Cao
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

147

