The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Generative Exploration and Exploitation
Jiechuan Jiang

Zongqing Lu∗

Peking University
jiechuan.jiang@pku.edu.cn

Peking University
zongqing.lu@pku.edu.cn

GAN (Florensa et al. 2018) generates different goals at the appropriate level of difﬁculty for the agent. HER (Andrychowicz et al. 2017) replays each episode with a different goal
sampled from the buffer rather than the original one to be
achieved. However, driven by random exploration the agent
still rarely obtains a real reward signal.
Changing start state distribution has been considered to
accelerate learning. Appropriate start states can improve the
policy training and performance, which has been proven
theoretically by (Kearns, Mansour, and Ng 2002). Some
works adopt the concept of reversing (Florensa et al. 2017;
Goyal et al. 2018), gradually learning to reach the goal from
a set of start states increasingly far from the goal. Other
researches change the start states by sampling from the
states visited by expert demonstrations (Nair et al. 2018;
Resnick et al. 2018). However, all these methods require a
large amount of prior knowledge and handcrafted designs.
In this paper, we propose a novel method called Generative
Exploration and Exploitation (GENE) to overcome sparse
reward. GENE dynamically changes the start states of agent
to the generated novel states to encourage the agent to explore the environment or to the generated unskilled states to
propel the agent to exploit received reward signals. We adopt
Variational Autoencoder (VAE) (Kingma and Welling 2013)
to generate desired states and let the agent play from these
states rather than the initial state. As the encoder of VAE
compresses high-dimensional states into a low-dimensional
encoding space, it is easy to estimate the probability density
functions (PDFs) of successful states and failed states experienced by the agent via Kernel Density Estimation (KDE)
(Rosenblatt 1956). We sample from the distribution to feed
into the decoder to reconstruct states. By deliberately giving
high probability to the state encodings with little difference
between these two densities, GENE is able to adaptively
guide the agent to explore novel states and to practice at
unskilled states as the learning progresses.
GENE can be combined with any RL algorithm, no matter
on-policy or off-policy, single-agent or multi-agent. Driven
by unsupervised VAE and statistical KDE, GENE relies on no
prior knowledge and handcrafted designs. Like other methods
that change start states, GENE requires the start state can be
set arbitrarily, which however is feasible in many simulators,
e.g., MuJoCo (Todorov, Erez, and Tassa 2012), Robotics
(Brockman et al. 2016), MPE (Lowe et al. 2017), and MAgent

Abstract
Sparse reward is one of the biggest challenges in reinforcement learning (RL). In this paper, we propose a novel method
called Generative Exploration and Exploitation (GENE) to
overcome sparse reward. GENE automatically generates start
states to encourage the agent to explore the environment and to
exploit received reward signals. GENE can adaptively tradeoff
between exploration and exploitation according to the varying
distributions of states experienced by the agent as the learning progresses. GENE relies on no prior knowledge about the
environment and can be combined with any RL algorithm,
no matter on-policy or off-policy, single-agent or multi-agent.
Empirically, we demonstrate that GENE signiﬁcantly outperforms existing methods in three tasks with only binary rewards,
including Maze, Maze Ant, and Cooperative Navigation. Ablation studies verify the emergence of progressive exploration
and automatic reversing.

Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved great success in many sequential decision-making problems, such
as Atari games (Mnih et al. 2015), Go (Silver et al. 2016;
2017), and robotic tasks (Levine et al. 2016; Duan et al.
2016). However, a common challenge in many real-world
applications is the reward is extremely sparse or only binary.
For example, in goal-based tasks, the agent can only receive
the reward when it reaches the goal. Nevertheless, the goal
is usually hard to reach via random exploration, such as greedy and Gaussian noise. Domain-speciﬁc knowledge can
be used to construct a shaped reward function to guide the
policy optimization. However, it often biases the policy in a
suboptimal direction, and more importantly domain-speciﬁc
knowledge is unavailable in many cases.
Some exploration methods have been proposed to address
sparse reward. A method family quantiﬁes the novelty of the
state and takes it as the intrinsic reward to encourage the
agent to explore new states, e.g., count-based exploration
(Bellemare et al. 2016; Ostrovski et al. 2017) and curiositydriven exploration (Pathak et al. 2017; Burda et al. 2018;
2019). However, intrinsic reward leads to deviation from the
true target and causes the learning process detoured and unstable. Some methods set additional goals for exploration. Goal
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4337

