The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Planning and Acting with
Non-Deterministic Events: Navigating between Safe States
Lukáš Chrpa

Jakub Gemrot, Martin Pilát

Faculty of Electrical Engineering
Czech Technical University in Prague

Faculty of Mathematics and Physics
Charles University

with dead-ends (Patra et al. 2019). Fully Observable NonDeterministic (FOND) planning assumes non-deterministic
action effects. The well known PRP planner (Muise, McIlraith, and Beck 2012) handles non-determinism by attempting to “close” states from which there does not yet exist a
plan. PRP has been adapted to deal with multi-agent planning problems (Muise et al. 2016) and, in a similar spirit,
it can be extended to deal with problems with events. However, considering that any subset of applicable independent
events can occur in a single step makes non-deterministic
branching exponential with respect to the number of events.

Abstract
Automated Planning addresses the problem of ﬁnding a sequence of actions, a plan, transforming the environment from
its initial state to some goal state. In real-world environments,
exogenous events might occur and might modify the environment without agent’s consent. Besides disrupting agent’s
plan, events might hinder agent’s pursuit towards its goals and
even cause damage (e.g. destroying the robot).
In this paper, we leverage the notion of Safe States in dynamic
environments under presence of non-deterministic exogenous
events that might eventually cause dead-ends (e.g. “damage”
the agent) if the agent is not careful while executing its plan.
We introduce a technique for generating plans that constrains
the number of consecutive “unsafe” actions in a plan and a
technique for generating “robust” plans that effectively evade
event effects. Combination of both approaches plans and executes robust plans between safe states. We empirically show
that such an approach effectively navigates the agent towards
its goals in spite of presence of dead-ends.

The success of FF-replan (Yoon, Fern, and Givan
2007) in the International Planning Competition 2006
(it was an unofﬁcial winner of the probabilistic track)
indicates that the problem can be addressed by the
Planning/Execution/Replanning (PER) approach (Komenda,
Novák, and Pechoucek 2014) that interleaves planning, plan
execution and re-planning if the agent is in an unexpected
state or cannot execute the following action. However, in domains with dead-ends such an approach might not be effective (and might even be dangerous). A recent work concerning reasoning about “dangerous states” (those close to deadends) has improved the success rate of the PER approach albeit not providing guarantees of dead-end avoidance (Chrpa,
Gemrot, and Pilát 2017).

Introduction
Automated planning seeks to ﬁnd a sequence of actions
transforming an environment from a given initial state to a
desired goal state (Ghallab, Nau, and Traverso 2004). Planning and acting in real-world scenarios (Ingrand and Ghallab 2017) poses a challenge as plan execution might not go
as planned as, for example, exogenous events might occur
during the plan execution. It is often known what can happen and under which circumstances (e.g. failure to establish
communication, or a blocked passage). Such information
can be encoded into a domain model as events, so the system
that plans and executes the plan can reason with them.
The concept of events in planning is not new (Dean
and Wellman 1990) and was used in some systems such
as Circa (Musliner, Durfee, and Shin 1993). These systems, however, reason with a very small state space.
Markov Decision Process (MDP)-based approaches consider events (Mausam and Kolobov 2012) while providing the most promising action in a given state. MonteCarlo Tree Search (MCTS) approaches provide similar beneﬁts, however, the success rate tends to drop for problems

In this paper, we focus on single-agent planning in fully
observable environment with deterministic action effects
and non-deterministic exogenous events where we, roughly
speaking, adapt the PER approach to reason with “safe
states” (Cserna et al. 2018) in order to avoid reaching deadend states. A safe state, the notion adopted from Cserna et
al. (2018) who use it for online planning, stands for a state
that cannot be transformed into a dead-end state by events
only. In contrast to “dangerous states” reasoning (Chrpa,
Gemrot, and Pilát 2017), we do not quantify “danger”, our
idea is to allow replanning episodes only in safe states and
executing safely applicable sequences of actions, that is, after such a sequence is executed (and it is always possible
despite event occurrence) the agent is in the safe state. To
ﬁnd safely applicable sequences of actions, or robust plans
in other words, inspired by Palacios and Geffner (2009),
we present a compilation of the problem of ﬁnding robust

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9802

