The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

When Radiology Report Generation Meets Knowledge Graph
Yixiao Zhang,1 Xiaosong Wang,2 Ziyue Xu,2 Qihang Yu,1 Alan Yuille,1 Daguang Xu2
1

Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, USA
2
NVIDIA Corporation, Bethesda, USA
{wjzzzyx, yucornetto, alan.l.yuille}@gmail.com, {xiaosongw, ziyuex, daguangx}@nvidia.com

report generation for chest x-ray images (Yuan et al. 2019;
Li et al. 2019; Xue et al. 2018; Jing et al. 2017; Liu et al.
2019). Most of the existing works based on the CNN-RNN
Encoder-Decoder framework which has been widely applied
in image captioning and visual question answering tasks.
Xue et al. (Xue et al. 2018) takes multiple image modalities as the input to the encoder. Two-level decoders are included to generate free text paragraphs (multiple sentences)
instead of single sentences (Jing et al. 2017), while others
apply hierarchical generation (Krause et al. 2017) and selfcritical sequence training (Rennie et al. 2017) to enhance
the readability in the radiology reports. These models tackled on some aspects of the differences between the natural
image captioning and the radiology report generation tasks,
e.g., inputs from multiple views, and the fact that a report
usually consists of multiple sentences with each one focusing on a speciﬁc observation. Nonetheless, one aspect which
was not addressed in the previous works is that the correctness of generating clinic-relevant context (positive disease
mentions) should be emphasized more than other common
words. Furthermore, the medical observations presented in
a radiology image are not isolated from each other but may
have mutual inﬂuence. It is desired that their relationship
should be modeled.

Abstract
Automatic radiology report generation has been an attracting
research problem towards computer-aided diagnosis to alleviate the workload of doctors in recent years. Deep learning techniques for natural image captioning are successfully
adapted to generating radiology reports. However, radiology
image reporting is different from the natural image captioning task in two aspects: 1) the accuracy of positive disease
keyword mentions is critical in radiology image reporting in
comparison to the equivalent importance of every single word
in a natural image caption; 2) the evaluation of reporting quality should focus more on matching the disease keywords and
their associated attributes instead of counting the occurrence
of N-gram. Based on these concerns, we propose to utilize
a pre-constructed graph embedding module (modeled with a
graph convolutional neural network) on multiple disease ﬁndings to assist the generation of reports in this work. The incorporation of knowledge graph allows for dedicated feature
learning for each disease ﬁnding and the relationship modeling between them. In addition, we proposed a new evaluation
metric for radiology image reporting with the assistance of
the same composed graph. Experimental results demonstrate
the superior performance of the methods integrated with the
proposed graph embedding module on a publicly accessible
dataset (IU-RR) of chest radiographs compared with previous
approaches using both the conventional evaluation metrics
commonly adopted for image captioning and our proposed
ones.

In this work, we build a graph model with prior knowledge on chest ﬁndings, which could be injected into the existing models to enhance these two aspects. In this graph,
disease ﬁndings are deﬁned as nodes and related ﬁndings are
closely connected so that they can inﬂuence each other during the graph propagation and aggregation. We incorporate
this graph into the deep neural network to learn dedicated
features for each node on the graph. These graph features
are later used for the classiﬁcation and report generation.
Speciﬁcally, the graph embedding module is computed after a CNN feature extractor, and an attention mechanism is
designed to compute initial node features from CNN features. Then, graph convolutions are conducted to propagate
features over the chest abnormality graph. As the output, a
linear classiﬁer for classiﬁcation and a multi-level decoder
module for report generation are connected to the graph
convolution layers respectively. We decompose the learning
process into two stages. First, we train a multi-label classi-

Introduction
Interpreting radiology images and writing diagnostic reports
is a laborsome and error-prone process for radiologists. Automatic report generation systems can signiﬁcantly alleviate
the burden in the way that candidate reports are provided
in natural language for the radiologist to verify. Additionally, learning directly from the free-text reports brings in a
huge advantage for adopting data-hungry machine learning
paradigms, compared to many other medical image analysis applications that often require large amounts of quality
annotations.
The success of deep learning models on image captioning
has motivated a lot of works towards automated radiology
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12910

