The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Auto-GAN: Self-Supervised Collaborative Learning for Medical Image Synthesis
Bing Cao,1 Han Zhang,2∗ Nannan Wang,1∗ Xinbo Gao,1 Dinggang Shen2∗
1

2

State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
Department of Radiology and BRIC, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, USA

tors desire as many different modalities as possible to make
a joint and more accurate decision, certain limitations (e.g.,
restricted medical conditions, inadequate scanning time, and
cost/spending/resource control) could result in sacriﬁcing
some imaging modalities to have the most important one
done. For examples, low-resolution (e.g., thick-sliced) imaging modalities are always combined with another single
high-resolution imaging modality to save scanning time and
the low-resolution images can be misleading due to its partial coverage. CT is notorious for poor soft-tissue contrast
and radiation exposure, but can better quantify tissue’s physical density. MRI is non-invasive and safer with better contrast; therefore, it could be more prioritized than CT with
limited scanning time.

Abstract
In various clinical scenarios, medical image is crucial in disease diagnosis and treatment. Different modalities of medical
images provide complementary information and jointly helps
doctors to make accurate clinical decision. However, due to
clinical and practical restrictions, certain imaging modalities
may be unavailable nor complete. To impute missing data
with adequate clinical accuracy, here we propose a framework called self-supervised collaborative learning to synthesize missing modality for medical images. The proposed
method comprehensively utilize all available information correlated to the target modality from multi-source-modality images to generate any missing modality in a single model.
Different from the existing methods, we introduce an autoencoder network as a novel, self-supervised constraint, which
provides target-modality-speciﬁc information to guide generator training. In addition, we design a modality mask vector
as the target modality label. With experiments on multiple
medical image databases, we demonstrate a great generalization ability as well as specialty of our method compared with
other state-of-the-arts.

Due to the aforementioned restrictions on acquiring full
multi-modality images, imputing the missing or low-quality
modalities by using available modalities has become a very
important research topic in the artiﬁcial intelligence-based
medical image analysis (Van Buuren, Boshuizen, and Knook
1999; Sauerbrei and Royston 1999; Shen, Wu, and Suk
2017). Mounting effort has been put in developing effective image imputation algorithms for not only medical image analysis but also, more generally, natural image synthesis (e.g., style transfer (Gatys, Ecker, and Bethge 2016), denoising (Im et al. 2017), and super-resolution (Ledig et al.
2017)), where a mapping function is learned to translate images from a source domain to a target domain. While classic machine learning techniques (Jog et al. 2017) have made
enormous achievement, recently, generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014) has shown unprecedented superiority in such image generation tasks, including its recent variation conditional GAN (conduct imageto-image translation by using an imposed condition), e.g.,
Pix2Pix (Isola et al. 2017), CycleGAN (Zhu et al. 2017), and
StarGAN (Choi et al. 2018). However, these methods only
can transfer images from one to another domain, instead of
translating multi-modality images from multiple domains to
a target (new modality) domain. Since multi-modality images constitute fundamentally complementary information
to each other (Yu et al. 2018; 2019), it is theoretically and
practically necessary to use all the available information to
generate more accurate missing modalities. In addition, the

Introduction
Multimodal medical imaging such as computed tomography
(CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), positron emission tomography (PET) plays an irreplaceable role in routine clinical practice (e.g, lesion detection, disease diagnosis, and treatment planning). They provide unprecedented in
vivo resolution and contrast in visualization of internal organs of almost entire human body and the modern medicine,
especially precision medicine, has increasingly depended on
them.
In many clinical scenarios, doctors combine different
insights from multi-modality medical images (e.g., T1weighted (T1), T2-weighted (T2) and T2-FLAIR (FLuidAttenuated Inversion Recovery), and T1 post-contrast images) (T1-C) to make a ﬁnal diagnostic decision. Each imaging modality provides certain information. While the doc∗

Corresponding
authors:
Nannan
Wang
(nnwang@xidian.edu.cn), Han Zhang (hanzhang@med.unc.edu),
and Dinggang Shen (dgshen@med.unc.edu)
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10486

