The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Scalable and Generalizable Social Bot Detection through Data Selection
Kai-Cheng Yang,1 Onur Varol,2 Pik-Mai Hui,1 Filippo Menczer1,3
1

Center for Complex Networks and Systems Research, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA
2
Center for Complex Networks Research, Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA
3
Indiana University Network Science Institute, Bloomington, IN, USA

is extremely difﬁcult for humans with limited access to social media data to recognize bots, making people vulnerable
to manipulation.
Many machine learning frameworks for bot detection on
Twitter have been proposed in the past several years (see a
recent survey (Alothali et al. 2018) and the Related Work
section). However, two major challenges remain: scalability
and generalization.
Scalability enables analysis of streaming data with limited computing resources. Yet most current methods attempt
to maximize accuracy by inspecting rich contextual information about an account’s actions and social connections.
Twitter API rate limits and algorithmic complexity make it
impossible to scale up to real-time detection of manipulation
campaigns (Stella, Ferrara, and De Domenico 2018).
Generalization enables the detection of bots that are different from those in the training data, which is critical given
the adversarial nature of the problem — new bots are easily designed to evade existing detection systems. Methods
considering limited behaviors, like retweeting and temporal
patterns, can only identify certain types of bots. Even more
general-purpose systems are trained on labeled datasets that
are sparse, noisy, and not representative enough. As a result,
methods with excellent cross-validation accuracy suffer dramatic drops in performance when tested on cross-domain
accounts (De Cristofaro et al. 2018).
In this paper, we propose a framework to address these
two challenges. By focusing just on user proﬁle information,
which can be easily accessed in bulk, scalability is greatly
improved. While the use of fewer features may entail a small
compromise in individual accuracy, we gain the ability to
analyze a large-volume stream of accounts in real time.
We build a rich collection of labeled data by compiling all labeled datasets available in the literature and three
newly-produced ones. We systematically analyze the feature space of different datasets and the relationship between
them; some of the datasets tend to overlap with each other
while others have contradicting patterns.
The diversity of the compiled datasets allows us to build
a more robust classiﬁer. Surprisingly, by carefully selecting a subset of the training data instead of merging all
of the datasets, we achieve better performance in terms of

Abstract
Efﬁcient and reliable social bot classiﬁcation is crucial for
detecting information manipulation on social media. Despite
rapid development, state-of-the-art bot detection models still
face generalization and scalability challenges, which greatly
limit their applications. In this paper we propose a framework
that uses minimal account metadata, enabling efﬁcient analysis that scales up to handle the full stream of public tweets of
Twitter in real time. To ensure model accuracy, we build a rich
collection of labeled datasets for training and validation. We
deploy a strict validation system so that model performance
on unseen datasets is also optimized, in addition to traditional
cross-validation. We ﬁnd that strategically selecting a subset
of training data yields better model accuracy and generalization than exhaustively training on all available data. Thanks
to the simplicity of the proposed model, its logic can be interpreted to provide insights into social bot characteristics.

Introduction
Social bots are social media accounts controlled in part by
software. Malicious bots serve as important instruments for
orchestrated, large-scale opinion manipulation campaigns
on social media (Ferrara et al. 2016a; Subrahmanian et al.
2016). Bots have been actively involved in online discussions of important events, including recent elections in the
US and Europe (Bessi and Ferrara 2016; Deb et al. 2019;
Stella, Ferrara, and De Domenico 2018; Ferrara 2017). Bots
are also responsible for spreading low-credibility information (Shao et al. 2018) and extreme ideology (Berger and
Morgan 2015; Ferrara et al. 2016b), as well as adding confusion to the online debate about vaccines (Broniatowski et
al. 2018).
Scalable and reliable bot detection methods are needed to
estimate the inﬂuence of social bots and develop effective
countermeasures. The task is challenging due to the diverse
and dynamic behaviors of social bots. For example, some
bots act autonomously with minimal human intervention,
others are manually controlled so that a single entity can create the appearance of multiple human accounts (Grimme et
al. 2017). And while some bots are active continuously, others focus bursts of activity on different short-term targets. It
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1096

