The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference (IAAI-20)

Multi-Task Learning for Diabetic Retinopathy Grading and Lesion Segmentation
Alex Foo,1 Wynne Hsu,1 Mong Li Lee,1 Gilbert Lim,1,2 Tien Yin Wong2
1

School of Computing 2 Duke-NUS Medical School
National University of Singapore

Abstract
Although deep learning for Diabetic Retinopathy (DR)
screening has shown great success in achieving clinically
acceptable accuracy for referable versus non-referable DR,
there remains a need to provide more ﬁne-grained grading of
the DR severity level as well as automated segmentation of
lesions (if any) in the retina images. We observe that the DR
severity level of an image is dependent on the presence of
different types of lesions and their prevalence. In this work,
we adopt a multi-task learning approach to perform the DR
grading and lesion segmentation tasks. In light of the lack of
lesion segmentation mask ground-truths, we further propose
a semi-supervised learning process to obtain the segmentation masks for the various datasets. Experiments results on
publicly available datasets and a real world dataset obtained
from population screening demonstrate the effectiveness of
the multi-task solution over state-of-the-art networks.

No DR

No DR

Proliferative

Mild / Moderate

Mild

Moderate

Severe

Proliferative

Figure 1: Sample retina images and their ICDRS grade taken
from (Gulshan et al. 2016).

We observe that human graders examine the retina image for the presence of one or more lesions such as microaneurysms, hemorrhages, hard exudates and soft exudates before they assign the DR severity level to the image. The
ability to automate the segmentation of lesions in a retina
image can facilitate this grading process, and serve to validate the DR severity level assigned by the grader. In this
work, we explore the feasibility of adopting a multi-task
learning approach to perform these two closely related tasks:
DR grading and lesion segmentation. Speciﬁcally, we extend the well-known UNet architecture (Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox 2015) by replacing its encoder with a classic VGG-16 network (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014). This
creates a dual-stream network, where the VGG-16 encoder
outputs the DR grading and the decoder outputs the lesion
segmentation. Both streams thus complement each other.
The pixel level lesion segmentations provide justiﬁcation for
the DR severity level grading, while the severity level grading guides the lesion segmentation. Additionally, the streams
regularize each other during training which prevent overﬁtting of the individual tasks.
Obtaining precise pixel level annotation of abnormalities associated with DR like microaneurysms, soft exudates,
hard exudates and hemorrhages is labour intensive. Given
the limited availability of this invaluable resource for model
learning and performance evaluation, we propose a semisupervised approach for effective multi-task learning. Experiment results on several benchmark datasets demonstrate
that our approach leads to a signiﬁcant performance boost
over existing networks, notably in differentiating retina images having moderate DR from mild DR.

Introduction
Automated screening for Diabetic Retinopathy (DR) using
deep learning has achieved signiﬁcant progress and demonstrated excellent performance in terms of having accurate
classiﬁcations for referable versus non-referable DR (Ting
et al. 2019). The top performing deep learning networks
have obtained scores of above 90% for the area under the
Receiver Operating Characteristics curve (ROC) for moderate and above DR severity level (Sayres et al. 2019;
Ting et al. 2017). However, there remains a need to provide
more ﬁne-grained grading of the DR severity level.
A diabetic retina image can be graded into different levels
of severity according to the International Clinical Diabetic
Retinopathy Scale (ICDRS) (Gulshan et al. 2016). There
are 5 levels in this scale: 0 (no apparent DR), 1 (mild DR), 2
(moderate DR), 3 (severe DR), 4 (poliferative DR). Figure 1
shows sample retinal images and their corresponding DR
severity level based on ICDRS. Learning a model to classify retina images into the various groups is a challenge due
to limited labeled data. This is further worsened by the situation where the labels can be noisy as a result of the subjective
labeling by different human graders.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13267

