The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Predicting Propositional
Satisﬁability via End-to-End Learning
Chris Cameron, Rex Chen, Jason Hartford, Kevin Leyton-Brown
Department of Computer Science
University of British Columbia
{cchris13, rexctran, jasonhar, kevinlb}@cs.ubc.ca

Over the past two decades, machine learning has been
shown to be very useful for making instance-speciﬁc predictions about properties of SAT problems (e.g., algorithm
runtime prediction (Hutter et al. 2014), algorithm selection
(Xu et al. 2008), and satisﬁability prediction (Xu, Hoos,
and Leyton-Brown 2012)). Perhaps the key drawback of
this work is its reliance on hand-engineered features. The
computation of most of these features requires between
linear and cubic time in the size of the input. It is difﬁcult to assess whether less computationally expensive features would yield similar results, to determine whether
important features are missing, and to translate a modeling approach to a new domain. Learning representations
from raw problem descriptions via neural networks is a
promising approach for addressing these obstacles. There
has been recent work in this direction (Evans et al. 2018;
Selsam et al. 2019); this work is very interesting from a machine learning perspective, but has tended to focus on problems that are trivial from a combinatorial optimization perspective (e.g., < 1 second to solve by modern SAT solvers).

Abstract
Strangely enough, it is possible to use machine learning models to predict the satisﬁability status of hard SAT problems
with accuracy considerably higher than random guessing. Existing methods have relied on extensive, manual feature engineering and computationally complex features (e.g., based on
linear programming relaxations). We show for the ﬁrst time
that even better performance can be achieved by end-to-end
learning methods — i.e., models that map directly from raw
problem inputs to predictions and take only linear time to evaluate. Our work leverages deep network models which capture a
key invariance exhibited by SAT problems: satisﬁability status
is unaffected by reordering variables and clauses. We showed
that end-to-end learning with deep networks can outperform
previous work on random 3-SAT problems at the solubility
phase transition, where: (1) exactly 50% of problems are satisﬁable; and (2) empirical runtimes of known solution methods
scale exponentially with problem size (e.g., we achieved 84%
prediction accuracy on 600-variable problems, which take
hours to solve with state-of-the-art methods). We also showed
that deep networks can generalize across problem sizes (e.g.,
a network trained only on 100-variable problems, which typically take about 10 ms to solve, achieved 81% accuracy on
600-variable problems).

1

One of the most widely studied distributions of SAT instances is uniform random 3-SAT at the solubility phase
transition (Cheeseman, Kanefsky, and Taylor 1991; Mitchell,
Selman, and Levesque 1992). These problems are easy to
generate, but are very challenging to solve in practice. Indeed,
empirical runtimes for high-performance complete solvers
have been shown to scale exponentially with problem size
on these instances (Mu and Hoos 2015). Holding the number
of variables ﬁxed, the probability that a randomly-generated
formula will be satisﬁable approaches 100% as the number of clauses shrinks (most problems are underconstrained)
and approaches 0% as the number of clauses grows (most
problems are overconstrained). For intermediate numbers of
variables, this probability does not vary gradually, but instead undergoes a sharp phase transition at a critical point
(a clauses-to-variables ratio of about 4.26) where the probability that a formula will be satisﬁable is exactly 50%. Using hand-engineered features, past work (Sandholm 1996;
Xu, Hoos, and Leyton-Brown 2012) showed that an instance’s
satisﬁability status can be predicted with accuracy higher
than that of random guessing. In particular, Xu, Hoos, and
Leyton-Brown built the models which we believe represent
the current state of the art, and they also investigated whether
models could generalize across problem sizes so as to claim

Introduction

NP-complete combinatorial problems are pervasive in many
domains, such as planning, scheduling, and networking. The
propositional satisﬁability (SAT) problem is among the most
widely studied of these; indeed, it was the ﬁrst to be proven
NP-complete. It is also used in many applications (e.g., model
checking (Clarke et al. 2001) and radio spectrum reallocation
(Fréchette, Newman, and Leyton-Brown 2016)) due both to
its encoding ﬂexibility and the availability of many highperformance solvers. The SAT problem asks whether a given
Boolean expression evaluates to true. SAT is typically represented in conjunctive normal form (CNF), as a conjunction
(AND) over clauses, each of which is an disjunction (OR)
over Boolean variables, which may optionally be negated.
The conjunction and disjunction operators are commutative,
so permuting their arguments does not change a problem
instance. The two-layer logical structure of CNF is simple to
reason about and is used by most SAT solvers.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3324

