The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Patch Proposal Network for Fast
Semantic Segmentation of High-Resolution Images
Tong Wu,1∗ Zhenzhen Lei,1∗ Bingqian Lin,3 Cuihua Li,1 Yanyun Qu,1† Yuan Xie2†
1

Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart City, School of Informatics,
Xiamen University, Fujian, China
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
3
School of Biomedical Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
{tongwu, zzlei}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, linbq6@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {chli, yyqu}@xmu.edu.cn, yxie@cs.ecnu.edu.cn
Abstract
Despite recent progress on the segmentation of highresolution images, there exist an unsolved problem, i.e.,
the trade-off among the segmentation accuracy, memory resources and inference speed. So far, GLNet is introduced
for high or ultra-resolution image segmentation, which has
reduced the computational memory of the segmentation
network. However, it ignores the importances of different
cropped patches, and treats tiled patches equally for fusion
with the whole image, resulting in high computational cost.
To solve this problem, we introduce a patch proposal network (PPN) in this paper, which adaptively distinguishes the
critical patches from the trivial ones to fuse with the whole
image for reﬁning segmentation. PPN is a classiﬁcation network which alleviates network training burden and improves
segmentation accuracy. We further embed PPN in a globallocal segmentation network, instructing global branch and reﬁnement branch to work collaboratively. We implement our
method on four image datasets:DeepGlobe, ISIC, CRAG and
Cityscapes, the ﬁrst two are ultra-resolution image datasets
and the last two are high-resolution image datasets. The experimental results show that our method achieves almost the
best segmentation performance compared with the state-ofthe-art segmentation methods and the inference speed is 12.9
fps on DeepGlobe and 10 fps on ISIC. Moreover, we embed
PPN with the general semantic segmentation network and the
experimental results on Cityscapes which contains more object classes demonstrate the generalization ability on general
semantic segmentation.

Figure 1: Performance comparison in inference memory usage, mIoU and inference speed on DeepGlobe. The bigger
the circle is, the faster the speed.
(Demir et al. 2018). However, semantic segmentation of HRI
or URI containing more than 2M or 4M pixels, respectively,
requires large computational resources and consumes a lot
of time. The most popular semantic segmentation methods,
such as FCN (Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015), PSPNet
(Zhao et al. 2017), are difﬁcult to be applied directly, because the standard GPU devices are hard to afford such huge
computational burden, causing computational difﬁculties as
well as even poor segmentation performance.
To solve the semantic segmentation problem of URI
or HRI, there exist three classes of segmentation methods: global approaches, local approaches and collaborative
global-local approaches. The global methods ﬁrstly down
sample an input image to a middle or small resolution one,
and then implement a deep segmentation model to solve the
segmentation problem. Meanwhile, the local methods conduct a deep segmentation model on the patches of HRI after
the input image is divided into several patches. It has been
observed that global methods, only using down-sampled images, lose details, causing inaccurate edge segmentation.
And the local methods may destroy the unity of an object
which makes it difﬁcult to classify correctly the object only

Introduction
With the rising up of deep learning, semantic segmentation achieves prominent progress. Recently, more focuses
are shifted on solving the semantic segmentation problem of high-resolution or ultra-high resolution images (HRI
or URI) by implementing the existing deep segmentation
models for special applications, such as medical diagnosis
(Tschandl, Rosendahl, and Kittler 2018; Codella et al. 2018;
Graham et al. 2019), urban planning and road extraction
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

12402

