The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Sequence Generation with
Optimal-Transport-Enhanced Reinforcement Learning
Liqun Chen, Ke Bai, Chenyang Tao, Yizhe Zhang, Guoyin Wang, Wenlin Wang,
Ricardo Henao, Lawrence Carin
Duke University

that involve the model-generated sequence at training time,
resulting in marked performance gains (Ranzato et al., 2016;
Norouzi et al., 2016; Rennie et al., 2017).
Among various empirical attempts to regularize MLE, the
use of reinforcement learning (RL) techniques has been investigated extensively (Ranzato et al., 2016; Norouzi et al.,
2016; Rennie et al., 2017; Paulus, Xiong, and Socher, 2018;
Wu et al., 2016). RL leverages a set of principled learning algorithms, such as REINFORCE Williams (1992) and
TRPO Schulman et al. (2015), to optimize the model over
desirable but often non-differentiable performance metrics.
In RL-based approaches these metrics are termed reward
functions. Relative to the likelihood, reward functions allow
the model to be informed by specilized performance metrics
that can be understood as regularizers to the standard MLE
objective Tan et al. (2018).
Crucial to the success of RL-regularized training is the
choice of the reward function. Current practice largely
falls into two categories: i) static rewards, such as phrasematching-based metrics like BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002),
ROUGE (Lin, 2004) and CIDEr Vedantam, Lawrence Zitnick, and Parikh (2015), routinely used in the evaluation of
language models; and more recently, ii) dynamic rewards
that track changes of the model in feature space during training, and are typically implemented via adversarial learning (Yu et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2018).
Despite encouraging results Rennie et al. (2017); Paulus,
Xiong, and Socher (2018), limitations of both types of rewards have been widely recognized. Static rewards usually
serve as imperfect proxies for human evaluation, resulting
in undesirable biases (Wang et al., 2018). While being more
objective, adversarial supervision in dynamic rewards relies on the delicate balance of a mini-max objective, which
can be easily undermined in practice Arjovsky and Bottou (2017); Zhang et al. (2017); Chen et al. (2018). Both
types of rewards can incur destabilization when training,
manifested as mode-dropping and gradient-vanishing. Consequently, careful ﬁne tuning is often required in the training
of RL-regularized NLP models.
Optimal transport (OT) has emerged recently as a powerful learning framework, demonstrating success on some of
the frontier challenges in machine learning, such as natural
image generation Salimans et al. (2018) and graph learning Xu et al. (2019). OT-based learning generally reformu-

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) has been widely used to aid
training in language generation. This is achieved by enhancing standard maximum likelihood objectives with userspeciﬁed reward functions that encourage global semantic
consistency. We propose a principled approach to address the
difﬁculties associated with RL-based solutions, namely, highvariance gradients, uninformative rewards and brittle training. By leveraging the optimal transport distance, we introduce a regularizer that signiﬁcantly alleviates the above issues. Our formulation emphasizes the preservation of semantic features, enabling end-to-end training instead of ad-hoc
ﬁne-tuning, and when combined with RL, it controls the exploration space for more efﬁcient model updates. To validate
the effectiveness of the proposed solution, we perform a comprehensive evaluation covering a wide variety of NLP tasks:
machine translation, abstractive text summarization and image caption, with consistent improvements over competing
solutions.

Introduction
Sequence generation is one of the central research topics
in natural language processing (NLP) studies, covering a
broad spectrum of applications including machine translation (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le, 2014; Cho et al., 2014;
Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio, 2015), abstractive summarization (Rush, Chopra, and Weston, 2015; Chopra, Auli, and
Rush, 2016), image captioning (Vinyals et al., 2015; Xu et
al., 2015), and style transfer (Shen et al., 2017; Prabhumoye
et al., 2018).
Maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) is employed
widely for training a sequence generation model. Speciﬁcally, given the sequential nature of language, MLE training follows an autoregressive design that maximizes the expected log-likelihood of a word conditioned on its previous context, i.e., the information encoded by the already observed input sequence Cho et al. (2014). This practice leads
to the well-known exposure bias issue, where the lack of exposure of the model to generated sequences during the training phase leads to the fast degeneration of semantic consistency for long sequences at test time (Bengio et al., 2015).
This has motivated development of regularization schemes
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7512

