The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Semi-Supervised Learning for Maximizing the Partial AUC
Tomoharu Iwata, Akinori Fujino, Naonori Ueda
NTT Communication Science Laboratories, Kyoto, Japan
{tomoharu.iwata.gy, akinori.fujino.yh, naonori.ueda.fr}@hco.ntt.co.jp

partial area under the ROC curve with a speciﬁc FPR range
as shown in Figure 1(a). Many methods for maximizing
the pAUC have been proposed (Komori and Eguchi 2010;
Ricamato and Tortorella 2011; Narasimhan and Agarwal
2013a; 2013b; Ueda and Fujino 2018; Wang and Chang
2010). However, existing pAUC maximization methods require many labeled data for training, which are expensive to
prepare.
In this paper, we propose a semi-supervised learning
method for maximizing the pAUC to achieve a high pAUC
with a small amount of labeled data and a large amount of
unlabeled data. Unlabeled data are usually easier to prepare
than labeled data. To exploit unlabeled data, we deﬁne the
unlabeled positive rate (UPR), which is the probability that
the decision function score of unlabeled data is higher than a
threshold. We then derive two approximations of the pAUC
from the partial area under the curves of the UPR and the
TPR or FPR: the ﬁrst is calculated from positive and unlabeled data, and the second is calculated from negative and
unlabeled data.
A classiﬁer is trained by maximizing the weighted sum
of the two approximations of the pAUC and the pAUC that
is calculated from positive and negative data. For classiﬁers,
the proposed method can use any differentiable functions,
such as logistic regression and neural networks. Although
several semi-supervised methods for AUC maximization
have been proposed (Fujino and Ueda 2016; Sakai, Niu, and
Sugiyama 2018; Kiryo et al. 2017), they are inapplicable to
pAUC maximization. The main contributions of this paper
are as follows:

Abstract
The partial area under a receiver operating characteristic
curve (pAUC) is a performance measurement for binary classiﬁcation problems that summarizes the true positive rate with
the speciﬁc range of the false positive rate. Obtaining classiﬁers that achieve high pAUC is important in a wide variety
of applications, such as cancer screening and spam ﬁltering.
Although many methods have been proposed for maximizing
the pAUC, existing methods require many labeled data for
training. In this paper, we propose a semi-supervised learning method for maximizing the pAUC, which trains a classiﬁer with a small amount of labeled data and a large amount
of unlabeled data. To exploit the unlabeled data, we derive
two approximations of the pAUC: the ﬁrst is calculated from
positive and unlabeled data, and the second is calculated from
negative and unlabeled data. A classiﬁer is trained by maximizing the weighted sum of the two approximations of the
pAUC and the pAUC that is calculated from positive and
negative data. With experiments using various datasets, we
demonstrate that the proposed method achieves higher test
pAUCs than existing methods.

1

Introduction

The area under a receiver operating characteristic (ROC)
curve (AUC) is widely used for performance measurement with binary classiﬁcation problems (Bradley 1997;
Huang and Ling 2005). The ROC curve is the true positive
rate (TPR) as a function of the false positive rate (FPR).
By maximizing the AUC, we can obtain a classiﬁer that
achieves high average TPRs over all FPR values from zero
to one (Brefeld and Scheffer 2005; Wang and Tang 2009;
Ding et al. 2015; Ying, Wen, and Lyu 2016; Han and Zhao
2010; Zhou, Lai, and Yen 2009; Zhao et al. 2011).
In many applications, we would like to achieve a high
TPR with a speciﬁc FPR range. For example, in cancer
screening applications, maintaining a low FPR is important
if we are to eliminate unnecessary and costly biopsies (Baker
and Pinsky 2001). In a spam detection system, we can accept
only a low FPR if we are to prevent legitimate emails from
being identiﬁed as spam. In such applications, a partial AUC
(pAUC) is more appropriate than an AUC. The pAUC is the

1. We derive two approximations of the pAUC that are calculated using unlabeled data (Section 4).
2. We propose a semi-supervised learning method for maximizing the pAUC based on the approximations of the
pAUC (Section 5). Our work is the ﬁrst attempt for semisupervised pAUC maximization to our knowledge.
3. We empirically demonstrate that the proposed method
performs better than existing supervised and semisupervised methods using various datasets for anomaly
detection (Section 6).

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4239

