The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Election Control in Social Networks via Edge Addition or Removal
Matteo Castiglioni,1 Diodato Ferraioli,2 Nicola Gatti1
1

2

Politecnico di Milano, Piazza Leonardo da Vinci 32, Milano, Italy
Università degli Studi di Salerno, Via Giovanni Paolo II, Fisciano, Italy
{matteo.castiglioni, nicola.gatti}@polimi.it, dferraioli@unisa.it

during the 2018 political campaign in Italy is linked with the
content of the populist parties that won the elections.
In this scenario, a natural question is to understand at
which extent the spread of (mis)information on social network media may alter the result of a political election. This
topic has recently received large interest in the community:
e.g., Auletta et al. (2015; 2017a; 2017b) show that, in the
case of two only candidates, a manipulator may be able to
lead the minority to become a majority by inﬂuencing the
order in which voters change their mind. Moreover, Auletta,
Ferraioli, and Greco (2018) show that, in the same previous
setting, a manipulator can lead a bare majority to consensus.
However, as showed by Auletta et al. (2019), these results
do not extend to the case with more than two candidates.
Arguably, the form of manipulation most studied in the
literature is seeding, where the manipulator has to ﬁnd a set
of seed nodes from which the information (either positive
towards the desired candidate or negative towards the opponents) spreads over the network. This form of manipulation
has been largely studied in the setting with only two candidates, according to various diffusion models (Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003; Bredereck and Elkind 2017). Only
recently, the setting with multiple candidates has been investigated. In particular, Wilder and Vorobeychik (2018) study
the manipulation of a plurality voting based election when
the information spread in the network according to an Independent Cascade model; Corò et al. (2019) extend this result
to a linear threshold diffusion model and arbitrary scoring
rules; and Aboueimehrizi et al. (2019) allow a manipulator to have imperfect information on the network. However,
all of these works still assume the manipulator only sends
messages in favour or against a single candidate. This assumption is very restrictive and unrealistic when there are
multiple candidates: for a manipulator, it may be advantageous to send messages not only in favour of her desired
candidate, but also in favour of a third weaker candidate to
make that the latter “steals” votes from the stronger opponents. However, Castiglioni et al. (2019) show that, when
messages about multiple candidates are allowed, then the
optimal seeding is usually hard even to approximate.
In all the above results, the network is given and the manipulator has no chance to alter the social relationships be-

Abstract
We focus on the scenario in which messages pro and/or
against one or multiple candidates are spread through a social
network in order to affect the votes of the receivers. Several
results are known in the literature when the manipulator can
make seeding by buying inﬂuencers. In this paper, instead,
we assume the set of inﬂuencers and their messages to be
given, and we ask whether a manipulator (e.g., the platform)
can alter the outcome of the election by adding or removing
edges in the social network. We study a wide range of cases
distinguishing for the number of candidates or for the kind
of messages spread over the network. We provide a positive
result, showing that, except for trivial cases, manipulation is
not affordable, the optimization problem being hard even if
the manipulator has an unlimited budget (i.e., he can add or
remove as many edges as desired). Furthermore, we prove
that our hardness results still hold in a reoptimization variant,
where the manipulator already knows an optimal solution to
the problem and needs to compute a new solution once a local
modiﬁcation occurs (e.g., in bandit scenarios where estimations related to random variables change over time).

Introduction
Nowadays, social network media are the most used, if not
the unique, sources of information. This indisputable fact
turned out to inﬂuence most of our daily actions, and also
to have severe effects on the political life of our countries.
Indeed, in many of the recent political elections around the
world, there has been evidence of the impact that false or incomplete news spread through these media inﬂuenced the
electoral outcome. For example, in the recent US presidential election, Allcott and Gentzkow (2017) and Guess,
Nyhan, and Reiﬂer (2018) show that, on average, 92% of
Americans remembered pro-Trump false news, while 23%
of them remembered the pro-Clinton fake news. As another
example, Ferrara (2017) shows that automated accounts in
Twitter spread a considerable amount of political news in order to alter the outcome of 2017 French elections. Furthermore, Alaphilippe et al. (2018) and Giglietto et al. (2018)
show that the fake news spread over the major social media
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1878

