The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

GraLSP: Graph Neural Networks with Local Structural Patterns
Yilun Jin,1∗ Guojie Song,2† Chuan Shi3
1

2

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong SAR, China
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, Ministry of Education, Peking University, China
3
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
yilun.jin@connect.ust.hk, gjsong@pku.edu.cn, shichuan@bupt.edu.cn

tree is constructed which is computed in a bottom-up manner. Being powerful yet efﬁcient, neighborhood aggregation
based GNNs1 have hence attracted the attention of numerous
research works (Xu et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2019).
In addition to node-level features which GNNs aggregate,
features of other scales also prevail in graphs, among which,
structural patterns of varying scales recurring frequently are
typical and indicative of node and graph properties, such as
functions in molecular networks (Pržulj 2007), pattern of information ﬂow (Granovetter (1977), Paranjape (2017)), and
social phenomena (Kovanen et al. 2013), which are often
global insights which node-level features fail to provide.
Yet, although GNNs do encode neighborhoods of nodes
(Xu et al. 2018), they are not ensured to generate distinctive
results for nodes with different structural patterns. Speciﬁcally, distinctions between local structural patterns are minuscule, one or two links for example, which makes it hard
for GNNs to generate distinctive embeddings for structural
patterns, even with wildly different semantics.
We take the triadic closures, patterns characteristic of
strong ties in social networks, as examples (Huang et al.
2015). We show the computation tree of a triadic closure
in a 2-layer GNN in Fig. 1. As can be shown, the only difference the triadic closure makes is the existence of ﬁrst order neighbors (green nodes) on the second layer of the tree,
whose impact tends to diminish as their neighborhood (red
nodes) expands. It is thus concluded that, based on neighborhood aggregation, GNNs can, in some cases, fail to generate
distinctive embeddings for structural patterns that are topologically similar but carry wildly different semantics.

Abstract
It is not until recently that graph neural networks (GNNs)
are adopted to perform graph representation learning, among
which, those based on the aggregation of features within the
neighborhood of a node achieved great success. However, despite such achievements, GNNs illustrate defects in identifying some common structural patterns which, unfortunately,
play signiﬁcant roles in various network phenomena. In this
paper, we propose GraLSP, a GNN framework which explicitly incorporates local structural patterns into the neighborhood aggregation through random anonymous walks. Specifically, we capture local graph structures via random anonymous walks, powerful and ﬂexible tools that represent structural patterns. The walks are then fed into the feature aggregation, where we design various mechanisms to address the
impact of structural features, including adaptive receptive radius, attention and ampliﬁcation. In addition, we design objectives that capture similarities between structures and are
optimized jointly with node proximity objectives. With the
adequate leverage of structural patterns, our model is able
to outperform competitive counterparts in various prediction
tasks in multiple datasets.

1

Introduction

Graphs are ubiquitous due to their accurate depiction of relational data. Graph representation learning (Cui et al. 2018),
in order to alleviate sparsity and irregularity of graphs, came
into life, projecting nodes to vector spaces while preserving
graph properties. Vector spaces being regular, graph representation learning hence serves as a versatile tool by accommodating numerous prediction tasks on graphs.
More recently, success in extending deep learning to
graphs brought about Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)
(Zhou et al. 2018) and achieved impressive performances.
Many GNNs follow a recursive scheme called neighborhood aggregation, where the representation vectors of nodes
are computed via aggregating and transforming the features
within their neighborhoods. By doing so, a computation

Neighborhood
Aggregation
Twice
Graph

Computational Tree

Figure 1: Computational Tree of a Triadic Closure Graph

∗

Work done during undergraduate study at Peking University
Guojie Song is the corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

1

In this paper we focus on GNNs based on neighborhood aggregation, like (Xu et al. 2018), and leave other architectures for
future work.
4361

