The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Attentive User-Engaged Adversarial Neural
Network for Community Question Answering
∗

Yuexiang Xie,1,2 Ying Shen,1 Yaliang Li,2 Min Yang,3 Kai Lei ,1,4
1

Shenzhen Key Lab for Information Centric Networking & Blockchain Technology (ICNLAB), SECE, Peking University
2
Alibaba Group 3 Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
PCL Research Center of Networks and Communications, Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
xieyx@pku.edu.cn, {shenying, leik}@pkusz.edu.cn,
yaliang.li@alibaba-inc.com, min.yang@siat.ac.cn
Abstract

Category: Doha Shopping
Q1: What is best mall in Doha to buy good furniture?
Where are best furniture stores and showrooms. Thank
you :) (Posted by Angela Dondi in Dec, 2012)
A1: There are several; my Favorite is Pan Emirates @
Salwa Road. (Posted by Yasir Kh in Jan, 2013)
A2: Best of the best is haraj mall in najemma. (Posted
by anonymous in Dec, 2012)

We study the community question answering (CQA) problem
that emerges with the advent of numerous community forums
in the recent past. The task of ﬁnding appropriate answers to
questions from informative but noisy crowdsourced answers
is important yet challenging in practice. We present an Attentive User-engaged Adversarial Neural Network (AUANN),
which interactively learns the context information of questions and answers, and enhances user engagement with the
CQA task. A novel attentive mechanism is incorporated to
model the semantic internal and external relations among
questions, answers and user contexts. To handle the noise issue caused by introducing user context, we design a two-step
denoise mechanism, including a coarse-grained selection process by similarity measurement, and a ﬁne-grained selection
process by applying an adversarial training module. We evaluate the proposed method on large-scale real-world datasets
SemEval-2016 and SemEval-2017. Experimental results verify the beneﬁts of incorporating user information, and show
that our proposed model signiﬁcantly outperforms the stateof-the-art methods.

Category: Sports in Qatar
Q2: Anybody know any evening swimming classes offered in Doha for adults only; maybe 3 classes per week
possibly. Thank you. (Posted by Lucky gal in Jan, 2013)
A3: Dana club also offer swimming classes for adults
and kidz. You can adjust your own schedule and number
of classes as well. (Posted by Yasir Kh in Jan, 2013)
A4: Aspire club is conducting swimming class for
adults... u have to register online in their site to get the
appointment. (Posted by hindiwatan in Jan, 2013)
Table 1: Examples of CQA Forums

Introduction
as well as the contextual information about question and answer sentences. Typical examples of CQA forums are shown
in Table 1. The CQA web forums usually have few restrictions, which leads to several differences between CQA task
and traditional QA task. First of all, these forums contain
not only numerous question and answer sentences, but also
metadata such as user identiﬁer, question category and date
of posting, which provides researchers with the potential to
make improvement in the CQA task (Wen et al. 2018). Secondly, the questions and answers in CQA are usually multiple sentences and can contain much noise (e.g., abbreviations, misspelled words and emoticons), while traditional
QA task deals with relatively simpler and cleaner sentences.
Thirdly, for questions in a community forum, the received
answers vary a lot in terms of content and quality. Accordingly, we can conclude that CQA task contains more noise
in questions and answers, but can provide access to other
metadata, such as user information.
Recent researches (Wu, Xu, and Houfeng 2018; Shao et
al. 2019) regard the CQA task as a text matching prob-

Community Question Answering (CQA) has gained increasing popularity in the recent past. More and more people
would like to use web forums such as Yahoo!1 , Stack Overﬂow2 and Quora3 to freely ask questions or provide answers
to others. Because of the uneven quality of answers, it takes
much effort to go through a set of candidate answers and
ﬁnd answers that might be useful. We consider the problem
of automatically ﬁnding an appropriate answer to a given
question with assistance from community question answering forums which have accumulated a large number of questions.
The major challenge of this task is how to utilize the user
context information that reﬂects user’s expertise and hobby,
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://answers.yahoo.com
2
https://www.stackoverﬂow.com
3
https://www.quora.com
9322

