The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Beyond Dropout: Feature Map Distortion to Regularize Deep Neural Networks
Yehui Tang,1∗ Yunhe Wang,2 Yixing Xu,2 Boxin Shi,4,5 Chao Xu,1 Chunjing Xu,2 Chang Xu3
1

2

Key Lab of Machine Perception (MOE), CMIC, School of EECS, Peking University, China
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, 3 School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney, Australia
4
National Engineering Laboratory for Video Technology, Peking University, 5 Peng Cheng Laboratory
{yhtang, shiboxin}@pku.edu.cn, {yunhe.wang, xuyixing, xuchunjing}@huawei.com,
chaoxu@cis.pku.edu.cn, c.xu@sydney.edu.au

other words, the empirical risk should be closed to the expected risk. To this end, (Hinton et al. 2012) ﬁrst proposed
the conventional binary dropout approach, which reduces
the co-adaptation of neurons by stochastically dropping part
of them in the training phase. This operation can be either
regarded as a model ensemble technique or a data augmentation method, which signiﬁcantly enhances the performance
of the resulting network on the test set.
To improve the performance of dropout implemented on
deep neural networks, (Ba and Frey 2013) adaptively adjusted the dropout probability of each neuron by interleaving
a binary belief network into the neural networks. Gaussian
Dropout (Srivastava et al. 2014) multiplying the outputs of
the neurons by Gaussian random noise is equal to the conventional binary dropout. It was further analyzed from the
perspective of Bayesian regularization and the dropout probability can be optimized automatically (Kingma, Salimans,
and Welling 2015). Instead of disabling the activation, DropConnect (Wan et al. 2013) randomly set a subset of network weights to zero. (Wan et al. 2013) derived a bound
on the generalization performance for Dropout and DropConnect. (Zhai and Wang 2018) connected the bound with
drop probability and optimized the dropout probability together with network parameters during the training. Focusing on the convolutional neural networks, (Ghiasi, Lin, and
Le 2018) proposed to drop contiguous regions of a feature
map to obstruct the information ﬂow more radically.
Existing variants of dropout have made tremendous efforts for minimizing the gap between the expected risk and
the empirical risk, but they all follow the general idea of disabling parts of the output of an arbitrary layer in the neural
network. The essence of the success is to randomly obscure
part of semantic information extracted by the deep neural
network and avoid the massive parameters to over-ﬁt the
training set. Setting a certain number of the elements in the
feature map to zero is a straightforward way to disturb the
information propagation across layers in the neural network,
but it is by no means the only way to accomplish this goal.
Most importantly, such sort of hand-crafted operations are
hardly to be the optimal ones in most cases.
In this work, we propose a novel approach for enhancing
the generalization ability of deep neural networks by inves-

Abstract
Deep neural networks often consist of a great number of trainable parameters for extracting powerful features from given
datasets. One one hand, massive trainable parameters signiﬁcantly enhance the performance of these deep networks.
One the other hand, they bring the problem of over-ﬁtting.
To this end, dropout based methods disable some elements in
the output feature maps during the training phase for reducing the co-adaptation of neurons. Although the generalization
ability of the resulting models can be enhanced by these approaches, the conventional binary dropout is not the optimal
solution. Therefore, we investigate the empirical Rademacher
complexity related to intermediate layers of deep neural networks and propose a feature distortion method for addressing
the aforementioned problem. In the training period, randomly
selected elements in the feature maps will be replaced with
speciﬁc values by exploiting the generalization error bound.
The superiority of the proposed feature map distortion for
producing deep neural network with higher testing performance is analyzed and demonstrated on several benchmark
image datasets.

Introduction
The superiority of deep neural networks, especially convolutional neural networks (CNNs) has been well demonstrated
in a large variety of computer vision tasks including image recognition (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012;
He et al. 2016a; Wang et al. 2018a), object detection (Ren
et al. 2015; Redmon et al. 2016), video analysis (Feichtenhofer, Pinz, and Zisserman 2016), Natural Language Processing (Wang, Li, and Smola 2019) etc. Actually, the huge
success of deep CNNs should be attributed to the larger
number of trainable parameters and available annotation
data, e.g. the ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009) dataset with over
1 million images from 1000 different categories.
Since deep networks are often over parameterized for
achieving higher performance on the training set, an important problem is to avoid over-ﬁtting, i.e. the excellent performance achieved on the train set is expected to be repeated
on the test set (Hinton et al. 2012; Wang et al. 2018b). In
∗

This work was done while visiting Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5964

