The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Separate in Latent Space: Unsupervised Single Image Layer Separation
Yunfei Liu,1 Feng Lu1,2 *
1

State Key Laboratory of VR Technology and Systems, School of CSE, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{lyunfei, lufeng}@buaa.edu.cn

form. As shown in Fig. 1, for reﬂection separation, the input image I can be decomposed into a reﬂection layer LR
and a background layer LB in the form of I = LR + LB .
While for intrinsic decomposition, the input image I can be
represented by the pixel-wise product of an albedo image
LA and a shading image LS , or alternatively formulated as
log(I) = log(LA ) + log(LS ).

Abstract
Many real world vision tasks, such as reﬂection removal from
a transparent surface and intrinsic image decomposition, can
be modeled as single image layer separation. However, this
problem is highly ill-posed, requiring accurately aligned and
hard to collect triplet data to train the CNN models. To address
this problem, this paper proposes an unsupervised method that
requires no ground truth data triplet in training. At the core
of the method are two assumptions about data distributions in
the latent spaces of different layers, based on which a novel
unsupervised layer separation pipeline can be derived. Then
the method can be constructed based on the GANs framework
with self-supervision and cycle consistency constraints, etc.
Experimental results demonstrate its successfulness in outperforming existing unsupervised methods in both synthetic and
real world tasks. The method also shows its ability to solve a
more challenging multi-layer separation task.

1

Input

Background ʊ Reflection

Input

Albedo ʊ Shading

Figure 1: Examples of single image layer separation: reﬂection separation and intrinsic image decomposition.
Despite its wide applicability, single image layer separation has been found fundamentally ill-posed, due to the existence of countless feasible solutions. To constrain the solution
space, conventional methods use different priors such as low
rank (Han and Sim 2017), sparsity (Li and Brown 2013)
and relative smoothness (Li and Brown 2014) in optimization. Such hand-crafted constraints may work well in speciﬁc
cases but fail in more complex cases. Recently, the deep convolutional neural network (CNN) has been widely used to
handle similar problems (Fan et al. 2018; Yang et al. 2018;
Zhang, Ng, and Chen 2018). However, CNN-based methods
face major difﬁculties in high-quality data acquisition: 1) it is
difﬁcult or even impossible to obtain the ground truth of each
layer for real images, and 2) different datasets vary greatly
and cannot be used jointly. Since the performance of CNNs
relies heavily on the training data, existing methods have to
either use synthetic data with limited reality or train their
networks with imperfect data.
In order to overcome such difﬁculties, this paper suggests
not requiring the ground truth data triplet, i.e., one input
image and its exact two layers as training data, but simply
collecting images from the three domains independently. In
this manner, sufﬁcient training data can be easily obtained
without the acquisition problem. The absence of ground truth
triplet, however, makes it an unsupervised learning problem.
Therefore, we propose an unsupervised single image layer
separation (unsupervised SILS) method in this paper.

Introduction

Real imaging process is inﬂuenced by different factors, e.g.,
shape, illumination, reﬂection and refraction, making the
captured images highly complex. Such images, when used
as input data to an AI system, may heavily affect the system performance on various vision-based tasks, such as object detection (Girshick 2015), makeup removal (Cao et al.
2019), rain drop removal (Hao et al. 2019) and 3D reconstruction (Tatarchenko et al. 2019). As a result, separating different
visual attributes from a single image has been considered an
important research goal for decades.
This paper considers visual attributes separation via Single
Image Layer Separation (SILS). It aims at decomposing an
image into several independent layers with speciﬁc physical
meanings. In general, this problem can be formulated as:
(1)
I = L1 ⊕ L2 ⊕ · · · ,
where Li is the i-th layer and I is the input image that
can be reconstructed by a pixel-wise blend of all the layers. Plenty of real world problems can be represented in this
* Corresponding Author: Feng Lu.

This work is partially supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grant 61972012 and Grant
61732016.
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11661

