The Tenth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (EAAI-20)

Semi-Supervised Learning to Perceive Children’s Affective States in a Tablet Tutor
Mansi Agarwal

Jack Mostow

Delhi Technological University,
New Delhi, India
mansiagarwal bt2k16@dtu.ac.in

Carnegie Mellon University,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
mostow@cs.cmu.edu

15-month-long independent controlled study of 2700 children in 170 villages in Tanzania. RoboTutor’s thousands of
activities teach children who have little or no prior schooling. Our eventual goal for automated affect detection is to
help RoboTutor increase children’s engagement and learning gains. The work reported here is novel in several respects.
Novel population: Work on affect detection in intelligent
tutors has typically focused on American high school and
college students. In contrast, the work reported here is based
on data from children ages 6-12 in Tanzania. This data is
novel in three respects. First, few databases of facial expressions include children’s faces (Egger et al. 2011) (Nojavanasghari et al. 2016). Second, even fewer include Africans
(Du, Tao, and Martinez 2014). Finally, emotional expression
varies from culture to culture (Matsumoto 1991), so affect
detectors trained on an American population might not work
for an East African population.
Authentic context: Foundational research on emotion detection has mainly focused on six “basic” emotions (happiness, sadness, surprise, disgust, anger, and fear) (Craig et al.
2008). Typically these emotions are represented by deliberate facial expressions (Kaulard et al. 2012) or elicited by
experimental stimuli (Valstar and Pantic 2010). In contrast,
the affective states relevant to intelligent tutors are students’
normal reactions to them, namely boredom, confusion, delight, frustration, surprise, and neutral or “ﬂow” (D’Mello,
Picard, and Graesser 2007). Most facial expression data is
recorded in well-controlled laboratory conditions. In contrast, this paper is based on data from authentic contexts of
children using RoboTutor.
Camera-only: Even data on authentic affective states in
intelligent tutors are typically collected in heavily instrumented laboratory conditions using an expensive array of
devices such as pressure sensors (D’Mello and Graesser
2009) and EEG headsets (Petrantonakis and Hadjileontiadis
2009), as well as video from cameras external to the tutor itself. These input signals are informative for research but not
practical outside the lab.
In contrast, we use only video input recorded by Google
Pixel C Android tablets running RoboTutor in the ﬁeld, both
indoors and outdoors. Limiting its temporal and spatial reso-

Abstract
Like good human tutors, intelligent tutoring systems should
detect and respond to students’ affective states. However, accuracy in detecting affective states automatically has been
limited by the time and expense of manually labeling training data for supervised learning. To combat this limitation,
we use semi-supervised learning to train an affective state detector on a sparsely labeled, culturally novel, authentic data
set in the form of screen capture videos from a Swahili literacy and numeracy tablet tutor in Tanzania that shows the
face of the child using it. We achieved 88% leave-1-child-out
cross-validated accuracy in distinguishing pleasant, unpleasant, and neutral affective states, compared to only 61% for the
best supervised learning method we tested. This work contributes toward using automated affect detection both off-line
to improve the design of intelligent tutors, and at runtime to
respond to student affect based on input from a user-facing
tablet camera or webcam.

1

Introduction and Relation to Prior Work

The ﬁeld of affective computing seeks to narrow the communicative gap between the naturally emotional human and
the emotionally challenged computer by developing computational systems that recognize and respond to the affective
states (i.e., emotions) of the user (Picard 2000). In particular, considerable work has investigated the automated estimation of affective states from facial expressions (e.g. (Faria
et al. 2017)) and other visual cues (e.g. (Bidwell and Fuchs
2011)). Emotional expressions are socially reactive, so users
may try to mask certain unpleasant emotions (McDaniel et
al. 2007).
Much of the research on affective computing has focused
on making intelligent tutoring systems react to students’
emotions (e.g., (Woolf et al. 2009), (D’Mello and Graesser
2012), (Craig et al. 2004)). This paper likewise presents
work on automated detection of children’s affective states in
RoboTutor (Mostow 2019), a tablet app that (like the other 4
Finalists in the Global Learning XPRIZE (XPRIZE 2015))
achieved dramatically higher learning gains in basic literacy
and numeracy than a delayed-treatment group in XPRIZE’s
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13407

