The Tenth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (EAAI-20)

AISpace2: An Interactive Visualization Tool
for Learning and Teaching Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Chenliang Zhou,1 Dominic Kuang, Jingru Liu, Hanbo Yang,
Zijia Zhang, Alan Mackworth, David Poole2
Department of Computer Science
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, BC, Canada
1
chenliang.zhou@qq.com
2
poole@cs.ubc.ca
to students (Kehoe, Stasko, and Taylor 2001). A more speciﬁc experiment has been done to show that the visualization
tools can help students learn and understand search AI algorithms (Naser 2008). Although some experiments have been
conducted to show that animations in learning may bring a
fake feeling of satisfaction, negatively impacting the development of learning strategies, they are impressively advantageous for learners to understand dynamic activities, and
can give them more conﬁdence and motivation (Ainsworth
2008). Therefore, to engage students and encourage them to
learn more actively, we built tools so the execution of the
algorithms can be visualized and students can interact with
and control these visualizations.
In 2016, we started a project called AISpace2 (https:
//aispace2.github.io/AISpace2/), an interactive and visualizable pedagogical tool designated to help learn and teach AI
knowledge. In this paper we give an introduction to AISpace2. We ﬁrst present some background information about
CIspace and AIspace, the previous generations of AISpace2,
since their ﬁrst launch in 1999 (Poole and Mackworth 2001;
Knoll et al. 2008), and then AIPython (Poole and Mackworth 2017a), on which AISpace2 is built. We then talk
about the design approaches adopted in AISpace2 and their
advantages compared to its predecessors. Next, we outline
some important features in AISpace2 followed by some
evaluations of our project based on user feedback. Finally,
we give a plan of our future work, including a summary of
possible improvements and achievements we could make.

Abstract
AIspace is a set of tools used to learn and teach fundamental
AI algorithms. The original version of AIspace was written in
Java. There was not a clean separation of the algorithms and
visualization; it was too complicated for students to modify
the underlying algorithms. Its next generation, AIspace2, is
built on AIPython, open source Python code that is designed
to be as close as possible to pseudocode. AISpace2, visualized in JupyterLab, keeps the simple Python code, and uses
hooks in AIPython to allow visualization of the algorithms.
This allows students to see and modify the high-level algorithms in Python, and to visualize the output in a graphical
form, aiming to better help them to build conﬁdence and comfort in AI concepts and algorithms. So far we have tools for
search, constraint satisfaction problems (CSP), planning and
Bayesian network. In this paper we outline the tools and give
some evaluations based on user feedback.

Introduction
Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) is becoming a more and more
popular and important ﬁeld in computer science. However,
both teaching and learning AI are not simple for many instructors and students, partly because the concepts and algorithms are more abstract and not as straightforward as the
ones the students encountered before in a basic algorithm
course (Greiner and Schaeffer 2001; Hearst 1994).
Several researchers have pointed out that the use of certain
level of multimedia, such as animation and visualization, in
presenting course materials is more effective to capture the
attention from students and thus more helpful in motivating their interest to learn AI (Naps et al. 2003; Demetriadis, Triantﬁllou, and Pombortsis 2003). Compared to traditional paper-based learning, strategies that involve computers could help decrease students’ cognitive load (Khalil,
Mansour, and Wilhite 2010) and its outcome is at least as
good as the traditional teaching strategies (Valentine, Belski,
and Hamilton 2017). It is also shown in Zeng’s work (2016)
that computer visualization can promote the understanding
of models in deep learning, a subﬁeld of AI. There is evidence that those visualized AI algorithms, although complicated, could become more accessible and less intimidating

Related Work
In this section we brieﬂy talk about the history of CIspace
(Poole and Mackworth 2001), AIspace (Knoll et al. 2008)
and AIPython.

CIspace
In 1999, Poole and Mackworth launched CIspace (2001), a
set of nine visualization applets aimed at helping to learn
AI concepts and algorithms interactively based on their
textbook Computational Intelligence: A Logical Approach
(1998). The goal of CIspace is to enhance approaches to
learning and teaching AI, which can be further decomposed
into the usability goal and the pedagogical goal (Amershi et

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13493

