The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Logics for Sizes with Union or Intersection
Caleb Kisby,1 Saúl A. Blanco,1 Alex Kruckman,2 Lawrence S. Moss3
1

Department of Computer Science, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN 47408, USA
{cckisby, sblancor}@indiana.edu
2
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Wesleyan University, Middletown, CT 06459, USA
akruckman@wesleyan.edu
3
Department of Mathematics, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN 47405, USA
lmoss@indiana.edu

van Benthem 2008). One of the main goals of this program
is to demonstrate that components of natural language inference that can be modeled at all can be modeled by decidable logical systems. Also, our work aims at obtaining
complete logical systems for its fragments, with an eye toward efﬁcient computer implementations. Union and intersection are common points of interest and inspiration in
natural language semantics (Keenan and Faltz 1985), and
reasoning about the sizes of sets has been a common subject of investigation in natural logic (Moss and Raty 2018;
Pratt-Hartmann 2008). This paper contributes to this goal
of natural logic: we provide complete axiomatizations of
fragments of reasoning about sizes with either union or intersection, and we show that these logics are decidable in
polynomial time.

Abstract
This paper presents the most basic logics for reasoning about
the sizes of sets that admit either the union of terms or the intersection of terms. That is, our logics handle assertions All x y
and AtLeast x y, where x and y are built up from basic terms
by either unions or intersections. We present a sound, complete, and polynomial-time decidable proof system for these
logics. An immediate consequence of our work is the completeness of the logic additionally permitting More x y. The
logics considered here may be viewed as efﬁcient fragments
of two logics which appear in the literature: Boolean Algebra with Presburger Arithmetic and the Logic of Comparative
Cardinality.

1

Introduction

Reasoning about the sizes of sets is common in both human
and artiﬁcial reasoning. It is also common, both in “realworld” human settings and in artiﬁcial systems, to reason in
this way about unions and intersections of sets. In human
settings, this use of union or intersection is often reﬂected
by natural language phrases such as “animals or plants” (for
union), or “mammals with paws” (for intersection). For example, one might reason that if all cats are mammals that
purr and there are at least as many cats as purring things,
then it follows that all purring things are cats.
In this paper, we examine logics which capture the most
basic fragments of reasoning about the sizes of ﬁnite sets
alongside union or intersection. Our two main logics handle
assertions All x y (all x are y) and AtLeast x y (there are
at least as many x as y). In the ﬁrst logic, terms may be
formed using union, whereas in the second logic, terms may
be formed using intersection.
We emphasize that these fragments are the most basic
because we wish to reﬂect one of the primary lessons of
cognitive science: That computationally light systems are
the most cognitively plausible ones (Moss and Raty 2018).
Accordingly, the two main logics we present are decidable in
polynomial time.
The logics considered here are part of a broader enterprise of natural logic (Moss 2015; Moss and Raty 2018;

Related Work. There has been recent work at the conﬂuence of logic and artiﬁcial intelligence on systems for reasoning about sizes, often including reasoning about union and
intersection. The closest system to ours in the literature is
the polynomial-time decidable logic of All, Some, AtLeast,
More, with set complement as a term forming operation (but
not including union or intersection), which was investigated
in (Moss 2016).
If one were to add strict cardinality comparison, set complement, and propositional connectives ∧, ∨, and ¬ on top
of our work, the resulting logic would look like the Logic of
Comparative Cardinality CardCompLogic in (Ding, HarrisonTrainor, and Holliday 2018). Our logics are restricted further
by requiring that all variables x have a ﬁnite interpretation
(in CardCompLogic one may express this using the predicate
F in(x)). As shown in (Ding, Harrison-Trainor, and Holliday
2018), CardCompLogic is NP-complete, so what our logics
lose in expressive power they recoup in efﬁciency. Additionally, the method of proof in (Ding, Harrison-Trainor, and
Holliday 2018) is rather different from ours.
The logics presented in this paper may also be viewed as
fragments of Boolean Algebra with Presburger Arithmetic
(BAPA) (Kuncak, Nguyen, and Rinard 2006). BAPA is a
two-sorted logic, allowing both set relations in the language
of Boolean Algebra and numerical relations in the language
of Presburger Arithmetic. These two sorts are connected by a
set cardinality function |s| mapping sets to numbers. BAPA

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2870

