The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Knowledge-Enriched Visual Storytelling
Chao-Chun Hsu,1* Zi-Yuan Chen,2* Chi-Yang Hsu,3
Chih-Chia Li,4 Tzu-Yuan Lin,5 Ting-Hao (Kenneth) Huang,3 Lun-Wei Ku2,6
1

University of Colorado Boulder, 2 Academia Sinica, 3 Pennsylvania State University,
4
National Chiao Tung University, 5 National Taiwan University,
6
Most Joint Research Center for AI Technology and All Vista Healthcare
chao-chun.hsu@colorado.edu, {zychen, lwku}@iis.sinica.edu.tw, {cxh5437, txh710}@psu.edu

Abstract
Stories are diverse and highly personalized, resulting in a
large possible output space for story generation. Existing endto-end approaches produce monotonous stories because they
are limited to the vocabulary and knowledge in a single training dataset. This paper introduces KG-Story, a three-stage
framework that allows the story generation model to take advantage of external Knowledge Graphs to produce interesting stories. KG-Story distills a set of representative words
from the input prompts, enriches the word set by using external knowledge graphs, and ﬁnally generates stories based
on the enriched word set. This distill-enrich-generate framework allows the use of external resources not only for the
enrichment phase, but also for the distillation and generation phases. In this paper, we show the superiority of KGStory for visual storytelling, where the input prompt is a sequence of ﬁve photos and the output is a short story. Per
the human ranking evaluation, stories generated by KG-Story
are on average ranked better than that of the state-of-theart systems. Our code and output stories are available at
https://github.com/zychen423/KE-VIST.

Figure 1: Overview of KG-Story. KG-Story ﬁrst (i) distills
a set of representative words from the input prompts and (ii)
enriches the word set by using external knowledge graphs,
and (iii) generates stories based on the enriched word set.

Introduction
limited in terms of vocabulary and knowledge in VIST. Similar phenomena are observed for text story generation models using a single training set, where the output can be “fairly
generic” (Fan, Lewis, and Dauphin 2018). Second, the VIST
dataset is considerably smaller than that of other text generation tasks. The MSCOCO dataset for image captioning contains 995,684 captions (Lin et al. 2014); the VQA dataset for
visual question answering contains ∼0.76M questions and
∼10M answers (Antol et al. 2015); and the ROC dataset for
text story generation contains 98,159 stories (Mostafazadeh
et al. 2016). The VIST dataset, in contrast, contains only
49,603 stories. Thus it is not surprising that stories generated using VIST show low lexical diversity. Finally, no existing work takes into account relations between photos. Visual
storytelling was introduced as an artiﬁcial intelligence task
that attempts to “interpret causal structure” and “make sense
of visual input to tie disparate moments together” (Huang
et al. 2016). However, existing approaches still treat it as a
sequential image captioning problem and omit relations between images.

Stories are diverse and highly personalized. Namely, story
generation models, whether using text or images as input
prompts, aim at a large possible output space with rich information and vocabulary. One classic example is visual storytelling (VIST), an interdisciplinary task that takes a sequence of ﬁve photos as the input and generates a short story
as the output (Huang et al. 2016). However, existing visual
storytelling approaches produce monotonous stories with
repetitive text and low lexical diversity (Hsu et al. 2019).
We believe three major factors contribute to this problem.
First, most prior work uses only a single training set (i.e., the
VIST dataset) in an end-to-end manner (Wang et al. 2018b;
Kim et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2018a). Although this can result in legitimate stories, the end-to-end architecture makes
it difﬁcult to use external data. The generated stories are thus
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
∗

denotes equal contribution
7952

