The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Joint Character-Level Word Embedding and
Adversarial Stability Training to Defend Adversarial Text
Hui Liu,1,2 Yongzheng Zhang,1,2 Yipeng Wang,1,2 Zheng Lin,1,2 Yige Chen1,2
2

1
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{liuhui, zhangyongzheng, wangyipeng, linzheng, chenyige}@iie.ac.cn

Abstract

Example

Input

Prediction

Text classiﬁcation is a basic task in natural language processing, but the small character perturbations in words can greatly
decrease the effectiveness of text classiﬁcation models, which
is called character-level adversarial example attack. There
are two main challenges in character-level adversarial examples defense, which are out-of-vocabulary words in word embedding model and the distribution difference between training and inference. Both of these two challenges make the
character-level adversarial examples difﬁcult to defend. In
this paper, we propose a framework which jointly uses the
character embedding and the adversarial stability training to
overcome these two challenges. Our experimental results on
ﬁve text classiﬁcation data sets show that the models based on
our framework can effectively defend character-level adversarial examples, and our models can defend 93.19% gradientbased adversarial examples and 94.83% natural adversarial examples, which outperforms the state-of-the-art defense
models.

Original

never coming here again found hair in my to go food .

Negative

Adversarial

enver coming here again found hair in my to go food.

Positive

1

Original
Adversarial

i just called these guys talk about customer service,
they were excellent .
i just called these guys talk about customer service,
they were exciellent .

Positive
Negative

Table 1: The char-level adversarial examples in Yelp Review
Polarity corpus.

al. 2018), word-level adversarial examples (Papernot et al.
2016) and sentence-level adversarial examples (Liang et al.
2017). In this paper, we mainly discuss the char-level adversarial examples, which are the most frequently used method
to fool the state-of-the-art text classiﬁcation models (Gao et
al. 2018; Li et al. 2018) in recent years. Adversarial examples of text classiﬁcation reveal the vulnerability of the text
classiﬁcation models, and this vulnerability greatly hinders
the application of text classiﬁcation, such as phishing and
spam detection systems.
However, the defense of char-level adversarial examples
has two main challenges, namely out-of-vocabulary (OOV)
words and distribution differences. The OOV words are
caused by the word embedding mechanism, which is supposed to map the words in the vocabulary to ﬁxed highdimensional vectors. But when a word is out of the vocabulary, it will be replaced by the uninformed word UNK. In
actual, there is a high probability that the adversarial words
are OOV words to the word embedding based models, which
brings the loss of many informative words. For example,
as shown in Table 1, we only insert a char i into the word
“excellent”, and we will get an adversarial OOV word “exciellent” to the word embedding based model. Besides, the
char-level adversarial examples disrupt the intrinsic structure of word including preﬁx and sufﬁx, which causes the
distribution difference between the training set and adversarial examples. This distribution difference violates the assumption of independent identical distribution in machine
learning and leads to the poor performance of well-trained
text classiﬁcation models to adversarial examples.
To avoid the OOV words during the text processing, (Gao

Introduction

Text classiﬁcation is a basic task in natural language processing (NLP). In recent years, (Kim 2014; Zhang, Zhao,
and LeCun 2015; Lai et al. 2015) apply deep neural networks to improve the text classiﬁcation models. However,
(Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014) show that small
perturbations in test inputs can fool the state-of-the-art deep
neural networks based classiﬁers. To improve the robustness
of these deep neural networks based text classiﬁcation models, many recent works (Liang et al. 2017; Gao et al. 2018;
Li et al. 2018) have focused on adversarial examples, which
are well-crafted by adding small perturbations to original examples, to fool the trained text classiﬁcation models. For
example, as shown in Table 1, we only swap two chars in
the word “never” to generate an adversarial word “enver”.
This small perturbation can cause the well-trained text classiﬁcation model to misclassify the entire sentence. In general, the generation methods of adversarial examples in text
classiﬁcation are mainly divided into three categories, which
are character-level (char-level) adversarial examples (Gao et
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8384

