The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Block Hankel Tensor ARIMA for Multiple Short Time Series Forecasting
Qiquan Shi,1 Jiaming Yin,2∗ Jiajun Cai,3∗ Andrzej Cichocki,4 Tatsuya Yokota,5
Lei Chen,1 Mingxuan Yuan,1 Jia Zeng1
1

3

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Hong Kong, China, 2 Tongji University, Shanghai, China
The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China, 4 The Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Moscow, Russia
5
Nagoya Institute of Technology, Nagoya, Japan; RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, Japan
{shiqiquan, lc.leichen, yuan.mingxuan, zeng.jia}@huawei.com, 14jiamingyin@tongji.edu.cn, jjcai@connect.hku.hk,
a.cichocki@skoltech.ru, t.yokota@nitech.ac.jp

thus suffer from high computational cost, especially for a
large number of TS. In addition, ARIMA models do not consider the intrinsic relationships among correlated TS, which
may limit their performance. Recently, researchers from
Facebook developed Prophet (Taylor and Letham 2018). It
can estimate each TS well based on an additive model where
non-linear trends are ﬁt with seasonality and holidays. However, its computational expense grows steeply with increasing number of TS due to it estimates single TS separately.
Multiple TS arising from real applications can be reformulated as a matrix or even a high-order tensor (multi-way
data) naturally. For example, the spatio-temporal grid of
ocean data in meteorology can be shaped as a fourth-order
tensor TS, wherein four factors are jointly represented as
latitude, longitude, grid points and time (Jing et al. 2018).
When dealing with tensors, traditional linear TSF models require reshaping TS into vectors. This vectorization not only
causes a loss of intrinsic structure information but also results in high computational and memory demands.
Tensor decomposition is a powerful computational technique for extracting valuable information from tensorial data
(Cichocki et al. 2016; Shi et al. 2018; Zhou, Lu, and Cheung 2019; Zhou and Cheung 2019). Taking this advantage,
tensor decomposition-based approaches can handle multiple TS simultaneously and achieve good forecasting performance (Dunlavy, Kolda, and Acar 2011; Li et al. 2015;
Tan et al. 2016; Bhanu et al. 2018; Faloutsos et al. 2018).
For example, Tucker decomposition integrated with AR
model was proposed (Jing et al. 2018) to obtain the multilinear orthogonality AR (MOAR) model and the multilinear constrained AR model for high-order TSF. Moreover, some works incorporate decomposition with neural
networks for more complex tensorial TS (Yu et al. 2017;
Ma et al. 2019).
However, instead of being high-dimensional tensors in
nature, many real-world TS are relatively short and small
(Smyl and Kuber 2016). For example, since the entire life
cycle of electronic products like smartphones or laptops is
usually quite short (around one year for each generation),
their historical demand data of product materials and sales
records are very small. Due to limited information, the future demands or sales of these products cannot be effectively

Abstract
This work proposes a novel approach for multiple time series
forecasting. At ﬁrst, multi-way delay embedding transform
(MDT) is employed to represent time series as low-rank block
Hankel tensors (BHT). Then, the higher-order tensors are projected to compressed core tensors by applying Tucker decomposition. At the same time, the generalized tensor Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA) is explicitly
used on consecutive core tensors to predict future samples.
In this manner, the proposed approach tactically incorporates
the unique advantages of MDT tensorization (to exploit mutual correlations) and tensor ARIMA coupled with low-rank
Tucker decomposition into a uniﬁed framework. This framework exploits the low-rank structure of block Hankel tensors
in the embedded space and captures the intrinsic correlations
among multiple TS, which thus can improve the forecasting
results, especially for multiple short time series. Experiments
conducted on three public datasets and two industrial datasets
verify that the proposed BHT-ARIMA effectively improves
forecasting accuracy and reduces computational cost compared with the state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Time series forecasting (TSF) is one of the most sought-after
and yet arguably the most challenging tasks. It has played an
important role in a wide range of areas including statistics,
machine learning, data mining, econometrics, operations research for several decades. For example, forecasting the supply and demand of products can be used for optimizing inventory management, vehicle scheduling and topology planning, which are crucial for most aspects of supply chain optimization (Faloutsos et al. 2019).
Among existing TSF approaches, autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) (Box and Jenkins 1968)
is one of the most popular and widely used linear models
due to its statistical properties and great ﬂexibility (Liu et
al. 2016). ARIMA merges the autoregressive model (AR)
and the moving average model (MA) with differencing
techniques for non-stationary TSF. However, most existing
ARIMA models need to predict multiples TS one by one and
∗

Work done during an internship at Huawei.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5758

