The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

V-PROM: A Benchmark for Visual Reasoning Using Visual Progressive Matrices
Damien Teney,1* Peng Wang,2* Jiewei Cao,1 Lingqiao Liu,1 Chunhua Shen,1 Anton van den Hengel1
1

Australian Institute for Machine Learning
The University of Adelaide
Adelaide, Australia
2
University of Wollongong
Wollongong, Australia
*
Authors with equal contribution, listed in alphabetical order

Abstract

Answer candidates

Context panels

Advances in machine learning have generated increasing enthusiasm for tasks that require high-level reasoning on top
of perceptual capabilities, particularly over visual data. Such
tasks include, for example, image captioning, visual question
answering, and visual navigation. Their evaluation is however
hindered by task-speciﬁc confounding factors and dataset biases. In parallel, the existing benchmarks for abstract reasoning are limited to synthetic stimuli (e.g. images of simple shapes) and do not capture the challenges of real-world
data. We propose a new large-scale benchmark to evaluates
abstract reasoning over real visual data. The test involves visual questions that require operations fundamental to many
high-level vision tasks, such as comparisons of counts and
logical operations on complex visual properties. The benchmark measures a method’s ability to infer high-level relationships and to generalise them over image-based concepts.
We provide multiple training/test splits that require controlled
levels of generalization. We evaluate a range of deep learning architectures, and ﬁnd that existing models, including
those popular for vision-and-language tasks, are unable to
solve seemingly-simple instances. Models using relational
networks fare better but leave substantial room for improvement.

Figure 1: We propose a new task to evaluate a model’s ability
to perform abstract reasoning over complex visual stimuli.
Each test instance is a matrix of 3 × 3 images, within which
each row contains 3 images that exemplify the same relationship (in this case they have the same shape). The task is
to identify the correct candidate for the missing 9scriptsizeth
image from a set of candidates. The correct answer above is
the third candidate that represents a heart-shaped object.

Introduction
Some of the most active research areas in computer vision
are tackling increasingly complex tasks that require highlevel reasoning. Some examples of this trend include visual
question answering (VQA) (Antol et al. 2015), image captioning (Anderson et al. 2016), referring expressions (Yu et
al. 2017), visual dialog (Das et al. 2017), and vision-andlanguage navigation (Anderson et al. 2018b). While deep
learning helped make signiﬁcant progress, these tasks expose the limitations of the pattern recognition methods that
have proved successful on classical vision tasks such as object recognition. A key indicator of the shortcomings of deep
learning methods is their tendency to respond to speciﬁc
features or biases in the dataset, rather than generalising to
an approach that is applicable more broadly (Agrawal et al.

2018; Devlin et al. 2015). In response, we propose a benchmark to directly measure a method’s ability for high-level
reasoning over real visual information, and in which we can
control the level of generalisation required.
Progress on the complex tasks mentioned above is typically evaluated on standardized benchmarks (Anderson et
al. 2018b; Antol et al. 2015; Teney, Liu, and van den Hengel
2016). Methods are evaluated with metrics on task-speciﬁc
objectives, e.g. predicting the correct answer in VQA, or
producing a sentence matching the ground truth in image
captioning. These tasks include a strong visual component,

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12071

