The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Overcoming Catastrophic Forgetting by Neuron-Level Plasticity Control
Inyoung Paik, Sangjun Oh, Taeyeong Kwak
Deep Bio Inc., Seoul, Republic of Korea
{iypaik, tykwak}@deepbio.com, me@juneoh.net

Injung Kim
Handong Global University, Pohang, Republic of Korea
ijkim@handong.edu

dynamic architectures for neural networks,(Fernando et al.
2017; Aljundi, Chakravarty, and Tuytelaars 2017; Lee et al.
2017a; Serrà et al. 2018; Masse, Grant, and Freedman 2018;
Siavash Golkar 2019) where the capacity to learn the new
task is obtained by assigning different parts of the network
to the new task. Note that these methods isolate a portion
of neurons, rather than parameters, to effectively(sometimes
perfectly) preserve the existing knowledge of the neural network.

Abstract
To address the issue of catastrophic forgetting in neural networks, we propose a novel, simple, and effective solution
called neuron-level plasticity control (NPC). While learning a
new task, the proposed method preserves the existing knowledge from the previous tasks by controlling the plasticity of
the network at the neuron level. NPC estimates the importance
value of each neuron and consolidates important neurons by
applying lower learning rates, rather than restricting individual
connection weights to stay close to the values optimized for
the previous tasks. The experimental results on the several
datasets show that neuron-level consolidation is substantially
more effective compared to connection-level consolidation
approaches.

Weight consolidation is a remarkable step made in this
area. Elastic Weight Consolidation(EWC)(Kirkpatrick et al.
2017) uses the diagonals of the Fisher information matrix
to identify and consolidate the parameters, which correspond to the connection weights in neural networks, that
are important for the previous tasks. In this way, the network learns the new task using less important parameters
while preserving previously learned knowledge. In Memory Aware Synapses(MAS)(Aljundi et al. 2018), the importance value of each weight is measured by the sample mean of the absolute value of the gradient. In Synaptic Intelligence(SI)(Zenke, Poole, and Ganguli 2017), the
importance value of each weight is computed by integrating the contribution to the change in loss. Meanwhile,
Selﬂess Sequential Learning(SSL)(Aljundi, Rohrbach, and
Tuytelaars 2018) suggests imposing sparsity on neuron activation while learning the preceding tasks to avoid exhausting all capacities. Their work and ours both focus
on neuron-level information. However, in contrast, while
the purpose of SSL is to save network capacity for the
subsequent tasks, we aim to preserve knowledge from the
previous tasks while learning a new task. Weight consolidation algorithms have drawn much attention, and therefore, have been adopted in many studies(Lee et al. 2017b;
Liu et al. 2018). Recent works(Kim, Kim, and Lee 2018;
Lee et al. 2017a) show that this approach may be used in
combination with other methods as a means of regularization.

Introduction
In the path to realizing artiﬁcial general intelligence with
deep neural networks, catastrophic forgetting remains one
of the most fundamental challenges. Gradient descent, the
most popular learning algorithm, is problematic when applied
to train a neural network for multiple tasks in a sequential
manner. When gradient descent optimizes the neural network
for the task at hand, the knowledge for the previous tasks is
catastrophically overwritten by new knowledge.
Since the initial discovery of the problem (McCloskey and
Cohen 1989), various approaches have been proposed to alleviate catastrophic forgetting in artiﬁcial neural networks.
One of these approaches is to include the data for multiple
tasks in every mini-batch. Although such a method can be
effective in retaining the performance of the previous tasks, it
causes an overhead to keep the training data for the previous
tasks. There have been several attempts to achieve a similar effect using only a limited portion of the previous data,
(Gepperth and Karaoguz 2016; Lopez-Paz 2017; Nguyen et
al. 2017) or none at all.(Li and Hoiem 2018; Shin et al. 2017;
Kamra, Gupta, and Liu 2017; Zacarias and Alexandre 2018;
Kim, Kim, and Lee 2018)
Another approach is to isolate the parts of the neural network containing previous knowledge, and learn the new task
using other parts of the network. This includes designing

In this study, we present the limitation of weight consolidation (or, for purposes of comparison, ’connection-level
consolidation’) in deep neural networks, and propose a novel
algorithm, called neuron-level plasticity control (NPC). As
the name suggests, NPC retains existing knowledge by con-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5339

