The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Segmenting Medical MRI via Recurrent Decoding Cell
Ying Wen,1 Kai Xie,2 Lianghua He3∗
1

School of Communication and Electronic Engineering &
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Multidimensional Information Processing, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
3
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tongji University, Shanghai, China

among which fully convolutional network (FCN) (Long,
Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015) is ﬁrst proposed for the task
of semantic segmentation. Since then, FCN-like networks
(Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox 2015; Dolz et al. 2018;
Sinha and Dolz 2019) have successfully been applied to
medical image segmentation due to their remarkable segmentation accuracy as well as the stability and robustness
to inhomogeneous intensity.

Abstract
The encoder-decoder networks are commonly used in medical image segmentation due to their remarkable performance
in hierarchical feature fusion. However, the expanding path
for feature decoding and spatial recovery does not consider
the long-term dependency when fusing feature maps from
different layers, and the universal encoder-decoder network
does not make full use of the multi-modality information to
improve the network robustness especially for segmenting
medical MRI. In this paper, we propose a novel feature fusion unit called Recurrent Decoding Cell (RDC) which leverages convolutional RNNs to memorize the long-term context
information from the previous layers in the decoding phase.
An encoder-decoder network, named Convolutional Recurrent Decoding Network (CRDN), is also proposed based on
RDC for segmenting multi-modality medical MRI. CRDN
adopts CNN backbone to encode image features and decode
them hierarchically through a chain of RDCs to obtain the
ﬁnal high-resolution score map. The evaluation experiments
on BrainWeb, MRBrainS and HVSMR datasets demonstrate
that the introduction of RDC effectively improves the segmentation accuracy as well as reduces the model size, and
the proposed CRDN owns its robustness to image noise and
intensity non-uniformity in medical MRI.

There still exist three main challenges for medical image
segmentation. Firstly, the importance of hierarchical feature
fusion. For medical images, the semantic information extracted from the deep layers is relatively simpler the spatial
information extracted from the shallow layers is more helpful compared with natural image segmentation. The biological details and spatial information for labeling the region
of interest accurately count a lot, which in turn requires the
designed network to own a better decoding capability for hierarchical feature fusion and spatial recovery. Secondly, the
use of multi-modality information. Medical images, especially MRI images, often have multi-modality scans (such
as T1, T2 and PD) obtained from different devices, and
different modalities respond differently to various tissues.
Hence, leveraging multi-modality information is beneﬁcial
to deal with the insufﬁcient tissue contrast problem and improve segmentation accuracy (Tseng et al. 2017). Thirdly,
the robustness of networks. Sufﬁcient training samples are
not easy to obtain for medical image segmentation, thus the
trained model may easily experience overﬁtting and be sensitive to image noise and intensity non-uniformity ﬁelds, and
this requires the robustness of network design.

Introduction
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) plays a pivotal role in
the analysis of neuroscience and the diagnosis of disease.
The accurate segmentation of medical MRI enables doctors
and researchers to obtain the anatomical information about
different parts of biological tissues. However, the traditional
way of pixel-level annotations by experts is tedious and
time-consuming, thus methods for automatic MRI segmentation gain interest. Clustering-based methods (Dunn 1973;
Gong et al. 2012) have shown satisfying segmentation for
certain entire and high-contrast images like MR brain slices.
In spite of this, these methods consume much time for iterations and are not robust enough for inhomogeneous intensity
and image noise in MRI. These years deep learning based
methods have shown its superiority in feature extraction,

For hierarchical feature fusion, the encoder-decoder structure has exhibited its superiority and is widely medical image segmentation. Models like U-Net (Ronneberger, Fischer,
and Brox 2015) and its variants (Milletari, Navab, and Ahmadi 2016; Zhou et al. 2018) encode information from different resolution of feature maps. Feature maps from deeper
layers of a CNN backbone encode higher-level semantic information and context contained in the large receptive ﬁeld,
and the shallow layers encode biological appearance and
spatial information in a relatively small receptive ﬁeld. The
decoders of these networks utilize the encoded information
from all layers, and combine the lower-level features and

∗

Corresponding author. Email: helianghua@tongji.edu.cn.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12452

