The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Graph-Driven Generative Models for Heterogeneous Multi-Task Learning
Wenlin Wang,1 Hongteng Xu,2 Zhe Gan,3 Bai Li,1 Guoyin Wang,1
Liqun Chen,1 Qian Yang,1 Wenqi Wang,4 Lawrence Carin1
1

Duke University, 2 Inﬁnia ML, Inc, 3 Microsoft Dynamics 365 AI Research, 4 Facebook, Inc
wenlin.wang@duke.edu

these circumstances, a new mechanism is required to leverage relationships across the entities from different tasks. So
motivated, we propose a graph-driven generative model to
learn heterogeneous tasks in a uniﬁed framework.

Abstract
We propose a novel graph-driven generative model, that
uniﬁes multiple heterogeneous learning tasks into the same
framework. The proposed model is based on the fact that
heterogeneous learning tasks, which correspond to different
generative processes, often rely on data with a shared graph
structure. Accordingly, our model combines a graph convolutional network (GCN) with multiple variational autoencoders,
thus embedding the nodes of the graph (i.e., samples for the
tasks) in a uniform manner, while specializing their organization and usage to different tasks. With a focus on healthcare
applications (tasks), including clinical topic modeling, procedure recommendation and admission-type prediction, we
demonstrate that our method successfully leverages information across different tasks, boosting performance in all tasks
and outperforming existing state-of-the-art approaches.

Taking advantage of the graph structure that commonly
appears in many real-world data, the proposed model treats
feature views, entities and their relationships as nodes and
edges in a graph, and formulates learning heterogeneous
tasks as instantiating different sub-graphs from the global
data graph. Speciﬁcally, a sub-graph contains the feature
views and the entities related to a task and their interactions.
Both the feature views and the interactions can be reused
across all tasks while the representation of the entities are
specialized for the task. We combine a shared graph convolutional network (GCN) (Kipf and Welling 2017) with multiple variational autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma and Welling
2013). The GCN serves as a generator of latent representations for the sub-graphs, while the VAEs are speciﬁed to address the different tasks. The model is then optimized jointly
over the objectives for all tasks to encourage the GCN to produce representations that can be used simultaneously by all
of them.

Introduction
Multi-task learning aims to jointly solve different learning tasks, while leveraging appropriate information sharing
across all tasks (Thrun 1996; Caruana 1997). It has been
shown that learning under a multi-task setting usually yields
enhanced performance relative to separately building singletask models (Sermanet et al. 2013; Hashimoto et al. 2016;
Ruder 2017). However, multi-task learning has been considered primarily for homogeneous tasks that share the same
objective (e.g., the same set of labels) (Baxter 1997; Bakker
and Heskes 2003; Yu, Tresp, and Schwaighofer 2005; Luo
et al. 2015). Real-world tasks are often heterogeneous (Jin
et al. 2014), meaning that each task potentially has a different objective and relies on complicated, often unobserved
interactions. Examples of tasks having different objectives
include classiﬁcation, regression, recommendation, etc.
From the perspective of generative models, heterogeneous tasks often correspond to distinct generative processes. This implies that traditional generative multi-task
learning methods (Baxter 1997; Bakker and Heskes 2003;
Yu, Tresp, and Schwaighofer 2005; Zhang, Ghahramani, and
Yang 2008), which often generalize a single class of generative model to multiple tasks, are not appropriate. Under

In health care, our motivating example, ICD (International
Statistical Classiﬁcation of Diseases) codes for diseases and
procedures can be used as a source of information for multiple tasks, e.g., modeling clinical topics of admissions, recommending procedures according to diseases and predicting admission types. These three tasks require the capture of
clinical relationships among ICD codes and admissions. A
given admission has an associated set of disease and procedure codes (i.e., feature views). However, the admission has
to be organized with different views (i.e., specialized entities) for tasks with different objectives. For instance, topic
modeling is an unsupervised task needing procedures and
diseases, admission-type prediction is a supervised task also
using procedures and diseases, and procedure recommendation is a supervised task that only uses disease codes. In
the context of our work, ICD codes and hospital admissions
constitute a graph as shown in Figure 1. The edges between
ICD codes and those between ICD codes and admissions are
quantiﬁed according to their coherency. The ICD codes are
embedded during training, which are used to specialize the

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
979

