The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Towards Fine-Grained Temporal Network
Representation via Time-Reinforced Random Walk
Zhining Liu,1∗ Dawei Zhou,2∗ Yada Zhu,3 Jinjie Gu,4 Jingrui He2
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, 2 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
3
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center, 4 Ant Financial Services Group
∗
Equal contribution
liuzhininguestc@gmail.com, {dzhou21, jingrui}@illinois.edu,
yzhu@us.ibm.com, jinjie.gujj@antﬁn.com
Abstract

Encoding a large-scale network into a low-dimensional space
is a fundamental step for various network analytic problems, such as node classiﬁcation, link prediction, community detection, etc. Existing methods focus on learning the
network representation from either the static graphs or timeaggregated graphs (e.g., time-evolving graphs). However,
many real systems are not static or time-aggregated as the
nodes and edges are timestamped and dynamically changing over time. For examples, in anti-money laundering analysis, cycles formed with time-ordered transactions might be
red ﬂags in online transaction networks; in novelty detection,
a star-shaped structure appearing in a short burst might be
an underlying hot topic in social networks. Existing embedding models might not be able to well preserve such ﬁnegrained network dynamics due to the incapability of dealing
with continuous-time and the negligence of ﬁne-grained interactions. To bridge this gap, in this paper, we propose a
ﬁne-grained temporal network embedding framework named
FiGTNE, which aims to learn a comprehensive network representation that preserves the rich and complex network context in the temporal network. In particular, we start from the
notion of ﬁne-grained temporal networks, where the temporal network can be represented as a series of timestamped
nodes and edges. Then, we propose the time-reinforced random walk (TRRW) with a bi-level context sampling strategy to explore the essential structures and temporal contexts
in temporal networks. Extensive experimental results on real
graphs demonstrate the efﬁcacy of our FiGTNE framework.

Figure 1: An example of Fine-Grained Temporal Networks. (a) A movie review network with three users and
three movies. (b) The corresponding streaming system logs,
which is presented in the form of timestamped (i.e., t =
{t1 , t2 , t3 }) interactions between users and movies within
a certain duration δ = {δ1 , δ2 , δ3 }. For each movie review,
the timestamp t indicates when a user comments a movie,
while δ records the active time of the review on the website.
to solve various high-impact tasks in graph analysis, such
as node classiﬁcation (Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena 2014),
link prediction (Grover and Leskovec 2016), community detection (Wang et al. 2017), etc.
Despite the success of network embedding on static
graphs, many real systems are not static as the nodes and
edges are evolving over time, i.e., the vertices and edges may
appear, vanish, or even reappear. In Fig. 1, we present a illustrative example of movie review network. Existing temporal
network embedding approaches either model the networks
as discrete-time dynamic graphs (Yu, Yin, and Zhu 2017)
or continuous-time dynamic graphs (Nguyen et al. 2018).
The former aims to capture the graph-level dynamics, which
aggregates temporal information into a sequence of snapshots. While the latter one aims to preserve the node-level
dynamics, which is often presented as a collection of timestamped edges. However, most of them neglect the existing
duration of temporal nodes and edges in the real systems.
For example, the length of bank account history (i.e., duration of nodes) is a key indicator for identifying synthetic
identities (Zhou et al. 2018a); the average communication

Introduction
Representation learning over graph-structured data, which
aims to encode the meaningful patterns and rich network context into a low-dimensional space, has received
great success in various domains, ranging from social
networks (Kipf and Welling 2016) to collaborative networks (Dong, Chawla, and Swami 2017), from knowledge graphs (Wang et al. 2014) to protein-protein networks (Cannistraci, Alanis-Lobato, and Ravasi 2013). By
learning the network embedding, conventional vector-based
machine learning algorithms can be naturally incorporated
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4973

