The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Network as Regularization for Training Deep
Neural Networks: Framework, Model and Performance
†

Kai Tian,† Yi Xu,† Jihong Guan,‡ Shuigeng Zhou†∗
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, and School of Computer Science, Fudan University, China
‡
Department of Computer Science & Technology, Tongji University, China
†
{ktian14, yxu17, sgzhou}@fudan.edu.cn; ‡ jhguan@tongji.edu.cn

malization (Ioffe and Szegedy 2015) and these proposed
speciﬁcally for DNNs (Szegedy et al. 2016; Wan et al. 2013;
Liu et al. 2018). According to where these methods act on
the networks, we can subsume the existing regularization
methods roughly into four types: weight-based, input-based,
activation-based and target-based.
Speciﬁcally, weight-based approaches impose constraints
to network weights to reduce the hypothesis space; inputbased methods add noise or impose transformations to samples for training more robust networks; activation-based
methods such as dropout randomly drop neurons to alleviate feature co-adaptation. These regularization techniques
have been extensively studied in the literature, while there
are relatively less works on target-based regularization.
The principle of target-based regularization methods is
that instead of focusing on the primary class (i.e., the
ground truth), the model also pays some attention to the
other classes. This makes the model more tolerant and less
over-conﬁdence (Szegedy et al. 2016; Pereyra et al. 2017;
Yang et al. 2018). In essence, they are equivalent to injecting prior knowledge to the labels. The differences among
them mainly lie in two aspects: what kind of prior is used
and how to adopt the prior to the labels. For example, label smoothing and conﬁdence penalty penalize the predicted
distribution by a uniform distribution (Szegedy et al. 2016;
Pereyra et al. 2017); (Xie et al. 2016) proposed a method to replace a small portion of the ground truth labels with incorrect
ones in each iteration; Soft target approaches such as teacherstudent optimization and bootstrapping (Hinton, Vinyals, and
Dean 2015; Reed et al. 2015) offer additional training signals that contain secondary information (Yang et al. 2018;
Furlanello et al. 2018) to the network. Most of these methods
above adopt the prior knowledge as a regularization term in
the original loss function, while teacher-student optimization
needs to train a teacher model ﬁrst, which causes additional
time consumption.
In this paper, to tackle the overﬁtting problem, we propose
an efﬁcient and general target-based regularization framework by dynamically incorporating guided semantic disturbance to the labels while avoid multiple training stages that
decrease training efﬁciency. We call the framework Network
as Regularization (NaR in short). One major source of the se-

Abstract
Despite powerful representation ability, deep neural networks (DNNs) are prone to over-ﬁtting, because of overparametrization. Existing works have explored various regularization techniques to tackle the over-ﬁtting problem. Some
of them employed soft targets rather than one-hot labels to
guide network training (e.g. label smoothing in classiﬁcation
tasks), which are called target-based regularization approaches
in this paper. To alleviate the over-ﬁtting problem, here we
propose a new and general regularization framework that introduces an auxiliary network to dynamically incorporate guided
semantic disturbance to the labels. We call it Network as
Regularization (NaR in short). During training, the disturbance
is constructed by a convex combination of the predictions
of the target network and the auxiliary network. These two
networks are initialized separately. And the auxiliary network
is trained independently from the target network, while providing instance-level and class-level semantic information to
the latter progressively. We conduct extensive experiments to
validate the effectiveness of the proposed method. Experimental results show that NaR outperforms many state-of-the-art
target-based regularization methods, and other regularization
approaches (e.g. mixup) can also beneﬁt from combining with
NaR.

Introduction
The great success in many real-world applications (e.g. computer vision, natural language processing) has shown the
powerful representation learning capability of deep neural
networks (DNNs) over a variety of data (Szegedy et al. 2016;
Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014). However, they are often
extremely large in depth or width with the number of parameters being far more than the number of training examples available. Thus, over-ﬁtting is a big challenge in DNN
optimization, which could seriously degrade the networks’
generalization power.
In the past decade, various regularization techniques have
been developed to tackle the over-ﬁtting problem, from 1 , 2
regularization schemes that are derived from traditional linear models, to dropout (Srivastava et al. 2014), batch nor∗

Correspondence author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6013

