The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference (IAAI-20)

Chemical and Textual Embeddings for Drug Repurposing
Galia Nordon

Levi Gottlieb∗

Kira Radinsky

Technion- Israel
Institute of Technology
Haifa, Israel

Rafael
Haifa, Israel

Technion- Israel
Institute of Technology
Haifa, Israel

site between a ligand (e.g., a drug) and a target protein using an optimization process of the chemical structure of the
drug to best ﬁt the protein structure; (4) Signature matching
of a drug and a disease; In this work we focus on signature
matching for the task of drug repurposing.
Signature matching requires representing a drug and a disease. In recent years, we identiﬁed two lines of research: (1)
Chemical representations: computational approaches focusing on the drugs’ chemical structures and their relationship
to the biological activity (Jaeger, Fulle, and Turk 2018); (2)
Natural language representations: literature-based-discovery
approaches that aim to represent the drugs from medical
publications (Yang et al. 2017; Weeber 2007); However, neither has been translated to a signiﬁcant applicative success.
In this paper, we study the merit of each representation, and
present a novel approach for combining the two. We present
a joint embedding of text and chemical structure in a joint
representation space and show empirical gain for the task of
drug repurposing.
A chemical drug embedding is created relying on the
drug’s chemical structure. This structure is responsible for
its functionality and effect on the body. There are several
methods to represent a chemical compound: (1) A structural
formula: a graph-like representation of a molecule, which is
descriptive, but computationally expensive and is difﬁcult to
process. (2) Chemical nomenclature: SMILES (Weininger
1988) and IUPAC names (Favre and Powell 2013) are systematic naming conventions for chemical compounds. They
are much easier to process by computational systems, although lack a good representation of the 3D structure of
the molecule. In contrast to text-based embedding which is
limited to words that exist in training vocabulary, chemicalbased embedding can be used for novel molecules. This
property is useful for drug discovery research. We study
such representation for the task of drug repurposing and
show that choosing the correct chemical representation is
important. We show that using larger construct, such as large
functional groups (IUPAC), is much more effective than
small sub-structures (Jaeger, Fulle, and Turk 2018).
In recent years, several attempts were made to present
textual drug embedding. Most methods (Zhang et al. 2019;
Ngo et al. 2016) create the representation based on the tex-

Abstract
Drug approval is a long and expensive process, that can take
10-15 years and more than 2 billion dollars. Therefore alternative techniques, such as drug repositioning, to identify new
uses for approved drugs, has been gaining increasing attention. We examine the employment of different drug embeddings to predict successful drug repositioning. We study the
employment of drug molecular structure and show that using larger chemical construct, such as large functional chemical groups, is much more effective than small sub-structures.
We then study embeddings that are based on textual medical
publications and compare them with the chemical-structurebased embeddings. We eventually present a novel embedding
technique to combine the merit of the textual and chemicalbased approaches. We provide empirical results on a repositioning benchmark set. Additionally, we present an application of such embedding as part of an ongoing repositioning research conducted with a major health care supplier, and
identify a novel drug and indication. The pair has been veriﬁed on a corpus of 1.5 million patient EHR data.

1

Introduction

Drug development is a process that can last between 10 and
15 years, while only 0.1% of the drugs that enter pre-clinical
testing progress to human testing, and only 20% of these are
approved by the FDA (Suresh and Basu 2008). Given the
low probability of a drug to succeed and the long development cycle of a new drug, repurposing of existing drugs to
treat diseases became ever more attractive. Drug repurposing, also know as repositioning, is the process of discovering new indication for known drugs. Historically, the identiﬁcation of such drugs was not systematic, but rather more
fortuitous. A famous example is the repurpsoing of Sildenaﬁl, an antihypertensive drug, to treat erectile dysfunction.
In recent years, several computational approaches were developed for the task, including: (1) Electronic health records
(EHRs) based approaches (Nordon et al. 2019); (2) Identifying genes associated with a disease; (3) Predicting binding
∗
Dr. Gottlieb is an organic chemist who contributed to the
chemical aspects of this paper.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13338

