The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Finding Needles in a Moving Haystack:
Prioritizing Alerts with Adversarial Reinforcement Learning
Liang Tong,1 Aron Laszka,2 Chao Yan,3 Ning Zhang,1 Yevgeniy Vorobeychik1
1

Washington University in St. Louis, {liangtong, zhang.ning, yvorobeychik}@wustl.edu
2
University of Houston, alaszka@uh.edu
3
Vanderbilt University, chao.yan@vanderbilt.edu

uninteresting logs to identify alerts that should be prioritized for closer inspection. A considerable literature has
therefore emerged attempting to reduce the number of false
alerts without signiﬁcantly affecting the ability to detect
malicious behavior (Hubballi and Suryanarayanan 2014;
Salah, Maciá-Fernández, and Dı́az-Verdejo 2013; Ho et al.
2017). Most of these attempt to add meta-reasoning on top of
detection systems to capture broader system state, combining related alerts, escalating priority based on correlated observations, or using alert correlation to dismiss false alarms.
Nevertheless, despite signiﬁcant advances, there are still
vastly more alerts than time to investigate them. With this
state of affairs, alert prioritization approaches have emerged,
but rely predominantly on predeﬁned heuristics, such as
sorting alerts by suspiciousness score or by potential associated risk (Vasilomanolakis et al. 2015).
We propose a novel model and principled computational
approach for robust alert prioritization. We model the problem of robust alert prioritization as a game in which the
defender chooses a stochastic policy for selecting alerts as
a function of observable state, while the attacker chooses
which attacks to execute with full knowledge of the system state. Our computational approach ﬁrst uses neural reinforcement learning to compute approximately optimal policies for either player in response to a ﬁxed stochastic policy
of their counterpart. It then uses these (approximate) best
response oracles as a part of a double-oracle framework. A
key technical challenge in this approach is the combinatorial set of defender and attacker actions in each state. We
address this challenge by alternatively representing the associated policies as neural networks with continuous outputs, and folding this into an actor-critic framework. While
this costs us ﬁnite-time theoretical convergence guarantees
(since policy space is no longer ﬁnite), it enables a practical
and highly effective implementation. Furthermore, our case
studies in network intrusion and fraud detection using realworld data demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach
compared to state-of-the-art alternatives.
Related Work Reinforcement learning using neural networks for value and policy approximation has led to signiﬁcant recent successes across several applications, most
notably game-playing (Mnih et al. 2015; Silver et al. 2016;
2018), and a number of advances in recent years have
made such approaches broadly applicable and highly effec-

Abstract
Detection of malicious behavior is a fundamental problem in
security. One of the major challenges in using detection systems in practice is in dealing with an overwhelming number
of alerts that are triggered by normal behavior (the so-called
false positives), obscuring alerts resulting from actual malicious activities. We introduce a novel approach for computing a policy for prioritizing alerts using adversarial reinforcement learning. Our approach assumes that the attacker knows
the full state of the detection system and the defender’s alert
prioritization policy, and will dynamically choose an optimal
attack. The ﬁrst step of our approach is to capture the interaction between the defender and attacker in a game theoretic
model. To tackle the computational complexity of solving this
game to obtain a dynamic stochastic alert prioritization policy, we propose an adversarial reinforcement learning framework. In this framework, we use neural reinforcement learning to compute best response policies for both the defender
and the adversary to an arbitrary stochastic policy of the other.
We then use these in a double-oracle framework to obtain an
approximate equilibrium of the game, which in turn yields a
robust stochastic policy for the defender. We use case studies
in network intrusion and fraud detection to demonstrate that
our approach is effective in creating robust alert prioritization
policies.1

1

Introduction

One of the core problems in security is detection of malicious behavior, such as malicious software and network
trafﬁc. There is a vast literature on different detection approaches, ranging from signature-based to machine-learning
based (Buczak and Guven 2016; Milenkoski et al. 2015).
Under the pressure of practical considerations such as liability and accountability, these systems are often conﬁgured to produce a large amount of alerts in order to be
sufﬁciently sensitive to capture most attacks. As a consequence, cybersecurity professionals are routinely inundated
with alerts, and must sift through these overwhelmingly
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Code and models are available under an open source license from https://github.com/shinington/AlertPrioritization. Due
to space limitation, some content is deferred to an extended version available at https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.08805.
946

