The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

FuzzE: Fuzzy Fairness Evaluation of Offensive
Language Classiﬁers on African-American English
Anthony Rios
Department of Information Systems and Cyber Security
University of Texas at San Antonio
anthony.rios@utsa.edu

may simply be unavailable or limited for particular topics or
social platforms.
Many metrics and strategies have been proposed to evaluate fairness in recent years (Zliobaite 2015; Hardt et al.
2016; Dixon et al. 2018; Mitchell et al. 2019). Most methodologies require ground-truth demographic or linguistic style,
annotations (Park, Shin, and Fung 2018; Badjatiya, Gupta,
and Varma 2019). In the absence of annotated demographic
data, Dixon et al. (2018) propose fuzzing methods to estimate fairness. Fuzzing has traditionally been used in software testing to ﬁnd bugs or security vulnerabilities (Bird and
Munoz 1983). To apply fuzzing to fairness testing, simulated
data is used to analyze how predictions change if the topic
of the tweet stays the same, but the text is slightly altered.
For example, fuzzing techniques will randomly change demographic words (e.g., “He”, “She”, “husband”, or “wife”)
in a tweet without changing its meaning. If the model’s prediction changes by these modiﬁcations, then we assume the
model is biased.
Typically, fuzzing techniques for software testing use
blackbox methodologies (Zalewski 2015; Liu et al. 2019).
Yet, the recent fuzzing approaches for fairness relies on
manually created templates. Furthermore, current lexiconbased fuzzing methods are limited to single lexical items
(e.g., “he” and “she”); complex syntactic constructions are
ignored (e.g., “O-be-V”). Likewise, the manual curation process may not capture differences in vocabulary across all
minority dialects. For example, “en” in Spanish translates
to both “in” and “on” in English. Therefore, Hispanic users
may say “Put the soup on the bowl”, rather than saying “Put
the soup in the bowl”. If changing the word “on” to “in”
changes the prediction of an advanced classiﬁer, then the
model is biased. Without expert domain knowledge, creating
fuzzing test cases that capture subtle differences in the use of
prepositions may not be obvious compared to words directly
related to a speciﬁc demographic factor (e.g., “him”, “her”,
“hispanic”). Similarly, differences in the use of language between groups may change over time, further increasing the
difﬁculty of manual curation.
In this work, we investigate the use of style transfer
to rank classiﬁcation models with regard to standardized
fairness metrics when minority linguistic styles are miss-

Abstract
Hate speech and offensive language are rampant on social
media. Machine learning has provided a way to moderate foul
language at scale. However, much of the current research focuses on overall performance. Models may perform poorly
on text written in a minority dialectal language. For instance,
a hate speech classiﬁer may produce more false positives
on tweets written in African-American Vernacular English
(AAVE). To measure these problems, we need text written in
both AAVE and Standard American English (SAE). Unfortunately, it is challenging to curate data for all linguistic styles
in a timely manner—especially when we are constrained to
speciﬁc problems, social media platforms, or by limited resources. In this paper, we answer the question, “How can
we evaluate the performance of classiﬁers across minority dialectal languages when they are not present within a particular dataset?” Speciﬁcally, we propose an automated fairness
fuzzing tool called FuzzE to quantify the fairness of text classiﬁers applied to AAVE text using a dataset that only contains
text written in SAE. Overall, we ﬁnd that the fairness estimates returned by our technique moderately correlates with
the use of real ground-truth AAVE text. Warning: Offensive
language is displayed in this manuscript.

1

Introduction

Offensive language and hate speech pose a signiﬁcant
problem on social media. The use of human moderators
does not scale to large online communities (e.g., Twitter).
Furthermore, human moderators may write offensive language themselves, thereby corrupting the system. Recent research efforts have focused on annotation theory for offensive language and on developing better classiﬁcation methods (Davidson et al. 2017; Zampieri et al. 2019). Unfortunately, as companies put offensive language classiﬁers into
production, they may be biased against certain minority
groups or linguistic styles (Sap et al. 2019). Yet, fairness is
rarely evaluated before putting systems into production for
a multitude of reasons. For example, a company or research
group may not have the resources to collect data from all
demographics of interest, or worse, data for certain groups
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
881

