The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning the Value of Teamwork to Form Efﬁcient Teams
Ryan Beal,1 Narayan Changder,2 Timothy J. Norman,1 Sarvapali D. Ramchurn1
1

School of Electronics and Computer Science, University of Southampton,
Southampton, SO17 1BJ, United Kingdom
{ryan.beal, t.j.norman, sdr1}@soton.ac.uk
2
The National Institute of Technology, Durgapur, West Bengal 713209, India
narayan.changder@gmail.com

ﬁreﬁghter may secure a building ﬁrst before sending in a
medic. In this paper, we consider how such directed interactions between agents can be valued and considered in the
prediction of team performance.
Against this background, we propose a novel approach to
forming teams using patterns that appear in a network of
interactions between agents. We then validate and evaluate
our approach by applying our models and algorithms to a
real-world team formation problem presented by the domain
of football (soccer). We show that our teamwork-focused
model outperforms other player-focused approaches at predicting the teams that would be chosen by human-expert
managers across 64 games from the 2018 FIFA World Cup.
We also show that our model is better at predicting the performance of teams from real-world data. Thus, this paper
advances the state of the art in the following ways:

Abstract
In this paper we describe a novel approach to team formation
based on the value of inter-agent interactions. Speciﬁcally, we
propose a model of teamwork that considers outcomes from
chains of interactions between agents. Based on our model,
we devise a number of network metrics to capture the contribution of interactions between agents. This is then used
to learn the value of teamwork from historical team performance data. We apply our model to predict team performance
and validate our approach using real-world team performance
data from the 2018 FIFA World Cup. Our model is shown to
better predict the real-world performance of teams by up to
46% compared to models that ignore inter-agent interactions.

1

Introduction

Team Formation (TF) is a fundamental concept that underpins many multi-agent systems where heterogeneous agents
with individual properties (e.g., roles, capabilities, costs)
come together to undertake tasks. TF involves the evaluation
of different sets of agents in order to determine how well
they will, individually or collectively, perform their tasks.
By so doing, it is then possible to pick sets of agents that
form the most effective teams. For example, teams of emergency responders are formed based on individual agent’s
abilities to navigate a difﬁcult environment or address threats
(Chalkiadakis and Boutilier 2012). Similarly, in ride-sharing
settings, groups of riders can be efﬁciently formed to minimise travel time and costs (Bistaffa et al. 2017b).1
Existing TF algorithms, such as (Fitzpatrick and Askin
2005), create effective human teams in the workplace using a mathematical programming formulation and a heuristic solution. Also, in (Scerri et al. 2005) a task allocation algorithm is discussed for extreme teams in disaster response.
The models and algorithms in these papers have shown to
be successful in their domains. However, these models typically ignore the fact that sets of agents interact in very speciﬁc ways. For example, agents in a team may transfer partly
ﬁnished products to each other along a production line or a

1. We propose a novel approach to team formation based on
the value of inter-agent interactions. Speciﬁcally, we propose a model of teamwork that considers the outcomes of
the chains of such interactions.
2. Based on our model, we propose a number of network
metrics to capture the contributions of individuals and
sets of agents.
3. We show how the value of teamwork can be learnt from
data and then applied to the prediction of team performance.
When taken together, our results establish the ﬁrst benchmarks for team formation based on the learnt value of teamwork. Furthermore, our work opens up a new area of research into the use of teamwork-based models to understand
how human teams work.
The rest of this paper is organised as follows. In Section 2
we review the literature, while Section 3 deﬁnes the network
model and the optimisation problem. Section 4 discusses the
application of our model to football to test and validate and
Section 5 provides the detail of methods that we use to apply
the model to the problems posed by football. We perform a
number of Experiments on our model in Section 6 and discuss our ﬁndings in Section 7. Finally, Section 8 concludes.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Note that TF is different from coalition formation in terms of
its focus on inter-agent interactions and non-selﬁsh agents.
7063

