The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Bounding Regret in Empirical Games
Steven Jecmen,1 Arunesh Sinha,2 Zun Li,3 Long Tran-Thanh4
1

Carnegie Mellon University, 2 Singapore Management University,
3
University of Michigan, 4 University of Southampton
sjecmen@cs.cmu.edu, aruneshs@smu.edu.sg, lizun@umich.edu, l.tran-thanh@soton.ac.uk

Further, given the cost involved in calling the simulator, the
deviation gain computation must also make as few calls to
the simulator as possible. Thus, there is a need to design
principled methods to compute the regret of an approximate
NE strategy proﬁle in an empirical game.
Our ﬁrst contribution is to set up the regret computation
in empirical games as a stochastic multi-armed bandit problem and provide efﬁcient solutions for this problem. However, unlike known bandit problems, our problem possesses
unique characteristics due to the following factors: (a) we
consider subsets of arms (called super-arms) which combine the rewards of underlying arms in a weighted sum and
(b) our goal is to bound the reward of the best super-arm
in an interval with high probability, which provides a high
probability bound on the value of the best deviation. We emphasize that our goal is not to identify the most proﬁtable
deviation strategy but to just bound this deviation’s gain,
which results in substantially fewer samples as compared to
approaches that aim to identify the best (super) arm. Our
main approach is called Super-Arm UCB (SAUCB). While
this problem, at ﬁrst glance, may seem amenable to known
techniques, we show via thorough experiments that simple
approaches using prior methods require many more samples
than SAUCB in practice. We also present three variants of
SAUCB and obtain their sample complexities. Furthermore,
we provide a lower bound for the sample complexity of a
speciﬁc instance of this problem.
Our second contribution is an extensive set of experiments
comparing SAUCB, its variants, and various baseline approaches. Our comparisons are for both synthetic data and
for a large-scale example based on a well-known agentbased simulator of stock markets that has been used in recent papers in AI venues (Wang, Vorobeychik, and Wellman
2018). Among potential approaches in the literature, a recent work applies to our setting (Huang et al. 2018) (called
COCI here based on the algorithm name); however, that
work does not aim for the goal mentioned in (b) above. Simple approaches combining pure arm exploration and sampling from the mixed strategy also perform poorly. Thus,
SAUCB is able to outperform all known approaches, including our own proposed variants, by a large amount. All the
full and missing proofs in this paper and additional graphical results are in the appendix of the full version, which is
available on the authors’ webpages.

Abstract
Empirical game-theoretic analysis refers to a set of models
and techniques for solving large-scale games. However, there
is a lack of a quantitative guarantee about the quality of output approximate Nash equilibria (NE). A natural quantitative
guarantee for such an approximate NE is the regret in the
game (i.e. the best deviation gain). We formulate this deviation gain computation as a multi-armed bandit problem, with
a new optimization goal unlike those studied in prior work.
We propose an efﬁcient algorithm Super-Arm UCB (SAUCB)
for the problem and a number of variants. We present sample
complexity results as well as extensive experiments that show
the better performance of SAUCB compared to several baselines.

Introduction
Real-world multi-agent interactions are often immensely
complex and unstructured. These real-world problems are
simply not amenable to theoretical analysis due to various complexities, such as stochastic and unknown utilities.
This has led to the development of the area of empirical
(or simulated) games (Wellman 2006; Tuyls et al. 2018),
which have been used successfully to model and solve complex multi-agent game interactions in stock markets (Wang,
Vorobeychik, and Wellman 2018) and cyber-security problems (Prakash and Wellman 2015). The main characteristic of such games is a simulator, which acts as an oracle
for player utility functions, taking as input a strategy proﬁle
(the strategy of each player) and returning an observation of
the utility each player obtained from that strategy proﬁle in
simulation. The simulator, in theory, allows one to ﬁll the
full game matrix with expected utilities. However, in practice, calls to the simulator are quite time consuming. Various
techniques have been proposed in the literature showing how
to use the simulator parsimoniously to compute approximate
Nash equilibria (NE) of these complex games using double
oracle or its adaptations (Lanctot et al. 2017).
Yet, applications of empirical games either do not provide a guarantee about the quality of the output approximate
NE solution or do so in an ad-hoc manner. A natural quality
measure is the most proﬁtable deviation gain from the approximate NE, also called the regret in the underlying game.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4280

