The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

RobuTrans: A Robust Transformer-Based Text-to-Speech Model
Naihan Li,∗1,4,5 Yanqing Liu,2 Yu Wu,3 Shujie Liu,3 Sheng Zhao,2 Ming Liu1,4,5
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
Microsoft STC Asia
3
Microsoft Research Asia
4
CETC Big Data Research Institute Co.,Ltd, Guiyang
5
Big Data Application on Improving Government Governance CapabilitiesNational Engineering Laboratory, Guiyang
lnhzsbls1994@163.com
{yanqliu, Wu.Yu, shujliu, szhao}@microsoft.com
csmliu@uestc.edu.cn
coder and an attention mechanism between them. The encoder is used to convert the input text into a semantic space,
based on which the decoder generates the spectrums, with
the guidance of the attention mechanism to decide when to
pronounce which word. Based on the generated spectrums,
a vocoder (Van Den Oord et al. 2016) is leveraged to synthesizes the ﬁnal audios.
By this method, the synthesized audio has excellent naturalness on general input texts like those in the training set,
some even achieve close-to-human quality (Li et al. 2018).
However, when the input texts are unusual1 , abnormal spectrums are generated, leading to bad audios. We summarize
and categorize these bad audios into following major types:
1) some words may be unclear even missed, or on the contrary, duplicated; 2) the decoding procedure stops too early
or too late; 3) the decoding procedure can’t stop until the
pre-deﬁned maximum length is reached. The vulnerability
and instability of these models limit their applicability to a
broader range of tasks, which require robust performance on
diverse inputs, such as voice assistant and vehicle navigator.
We conduct a detailed study on the above bad audios generated by TransformerTTS, ﬁnding that abnormal audios always appear with disordered attention alignments. To deal
with such a problem and ensure the monotonic correspondence from the phoneme sequence to the acoustic sequence,
Zhang, Ling, and Dai (2018) propose a forward attention
method for higher attention stability, in which the attention
probabilities at each time step are computed recursively using a forward algorithm. Raffel et al. (2017) propose a forced
monotonic attention mechanism, where at each output time
step, the decoder inspects memory entries in left-to-right
manner starting from where it left off at the previous output time step and chooses a single one to attend to.
We test them and ﬁnd none of them can completely get
rid of abnormal cases, instead gives rise to other issues such
as higher speech rate and weird rhythm.
In this paper, we remove the encoder-decoder attention
and apply a duration-based hard attention to copy encoder
hidden states to their corresponding frames, forcing the de-

Abstract
Recently, neural network based speech synthesis has achieved
outstanding results, by which the synthesized audios are of
excellent quality and naturalness. However, current neural
TTS models suffer from the robustness issue, which results
in abnormal audios (bad cases) especially for unusual text
(unseen context). To build a neural model which can synthesize both natural and stable audios, in this paper, we make
a deep analysis of why the previous neural TTS models are
not robust, based on which we propose RobuTrans (Robust
Transformer), a robust neural TTS model based on Transformer. Comparing to TransformerTTS, our model ﬁrst converts input texts to linguistic features, including phonemic
features and prosodic features, then feed them to the encoder.
In the decoder, the encoder-decoder attention is replaced with
a duration-based hard attention mechanism, and the causal
self-attention is replaced with a ”pseudo non-causal attention” mechanism to model the holistic information of the input. Besides, the position embedding is replaced with a 1D CNN, since it constrains the maximum length of synthesized audio. With these modiﬁcations, our model not only
ﬁx the robustness problem, but also achieves on parity MOS
(4.36) with TransformerTTS (4.37) and Tacotron2 (4.37) on
our general set.

1

Introduction

Speech synthesis (also known as text to speech, TTS) has a
pivotal role in a wide range of speech-related applications.
Owing to the development of deep learning techniques,
modern TTS pipelines make a step from HMM-based statistical parametric TTS models (Maia, Zen, and Gales 2010),
neural acoustic models (Ze, Senior, and Schuster 2013) to
neural end-to-end TTS models (Wang et al. 2017; Shen et
al. 2017; Li et al. 2018).
Along with the success of neural machine translation,
neural sequence to sequence models are applied to TTS
tasks, such as Tacotron2 (Shen et al. 2017) and TransformerTTS (Li et al. 2018). The neural sequence to sequence
model usually contains three components: an encoder, a de∗

Work done during internship at Microsoft STC Asia.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Such as URL, a sequence of numbers, and other texts which
are out of the domain of the training data

8228

