The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

FusionDN: A Uniﬁed Densely Connected Network for Image Fusion
Han Xu,1 Jiayi Ma,1,∗ Zhuliang Le,1 Junjun Jiang,2 Xiaojie Guo3
1

2

Electronic Information School, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150001, China
3
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300350, China
{xu han, lezhuliang}@whu.edu.cn, {jyma2010, xj.max.guo}@gmail.com, junjun0595@163.com

image. Then the fused result with more high-quality information can provide better visual perception.
According to imaging principles, image fusion tasks can
be broadly divided into two categories, such as fusing
images obtained by multi-modality imaging and by digital photography. Many traditional methods have been proposed to solve these kinds of fusion problems respectively.
These methods can be divided into spatial-domain methods and transform-domain methods (Zhang et al. 2020). In
spatial-domain methods, fusion is completed based on small
blocks or regions (Zhang, Bai, and Wang 2017). Transformdomain methods transform source images to other domains,
and the fusion process is completed in these transformed
domains, including multi-scale transform (e.g., pyramid,
wavelet, shearlet, discrete coscine transform), sparse representation (Zhang et al. 2018), hybrid (Paramanandham and
Rajendiran 2018), subspace and other methods.
In recent years, due to the strong ability of extracting image features, deep learning has been successfully applied
to image fusion. i) For multi-modality images, (Liu et al.
2017a) proposed a siamese convolutional network to generate a weight map for fusing medical images. In (Li and Wu
2018), the encoding network and the decoder are designed
to extract and fuse features for the infrared and visible image fusion and the method is also applied to multi-focus image fusion. Also in infrared and visible image fusion, FusionGAN (Ma et al. 2019) and its variants (Ma et al. 2020;
Xu et al. 2019) established an adversarial game between
a generator and a discriminator. The discriminator forces
fused images to have more details in visible images. In remote sensing image fusion, (Masi et al. 2016) proposed a
CNN for projection, mapping, and reconstruction to solve
the pansharpening problem. ii) For digital photography images, for the ﬁrst time, (Prabhakar, Srikar, and Babu 2017)
introduced deep learning in multi-exposure image fusion by
building a novel CNN and applying MEF-SSIM to realize unsupervised learning. In (Liu et al. 2017b), for fusing
multi-focus images, a deep CNN trained by high-quality image patches and corresponding artiﬁcially made blurred versions is adopted to encode a direct mapping between source
images and the focus map.
However, for different types of source images, the vital in-

Abstract
In this paper, we present a new unsupervised and uniﬁed
densely connected network for different types of image fusion tasks, termed as FusionDN. In our method, the densely
connected network is trained to generate the fused image conditioned on source images. Meanwhile, a weight block is applied to obtain two data-driven weights as the retention degrees of features in different source images, which are the
measurement of the quality and the amount of information
in them. Losses of similarities based on these weights are
applied for unsupervised learning. In addition, we obtain a
single model applicable to multiple fusion tasks by applying
elastic weight consolidation to avoid forgetting what has been
learned from previous tasks when training multiple tasks sequentially, rather than train individual models for every fusion
task or jointly train tasks roughly. Qualitative and quantitative
results demonstrate the advantages of FusionDN compared
with state-of-the-art methods in different fusion tasks.

Introduction
Image fusion is a signiﬁcant branch of image enhancement
and has been applied in military and civilian ﬁelds, such
as computer vision and surveillance. Due to limitations of
devices and techniques, the image captured by one type
of sensor or under a single shooting setting cannot characterize all the information in the scenario. For example,
visible images are affected by the light condition and infrared images cannot present details (Ma, Ma, and Li 2019;
Ma et al. 2016). Images taken by common devices can
only capture details within a very limited range, resulting in
under/over-exposure regions. Also, under a certain focal setting of optical lens, only the objects within the depth-of-ﬁeld
(DOF) have sharp appearances while others are blurred (Liu
et al. 2017b). Under these circumstances, more images taken
by different sensors or under different settings are needed
to describe the scenario in an all-round way. However, the
large amount of redundant information in these images is a
waste of storage space. Thus, the target of fusion is to preserve the vital information in them and merge it into a single
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12484

