The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Novel Learning Framework for
Sampling-Based Motion Planning in Autonomous Driving
Yifan Zhang,1∗ Jinghuai Zhang,1∗ Jindi Zhang,1 Jianping Wang,1 Kejie Lu,2 Jeff Hong3
1

City University of Hong Kong, 2 University of Puerto Rico at Mayaguez, 3 Fudan University
{yif.zhang, jzhang538-c, jd.zhang}@my.cityu.edu.hk, jianwang@cityu.edu.hk,
kejie.lu@upr.edu, hong liu@fudan.edu.cn

et al. 2008), sampling-based planners (Kuwata et al. 2009;
Karaman and Frazzoli 2011), interpolating curve planners
(Labakhua et al. 2008), and numerical optimization approaches (Ziegler et al. 2014). Among them, sampling-based
motion planning (SBMP) is becoming a mainstream motion planner in recent years (Ma et al. 2015; Banzhaf et al.
2017; Lim et al. 2018) given its capability of solving highdimensional motion planning problems in a shorter time.
Moreover, SBMP does not need precise obstacle geometry
while other methods do.
The key challenge in adopting SBMP to autonomous driving is to ensure that the planner can respond accurately to
the changing environment. The updating frequency of sensors on autonomous vehicles is usually set as 10Hz (Kuwata
et al. 2008), which means that the planner needs to ﬁnish its
decision in 100ms in order to be responsive to changes in
the surrounding environment. According to (Ma et al. 2015),
SBMP runs longer than 100ms in complex environments. To
ﬁnish the planning task in 100ms, a planner will have no
choice but to sample fewer points, which may fail to ﬁnd
a feasible solution. Even if a motion planner can ﬁnish its
task in time, it may bring other issues. For example, when
a planner always tries to ﬁnd an optimal path with the minimum cost, e.g., the shortest traveling time, or highest fuel
efﬁciency, it may lead to jerky velocity over different planning time windows, sharp lane changes, and ride-line driving. Such actions will sacriﬁce the comfort of passengers.
Moreover, the generated driving behavior may disturb other
drivers and may cause accidents.
In this paper, we tackle the aforementioned issues in
SBMP through a novel learning framework. Speciﬁcally, we
ﬁrst aim to allow motion planning to “see” ahead through
predicting the intention of surrounding vehicles because the
prediction will allow a motion planner to (1) have a longer
time for planning and (2) generate smooth velocity over a
longer time period. Then, we propose a new bias sampling
approach with prediction and imitation learning, which can
help generate a smooth and collision-free trajectory in a
shorter time. Our main contributions are summarized as follows:

Abstract
Sampling-based motion planning (SBMP) is a major trajectory planning approach in autonomous driving given its
high efﬁciency in practice. As the core of SBMP schemes,
sampling strategy holds the key to whether a smooth and
collision-free trajectory can be found in real-time. Although
some bias sampling strategies have been explored in the literature to accelerate SBMP, the trajectory generated under existing bias sampling strategies may lead to sharp lane changing. To address this issue, we propose a new learning framework for SBMP. Speciﬁcally, we develop a novel automatic
labeling scheme and a 2-Stage prediction model to improve
the accuracy in predicting the intention of surrounding vehicles. We then develop an imitation learning scheme to generate sample points based on the experience of human drivers.
Using the prediction results, we design a new bias sampling
strategy to accelerate the SBMP algorithm by strategically
selecting necessary sample points that can generate a smooth
and collision-free trajectory and avoid sharp lane changing.
Data-driven experiments show that the proposed sampling
strategy outperforms existing sampling strategies, in terms of
the computing time, traveling time, and smoothness of the trajectory. The results also show that our scheme is even better
than human drivers.

1

Introduction

In the past decade, autonomous driving has gained signiﬁcant developments with the joint effort from academia and
industry. In 2018, Google’s driverless car, Waymo, started
the taxi service, which was the ﬁrst one to put autonomous
driving technology into commercial practice. Despite such
promising developments, seeing surroundings robustly, perceiving objects in real-time, and acting safely on par with or
even better than human drivers remain as the big challenges
in achieving full autonomy.
Motion planning, which aims to generate a collision-free
trajectory from the current location to the immediate destination for a driverless vehicle, is the key to acting safely. In
the literature, there are four main categories of motion planning algorithms, graph search-based planners (Montemerlo
∗

The authors contributed equally to this work.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• Firstly, we reﬁne the existing automatic labeling strategy
for data preprocessing to correctly extract driving scenar1202

