The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Continuous Multiagent Control Using Collective
Behavior Entropy for Large-Scale Home Energy Management
Jianwen Sun,2,† Yan Zheng,1,2,† Jianye Hao,1,3,∗ Zhaopeng Meng,1 Yang Liu2
1

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
2
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei
{yanzheng, jianye.hao, mengzp}@tju.edu.cn, {kevensun, yangliu}@ntu.edu.sg

Narayanaswamy, and Narahari 2014). However, renewable
power generation relies on unstable natural resources, which
brings about a signiﬁcant challenge to maintain demandsupply balance when consuming electricity from renewable
sources. Meantime, with the rapid development of the advanced meters and basic computing facilities, smart grids
with distributed energy generation and distributed energy
storage have shown a high potential for energy management.
Therefore, efﬁcient energy-saving, management, and maximizing energy efﬁciency draw more and more attention.

Abstract
With the increasing popularity of electric vehicles, distributed
energy generation and storage facilities in smart grid systems, an efﬁcient Demand-Side Management (DSM) is urgent for energy savings and peak loads reduction. Traditional DSM works focusing on optimizing the energy activities for a single household can not scale up to large-scale
home energy management problems. Multi-agent Deep Reinforcement Learning (MA-DRL) shows a potential way to
solve the problem of scalability, where modern homes interact together to reduce energy consumers consumption while
striking a balance between energy cost and peak loads reduction. However, it is difﬁcult to solve such an environment with
the non-stationarity, and existing MA-DRL approaches cannot effectively give incentives for expected group behavior. In
this paper, we propose a collective MA-DRL algorithm with
continuous action space to provide ﬁne-grained control on a
large scale microgrid. To mitigate the non-stationarity of the
microgrid environment, a novel predictive model is proposed
to measure the collective market behavior. Besides, a collective behavior entropy is introduced to reduce the high peak
loads incurred by the collective behaviors of all householders
in the smart grid. Empirical results show that our approach
signiﬁcantly outperforms the state-of-the-art methods regarding power cost reduction and daily peak loads optimization.

Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has achieved tremendous success not only in various of single-agent tasks (Silver et al. 2016; Levine et al. 2016; Zheng et al. 2019a;
2019b), but also complex multiagent scenarios (Zheng et al.
2018a; 2018b). Recently, applying DRL in the smart grid
has been studied (Yan and Xu 2018; Huang et al. 2019;
Duan et al. 2019). Berlink and Costa applied a RL-based
demand-side management (DSM) technique to learn an optimal management policy in the energy management system
(EMS) (Berlink and Costa 2015). Di Wu et al. studied the
RL-based charing policy for electric vehicles (EV) (Di Wu et
al. 2018). François-Lavet et al. designed a DQN-based storage management strategy for a microgrid (François-Lavet et
al. 2016). However, these works investigate energy policies
for a single household, restricting the algorithm’s effectiveness and generalization in real scenarios.

Introduction
Due to the growing number of various electric devices in
modern life, meeting the energy demand becomes a significant challenge for the power grid (Wu, Zeng, and Boulet
2014). Companies spend tremendous time and money to
satisfy the sharply changing demands. With a fast-growing
market share, the large-scale use of electric vehicles brings
a high power consumption burden on the power system. As
more and more electric drive products are introduced into
people’s daily lives, the power grid is facing a major challenge of a large number of unstable loads. Meanwhile, distributed renewable power generation, such as wind and solar energy, is considered to be vital to achieving cost and
carbon reduction goals and is gaining prominence (Jain,

From a multiagent system perspective, Dusparic et al.
leverages the independent Q-learning to manage the energy
demand of a small group of households, where each agent
scheduled for the appliance usage of one household (Dusparic et al. 2013). However, their approach considered the
role of the household as the traditional power consumer,
and the rigid appliance usage schedules are inconvenient for
ﬂexible usage. The most related work to ours is that of Yang
et al., who focuses on a microgrid scenario and optimizes
the energy expense problem with a multiagent reinforcement
learning framework. They adopted the collective behavior
approximations to further reduce the cost compared with
the single household case and use the entropy-based method
to reduce the high peak load (Yang et al. 2019). However,
the entropy-based rewards encourage the agents to take unpredictable actions such that EV cannot meet its charging

∗

Corresponding author. † Equal contribution.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
922

