The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Path Planning Problems with Side
Observations—When Colonels Play Hide-and-Seek
Dong Quan Vu,1 Patrick Loiseau,2 Alonso Silva,3 Long Tran-Thanh4
3

1
Nokia Bell Labs France, AAAID Department, 2 Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LIG & MPI-SWS,
Safran Tech, Signal and Information Technologies, 4 Univ. of Southampton, School of Electronics and Computer Science
quan dong.vu@nokia.com, patrick.loiseau@inria.fr, alonso.silva-allende@safrangroup.com, l.tran-thanh@soton.ac.uk

Roberson 2012; Roberson 2006)), and in advertising for
distributing the ads’ broadcasting time (e.g., (Masucci and
Silva 2015)). On the other hand, in the (one-shot) HS game,
a seeker chooses n among k locations (n ≤ k) to search
for a hider, who chooses the probability of hiding in each
location. The seeker’s payoff is the summation of the probability that the hider hides in the chosen locations and the
hider’s payoff is the probability that she successfully escapes
the seeker’s pursuit. Several variants of the HS games are
used to model surveillance situations (Bhattacharya, Başar,
and Falcone 2014), anti-jamming problems (Wang and Liu
2016), vehicles control (Vidal et al. 2002), etc.

Abstract
Resource allocation games such as the famous Colonel Blotto
(CB) and Hide-and-Seek (HS) games are often used to model
a large variety of practical problems, but only in their oneshot versions. Indeed, due to their extremely large strategy
space, it remains an open question how one can efﬁciently
learn in these games. In this work, we show that the online CB and HS games can be cast as path planning problems with side-observations (SOPPP): at each stage, a learner
chooses a path on a directed acyclic graph and suffers the sum
of losses that are adversarially assigned to the corresponding
edges; and she then receives semi-bandit feedback with sideobservations (i.e., she observes the losses on the chosen edges
plus some others). We propose a novel algorithm, E XP 3-OE,
the ﬁrst-of-its-kind with guaranteed efﬁcient running time for
SOPPP without requiring any auxiliary oracle. We provide an
expected-regret bound of E XP 3-OE in SOPPP matching the
order of the best benchmark in the literature. Moreover, we
introduce additional assumptions on the observability model
under which we can further improve the regret bounds of
E XP 3-OE. We illustrate the beneﬁt of using E XP 3-OE in
SOPPP by applying it to the online CB and HS games.

1

Both the CB and the HS games have a long-standing
history (originated by (Borel 1921) and (Von Neumann
1953), respectively); however, the results achieved so-far in
these games are mostly limited to their one-shot and fullinformation version (see e.g., (Behnezhad et al. 2017; Gross
and Wagner 1950; Roberson 2006; Schwartz, Loiseau, and
Sastry 2014; Vu, Loiseau, and Silva 2018) for CB games and
(Hespanha, Prandini, and Sastry 2000; Yavin 1987) for HS
games). On the contrary, in most of the applications (e.g.,
telecommunications, web security, advertising), a more natural setting is to consider the case where the game is played
repeatedly and players have access only to incomplete information at each stage. In this setting, players are often required to sequentially learn the game on-the-ﬂy and adjust
the trade-off between exploiting known information and exploring to gain new information. Thus, this work focuses on
the following sequential learning problems:

Introduction

Resource allocation games have been studied profoundly in
the literature and showed to be very useful to model many
practical situations, including online decision problems, see
e.g. (Blocki et al. 2013; Bower and Gilbert 2005; Korzhyk,
Conitzer, and Parr 2010; Zhang, Lesser, and Shenoy 2009).
In particular, two of the most renowned are the Colonel
Blotto game (henceforth, CB game) and the Hide-and-Seek
game (henceforth, HS game). In the (one-shot) CB game,
two players, each with a ﬁxed amount of budget, simultaneously allocate their indivisible resources (called troops)
on n ∈ N battleﬁelds, each player’s payoff is the aggregate of the values of battleﬁelds where she has a higher
allocation. The scope of applications of the CB games includes a variety of problems; for instance, in security where
resources correspond to security forces (e.g., (Chia 2012;
Schwartz, Loiseau, and Sastry 2014)), in politics where budget are distributed to attract voters (e.g., (Kovenock and

(i) The online CB game: ﬁx k, n ≥ 1; at each stage, a learner
who has the budget k plays a CB game against some adversaries across n battleﬁelds; at the end of the stage, she receives limited feedback that is the gain (loss) she obtains
from each battleﬁeld (but not the adversaries’ strategies).
The battleﬁelds’ values can change over time and they are
unknown to the learner before making the decision at each
stage. This setting is generic and covers many applications
of the CB game. For instance, in radio resource allocation
problem (in a cognitive radio network), a solution that balances between efﬁciency and fairness is to provide the users
ﬁctional budgets (the same budget at each stage) and let
them bid across n spectrum carriers simultaneously to com-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2252

