The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Knowledge Integration Networks for Action Recognition
Shiwen Zhang,1,2 Sheng Guo,1,2 Limin Wang,3 Weilin Huang,∗1,2 Matthew R. Scott1,2
1

Malong Technologies, Shenzhen, China
Shenzhen Malong Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research Center, Shenzhen, China
3
State Key Lab for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China

2

Abstract
In this work, we propose Knowledge Integration Networks
(referred as KINet) for video action recognition. KINet is capable of aggregating meaningful context features which are
of great importance to identifying an action, such as human
information and scene context. We design a three-branch architecture consisting of a main branch for action recognition, and two auxiliary branches for human parsing and scene
recognition which allow the model to encode the knowledge
of human and scene for action recognition. We explore two
pre-trained models as teacher networks to distill the knowledge of human and scene for training the auxiliary tasks of
KINet. Furthermore, we propose a two-level knowledge encoding mechanism which contains a Cross Branch Integration (CBI) module for encoding the auxiliary knowledge into
medium-level convolutional features, and an Action Knowledge Graph (AKG) for effectively fusing high-level context
information. This results in an end-to-end trainable framework where the three tasks can be trained collaboratively, allowing the model to compute strong context knowledge efﬁciently. The proposed KINet achieves the state-of-the-art
performance on a large-scale action recognition benchmark
Kinetics-400, with a top-1 accuracy of 77.8%. We further
demonstrate that our KINet has strong capability by transferring the Kinetics-trained model to UCF-101, where it obtains
97.8% top-1 accuracy.

1

Figure 1: Human action is a high-level concept, which can
be identiﬁed using various semantic cues, such as human
and scene knowledge.

the last column, we can easily recognize a pushup action
from human pose presented. Therefore, context knowledge
is critical to understand human actions in videos, and learning meaningful such context knowledge is of great importance to improving the performance.
Past work commonly considered action recognition as a
classiﬁcation problem, and attempted to learn action-related
semantic cues directly from training videos (Feichtenhofer
et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2018a; Carreira and Zisserman
2017). They assumed that action-related features can be implicitly learned with powerful CNN models by simply using
video-level action labels. However, it has been proven that
learning action and actor segmentation jointly can boost the
performance of both tasks. Experiments were conducted on
A2D dataset (Xu et al. 2015), where the ground truth of actor masks and per-pixel action labels were provided. Yet in
practice, it is highly expensive to provide pixel-wise action
labels for a large-scale video dataset, and such per-pixel annotations are not available in most action recognition benchmarks, such as Kinetics (Carreira and Zisserman 2017) and

Introduction

Deep learning technologies have recently advanced various
tasks on video understanding, particularly for human action
recognition where the performance has been improved considerably (Wang et al. 2016a; Carreira and Zisserman 2017;
Wang et al. 2018b). Intuitively, human action is a highlysemantic concept that contains various semantic cues. For
example, as shown in Figure 1, in the ﬁrst column, one can
identify a skiing action by learning from a snow ﬁeld scene
with the related human dresses. In the second column, people can still know the action as basketball playing by observing basketball court and players, even it may be difﬁcult
to identify the ball due to low resolution or motion blur. In
∗

Weilin Huang is the corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12862

