The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Point-Based Methods for Model Checking
in Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes
Maxime Bouton

Jana Tumova

Mykel J. Kochenderfer

boutonm@stanford.edu
Stanford University
Stanford, CA

tumova@kth.se
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
Stockholm, Sweden

mykel@stanford.edu
Stanford University
Stanford, CA

(LTL) (Pnueli 1977) as the framework for specifying the objective. We are interested in computing the probability of
satisfying the desired formula when following the resulting
policy. This problem is known as quantitative model checking (Baier and Katoen 2008). In general, the problem of
computing a policy that has the best probability of satisfying
a logical formula in a POMDP is undecidable (Chatterjee,
Chmelik, and Tracol 2013). However, it is possible to derive approximate solutions to the problem with conﬁdence
bounds (Hauskrecht 2000).
We propose a methodology to approximately solve quantitative model checking problems in POMDPs. We show that
the problem of ﬁnding a policy maximizing the satisfaction
of the objective can be formulated as a reward maximization
problem. This consideration allows us to beneﬁt from efﬁcient approximate POMDP solvers, such as SARSOP (Kurniawati, Hsu, and Lee 2008), to solve the original model
checking problem. In addition, the bounds provided by the
solver constitute strong guarantees on the performance of
the resulting policy. We apply our methodology to classical
POMDP domains and demonstrate that it can scale to larger
environments than previous methods. We empirically verify
that the probability of success of the policy is consistent with
the upper and lower bounds provided by the solver. Finally,
we compare the performance of point-based methods against
previous work (Norman, Parker, and Zou 2017).

Abstract
Autonomous systems are often required to operate in partially
observable environments. They must reliably execute a speciﬁed objective even with incomplete information about the
state of the environment. We propose a methodology to synthesize policies that satisfy a linear temporal logic formula in
a partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP). By
formulating a planning problem, we show how to use pointbased value iteration methods to efﬁciently approximate the
maximum probability of satisfying a desired logical formula
and compute the associated belief state policy. We demonstrate
that our method scales to large POMDP domains and provides
strong bounds on the performance of the resulting policy.

Introduction
Designing decision making strategies for robotic systems in
uncertain environments can be challenging. In many applications, the agent is equipped with sensors that are not capable
of detecting all the relevant features of the environments.
Sensors may not be able to detect objects through walls or
directly measure the intentions of humans. Algorithms must
generate strategies that are both efﬁcient and reliable even in
situations where all the information about the environment is
not accessible. In addition, the resulting policies must exhibit
strong guarantees on their performance.
A principled way to take into account both stochastic dynamics and state uncertainty is to model the environment as a
partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP). The
objective is often speciﬁed using a reward function. The agent
seeks to ﬁnd a strategy that maximizes the expected accumulated reward over time. Deﬁning reward functions can be very
challenging and can lead to a value alignment problem, where
the agent does not behave as expected (Hadﬁeld-Menell et al.
2017). Although existing planning algorithms can generate
approximately optimal policies, it may not be straightforward how to interpret the performance of the policy through
expected accumulated rewards.
In this work, we focus on the problem of synthesizing
policies that achieve a desired objective expressed by a logical formula in a POMDP. We consider linear temporal logic

Related Work
Model checking in ﬁnite state Markov decision processes
(MDPs) has been studied extensively and relies on two main
solving strategies: value iteration and linear programs (Baier
and Katoen 2008; Lahijanian, Andersson, and Belta 2011).
These algorithms scale polynomially in the size of the MDP
and efﬁcient tools for probabilistic model checking can synthesize policies satisfying an LTL formula in MDPs with several millions states (Kwiatkowska, Norman, and Parker 2011;
Dehnert et al. 2017). However, these tools have little support for environments where the state is not observable, and
current methods cannot scale to large POMDPs useful for
robotics applications.
The general problem of ﬁnding a policy satisfying an LTL
formula in an inﬁnite horizon POMDP is undecidable (Chat-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10061

