The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Zero-Shot Text-to-SQL Learning with Auxiliary Task
Shuaichen Chang,1∗ Pengfei Liu,2 Yun Tang,3 Jing Huang,3 Xiaodong He,3 Bowen Zhou3
1
The Ohio State University, 2 Fudan University, 3 JD.COM AI Research
chang.1692@osu.edu, pﬂiu14@fudan.edu.cn, {yun.tang, jing.huang, xiaodong.he, bowen.zhou}@jd.com

global table schema. This assumption is useful for some
speciﬁc applications such as booking ﬂights (Dahl et al.
1994) and searching GEO (Zelle and Mooney 1996), but
not applicable to many real scenarios when different questions involve querying on different tables. (Zhong, Xiong,
and Socher 2017) addressed this problem and generated a
dataset called WikiSQL, which is by far the largest text-toSQL benchmark dataset.
In WikiSQL many tables have different table schemas and
each table has its own limited labeled data. One common approach is to encode the table column names in the input to
the training of an encoder-decoder model (Yu et al. 2018a;
Dong and Lapata 2018). (Yu et al. 2018a) proposed to utilize
high-level type information to better understand rare entities
and numbers in the natural language questions and encode
these information from the input. These type information
come from either external knowledge graph, a column or
a number. This approach of TypeSQL (Yu et al. 2018a) was
proven to be effective on WikiSQL when it is required for
the model to generalize to new tables.
We observe that a text-to-SQL encoder-decoder model
implicitly learn a mapping between entities in natural language questions to column names in tables. The model is
likely to fail on mapping to new table column names that it
never sees before. Hence if we learn a better mapping from
question words to table column names, then the text-to-SQL
generation model would be better generalized to new tables.
With this in mind, we introduce an auxiliary model to enhance the existing generation model.
Speciﬁcally, we propose a novel auxiliary mapping task
besides traditional text-to-SQL generation task. Here we
explicitly model the mapping from natural language entities
to table column names. The mapping model serves as an
supportive model to the speciﬁc text-to-SQL task as well as
regularization to the generation model to increase its generalization. These two tasks are trained together with a multitask learning loss. In practice, we adopt the coarse-to-ﬁne
decoder as the prototype of our generation model due to their
superior performance in text-to-SQL tasks. And the generation model is further improved by introducing bi-attention
layer (question-to-table attention and table-to-question attention) (Seo et al. 2017) and attentive pooling layer (dos

Abstract
Recent years have seen great success in the use of neural
seq2seq models on the text-to-SQL task. However, little work
has paid attention to how these models generalize to realistic
unseen data, which naturally raises a question: does this impressive performance signify a perfect generalization model,
or are there still some limitations?
In this paper, we ﬁrst diagnose the bottleneck of the text-toSQL task by providing a new testbed, in which we observe
that existing models present poor generalization ability on
rarely-seen data. The above analysis encourages us to design a simple but effective auxiliary task, which serves as
a supportive model as well as a regularization term to the
generation task to increase the models generalization. Experimentally, We evaluate our models on a large text-to-SQL
dataset WikiSQL. Compared to a strong baseline coarse-toﬁne model, our models improve over the baseline by more
than 3% absolute in accuracy on the whole dataset. More interestingly, on a zero-shot subset test of WikiSQL, our models
achieve 5% absolute accuracy gain over the baseline, clearly
demonstrating its superior generalizability.

Introduction
Text-to-SQL has recently attracted much attention as a
sequence-to-sequence learning problem due to its practical
usage for search and question answering (Dong and Lapata 2016; Zhong, Xiong, and Socher 2017; Xu, Liu, and
Song 2017; Cai et al. 2018; Yu et al. 2018a; Dong and
Lapata 2018; Finegan-Dollak et al. 2018; Yu et al. 2018b;
Wang et al. 2017; Shi et al. 2018; McCann et al. 2018). The
performance on some text-to-SQL tasks has been improved
progressively (Dong and Lapata 2018; Wang et al. 2017;
Shi et al. 2018; Hwang et al. 2019; He et al. 2019) in recent years. As pointed out in (Finegan-Dollak et al. 2018),
when evaluating models on text-to-SQL tasks, we need to
measure how well the models generalize to realistic unseen
data, which is very common in the real applications.
Most of the previous text-to-SQL tasks assumed that all
questions came from a ﬁxed database and hence share one
∗

Work done during an internship at JD AI Research
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7488

