The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Algorithms for Manipulating Sequential Allocation
Mingyu Xiao, Jiaxing Ling
School of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
myxiao@gmail.com, lingjiaxing@std.uestc.edu.cn

In this example, Agent 1 will take a at the ﬁrst turn,
Agent 3 will take e at the second turn, Agent 2 will take
two items c and b at the third and fourth turns, and Agent 1
will take d at the last turn.

Abstract
Sequential allocation is a simple and widely studied mechanism to allocate indivisible items in turns to agents according
to a pre-speciﬁed picking sequence of agents. At each turn,
the current agent in the picking sequence picks its most preferred item among all items having not been allocated yet.
This problem is well-known to be not strategyproof, i.e., an
agent may get more utility by reporting an untruthful preference ranking of items. It arises the problem: how to ﬁnd the
best response of an agent? It is known that this problem is
polynomially solvable for only two agents and NP-complete
for an arbitrary number of agents. The computational complexity of this problem with three agents was left as an open
problem. In this paper, we give a novel algorithm that solves
the problem in polynomial time for each ﬁxed number of
agents. We also show that an agent can always get at least
half of its optimal utility by simply using its truthful preference as the response.

In sequential allocation, given a ﬁxed policy, the outcome will only depend on the ordinal preference rankings of
agents over items. It is folklore that sequential allocation is
not strategyproof, which means that an agent may get more
utility by reporting an untruthful preference ranking. For example, in the above instance, if Agent 1 misreports its preference ranking as b  a  c  d  e, then it will get items
{b, a}, while originally it will get items {a, d}. Agent 1 may
get more utility by taking {b, a} since b  d. This motivates
many aspects of the study on this mechanism.
There are several models based on the sequential allocation mechanism. We have different objectives to maximize
the overall social welfare (Bouveret and Lang 2011) or the
utility of a certain agent (Bouveret and Lang 2014), and different requirements on the pattern of the picking sequences
and the number of agents. One of the earliest models studied in (Kohler and Chandrasekaran 1971) has two agents and
the policy is strictly alternating (e.g., 121212 . . . ). A balanced alternation pattern of the policy (e.g., 12212112 . . . )
was studied in (Brams and Taylor 2000). One interesting application of sequential allocation was found in course allocation to students and several axiomatic properties and
manipulability on this application have been revealed. Budish and Cantillion (2012) investigated a randomized version
of the sequential allocation mechanism to allocate courses
to students, and Pareto optimal solutions for a model of
course allocation were studied in (Cechlárová, Klaus, and
Manlove 2018). The Boston mechanism is another sequential allocation mechanism with applications in school choice
for students (Abdulkadiroglu et al. 2006; Kojima and Ünver
2014). A general and systematic study of the sequential allocation was done by Bouveret and Lang (2011) and by
Kalinowski et al. (2013) from a game-theoretic view. Since
the work of Kohler and Chandrasekaran (1971), a series
of followup works on strategic aspects of sequential allocation have been made (Aziz, Goldberg, and Walsh 2017;
Aziz, Walsh, and Xia 2015; Levine and Stange 2012; Tominaga, Todo, and Yokoo 2016; Aziz et al. 2015).

Introduction
Sequential allocation is a simple and widely studied mechanism to allocate indivisible items to agents (Bouveret and
Lang 2011; 2014; Aziz et al. 2017). In a sequential allocation mechanism, there are several indivisible items to be
allocated to some agents, each agent has a strict preference
ranking over all the items, and there is a sequence of the
agents, called the policy, to specify the turns of the agents to
get the items. The items are allocated to the agents according to the policy: at each turn, the current agent on the policy
picks the most preferred item in its preference ranking that
has not yet been allocated. We give an example.
Example 1. There are ﬁve items {a, b, c, d, e}, three agents
{1, 2, 3} with preference rankings
Agent 1 : a  b  c  d  e
Agent 2 : c  b  e  d  a
Agent 3 : e  b  d  c  a
and a policy

π : 13221.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2302

