The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Adapting Language Models for Non-Parallel Author-Stylized Rewriting
Bakhtiyar Syed,‡ Gaurav Verma,† Balaji Vasan Srinivasan,†
Anandhavelu Natarajan,† Vasudeva Varma‡
‡

IIIT Hyderabad, † Adobe Research
syed.b@research.iiit.ac.in
{gaverma, balsrini, anandvn}@adobe.com
vv@iiit.ac.in

Abstract

2ULJLQDO7H[W
7KHIURQWGHVNVWDĳ
ZDVSURIHVVLRQDODQGYHU\
KHOSIXO

Given the recent progress in language modeling using
Transformer-based neural models and an active interest in
generating stylized text, we present an approach to leverage the generalization capabilities of a language model to
rewrite an input text in a target author’s style. Our proposed
approach adapts a pre-trained language model to generate
author-stylized text by ﬁne-tuning on the author-speciﬁc corpus using a denoising autoencoder (DAE) loss in a cascaded
encoder-decoder framework. Optimizing over DAE loss allows our model to learn the nuances of an author’s style without relying on parallel data, which has been a severe limitation of the previous related works in this space. To evaluate the efﬁcacy of our approach, we propose a linguisticallymotivated framework to quantify stylistic alignment of the
generated text to the target author at lexical, syntactic and surface levels. The evaluation framework is both interpretable as
it leads to several insights about the model, and self-contained
as it does not rely on external classiﬁers, e.g. sentiment or
formality classiﬁers. Qualitative and quantitative assessment
indicates that the proposed approach rewrites the input text
with better alignment to the target style while preserving the
original content better than state-of-the-art baselines.

7KHKRUVHGRFWRUFDPH
DSOHDVDQWPDQDQGIXOORI
KRSHDQGSURIHVVLRQDO
LQWHUHVWLQWKHFDVH
,VDLG,ZDVLQD
GUHDGIXOKXUU\DQG,ZLVKHG
ZHFRXOGJHWWKLVEXVLQHVV
SHUPDQHQWO\PDSSHGRXW

6W\OL]HG7H[W
6LU$UWKXU&RQDQ
'R\OHŖV6W\OH

*HRUJH$OIUHG
+HQW\ŖV6W\OH

6W\OH/0
)LQHWXQHG/0V

=DQH*UH\ŖV6W\OH

7KHIURQWGHVNVWDĳZDVD
SURIHVVLRQDODQGYHU\KHOSIXORQH
7KHPDQ VIDFHZDVD
SOHDVDQWPDQDQGIXOORI
KRSHDQGSURIHVVLRQDO
LQWHUHVWLQJHQHUDO
,VDLG,ZDVLQD
GUHDGIXOPRPHQW VWLPH
DQG,ZLVKHGZHFRXOG
JHWWKLVEXVLQHVVVHWWOHG

Figure 1: An overview of generating author-stylized text using StyleLM, our proposed model.

and also a combination of these attributes (Subramanian et
al. 2018). The interest along these lines has given rise to annotated and parallel data that comprise of paired realizations
that lie on opposite ends of formality and sentiment spectrum (Rao and Tetreault 2018; Mathews, Xie, and He 2016).
The dimensions of style considered across all these works
are psycholinguistic aspects of text and the aim is to transfer
the text across different levels of the chosen aspect.
However, there has been lack of explorations that aim to
generate text across author styles – wherein the notion of
style is not a speciﬁc psycholinguistic aspect but an amalgam of the author’s linguistic choices expressed in their
writing (Jhamtani et al. 2017; Tikhonov and Yamshchikov
2018). While the work by Jhamtani et al. (2017) tries to generate “Shakespearized” text from Modern English and is in
a similar vein, it relies on the availability of parallel data.
Since the availability of parallel data is not always guaranteed and it is arduous to curate one, such an approach cannot scale for different authors. We therefore propose a novel
framework for author-stylized rewriting without relying on
parallel data with source-text to target-text mappings. Figure
1 shows a few examples where an input text is rewritten in
the style of a chosen author by our model.
Our approach for generating author-stylized text involves
leveraging the generalization capabilities of state-of-the-art
language models and adapting them to incorporate the stylistic characteristics of a target author without the need of parallel data. We ﬁrst pre-train a language model on a combi-

Introduction
There has been a growing interest in studying style in natural language and solving tasks related to it (Hu et al. 2017;
Shen et al. 2017; Subramanian et al. 2018; Fu et al. 2018;
Vadapalli et al. 2018; Niu and Bansal 2018). Tasks like genre
classiﬁcation (Kessler, Numberg, and Schütze 1997), author proﬁling (Garera and Yarowsky 2009), sentiment analysis (Wilson, Wiebe, and Hoffmann 2005), social relationship classiﬁcation (Peterson, Hohensee, and Xia 2011) have
been of active interest to the community. Recently, stylized text generation (Hovy 1990; Inkpen and Hirst 2006)
and style transfer (Li et al. 2018; Prabhumoye et al. 2018;
Fu et al. 2018) have gained traction; both these tasks aim
to generate realizations of an input text that align to a target
style. A majority of the work here is focused around generating text with different levels of sentiment (Shen et al. 2017;
Ficler and Goldberg 2017) and formality (Jain et al. 2019)
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9008

