The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Graph Convolutional Networks with Markov
Random Field Reasoning for Social Spammer Detection
Yongji Wu,1 Defu Lian,1∗ Yiheng Xu,2 Le Wu,3 Enhong Chen1
1
University of Science and Technology of China
Harbin Institute of Technology, 3 Hefei University of Technology
{wuyongji317, dove.ustc, hi.ranpox, lewu.ustc}@gmail.com, cheneh@ustc.edu.cn
2

estimated that between 9% and 15% of active Twitter accounts are fake. The malicious behavior of social spammers
poses a severe threat to the quality of user experience, hence
effectively identifying these spammers is of great real-world
importance in the development of OSNs.

Abstract
The recent growth of social networking platforms also led
to the emergence of social spammers, who overwhelm legitimate users with unwanted content. The existing social spammer detection methods can be characterized into two categories: features based ones and propagation-based ones. Features based methods mainly rely on matrix factorization using tweet text features, and regularization using social graphs
is incorporated. However, these methods are fully supervised
and can only utilize labeled part of social graphs, which
fail to work in a real-world semi-supervised setting. The
propagation-based methods primarily employ Markov Random Fields (MRFs) to capture human intuitions in user following relations, which cannot take advantages of rich text
features. In this paper, we propose a novel social spammer
detection model based on Graph Convolutional Networks
(GCNs) that operate on directed social graphs by explicitly
considering three types of neighbors. Furthermore, inspired
by the propagation-based methods, we propose a MRF layer
with reﬁning effects to encapsulate these human insights in
social relations, which can be formulated as a RNN through
mean-ﬁeld approximate inference, and stack on top of GCN
layers to enable end-to-end training. We evaluate our proposed method on two real-world social network datasets, and
the results demonstrate that our method outperforms the stateof-the-art approaches.

A number of social spammer detection methods have been
proposed, following spam detection in traditional environments like email (Blanzieri and Bryl 2008) and Web pages
(Gyongyi and Garcia-Molina 2005). Most existing models can be divided into two categories: features based approaches and propagation-based ones. Features based methods (Zhu et al. 2012; Hu et al. 2013; 2014; Hu, Tang, and Liu
2014; Shen et al. 2017) generally exploit text features mined
from tweets posted by users. Matrix factorization is performed on these features, and social graphs are used in regularization. However, these matrix factorization based methods are fully supervised; they can only utilize labeled part of
the social graph, hence need a large number of labeled samples to work successfully. Recently, Li et al. (2018) proposed
a semi-supervised model using an autoencoder framework.
This model uses node2vec and doc2vec embeddings as input features for text view and social graph view. However,
it fails to capture the interactions between users in social
graphs explicitly. The propagation-based methods (Wang,
Zhang, and Gong 2017; Wang, Gong, and Fu 2017), which
are also called guilt-by-association methods, assume some
sort of correlations between a pair of users and model these
intuitions using a Markov Random Field (MRF). However,
these methods simply perform the computation of posterior
distributions of MRFs using a pre-deﬁned pairwise inﬂuence
weight, and cannot beneﬁt from features in tweet text.

Introduction
Online Social Networks (OSNs) such as Facebook and Twitter have gained increasing popularity in recent years for
users to interact and communicate. Nowadays, they have become a universal platform for users to discuss events and
share personal experience. However, with this growing popularity, a new kind of malicious users known as social spammers surface (Webb, Caverlee, and Pu 2008). These spammers launch various attacks on social networks with fake
accounts. For instance, spreading advertisement to promote
sales, posting tweets containing links to pornographic sites
(Singh, Bansal, and Sofat 2016), or hijacking trend topics
(VanDam and Tan 2016). A recent study (Varol et al. 2017)

To this end, we propose a novel model for social spammer detection to take advantage of both features based
and propagation-based methods. Since Graph Convolutional
Networks (GCNs) which are developed in recent years (Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst 2016; Kipf and Welling
2016) can combine both graph structures and node features
for semi-supervised learning, we use them as the building
block of our model. Besides, the ability of GCNs to propagate information layer-wisely allows them to learn localized
patterns at different scales. In our scenario, we consider that
different directions in users’ following relations entail differ-

∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1054

