The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Near-Optimal Change-Detection Based Algorithm
for Piecewise-Stationary Combinatorial Semi-Bandits
Huozhi Zhou,1∗ Lingda Wang,1∗ Lav R. Varshney,1 Ee-Peng Lim2
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
2
School of Information Systems, Singapore Management University
{hzhou35, lingdaw2, varshney}@illinois.edu, eplim@smu.edu.sg

lower bound is of order Ω(log T ) (Lai and Robbins 1985),
where T is the number of time steps. Several algorithms
have been proposed and proven to achieve O(log T ) regret (Agrawal and Goyal 2012; Auer, Cesa-Bianchi, and Fischer 2002). The adversarial setting is when at each time
step the environment generates the reward in an adversarial √
manner, whose minimax regret lower bound is of order
Ω( T ). Several algorithms achieving order-optimal (up to
poly-logarithm factors) regret have been proposed in recent
years (Hazan and Kale 2011; Bubeck, Cohen, and Li 2018;
Li, Chen, and Giannakis 2019).
Many real-world applications, however, have a combinatorial nature that cannot be fully characterized by the classical MAB model. For example, online movie sites aim
to recommend multiple movies to the users to maximize
their utility under some constraints (e.g., recommend at
most one movie for each category). This phenomenon motivates the study of combinatorial semi-bandits (CMAB),
which aims to identify the best super arm, a set of base
arms with the highest aggregated reward. Several algorithms for stochastic CMAB with provable guarantees based
on optimism principle have been proposed recently (Chen,
Wang, and Yuan 2013; Kveton et al. 2015; Combes et al.
2015). All of these algorithms use some oracle to overcome the curse of dimensionality of the action space for
solving some combinatorial optimization problem at each
iteration. In addition, these algorithms achieve the optimal
O(C log T ) regret upper bound, where C is an instancedependent parameter. Adversarial CMAB is also well studied.√Several algorithms achieve optimal regret of order
O( T ) based on either Follow-the-Regularized-Leader or
Follow-the-Perturbed-Leader, both of which are general
frameworks for adversarial online learning algorithm design (Hazan 2016). Moreover, one recent study has developed an algorithm that is order-optimal for both stochastic
and adversarial CMAB (Zimmert, Luo, and Wei 2019).
Although both stochastic and adversarial CMAB are wellstudied, understanding of the scenario lying in the “middle” of these two settings is still limited. Such a “middle”
setting where the reward distributions of base arms slowly
change over time may be a more realistic model in many
applications. For instance, in online recommendation sys-

Abstract
We investigate the piecewise-stationary combinatorial semibandit problem. Compared to the original combinatorial
semi-bandit problem, our setting assumes the reward distributions of base arms may change in a piecewise-stationary
manner at unknown time steps. We propose an algorithm,
GLR-CUCB, which incorporates an efﬁcient combinatorial
semi-bandit algorithm, CUCB, with an almost parameter-free
change-point detector, the Generalized Likelihood Ratio Test
(GLRT). Our analysis √
shows that the regret of GLR-CUCB is
upper bounded by O( N KT log T ), where N is the number of piecewise-stationary segments, K is the number of
base arms, and T is the number of time steps. As a complement, we also derive
√ a nearly matching regret lower bound
on the order of Ω( N KT ), for both piecewise-stationary
multi-armed bandits and combinatorial semi-bandits, using
information-theoretic techniques and judiciously constructed
piecewise-stationary bandit instances. Our lower bound is
tighter
√ than the best available regret lower bound, which is
Ω( T ). Numerical experiments on both synthetic and realworld datasets demonstrate the superiority of GLR-CUCB
compared to other state-of-the-art algorithms.

1

Introduction

The multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem, ﬁrst proposed
by Thompson (1933), has been studied extensively in the
statistics and machine learning communities, as it models
many online decision making problems such as online recommendation (Li, Karatzoglou, and Gentile 2016), computational advertising (Tang et al. 2013), and crowdsourcing
task allocation (Hassan and Curry 2014). The classical MAB
is modeled as an agent repeatedly pulling one of K arms and
observing the reward generated, with the goal of minimizing the regret which is the difference between the reward
of the optimal arm in hindsight and the reward of the arm
chosen by the agent. This classical problem is well understood for both stochastic (Lai and Robbins 1985) and adversarial settings (Auer et al. 2002). The stochastic setting is
when the reward of each arm is generated from a ﬁxed distribution, and it is well known that the problem-dependent
∗

The ﬁrst two authors contributed equally to this work
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6933

