The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Multi-View Partial Multi-Label Learning with Graph-Based Disambiguation
Ze-Sen Chen,1,2 Xuan Wu,3 Qing-Guo Chen,3 Yao Hu,3 Min-Ling Zhang1,2,4∗
1

2

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
3
YouKu Cognitive and Intelligent Lab, Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
4
Collaborative Innovation Center of Wireless Communications Technology, China
{chenzs, zhangml}@seu.edu.cn, {wx193834, qingguo.cqg, yaoohu}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
In multi-view multi-label learning (MVML), each training
example is represented by different feature vectors and associated with multiple labels simultaneously. Nonetheless,
the labeling quality of training examples is tend to be affected by annotation noises. In this paper, the problem of
multi-view partial multi-label learning (MVPML) is studied,
where the set of associated labels are assumed to be candidate ones and only partially valid. To solve the MVPML
problem, a two-stage graph-based disambiguation approach
is proposed. Firstly, the ground-truth labels of each training
example are estimated by disambiguating the candidate labels with fused similarity graph. After that, the predictive
model for each label is learned from embedding features generated from disambiguation-guided clustering analysis. Extensive experimental studies clearly validate the effectiveness
of the proposed approach in solving the MVPML problem.

Figure 1: An examplar multi-view partial multi-label scenario. The news webpage can be represented from different
views such as text, image and video. Furthermore, among
the six candidate labels annotated by crowdsourced labelers,
only three of them are valid ones including Soccer, Europa
league and England.

Introduction
The task of multi-view multi-label learning (MVML) widely
exists in real-world applications, where each object consists
of diverse representations and multiple class labels simultaneously (Luo et al. 2013; Liu et al. 2015; Zhu, Li, and Zhang
2016; Xing et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2018; Zhu et al. 2018;
Wu et al. 2019). For instance, a news webpage can be represented from different views including text, image and video,
while at the same time annotated with multiple class labels
such as sports, economic, and entertainment.
In conventional MVML studies, it is commonly assumed
that all relevant labels have been precisely annotated for
each training instance. Nonetheless, in many real-world scenarios, precise annotations are usually difﬁcult and costly
to be obtained. As shown in Figure 1, a news webpage with
text, image and video views might be annotated with six candidate labels from crowdsourced labelers, among which only
Soccer, Europa league and England are ground-truth ones.
Under these circumstances, the multiple class labels associated with each training example are only candidate ones
which are partially valid. In this paper, we formalize the cor-

responding learning task as the problem of Multi-View Partial Multi-label Learning (MVPML).
Let X = Rd1 ×Rd2 · · ·×RdV be the feature space consisting of V views, where dv (1 ≤ v ≤ V ) denotes the dimenq
sionality of the v-th view. Furthermore, let Y = {yc }c=1 be
the label space consisting of q possible class labels. Given
the MVPML training set D = {(xi , Yi ) | 1 ≤ i ≤
V
m}, where xi = [x1i , x2i , · · · , xVi ] ∈ X is the v=1 dv dimensional feature vector and Yi ⊆ Y is the candidate label set associated with xi . The basic assumption of MVPML
lies in that the ground-truth labels Yi ⊆ Y for xi reside in
its candidate label set, i.e. Yi ⊆ Yi , which are not directly
accessible to the learning algorithm. The task of MVPML is
to learn a predictive model h : X → 2Y from D which can
assign a set of proper labels for the unseen instance.
Intuitively, the problem of MVPML can be solved by resorting to its degenerated version. Speciﬁcally, by ignoring
labeling noises in candidate label set and thus treating all
candidate labels as ground-truth ones, the MVPML problem
will degenerate to the MVML counterpart (Liu et al. 2015;
Zhu, Li, and Zhang 2016; Xing et al. 2018; Zhang et al.

∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3553

