The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Representation Learning with Multiple
Lipschitz-Constrained Alignments on Partially-Labeled Cross-Domain Data
†

Songlei Jian,† Liang Hu,‡ Longbing Cao,‡ Kai Lu†

College of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, China
Advanced Analytics Institute, University of Technology Sydney, Australia
{jiansonglei, kailu}@nudt.edu.cn, rainmilk@gmail.com, longbing.cao@uts.edu.au
‡

learning heterogeneous but complementary information between domains for representation is promising yet challenging. It will be very promising if a representation learning
approach can effectively learn complementary information
from other domains, which enables the knowledge of machines to be self-evolutionary. However, it is still a challenging task for existing cross-domain representation learning
methods because only limited consensus data (e.g., labeled
data) are available to construct the linkage between domains
and the data distributions and structures are usually highly
heterogeneous in different domains.

Abstract
The cross-domain representation learning plays an important role in tasks including domain adaptation and transfer learning. However, existing cross-domain representation
learning focuses on building one shared space and ignores
the unlabeled data in the source domain, which cannot effectively capture the distribution and structure heterogeneities in
cross-domain data. To address this challenge, we propose a
new cross-domain representation learning approach: MUltiple Lipschitz-constrained AligNments (MULAN) on partiallylabeled cross-domain data. MULAN produces two representation spaces: a common representation space to incorporate
knowledge from the source domain and a complementary
representation space to complement the common representation with target local topological information by Lipschitzconstrained representation transformation. MULAN utilizes
both unlabeled and labeled data in the source and target
domains to address distribution heterogeneity by Lipschitzconstrained adversarial distribution alignment and structure
heterogeneity by cluster assumption-based class alignment
while keeping the target local topological information in
complementary representation by self alignment. Moreover,
MULAN is effectively equipped with a customized learning
process and an iterative parameter updating process. MULAN
shows its superior performance on partially-labeled semisupervised domain adaptation and few-shot domain adaptation and outperforms the state-of-the-art visual domain adaptation models by up to 12.1%.

Inspired by this, we propose a novel cross-domain representation learning approach: Multiple Lipschitz-constrained
Alignments (MULAN) to construct both common representations and complementary representations for partiallylabeled cross-domain data. Different from existing semisupervised (Motiian et al. 2017; Tzeng et al. 2015) or unsupervised domain adaptation methods (Haeusser et al. 2017;
Shu et al. 2018; Xie et al. 2018) in which the fully-labeled
source data is available during learning, MULAN utilizes
partially labeled data in both source and target domains,
which is more common in real-life applications. Also, classic cross-domain representation learning aims to build one
common feature space in which the local topological and
distribution information of the target domain may be ignored during the alignment with the source domain. In contrast, MULAN involves Lipschitz-constrained representation transformation to generates two representation spaces:
a common representation space and a complementary representation space. In the common space, the representations
of target data follow the distribution of the source domain,
while the representations in the complementary space aim to
keep the topological information of the target domain which
complements the information loss of the common space.

Introduction
Learning tasks including domain adaptation (DA) (Rozantsev, Salzmann, and Fua 2018), transfer learning (TL) (Pan
and Yang 2010), and image-image translation (Liu et al.
2018a; Lee et al. 2018) aim to acquire knowledge from one
domain to enhance that of the other. Typically, such tasks
transfer a knowledge representation from a source domain
to a target domain by jointly learning a common representation across domains. To date, learning the cross-domain
representation is still highly challenging due to the heterogeneities of data distributions and structures between domains, which widely exist in real-world applications. In addition to the common information shared across domains,

Our key idea is to build multiple alignments based on the
Lipschitz-constrained transformation, i.e., class alignment,
distribution alignment and self alignment between source
and target domains. The class alignment makes use of the
labeled data and is based on the cluster assumption which
is widely taken in semi-supervised learning in order to help
the source and target alignment in the common space. The
distribution alignment uses adversarial learning to generate

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4320

