The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Automatic Car Damage Assessment System: Reading
and Understanding Videos as Professional Insurance Inspectors
Wei Zhang, Yuan Cheng, Xin Guo, Qingpei Guo, Jian Wang,
Qing Wang, Chen Jiang, Meng Wang, Furong Xu, Wei Chu
Ant Financial Services Group, Z Space No. 556 Xixi Road Hangzhou, 310099, Zhejiang, China
{ivy.zw, chengyuan.c, bangzhu.gx, qingpei.gqp, bobblair.wj, wq176625, qichen.jc, darren.wm}@antﬁn.com,
{booyoungxu.xfr, weichu.cw}@antﬁn.com

of cars with variant appearances. There are also companies announced that they can recognize damaged components and damage degree from images1 2 3 . However, these
methods are based on images not videos. On one hand photos taken distantly are hard to recognize damage details and
closely are hard to recognize components, thus it requires
users shooting more than once to get accurate results while
our system using videos has less interaction with users.On
the other hand videos containing much more frames can depress noises and improve recall compared with photos. Remote video conference systems (Huang et al. 2017) utilizing
videos captured by smart phones and completing claims remotely, which still requires professional engineers to watch
videos and make decisions at the service center. Our system
evaluates damage from uploaded videos automatically.
We conduct experiments to compare damage assessment
accuracy between acquiring videos and images with different app and more than 1000 cases each. The average accuracy of videos is 29.1% higher and the ratio of high quality
shooting data on predeﬁned criterion is also 20% higher.

Abstract
We demonstrate a car damage assessment system in car insurance ﬁeld based on artiﬁcial intelligence techniques, which
can exempt insurance inspectors from checking cars on site
and help people without professional knowledge to evaluate car damages when accidents happen. Unlike existing approaches, we utilize videos instead of photos to interact with
users to make the whole procedure as simple as possible. We
adopt object and video detection and segmentation techniques
in computer vision, and take advantage of multiple frames extracted from videos to achieve high damage recognition accuracy. The system uploads video streams captured by mobile
devices, recognizes car damage on the cloud asynchronously
and then returns damaged components and repair costs to
users. The system evaluates car damages and returns results
automatically and effectively in seconds, which reduces laboratory costs and decreases insurance claim time signiﬁcantly.

Introduction
Capturing and uploading photos or videos by mobile devices
is convenient today. If the domain knowledge of damage assessment can be formulated into a computer vision problem
, photos or videos acquired by users can be processed automatically in car insurance ﬁeld. In traditional ways, insurance companies have required inspectors to investigate at the
accident scene, which takes hours or days long. We demonstrate an automatic car damage assessment system based on
computer vision and deep learning, which completes claim
processing in seconds and saves laboratory. The users without professional knowledge can also use our system to evaluate car damages when accident happens.
Recently, there are methods that formulate damage assessment as an image content analysis problem. Image classiﬁcation utilized by (Jeffrey 2018) cannot handle tiny damages and multiple damaged components effectively. Retrieving similar damage photos from historical database(Tofte
2016) is limited to variety of database and tends to be affected by car appearances and shooting angle. Using 3D
computer aided design model (Jayawardena 2013) to recognize components is hard to be applied to different kinds

System Framework and Technique Details
The challenges of automatic damage assessment and our solutions are in the following aspects:
• High quality videos are hard to acquire since unpredictable user behaviours lead to problems like defocus, arbitrary shooting angle and extreme car component scales.
Our system acquires videos through a front end interaction module to guide users to shoot high quality and
proper distance videos.
• Reﬂections, mud and covers on the car exterior can be
misidentiﬁed as damages. With model fusion of multiple
frames extracted from videos, noise is depressed and more
accurate results are recalled.
• Car components and damages need to be segmented in
pixel level to accurately localize damages. A challenge
of segmentation is that annotations are much more costly
1

tractable.ai/products/car-accidents
tonkabi.com/artiﬁcial-intelligence
3
www.altoros.com/car-damage-recognition
2

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13646

