The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Scale-Wise Convolution for Image Restoration
Yuchen Fan,1 Jiahui Yu,1 Ding Liu,2 Thomas S. Huang1
1

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2 Bytedance Inc.
{yuchenf4, jyu79, t-huang1}@illinois.edu, liuding@bytedance.com

ing, image classiﬁcation, object detection and many others computer vision tasks. More recently, the importance
of scale-invariance is demonstrated in object detection using convolutional neural networks (Singh and Davis 2018),
which is further improved by an efﬁcient multi-scale training
method (Singh, Najibi, and Davis 2018) of object detectors.
While modeling scale-invariance has greatly improved visual recognition performance, few efforts have succeeded
in utilizing scale-invariant features for image restoration
tasks based on convolutional neural networks. For example,
random-scale data augmentation during training and multiscale testing are proven beneﬁcial to a wide range of image recognition problems like classiﬁcation (Szegedy et al.
2015) and detection (Fu et al. 2017). However, naively applying those techniques usually lead to worse performance
for image restoration like super-resolution. It is likely due
to the fact that, unlike image recognition problems, the performance of low-level image restoration tasks is very sensitive to naive scaling of input images. Is modeling scaleinvariance unnecessary for image restoration tasks?
In this work, we demonstrate that properly modeling
scale-invariance into convolutional neural networks can
bring signiﬁcant gain for image restoration tasks. We
draw inspiration from spatial-wise convolution for shiftinvariance, and propose the “scale-wise convolution” that is
designed to convolve across multiple scales to achieve scaleinvariance. In our scale-wise convolutional network (SCN),
we ﬁrst map the input image to the feature space and then
build a feature pyramid representation via bi-linear downscaling progressively. Based on the feature pyramid, we apply the same function (several shared layers) to process different scales and aggregate the neighborhoods. After several residual blocks with scale-wise convolutions, we take
the feature output of the largest scale and predict the results
with a linear convolution. The proposed scale-wise convolution learns to dynamically activate and aggregate features
from different input scales in each residual building block,
in order to exploit contextual information on multiple scales.
We compare our proposed network to several multiscale convolutional networks with different design choices
(shared or un-shared weights, different layer connectivity,
etc). We show in our experiments that these multi-scale convolutional networks are inferior than our proposed scalewise convolutional network. We also study the way of

Abstract
While scale-invariant modeling has substantially boosted
the performance of visual recognition tasks, it remains
largely under-explored in deep networks based image restoration. Naively applying those scale-invariant techniques (e.g.,
multi-scale testing, random-scale data augmentation) to image restoration tasks usually leads to inferior performance. In
this paper, we show that properly modeling scale-invariance
into neural networks can bring signiﬁcant beneﬁts to image
restoration performance. Inspired from spatial-wise convolution for shift-invariance, “scale-wise convolution” is proposed to convolve across multiple scales for scale-invariance.
In our scale-wise convolutional network (SCN), we ﬁrst map
the input image to the feature space and then build a feature pyramid representation via bi-linear down-scaling progressively. The feature pyramid is then passed to a residual
network with scale-wise convolutions. The proposed scalewise convolution learns to dynamically activate and aggregate
features from different input scales in each residual building
block, in order to exploit contextual information on multiple scales. In experiments, we compare the restoration accuracy and parameter efﬁciency among our model and many
different variants of multi-scale neural networks. The proposed network with scale-wise convolution achieves superior performance in multiple image restoration tasks including image super-resolution, image denoising and image compression artifacts removal. Code and models are available at:
https://github.com/ychfan/scn sr.

1

Introduction

The exploitation of scale-invariance in computer vision
and image processing has greatly beneﬁted feature engineering (Lowe 2004), image classiﬁcation (Szegedy et al.
2015), object detection (Cai et al. 2016; Lin et al. 2017;
Fu et al. 2017; Singh and Davis 2018; Yu et al. 2016), semantic segmentation (Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox 2015;
Badrinarayanan, Kendall, and Cipolla 2017) and the training of convolutional neural networks (Szegedy et al. 2015;
Singh, Najibi, and Davis 2018). For example, Lowe proposed the scale-invariant features (SIFT) (Lowe 2004) that
are consistent across a substantial range of afﬁne distortion.
Due to its robustness, the SIFT features have been shown undeniably successful and ubiquitously used for image matchc 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10770

