The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

An Interactive Regret-Based Genetic Algorithm for
Solving Multi-Objective Combinatorial Optimization Problems
Nawal Benabbou, Cassandre Leroy, Thibaut Lust
Sorbonne Université, CNRS, Laboratoire d’Informatique de Paris 6, LIP6 F-75005 Paris, France
{nawal.benabbou, cassandre.leroy, thibaut.lust}@lip6.fr

is among the Pareto-optimal solutions1 . While the ﬁrst contributions mainly focused on the generation of all Pareto optimal solutions, tackling problems with many objectives has
required the development of new methods to avoid computational overhead due to the high number of Pareto optimal
solutions. Many of these new contributions concern the integration of preferences. However most of them focus on the
elaboration of efﬁcient methods to identify the best solution
given a preference model, considering preference elicitation
as a preliminary stage. In this paper, we address both issues
simultaneously. The idea is to collect preference information during the search to focus on promising solutions while
reducing the elicitation burden by only asking queries to discriminate between the solutions found during the search.
Preference elicitation on combinatorial domains is an active topic that has been recently studied in various contexts, e.g. in voting problems (Benabbou and Perny 2016;
Benabbou et al. 2016), in stable matching problems (Drummond and Boutilier 2014), in constraint satisfaction problems (Boutilier et al. 2006), in Markov Decision Processes
(Regan and Boutilier 2011; Weng and Zanuttini 2013;
Gilbert et al. 2015) and in multi-objective optimization problems (Korhonen 2005; Kaddani et al. 2017; Benabbou and
Perny 2018). In this paper, we assume that the DM’s preferences can be represented by a parameterized scalarizing
function that is initially not known, and we study the potential of incremental elicitation (White III , Sage, and Dozono 1984) in this context. The idea is to select preference queries one at a time, to be as informative as possible, so as to progressively reduce the set of admissible preference parameters until determining a (near-)optimal solution. We focus here on regret-based incremental elicitation,
an approach recently designed within the Artiﬁcial Intelligence community, as it was proved to be very effective in
practice (Wang and Boutilier 2003; Boutilier et al. 2006;
Benabbou and Perny 2015). More precisely, we propose a
new interactive solving method that uses regret-based incremental elicitation techniques to solve hard MOCO problems
with unknown preference parameters. For this purpose, we
focus on genetic algorithms, which are widely applied to nu-

Abstract
We propose a new approach consisting in combining genetic
algorithms and regret-based incremental preference elicitation for solving multi-objective combinatorial optimization
problems with unknown preferences. For the purpose of elicitation, we assume that the decision maker’s preferences can
be represented by a parameterized scalarizing function but
the parameters are initially not known. Instead, the parameter imprecision is progressively reduced by asking preference
queries to the decision maker during the search to help identify the best solutions within a population. Our algorithm,
called RIGA, can be applied to any multi-objective combinatorial optimization problem provided that the scalarizing
function is linear in its parameters and that a (near-)optimal
solution can be efﬁciently determined when preferences are
known. Moreover, RIGA runs in polynomial time while asking no more than a polynomial number of queries. For the
multi-objective traveling salesman problem, we provide numerical results showing its practical efﬁciency in terms of
number of queries, computation time and gap to optimality.

Introduction
Preference-based search is an important line of research in
Artiﬁcial Intelligence with various applications to investments planning, resource allocation, group conﬁguration,
recommendation systems and electronic commerce (see e.g.,
(Junker 2002; Auger et al. 2009; Roijers and Whiteson 2017;
Marinescu, Razak, and Wilson 2017; Zintgraf et al. 2018)).
The increasing complexity of applications encountered in
Artiﬁcial Intelligence and other areas of Computer Science signiﬁcantly complicates the task of decision makers
(DM) who need to ﬁnd the best solution to their problems.
In many practical search problems, the evaluation of solutions involves several aspects or points of view corresponding to multiple objectives (e.g., time, cost, distance, risk).
Multi-objective combinatorial optimization (MOCO) is concerned with problems involving several (conﬂicting) objectives/criteria to be optimized simultaneously (e.g., minimizing costs while maximizing proﬁts).
In MOCO problems, without preference information, we
only know that the best solution for the decision maker (DM)
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
A solution is called Pareto-optimal if no other solution is better
on all objectives while being strictly better on at least one objective.

2335

