The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Distributed Primal-Dual Optimization for Online Multi-Task Learning
Peng Yang, Ping Li
Cognitive Computing Lab
Baidu Research
10900 NE 8th ST, Bellevue WA, 98004, USA
{pengyang01, liping11}@baidu.com

where task models can synchronize data with others to leverage knowledge of related tasks. In such setting, each task i
is endowed with a sequence of objective functions (fti )Tt=1 ,
where fti is the loss function of i-th task at round t. The goal
boils down to minimizing the sequential objective functions
across m different tasks,

Abstract
Conventional online multi-task learning algorithms suffer from
two critical limitations: 1) Heavy communication caused by
delivering high velocity of sequential data to a central machine;
2) Expensive runtime complexity for building task relatedness.
To address these issues, in this paper we consider a setting
where multiple tasks are geographically located in different
places, where one task can synchronize data with others to
leverage knowledge of related tasks. Speciﬁcally, we propose
an adaptive primal-dual algorithm, which not only captures
task-speciﬁc noise in adversarial learning but also carries out
a projection-free update with runtime efﬁciency. Moreover,
our model is well-suited to decentralized periodic-connected
tasks as it allows the energy-starved or bandwidth-constraint
tasks to postpone the update. Theoretical results demonstrate
the convergence guarantee of our distributed algorithm with
an optimal regret. Empirical results conﬁrm that the proposed
model is highly effective on various real-world datasets.

min

W:W∈K

T

t=1

Ft (W)

(1)

m
where Ft (W) = i=1 fti (wi ) is denoted as the instantaneous loss at round t, while W = [w1 , . . . , wm ] ∈ Rd×m is
parameter matrix for m tasks. Note that K is a closed convex
subset characterized by an inequality, i.e., K = {W|g(W) ≤
0}. It aims to constrain W into simple sets, e.g., hyperplanes,
balls, bound constraints, etc. We assume m ≤ d without loss
of generality. The algorithm for solving problem (1) has to
be distributed, in the sense that each task, accessing only
local task data, is required to communicate with other tasks
in a bandwidth-limited network. Moreover, the distributed
tasks have to learn incrementally from data streams, for the
merits of capturing the dynamic nature of the changing environment (Zhang et al. 2018).
The success of multitask learning relies on the relatedness between tasks. To build the task relationship, existing algorithms used low-rank matrices to enforce different tasks to share a common structure (Smith et al. 2017;
Yang et al. 2019). The low-rank optimization problem can be
solved by the ﬁrst-order optimization methods, e.g., subgradient descent (Bauschke et al. 2011). Although these methods
are guaranteed to converge, they are inefﬁcient because a
singular value decomposition (SVD), which takes O(dm2 )
time, is required at each round. To reduce the computation
complexity, many efﬁcient solvers have been developed by
replacing the full SVD with a partial SVD. However, those
approaches either require the function to be smooth (Wang,
Kolar, and Srebro 2016) or are designed for the constraint optimization (Zheng, Bellet, and Gallinari 2018). Furthermore,
the problem that different tasks generally have different noise
levels was ignored by those approaches mentioned above.
The adversarial noise with large loss residues may corrupt
the task relativeness by the conventional convex loss functions. To deal with noise, a calibrated multivariate regression
approach was developed in (Liu, Wang, and Zhao 2014), and

Introduction
Multi-task learning (MTL) is widely used learning framework
where similar tasks are considered jointly for the purpose of
improving performance compared to learning the tasks separately (Caruana 1997). By transferring information between
tasks it is hoped that samples will be better utilized, leading to improved generalization performance. MTL has been
successfully applied in practical scenarios, e.g., speech recognition (Seltzer and Droppo 2013), image classiﬁcation (Lapin,
Schiele, and Hein 2014), disease gene prediction (Zhou et
al. 2013), etc. Recent years also witness extensive studies on streaming data, known as online multi-task learning
(OMTL) (Dekel, Long, and Singer 2006; Saha et al. 2011;
Yang, Zhao, and Gao 2017), for the merits of capturing the
dynamically changing and uncertain nature of the environment, which is in contrast to the ofﬂine setting in which
the objective functions are ﬁxed (Liu, Pan, and Ho 2017;
Smith et al. 2017).
Existing OMTL techniques suffer from the heavy communication caused by centralizing the high velocity of sequential
data from different locations to a single machine. In this paper, we address OMTL problem in a distributed manner, i.e.,
multiple tasks are geographically located in different places,
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6631

