The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Real-Time Emotion Recognition via
Attention Gated Hierarchical Memory Network
Wenxiang Jiao,1 Michael R. Lyu,1 Irwin King1
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, N.T., Hong Kong, China
{wxjiao, lyu, king}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

 

Abstract

  

!'

" #

   

!&

"#

       
     
      

!%

" #

      

!$

"#



" #

      
    

Real-time emotion recognition (RTER) in conversations is
signiﬁcant for developing emotionally intelligent chatting
machines. Without the future context in RTER, it becomes
critical to build the memory bank carefully for capturing historical context and summarize the memories appropriately
to retrieve relevant information. We propose an Attention
Gated Hierarchical Memory Network (AGHMN) to address
the problems of prior work: (1) Commonly used convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for utterance feature extraction are less compatible in the memory modules; (2) Unidirectional gated recurrent units (GRUs) only allow each historical utterance to have context before it, preventing information propagation in the opposite direction; (3) The Soft
Attention for summarizing loses the positional and ordering
information of memories, regardless of how the memory bank
is built. Particularly, we propose a Hierarchical Memory Network (HMN) with a bidirectional GRU (BiGRU) as the utterance reader and a BiGRU fusion layer for the interaction
between historical utterances. For memory summarizing, we
propose an Attention GRU (AGRU) where we utilize the attention weights to update the internal state of GRU. We further promote the AGRU to a bidirectional variant (BiAGRU)
to balance the contextual information from recent memories
and that from distant memories. We conduct experiments on
two emotion conversation datasets with extensive analysis,
demonstrating the efﬁcacy of our AGHMN models.





       
    

Figure 1: The speciﬁcation of the RTER task.

2015; Poria et al. 2017; Hazarika et al. 2018b). Thus, in this
paper, we tackle the RTER task in text conversations.
Without the future context, in RTER, it becomes critical to
exploit the contextual information from the historical utterances. For this purpose, one needs to take good care of two
factors, i.e., the memory bank for capturing historical context, and the summarizing technique for the query to extract
relevant information from the memory bank. The memory
bank is usually built in a two-level fashion to simulate the hierarchical structure of conversations, i.e., words-to-utterance
and utterances-to-conversation. Speciﬁcally, existing models (Hazarika et al. 2018a; 2018b; Majumder et al. 2019)
obtain their memory banks by utilizing convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to learn utterance features and unidirectional gated recurrent units (GRUs) (Cho et al. 2014) to
capture relationship of utterances. However, through our exploration, we ﬁnd that a bidirectional GRU (BiGRU) learns
better utterance features than commonly used CNNs. Moreover, the unidirectional GRU only allows each historical utterance to have context before but not after it, which may
prevent information propagation in the opposite direction.
As for the summarizing techniques, the commonly used Soft
Attention produces a weighted sum of the memories, which
can be regarded as a bag-of-memories. Just as the bag-of-

Introduction
Emotion recognition is a signiﬁcant research topic because
of the potential application in developing empathetic machines in present artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) era. We focus on
the real-time scenario to detect the emotion state of speakers
in an ongoing conversation at utterance-level. According to
(Olson 1977), an utterance is a unit of speech bounded by
breathes and pauses. We term this task as Real-Time Emotion Recognition (RTER). Inherently, emotion recognition
is a multi-modal learning task that could involve text, video
and audio features, but the text feature plays the most signiﬁcant role (Chen et al. 1998; Poria, Cambria, and Gelbukh
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8002

