The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Knowledge Graph Transfer Network for Few-Shot Recognition
Riquan Chen,1 Tianshui Chen,1,2 Xiaolu Hui,1 Hefeng Wu,1 ∗ Guanbin Li,1 Liang Lin1,2
1

Sun Yat-sen University, 2 DarkMatter AI Research
{sysucrq, tianshuichen, wuhefeng}@gmail.com, huixlu@mail2.sys.edu.cn,
{liguanbin, linlng}@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract

Training
examples

Few-shot learning aims to learn novel categories from very
few samples given some base categories with sufﬁcient training samples. The main challenge of this task is the novel categories are prone to dominated by color, texture, shape of
the object or background context (namely speciﬁcity), which
are distinct for the given few training samples but not common for the corresponding categories (see Figure 1). Fortunately, we ﬁnd that transferring information of the correlated
based categories can help learn the novel concepts and thus
avoid the novel concept being dominated by the speciﬁcity.
Besides, incorporating semantic correlations among different
categories can effectively regularize this information transfer.
In this work, we represent the semantic correlations in the
form of structured knowledge graph and integrate this graph
into deep neural networks to promote few-shot learning by a
novel Knowledge Graph Transfer Network (KGTN). Specifically, by initializing each node with the classiﬁer weight
of the corresponding category, a propagation mechanism is
learned to adaptively propagate node message through the
graph to explore node interaction and transfer classiﬁer information of the base categories to those of the novel ones.
Extensive experiments on the ImageNet dataset show significant performance improvement compared with current leading competitors. Furthermore, we construct an ImageNet-6K
dataset that covers larger scale categories, i.e, 6,000 categories, and experiments on this dataset further demonstrate
the effectiveness of our proposed model.

SGM
Ours

SGM
Ours

Figure 1: Visualization results of SGM and our proposed
models. The ﬁrst column shows the only training samples
of different categories. The next three columns show the examples that are correctly classiﬁed by both two models. The
last three columns show the samples that are misclassiﬁed
by the SGM model but correctly classiﬁed by our model. It
can be observed that the SGM model can well classify samples with high similarity to the training image but fails in
the samples with a large difference in appearance. In contrast, our proposed model shows superior performance on
more appearance patterns.

Introduction
Recently, deep convolutional neural networks (ConvNet)
(Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; He et al. 2016)
have obtained remarkable success in various visual recognition tasks. To fully train a deep ConvNet recognition system,
it is requested that each category has thousands of training
samples. If the system needs to recognize some novel categories, we need to collect large amounts of training samples
for these categories to avoid being overﬁtting. In contrast,

human can effortlessly learn to recognize novel categories
with few samples by exploiting prior knowledge accumulated from daily life. Mimicking this ability to learn novel
categories from very few samples (also known as few-shot
learning) is a crucial yet practical task in the computer vision
community.
Formally, we consider a general and practical scenario for
few-shot learning, in which there exist a set of base categories with sufﬁcient training samples and a set of novel
categories with very limited samples (e.g., no more than ten
samples in this work). Unlike previous works that merely
focus on the novel categories, we aim to develop a recog-

∗
Riquan Chen and Tianshui Chen contribute equally and share
ﬁrst-authorship. Corresponding author is Hefeng Wu. This work is
partly supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China
(No. U1611461 and 61876045) and SenseTime Research Fund.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10575

