The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Generalized Arc Consistency Algorithms for
Table Constraints: A Summary of Algorithmic Ideas
Roland H. C. Yap,1 Wei Xia, Ruiwei Wang1
1

School of Computing, National University of Singapore
{ryap, ruiwei}@comp.nus.edu.sg

incompatible values but to its local nature does not remove
all such values, while the search instantiates further variables
to simplify the problem till eventually we are certain about
the values or the problem is determined to be unsatisﬁable.
A canonical way of deﬁning a FD constraint is simply to deﬁne the allowed (or disallowed) tuples of values,
thus the constraint is deﬁned as a table hence the term table constraint. The seminal work of Mackworth (Mackworth 1977) (it has > 3600 citations in Google Scholar)
deﬁned a certain local consistency, namely, arc consistency
(AC) together with algorithms, on (binary) table constraints.
Since then there has been considerable research on AC and
its more general form, generalized arc consistency (GAC).
GAC algorithms have sped up by several orders of magnitude over the years. Figure 1 shows the algorithmic improvements over time, for selected GAC algorithms on a
diverse set of instances.1 Newer algorithms such as GACVA (Lecoutre and Szymanek 2006), STR2+ (Lecoutre 2008;
2011), STR3 (Lecoutre, Likitvivatanavong, and Yap 2012;
2015b), and Mddc (Cheng and Yap 2008; 2010) are faster
than the older GAC-4 (Mohr and Masini 1988), GAC-V,
and GAC-A (Bessière and Régin 1997) but slower than
the even newer algorithms such as STRbit (Wang et al.
2016), CT (Demeulenaere et al. 2016) and HTAC (Wang and
Yap 2019), e.g. on the Crossword-ogd-vg-11-13 instance—
GAC-A timeouts, CT takes 49.78s and HTAC is the fastest
at 21.97s (this problem instance is also in Figure 1).
There has been a large body of work on (generalized)
arc consistency algorithms dating from the AC3 algorithm
(Mackworth 1977) in 1977. Many different ideas in the development of (G)AC algorithms shown by the considerable
progress in Figure 1. This paper surveys techniques and
algorithms for (G)AC on table constraints ((G)AC refers
to both GAC and AC). Table 1 gives an overview of the
key techniques and algorithms that we will discuss in this
paper. Our goal is to explain key ideas which have been
historically important as well as review more recent algorithmic ideas over the past decades. While it is not possible to cover all algorithms and ideas due to space, we

Abstract
Constraint Programming is a powerful paradigm to model
and solve combinatorial problems. While there are many
kinds of constraints, the table constraint (also called a CSP)
is perhaps the most signiﬁcant—being the most well-studied
and has the ability to encode any other constraints deﬁned on
ﬁnite variables. Thus, designing efﬁcient ﬁltering algorithms
on table constraints has attracted signiﬁcant research efforts.
In turn, there have been great improvements in efﬁciency over
time with the evolution and development of AC and GAC algorithms. In this paper, we survey the existing ﬁltering algorithms for table constraint focusing on historically important
ideas and recent successful techniques shown to be effective.

1

Introduction

“Constraints” is a surprisingly powerful notion. It is used
successfully in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) and in diverse areas in computer science, e.g., code generation, optimization,
program synthesis, robotics, semantic web, simulation, software engineering, type checking, veriﬁcation, etc. Historically constraints were developed in AI under the framework
of Constraint Satisfaction Problems (CSP) (see (Freuder and
Mackworth 2006) for a history). A CSP is given some relations over a ﬁnite set of variables—a canonical task is to
determine satisﬁability (see (Dechter 2003) for details). Another signiﬁcant line of development comes from the integration of constraints into programming languages initiated
by the work in Constraint Logic Programming (CLP) (see
(Jaffar and Maher 1994)) which is now called Constraint
Programming (CP). CP broadened the notion of constraints,
e.g. real-valued constraints, complex global constraints (see
(van Hoeve and Katriel 2006)), etc.
A key task is how to solve constraints, i.e. solving the
CSP. We focus on ﬁnite domain (FD) constraints where the
variables of the CSP take ﬁnite values which can be used
to encode/model combinatorial problems. Since ﬁnite domain CSPs are NP-complete in general, the typical approach
taken to solve them is to combine a local consistency algorithm with a search strategy to instantiate (or restrict) the
variables. The consistency algorithm removes (ﬁlters) some

1

The benchmarks are intended to illustrate overall differences in
the performance of the selected algorithms rather than being comprehensive.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13590

