The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Stable Learning via Sample Reweighting
Zheyan Shen,1 Peng Cui,1 Tong Zhang,2 Kun Kuang1,3
1

Tsinghua University, 2 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
Zhejiang University
shenzy17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, cuip@tsinghua.edu.cn,
tongzhang@tongzhang-ml.org, kkun2010@gmail.com

environments. It is common in practice that, due the different
time spans, regions and strategies we collect the data, there
usually exist such spurious associations. If we only leverage
the stable structure for prediction, we can ensure good prediction performance even when the unknown test distribution
signiﬁcantly differs from the training distribution.

Abstract
We consider the problem of learning linear prediction models
with model misspeciﬁcation bias. In such case, the collinearity among input variables may inﬂate the error of parameter
estimation, resulting in instability of prediction results when
training and test distributions do not match. In this paper we
theoretically analyze this fundamental problem and propose a
sample reweighting method that reduces collinearity among
input variables. Our method can be seen as a pretreatment of
data to improve the condition of design matrix, and it can then
be combined with any standard learning method for parameter estimation and variable selection. Empirical studies on
both simulation and real datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our method in terms of more stable performance across
different distributed data.

The main challenge of stable learning is that in real applications, we can not expect to choose a completely correct model
for the underlying application problem. We show in this paper that if an incorrect model is used at the training time
(which is inevitable in practice), the existence of collinearity among variables (i.e. linear dependence between two or
more input variables) can inﬂate a small misspeciﬁcation
error arbitrarily large, thus causes instability of prediction
performance across different distributed test data. Therefore,
how to reduce collinearity is of paramount importance in the
stable learning problem.

Introduction
We consider the classical problem of predicting a target
y using a linear combination of p input variables x =
[x1 , . . . , xp ] ∈ Rp . In practice many machine learning methods can be used for such purpose. However, the performance
of most machine learning methods deteriorate when the distribution of the test data deviates from that of the training
data. This is because the traditional learning methods rely
on a fundamental assumption that the data drawn at training
time are from the same underlying distribution as the test
data. In many real situations, however, this assumption can
be violated since we have no prior knowledge on the test
data which will be generated in the future. Therefore, a large
bunch of learning methods which assume the availability of
the test data distribution (e.g. transfer learning (Pan, Yang,
and others 2010)) are not readily applicable at such scenarios.
In this paper, we consider the stable learning problem
that directly addresses this fundamental issue. The goal of
stable learning is to learn a predictive model that performs
uniformly well on any data point x. We actually need two assumptions: (1) There exists a stable structure between target
y and predictor xp which keeps invariant across the whole distribution. (2) There also exist spurious associations brought
by external biases which could be unstable across different

Collinearity (Alin 2010; Farrar and Glauber 1967) can also
be regarded as an ill-conditioning (Fildes 1993) or lack of
orthogonality for the design matrix X. It brings challenges
to evaluate the individual importance of variables in a linear
model since their contributions are interchangeable. As a long
standing problem in statistics, considerable efforts have been
made on collinearity. The major way to handle collinearity
is performing variable selection. Mutual information based
methods like (Kononenko 1994; Raileanu and Stoffel 2004;
Ding and Peng 2005; Peng, Long, and Ding 2005) can be
seen as a pretreatment of data. They basically chooses a subset of variables that are representative and discriminative for
response variable by maximizing the correlation between
selected variables and response while minimizing the correlation among selected variables. Another strand of methods
are based on regularization techniques, which get signiﬁcant
attention because they simultaneously achieve good performance on parameter estimation and variable selection. Distinguished by different assumptions on the variables’ structure,
the approach of (Zou and Hastie 2005; Lorbert et al. 2010;
Grave, Obozinski, and Bach 2011) designs penalty terms
by constraining the correlated variables to be either all selected or not selected at all as ”clusters”, and the approach
of (Chen et al. 2013; Takada, Suzuki, and Fujisawa 2018;
Zhou, Jin, and Hoi 2010) chooses only one variable within

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5692

