The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference (IAAI-20)

Discovery News: A Generic Framework for Financial News Recommendation
Chong Wang, Lisa Kim, Grace Bang, Himani Singh, Russell Kociuba,
Steven Pomerville, Xiaomo Liu∗
S&P Global Ratings
55 Water Street, New York, NY 10004
{chong.wang, lisa.kim, grace.bang, himani.singh, russell.kociuba, steven.pomerville, xiaomo.liu}@spglobal.com

alert. The lack of comprehensive coverage means the attention to certain critical news events can be delayed or missed
altogether. Additionally, when a breaking news event occurs,
dozens of media outlets report on the same occurrence which
result in multiple alerts on the same event. Manual review of
relevant and important news events is time consuming and
error-prone.
At S&P Global Ratings, identifying the relevance of the
news event to the analytical assessment of a company is a
complex process due to the nuanced deﬁnition of a credit
rating. The credit rating of a company is a 1-to-2 year forward looking assessment of the company’s performance and
thus, material news events should impact the future performance of the company in a sustained and meaningful way.
This impacts the approach required to assess the relevance of
the news events to the end user. For example, certain topics
like a management turnover could be breaking news but may
not be impactful to the company’s rating and thus not highly
relevant for analysts. Additionally, for example, if Google
engages in an activity in partnership with Walmart, if the activity were to primarily impact Google and only tangentially
impact Walmart, the news event would not be as relevant for
analysts covering Walmart.
Therefore, it is important to build a news recommender
system for ﬁnancial analysis, which can suggest important
news articles that are relevant to ﬁnancial analysts’ tasks. To
be applied in large ﬁnancial companies, such system must
be 1) effective so that analysts will not miss any important
information, 2) efﬁcient so that news can be timely updated,
3) scalable so that it can be used in large business environments, and 4) extendable so that changing business requirements can easily be met.
In this paper, we propose a framework for the automated
ingestion, clustering, relevancy, and ranking of news events
for ﬁnancial analysts in the debt capital market. It is an ongoing project currently in the testing phase at S&P Global
Ratings. More speciﬁcally, the method herein uses a combination of entity-based news tracking, clustering, relevancy,
and ranking models to detect news events, ﬁlter out noise,
cluster the same event into each of the respective clusters,
assign relevance of news event to main entity, and rank each
news event cluster based on the importance of the event. The

Abstract
In the ﬁnancial services industry, it is crucial for analysts
to constantly monitor and stay informed on the latest developments of their portfolio of companies. This ensures that
analysts are up-to-date in their analysis and provide highly
credible and timely insights. Currently, analysts receive news
alerts through manually created news alert subscriptions that
are often noisy and difﬁcult to manage. The manual review
process is time-consuming and error-prone. We demonstrate
Discovery News, a framework for an automated news recommender system for ﬁnancial analysis at S&P’s Global Ratings. This system includes the automated ingestion, relevancy, clustering, and ranking of news. The proposed framework is adaptable to any form of input news data and can
seamlessly integrate with other data used for analysis like ﬁnancial data.

Introduction
Analysts in the ﬁnancial services industry ingest news from
dozens of sources every day. It is critical for them to stay
up-to-date on the latest events as at any moment, key material events could occur that impact their analysis on a given
company. For example, a company could announce an acquisition or a disruption to their supply chain that would materially impact its business operations. By staying informed
on these events in a timely manner, analysts can promptly respond to these changing circumstances and potentially minimize any impact of the company’s action on their investment
holdings or analysis.
Currently, for each company they analyze, the analysts
manually set up news alert subscriptions from a ﬁxed set
of sources like Google or Bloomberg based on keywords of
the company’s name. Thus, the news alerts analysts receive
contain much noise. Also, a company with a name like “Apple” could result in new alerts about apple orchards or apple
juice. Or alternatively, if there are critical articles discussing
changes in regulations of the smartphone industry but there
are no explicit mentions of company names, this may not
be picked up through the keyword generated manual news
∗

corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13390

