The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

FourierSAT: A Fourier Expansion-Based Algebraic
Framework for Solving Hybrid Boolean Constraints∗
Anastasios Kyrillidis, Anshumali Shrivastava, Moshe Y. Vardi, Zhiwei Zhang†
Rice University, Houston, TX, USA
{anastasios, anshumali, vardi, zhiwei}@rice.edu

of literals. Despite the NP-completeness of CNF-SAT, there
has been a lot of progress on the engineering side of CNFSAT solvers. Mainstream SAT solvers can be classiﬁed into
complete and incomplete ones: A complete SAT solver will
return a solution if there exists one or prove unsatisﬁability if no solution exists, while an incomplete algorithm is
not guaranteed to ﬁnd a satisfying assignment. Clearly, an
incomplete algorithm cannot prove unsatisﬁability.

Abstract
The Boolean SATisﬁability problem (SAT) is of central importance in computer science. Although SAT is known to be
NP-complete, progress on the engineering side—especially
that of Conﬂict-Driven Clause Learning (CDCL) and Local
Search SAT solvers—has been remarkable. Yet, while SAT
solvers, aimed at solving industrial-scale benchmarks in Conjunctive Normal Form (CNF), have become quite mature,
SAT solvers that are effective on other types of constraints
(e.g., cardinality constraints and XORs) are less well-studied;
a general approach to handling non-CNF constraints is still
lacking. In addition, previous work indicated that for speciﬁc
classes of benchmarks, the running time of extant SAT solvers
depends heavily on properties of the formula and details of
encoding, instead of the scale of the benchmarks, which adds
uncertainty to expectations of running time.
To address the issues above, we design FourierSAT, an
incomplete SAT solver based on Fourier analysis of Boolean
functions, a technique to represent Boolean functions by multilinear polynomials. By such a reduction to continuous optimization, we propose an algebraic framework for solving
systems consisting of different types of constraints. The idea
is to leverage gradient information to guide the search process in the direction of local improvements. Empirical results
demonstrate that FourierSAT is more robust than other
solvers on certain classes of benchmarks.

1

Most modern complete SAT solvers are based on the
the Conﬂict-Driven Clause Learning (CDCL) algorithm
(Marques-Silva and Sakallah 1999), an evolution of the
backtracking Davis-Putnam-Logemann-Loveland (DPLL)
algorithm (Davis and Putnam 1960; Davis, Logemann,
and Loveland 1962). The main techniques used in CDCL
solvers include clause-based learning of conﬂicts, random
restarts, heuristic variable selection, and effective constraintpropagation data structures (Gong and Zhou 2017). Examples of highly efﬁcient complete SAT solvers include MiniSat (Eén and Sörensson 2003), BerkMin (Goldberg and
Novikov 2007), PicoSAT (Biere 2008), Lingeling (Biere
2010), Glusose (Audemard and Simon 2014) and MapleSAT
(Liang 2018). Overall, CDCL-based SAT solvers constitute
a huge success for SAT problems, and have been dominating
in the research of SAT solving.
Local search techniques are mostly used in incomplete
SAT solvers. The number of unsatisﬁed clauses is often regarded as the objective function. Local search algorithms mainly include greedy local search (GSAT) (Selman, Levesque, and Mitchell 1992) and random walk GSAT
(WSAT) (Selman, Kautz, and Cohen 1999). During the
main loop, GSAT repeatedly checks the current assignments
neighbors and selects a new assignment to maximize the
number of satisﬁed clauses. In contrast, WSAT randomly selects a variable in an unsatisﬁed clause and inverts its value
(Gong and Zhou 2017). On top of these basic algorithms,
several heuristics for variable selection have been proposed,
such as NSAT (McAllester, Selman, and Kautz 1997), Sparrow (Balint and Fröhlich 2010), and ProbSAT (Balint and
Schöning 2012). While practical local search SAT solvers
could be slower than CDCL solvers, local search techniques
are still useful for solving a certain class of benchmarks,
such as hard random formulas and MaxSAT. Local search al-

Introduction

Constraint satisfaction problems (CSPs) are fundamental in mathematics, physics, and computer science. The
Boolean SATisﬁability problem (SAT) is a special class of
CSPs, where each variable takes value from the binary set
{True, False}. Solving SAT efﬁciently is of utmost signiﬁcance in computer science, both from a theoretical and a
practical perspective.
As a special case of SAT, conjunctive normal forms
(CNFs) are a conjunction (and-ing) of disjunctions (or-ing)
∗
The author list has been sorted alphabetically by last name;
this should not be used to determine the extent of authors’ contributions.
†
Corresponding author: Zhiwei Zhang.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1552

