The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

The Stanford Acuity Test: A Precise Vision Test Using
Bayesian Techniques and a Discovery in Human Visual Response
Chris Piech,* 1 Ali Malik,∗1 Laura M Scott, Robert T Chang,2 Charles Lin2
1

Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
2
Department of Ophthalmology, Stanford University
{piech, malikali}@cs.stanford.edu, {rchang3, lincc}@stanford.edu

treatment of patients; yet, it suffers from some notable shortcomings. Acuity exams such as these exhibit high variance
in their results due to the large role that chance plays in the
ﬁnal diagnosis, and the approximation error incurred by the
need to discretise letter sizes on a chart. On the other hand,
digital exams can show letter of any size and can adaptively
make decisions based on intelligent probabilistic models. As
such they have potential to address the shortcomings of analog charts.
While promising, contemporary digital exams have yet to
dramatically improve accuracy over traditional chart-based
approaches. The current best digital exam uses a psychometric Item Response Theory (IRT) algorithm for both selecting
the next letter size to query and for making a ﬁnal prediction
of acuity. Under simulation analysis, this digital exam results
in a 19% reduction in error over traditional chart-based approaches. The separate ﬁelds of reinforcement learning and
psychometric IRT have independently explored how to effectively make decisions under uncertainty. By merging the
good ideas from both disciplines we can develop a much
better visual acuity test.
In this paper we make two main contributions. First, we
revisit the human Visual Response Function—a function relating the size of a letter to the probability of a person identifying it correctly—and discover that it follows an interpretable parametric form that ﬁts real patient data. Second,
we present an algorithm to measure a person’s acuity which
uses several Bayesian techniques common in modern artiﬁcial intelligence. The algorithm, called the Stanford Acuity
Test (StAT)1 , has the following novel features:

Abstract
Chart-based visual acuity measurements are used by billions
of people to diagnose and guide treatment of vision impairment. However, the ubiquitous eye exam has no mechanism
for reasoning about uncertainty and as such, suffers from a
well-documented reproducibility problem. In this paper we
make two core contributions. First, we uncover a new parametric probabilistic model of visual acuity response based
on detailed measurements of patients with eye disease. Then,
we present an adaptive, digital eye exam using modern artiﬁcial intelligence techniques which substantially reduces acuity exam error over existing approaches, while also introducing the novel ability to model its own uncertainty and incorporate prior beliefs. Using standard evaluation metrics, we
estimate a 74% reduction in prediction error compared to the
ubiquitous chart-based eye exam and up to 67% reduction
compared to the previous best digital exam. For patients with
eye disease, the novel ability to ﬁnely measure acuity from
home could be a crucial part in early diagnosis. We provide a
web implementation of our algorithm for anyone in the world
to use. The insights in this paper also provide interesting implications for the ﬁeld of psychometric Item Response Theory.

1

Introduction

Reliably measuring a person’s visual ability is an essential
component in the detection and treatment of eye diseases
around the world. However, quantifying how well an individual can distinguish visual information is a surprisingly
difﬁcult task—without invasive techniques, physicians rely
on chart-based eye exams where patients are asked visual
questions and their responses observed.
Historically, vision has been evaluated by measuring a patient’s visual acuity: a measure of the font size at which a
patient can correctly identify letters shown a ﬁxed distance
away. Snellen, the traditional eye exam chart, determines
this statistic by marching down a set of discrete letter sizes,
asking the patient a small number of questions per size to indentify the size where the patient gets less than half the letters correct. This approach is simple and is used daily in the

1. Uses the new parametric form of the human Visual Response Function.
2. Returns a soft inference prediction of the patient’s acuity,
enabling us to express a calibrated conﬁdence in the ﬁnal
result.
3. Uses a posterior probability matching algorithm to adaptively select the next letter size shown to a user. This effectively balances exploration of the acuity belief.
1

The previous state-of-the-art, FrACT, was named after
Freiburg, the city in which it was developed. We continue in this
tradition.

* Equal contribution.

Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
471

