The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Coarse Correlation in Extensive-Form Games∗
Gabriele Farina,1 Tommaso Bianchi,2 Tuomas Sandholm1,3,4,5
1

Computer Science Department, Carnegie Mellon University, 2 DEIB, Politecnico di Milano
3
Strategic Machine, Inc., 4 Strategy Robot, Inc., 5 Optimized Markets, Inc.
{gfarina, sandholm}@cs.cmu.edu, tommaso4.bianchi@mail.polimi.it

related equilibrium are known in the literature: normalform correlated equilibrium (NFCE) (Aumann 1974; Gilboa
and Zemel 1989) and extensive-form correlated equilibrium (EFCE) (von Stengel and Forges 2008). The two solution concepts differ in what the mediator reveals to the
players. In an NFCE, the mediator privately reveals to each
player, just before the game starts, the (whole) normal-form
plan that was sampled for the player. Players are then free to
either play according to the plan, or play any other strategy
that they desire. In an EFCE, the mediator does not reveal
the whole plan to the players before the game starts. Instead,
the mediator incrementally reveals the plan by recommending individual moves. Each recommended move is only revealed when the player reaches the decision point for which
the recommendation is relevant. Each player is free to play
a move different than the recommended one, but doing so
comes at the cost of future recommendations, as the mediator will immediately stop issuing recommendations to any
player who did not follow all the recommendations so far.
Because of this deterrent, and because players have to decide
whether to follow recommendations knowing less about the
sampled normal-form plan than in NFCE, a social-welfaremaximizing EFCE always achieves social welfare equal or
higher than any NFCE.
Coarse correlated equilibrium differs from correlated
equilibrium in that players must decide whether or not to
commit to playing according to the recommendations of the
mediator before observing such recommendations. Normalform coarse-correlated equilibrium (NFCCE) (Moulin and
Vial 1978) is the coarse equivalent of NFCE. Before the
game starts, players decide whether to commit to playing
according to the normal-form plan that was sampled by the
mediator (from some correlated distribution known to all
players), without observing such a plan ﬁrst. Players who
decide to commit will privately receive the plan that was
sampled for them; players that decide to not commit will
not receive any recommended plan, and are free to play according to any strategy they desire. Since players know less
at the time of commitment than either in NFCE or EFCE,
a social-welfare-maximizing NFCCE is always guaranteed
to achieve equal or higher social welfare than any NFCE or
EFCE. No coarse equivalent of EFCE is known in the literature.
In this paper, we introduce the coarse equivalent of EFCE,

Abstract
Coarse correlation models strategic interactions of rational
agents complemented by a correlation device which is a mediator that can recommend behavior but not enforce it. Despite being a classical concept in the theory of normal-form
games since 1978, not much is known about the merits of
coarse correlation in extensive-form settings. In this paper,
we consider two instantiations of the idea of coarse correlation in extensive-form games: normal-form coarse-correlated
equilibrium (NFCCE), already deﬁned in the literature, and
extensive-form coarse-correlated equilibrium (EFCCE), a
new solution concept that we introduce. We show that EFCCEs are a subset of NFCCEs and a superset of the related
extensive-form correlated equilibria. We also show that, in
n-player extensive-form games, social-welfare-maximizing
EFCCEs and NFCCEs are bilinear saddle points, and give
new efﬁcient algorithms for the special case of two-player
games with no chance moves. Experimentally, our proposed
algorithm for NFCCE is two to four orders of magnitude
faster than the prior state of the art.

Introduction
As a generic term, correlated equilibrium denotes a family of solution concepts whereby a mediator that can recommend behavior, but not enforce it, complements the interaction of rational agents. Before the game starts, the
mediator—also called a correlation device—samples a tuple of normal-form plans (one for each player) from a publicly known correlated distribution. The mediator then proceeds to privately ask each player whether they would like
to commit to playing according to the plan that was sampled
for them. Being part of an equilibrium, the correlated distribution must be such that no player can beneﬁt from not
following the recommendations, assuming all other players
follow. Example games where a correlation device is natural include trafﬁc, congestion control, load balancing (Ashlagi, Monderer, and Tennenholtz 2008), and carbon abatement (Moulin, Ray, and Gupta 2014).
In the context of extensive-form (that is, tree-form)
games, two different instantiations of the idea of cor∗
The Supplemental Material for this paper can be found in the
arXiv version at https://arxiv.org/abs/1908.09893
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1934

