The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Reinforcement Learning from Imperfect
Demonstrations under Soft Expert Guidance
Mingxuan Jing,∗1 Xiaojian Ma,∗1,2 Wenbing Huang,∗1 Fuchun Sun,1 Chao Yang,1
Bin Fang,1 Huaping Liu1
1

Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist),
State Key Lab on Intelligent Technology and Systems,
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
2
Center for Vision, Cognition, Learning and Autonomy, Department of Computer Science, UCLA, CA 90095, USA
jmx16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, maxiaojian@ucla.edu
fcsun@tsinghua.edu.cn, hwenbing@126.com

Abstract
In this paper, we study Reinforcement Learning from Demonstrations (RLfD) that improves the exploration efﬁciency of
Reinforcement Learning (RL) by providing expert demonstrations. Most of existing RLfD methods require demonstrations to be perfect and sufﬁcient, which yet is unrealistic to
meet in practice. To work on imperfect demonstrations, we
ﬁrst deﬁne an imperfect expert setting for RLfD in a formal way, and then point out that previous methods suffer
from two issues in terms of optimality and convergence, respectively. Upon the theoretical ﬁndings we have derived, we
tackle these two issues by regarding the expert guidance as
a soft constraint on regulating the policy exploration of the
agent, which eventually leads to a constrained optimization
problem. We further demonstrate that such problem is able to
be addressed efﬁciently by performing a local linear search on
its dual form. Considerable empirical evaluations on a comprehensive collection of benchmarks indicate our method attains consistent improvement over other RLfD counterparts.

1

Figure 1: An overview of our RLfD method using soft constraint versus existing approaches using penalty departures.
Left: In penalty method, agent seeks to maximize the shaped
reward which may induce non-optimal solution. Right: Proposed soft constraint will guide the agent to explore towards
areas with high reward without altering the optimality.

Introduction

Early RLfD methods enhance RL by either putting expert demonstrations into a replay buffer for value estimation (Hester et al. 2018; Večerı́k et al. 2017) or applying them to pre-train the policy in a supervised manner (Silver et al. 2016; Cruz Jr, Du, and Taylor 2017),
both of which, however, simply regard demonstrations as
data-augmentations without making full use of them during the policy optimization procedure. To address this weakness, modern RLfD approaches (Sun, Bagnell, and Boots
2018; Kang, Jie, and Feng 2018) absorb ingredients from
Imitation Learning (Schaal 1997; Abbeel and Ng 2004;
Ziebart et al. 2008; Ho and Ermon 2016; Jing et al. 2019;
Yang et al. 2019), and encourage the agent to mimic the
demonstrated behaviors when the environmental feedback
is rare or even unavailable. Speciﬁcally, they reshape the native reward in RL by adding a demonstration-guided term to
force expert-alike exploration.
Whereas encouraging expert-alike actions does help in
avoiding futile exploration, continuously enforcing such
type of rewards during the whole learning phase is prob-

Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Sutton and Barto 1998) enables robots to acquire skills by interacting with the environment. Despite the conspicuous advancements they have attained, typical RL methods suffer from the exploration issue
that performing exploration over novel action-state trajectories is inefﬁcient, and is not spontaneously guaranteed when
the reward signals are sparse or incomplete. Thus, a fairly
of approaches (Brys et al. 2015; Chemali and Lazaric 2015;
Cederborg et al. 2015; Kang, Jie, and Feng 2018; Sun, Bagnell, and Boots 2018) have resorted to the combination of
RL with expert demonstrations (containing action-state trajectories), giving rise to a new research vein that exploits expert demonstrations to help policy exploration of the agent.
We refer this vein as Reinforcement Learning from Demonstrations (RLfD) in this paper.
∗
These authors contributed equally. Correspondence to Fuchun
Sun.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5109

