The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Towards Comprehensive Recommender Systems: Time-Aware Uniﬁed
Recommendations Based on Listwise Ranking of Implicit Cross-Network Data
Dilruk Perera, Roger Zimmermann
School of Computing, National University of Singapore
{dilruk, rogerz}@comp.nus.edu.sg

(1) Inability to provide timely recommendations for
new and existing users: Due to the high item-to-user ratio in web applications, existing user interactions are highly
sparse, and leads to low recommender performance (data
sparsity problem). It is also infeasible to determine new user
preferences due to the absence of their interactions (coldstart problem). Moreover, user preferences toward items are
also subject to constant change over time (Campos, Dıez,
and Cantador 2012; Koren 2009). Therefore, recommender
systems should capture such changes and model up-to-date
user preferences for effective recommendations for both new
and existing users.
(2) Not fully optimized to use implicit feedback data
for listwise ranking: Unlike interactions with explicit feedback (1-5 ratings), most user interactions are implicit in nature (e.g., watching a video or clicking on a link). Therefore, recent years have seen a shift in recommender systems
from using explicit ratings to widely and cheaply available
implicit ratings (Kelly and Teevan 2003). In practice, recommender systems output a ranked list of items, based on user
preferences. However, existing implicit feedback based systems, for example, Matrix Factorization (MF) (Koren, Bell,
and Volinsky 2009), Factorization Machines (FM) (Rendle
2010) and vast majority of deep learning models (He and
Chua 2017) are not fully optimized to rank a list of items.
They are commonly optimized for predicting user preferences for a single item (pointwise) or, ranking preferences
for a pair of items (pairwise). Therefore, the achievable recommender quality is limited.
We propose a time aware uniﬁed cross-network solution with a novel personalized listwise loss function to address the above limitations and create a consolidated recommender solution. User engagements on multiple social networks showcase their preferences from various perspectives.
Therefore, such preferences across networks can be used to
mitigate cold start and data sparsity issues, while improving recommender novelty and diversity. Therefore, for new
users, at the time of registration, their preferences are obtained from other source networks. For existing users, more
comprehensive preferences are obtained by integrating their
preferences with other source networks.
To capture the dynamic nature of user preferences, we

Abstract
The abundance of information in web applications make recommendation essential for users as well as applications. Despite the effectiveness of existing recommender systems, we
ﬁnd two major limitations that reduce their overall performance: (1) inability to provide timely recommendations for
both new and existing users by considering the dynamic nature of user preferences, and (2) not fully optimized for the
ranking task when using implicit feedback. Therefore, we
propose a novel deep learning based uniﬁed cross-network
solution to mitigate cold-start and data sparsity issues and
provide timely recommendations for new and existing users.
Furthermore, we consider the ranking problem under implicit feedback as a classiﬁcation task, and propose a generic
personalized listwise optimization criterion for implicit data
to effectively rank a list of items. We illustrate our crossnetwork model using Twitter auxiliary information for recommendations on YouTube target network. Extensive comparisons against multiple time aware and cross-network baselines show that the proposed solution is superior in terms
of accuracy, novelty and diversity. Furthermore, experiments
conducted on the popular MovieLens dataset suggest that the
proposed listwise ranking method outperforms existing stateof-the-art ranking techniques.

1

Introduction

Recommender systems have been effectively used in various web applications (e.g., search engines, e-commerce
and social networks) to mitigate the notorious information
overload problem. In addition to the user beneﬁts, where
interesting information are automatically recommended to
users, recommender systems help web applications to signiﬁcantly increase their revenue. For example, 35% of Amazon purchases and 75% of Netﬂix movie views are initiated by their internal recommender systems. Therefore,
over the years, constant efforts have been made to improve the quality of recommendations in terms of accuracy, novelty and diversity (Perera and Zimmermann 2018;
McLaughlin and Herlocker 2004). However, despite their
success, existing systems face two main limitations that continue to hinder their performances.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
189

