The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

General Transportability – Synthesizing
Observations and Experiments from Heterogeneous Domains
Sanghack Lee, Juan D. Correa, Elias Bareinboim
Causal Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory
Columbia University, USA
{sl4712, jdcorrea, eb}@cs.columbia.edu

goal of operating more efﬁciently and surgically in a deployment site, despite their structural differences (Pearl 2000;
Bareinboim and Pearl 2016).

Abstract
The process of transporting and synthesizing experimental
ﬁndings from heterogeneous data collections to construct
causal explanations is arguably one of the most central and
challenging problems in modern data science. This problem has been studied in the causal inference literature under
the rubric of causal effect identiﬁability and transportability
(Bareinboim and Pearl 2016). In this paper, we investigate a
general version of this challenge where the goal is to learn
conditional causal effects from an arbitrary combination of
datasets collected under different conditions, observational or
experimental, and from heterogeneous populations. Speciﬁcally, we introduce a uniﬁed graphical criterion that characterizes the conditions under which conditional causal effects
can be uniquely determined from the disparate data collections. We further develop an efﬁcient, sound, and complete
algorithm that outputs an expression for the conditional effect whenever it exists, which synthesizes the available causal
knowledge and empirical evidence; if the algorithm is unable
to ﬁnd a formula, then such synthesis is provably impossible,
unless further parametric assumptions are made. Finally, we
prove that do-calculus (Pearl 1995) is complete for this task,
i.e., the inexistence of a do-calculus derivation implies the
impossibility of constructing the targeted causal explanation.

1

One natural question that arises in these settings is what
makes scientists believe that experimental studies conducted
in one species could, at least in principle, be used to make
causal claims about another different one? Also, how could
AI engineers expect, or perhaps hope, that an intelligent system trained in one environment would operate successfully
when deployed in a different location? The key observation leveraged in these cases is that, while there might exist
glaring differences in the source and target domains, some
mechanisms are shared across domains, and owed to their
invariances, they would act as anchors, allowing knowledge
to be transported and causal learning to take place eventually (Pearl 2000; Spirtes, Glymour, and Scheines 2001;
Bareinboim and Pearl 2016; Pearl and Mackenzie 2018).
The ﬁelds of machine learning and artiﬁcial intelligence
provide the theoretical underpinnings to reason about causal
mechanisms so as to tackle the challenge of synthesizing experimental ﬁndings in a principled and systematic way. In
particular, we build on the framework of structural causal
models (SCMs) (Pearl 2000) to formalize this setting and
systematically leverage the invariant features of the underlying data-generating model. An increasingly large class
of problems regarding the generalizability of experimental ﬁndings across domains has been studied in the last
decades within the SCM framework. For instance, the problem of identiﬁability of causal effects has been investigated,
which is concerned with the conditions under which the
causal effect of a treatment variable (or set) X on an outcome variable (or set) Y , usually written as P (Y |do(X)),
can be determined from the combination of the observational distribution and qualitative understanding about the
domain encoded in the form of a causal diagram. A criterion
known as the backdoor has been introduced in (Pearl 1993),
which provided a formal, graphical justiﬁcation for when
causal effects can be identiﬁed by the adjustment formula,
and then estimated by propensity score methods. There exist a number of other conditions developed to solve this
problem (Galles and Pearl 1995; Pearl and Robins 1995;
Kuroki and Miyakawa 1999; Halpern 2000; Spirtes, Gly-

Introduction

In the empirical sciences, experiments are almost invariably
performed with the intent of being used elsewhere (e.g., outside the laboratory), where the conditions are likely to be
different. This practice is based on the premise that, owing
to certain commonalities between the source and target environments, causal claims will be valid even where experiments have never been carried out. In biology, for example, many experiments performed on Bonobos are not designed due to an inherent interest in this particular species,
but because of their similarity to Homo Sapiens, and the
hope that the experimental ﬁndings would be robust, and
transportable across species. The capability of generalizing
causal knowledge plays a critical role in machine learning
as well; an intelligent system is trained in one environment
— where it is allowed to perform interventions — with the
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10210

