The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Unsupervised Domain Adaptation via
Discriminative Manifold Embedding and Alignment
You-Wei Luo,1 Chuan-Xian Ren,1∗ Pengfei Ge,1 Ke-Kun Huang,2 Yu-Feng Yu3
1

School of Mathematics, Sun Yat-Sen University, China
2
School of Mathematics, JiaYing University, China
3
Department of Statistics and Institute of Intelligent Finance, Guangzhou University, China
{luoyw28, gepengf}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, rchuanx@mail.sysu.edu.cn
{kkcocoon, yuyufeng220}@163.com
illumination, camera views or resolution, often lead to the
shifting distributions (i.e., the domain shift) (Shimodaira
2000; Moreno-Torres et al. 2012). According to the transfer theory established by Ben-David et al. (Ben-David et al.
2007; 2010), the primary task for cross-domain adaptation
is to learn the discriminative feature representations while
narrowing the discrepancy between domains.
Recent literature indicates that CNNs learn abstract
representations with nonlinear transformations (Bengio,
Courville, and Vincent 2013), which suppress the negative effects caused by variant explanatory factors in domain
shift (Long et al. 2015). Pioneer works (Long et al. 2015;
Ganin et al. 2016; Long et al. 2017; Sankaranarayanan et
al. 2018) attempt to transfer the source classiﬁer with sufﬁcient supervision to the target domain by minimizing the
discrepancy between the source and target domains. Though
early adversarial confusion methods (Ganin et al. 2016;
Sankaranarayanan et al. 2018; Pinheiro 2018), which is inspired by Generative Adversarial Nets (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014), promise the generated features are domainindistinguishable and form a well-aligned the marginal distributions, the conditional distributions are still not guaranteed (Long et al. 2018; Saito et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2019b).
Some latest methods achieve remarkable improvement in
accuracy by employing the uncertainty information on the
target domain, e.g., pseudo labels and soft labels (Long et al.
2018; Saito et al. 2018; Pinheiro 2018; Chen et al. 2019b).
Though such information transduced from the source domain strengthens the discriminative ability of the target domain, there are still two points to be further explored. First,
direct utilization of uncertainty information is risky and
should be treated cautiously (Long et al. 2018), as the hardassigned pseudo labels may change the intrinsic structure
of data space (Ding and Fu 2019). Second, the batch-wise
training in deep learning limits the capture of global information; thus models may be misled by some extreme local
distributions.
In this paper, we develop a novel Riemannian manifold
embedding and alignment framework. As the transferability
and discriminability are both valuable (Chen et al. 2019b),
the proposal reaches a consistent rule for these two properties. The main idea is to describe the domains by a sequence

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation is effective in leveraging
the rich information from the source domain to the unsupervised target domain. Though deep learning and adversarial
strategy make an important breakthrough in the adaptability of features, there are two issues to be further explored.
First, the hard-assigned pseudo labels on the target domain
are risky to the intrinsic data structure. Second, the batchwise training manner in deep learning limits the description
of the global structure. In this paper, a Riemannian manifold learning framework is proposed to achieve transferability and discriminability consistently. As to the ﬁrst problem,
this method establishes a probabilistic discriminant criterion
on the target domain via soft labels. Further, this criterion
is extended to a global approximation scheme for the second issue; such approximation is also memory-saving. The
manifold metric alignment is exploited to be compatible with
the embedding space. A theoretical error bound is derived
to facilitate the alignment. Extensive experiments have been
conducted to investigate the proposal and results of the comparison study manifest the superiority of consistent manifold
learning framework.

Introduction
In machine learning, large-scale datasets with annotations
play a crucial role during the learning process. Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) achieves a signiﬁcant advance in various tasks via a huge number of well-labeled
samples (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015). Unfortunately,
such data is actually prohibitive in many real-world scenarios. Applying the learned model in the new environment, i.e., the cross-domains scheme, will cause a signiﬁcant degradation of recognition performance (Ren, Xu, and
Yan 2018; Kim et al. 2019).
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) is designed to
deal with the shortage of labels by leveraging the rich labels and strong supervision from the source domain to the
target domain, where the target domain has no access to the
annotations. In fact, datasets composed of speciﬁcally exploratory factors and variants, such as background, style,
∗

Corresponding Author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5029

