The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Reinforcement Mechanism Design: With
Applications to Dynamic Pricing in Sponsored Search Auctions∗
Weiran Shen,1 Binghui Peng,1 Hanpeng Liu,1 Michael Zhang,2
Ruohan Qian,3 Yan Hong,3 Zhi Guo,3 Zongyao Ding,3 Pengjun Lu,3 Pingzhong Tang1†
1

Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University
2
Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
Baidu Inc.

The gold-standard mechanism in sponsored search is the
well-known generalized second price (GSP) auction (Edelman, Ostrovsky, and Schwarz 2007; Varian 2007). The auctions allocate the best slots to the advertisers who submit the
highest bids, second best slots to the ones with the second
highest bids, and so on; and charge them based on the bids
one slot below them (or the lowest price for them to maintain the current slot). Major search engines all adopt some
variants of the GSP auction.
A problem with the vanilla GSP auction is that it is not
revenue optimal, according the seminal theory attributed to
Myerson (1981). It is known that, under standard game theory
assumptions, a revenue-optimal auction does not necessarily
allocate the slots by the rank of their bids. It is also known
that in an optimal auction, there exists a vector of advertiserspeciﬁc reserve prices that ﬁlter low bids. Over the years, a
large body of literature at the interface of the economics and
computer science has focused on revenue optimization of
GSP auctions by incorporating insights (ranking and reserve
price) from Myerson’s theory (Lahaie and Pennock 2007;
Roberts et al. 2013; Ostrovsky and Schwarz 2011; Thompson
and Leyton-Brown 2013).
However, most revenue optimization theories depend crucially on the assumptions about the bidders’ rational behaviors. Recently, it has been shown that such assumptions may
not hold in reality. Therefore, an emerging line of works has
started to focus on settings where the bidders use a certain
learning algorithm (Nekipelov, Syrgkanis, and Tardos 2015;
Balseiro and Gur 2017; Nazerzadeh et al. 2016). However,
most of these models do not give a speciﬁc and detailed
description of the bidders’ actual behaviors. Also, the different rationality levels of the heterogeneous bidder population
cannot be easily captured.

Abstract
In many social systems in which individuals and organizations interact with each other, there can be no easy laws to
govern the rules of the environment, and agents’ payoffs are
often inﬂuenced by other agents’ actions. We examine such
a social system in the setting of sponsored search auctions
and tackle the search engine’s dynamic pricing problem by
combining the tools from both mechanism design and the AI
domain. In this setting, the environment not only changes over
time, but also behaves strategically. Over repeated interactions
with bidders, the search engine can dynamically change the
reserve prices and determine the optimal strategy that maximizes the proﬁt. We ﬁrst train a buyer behavior model, with a
real bidding data set from a major search engine, that predicts
bids given information disclosed by the search engine and
the bidders’ performance data from previous rounds. We then
formulate the dynamic pricing problem as an MDP and apply
a reinforcement-based algorithm that optimizes reserve prices
over time. Experiments demonstrate that our model outperforms static optimization strategies including the ones that are
currently in use as well as several other dynamic ones.

Introduction
Selling advertisements online through sponsored search auctions is a proven proﬁt model for Internet search engine
companies such as Google and Baidu. When a user submits a
query in such a search engine, it displays, in the result page, a
few advertisements alongside the organic results, both related
to the query. In the backend, the keyword search triggers an
auction mechanism among all advertisers who are interested
in the keyword. The advertisers submit bids to compete for
advertising positions on the result page. The search engine
then ranks the advertisements on the result page according to
the advertisers’ bids and charges them only when someone
clicks on the advertisement.

Our approach: reinforcement mechanism design

∗

This work is supported by Science and Technology Innovation 2030 - “New Generation Artiﬁcial Intelligence” Major Project
No.(2018AAA0100904) and Beijing Academy of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (BAAI). An early version of this paper was posted on arxiv.org
(Shen et al. 2017).
†
kenshinping@gmail.com. To whom correspondence
should be addressed.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Instead of applying the mechanism design theory or machine
learning techniques in isolation, we propose a hybrid approach that combines insights from both domains to examine
how a social system with human players can be better designed. First, we follow the mechanism design theory and
describe our mechanism with a set of parameters. Then we
apply optimization algorithms to search for the optimal pa2236

