The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Entrainment2Vec: Embedding Entrainment for Multi-Party Dialogues
Zahra Rahimi, Diane Litman
Intelligent Systems Program
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
{zar10, dlitman}@pitt.edu

trainment values, or by averaging individuals’ entrainment
to the group (Gonzales, Hancock, and Pennebaker 2010;
Nenkova, Gravano, and Hirschberg 2008; Friedberg, Litman, and Paletz 2012; Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al. 2012;
Doyle and Frank 2016; Rahimi and Litman 2018). However, the entrainment structure of multi-party groups consists of many pairwise relations with different strengths and
directions. To the best of our knowledge, almost no existing multi-party entrainment measures utilize the structure of
pairwise entrainment relations in groups. Measuring convergence, Rahimi and Litman (2018) introduced a weighting
based on entrainment behaviors (converging, diverging, or
maintaining) in groups to decrease the inﬂuence of outliers.
Although this is an attempt to utilize the structure of group
entrainment relations, it encodes only one aspect of these
relations.
In this paper, utilizing the adaptive pairwise entrainment
measure (Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al. 2012), which measures how much a speaker adapts her language to another
one in a local turn-by-turn basis, we propose a graph-based
vector representation of multi-party entrainment to encode
the strength and structure of pairwise interactions in multiparty groups. Weighted directed entrainment graphs represent the structure of pairwise entrainment relations and their
strength. Learning embedding for the entrainment graphs,
we represent multi-party entrainment in vector-space where
groups with similar graphs have close vectors.
Learning dense vector representations for nodes, edges, or
sub-graphs from a large-scale sparse graph has been studied
by researchers and applied to social or knowledge graphs
(Luo et al. 2015; Tang et al. 2015; Grover and Leskovec
2016; Zhou et al. 2017; Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec
2017). The intuition is similar to word2vec (Mikolov et al.
2013). Similar nodes in a graph should have vector representations that are close to each other. Similarity can be deﬁned
as having similar neighbors or similar structural roles.
Inspired by these methods and by paragraph2vec (Le and
Mikolov 2014), we learn vectors for small graphs where
similarity is deﬁned as having a similar graph structure.
To encode the structure of small graphs/groups (only about
4 nodes/speakers), we propose to initialize the node and
graph embeddings by applying a set of graph algorithms

Abstract
Entrainment is the propensity of speakers to begin behaving like one another in conversation. While most entrainment studies have focused on dyadic interactions, researchers
have also started to investigate multi-party conversations. In
these studies, multi-party entrainment has typically been estimated by averaging the pairs’ entrainment values or by averaging individuals’ entrainment to the group. While such
multi-party measures utilize the strength of dyadic entrainment, they have not yet exploited different aspects of the
dynamics of entrainment relations in multi-party groups. In
this paper, utilizing an existing pairwise asymmetric entrainment measure, we propose a novel graph-based vector representation of multi-party entrainment that incorporates both
strength and dynamics of pairwise entrainment relations. The
proposed kernel approach and weakly-supervised representation learning method show promising results at the downstream task of predicting team outcomes. Also, examining the
embedding, we found interesting information about the dynamics of the entrainment relations. For example, teams with
more inﬂuential members have more process conﬂict.

1

Introduction

Entrainment is the propensity of speakers to begin behaving like one another in conversation. Evidence of entrainment has been found for multiple aspects of speech, including lexical choice (Brennan and Clark 1996; Metzing and Brennan 2003; Niederhoffer and Pennebaker 2002;
Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Gamon, and Dumais 2011; Gonzales, Hancock, and Pennebaker 2010; Pennebaker, Francis, and Booth 2001; Beňuš, Levitan, and Hirschberg 2012;
Rahimi et al. 2017; Friedberg, Litman, and Paletz 2012) in
both human-human and human-computer dialogues. In addition, the strength of entrainment has been shown to be associated with numerous social and conversational qualities,
such as the cohesiveness of speech (Lubold and Pon-Barry
2014; Natale 1975; Rahimi and Litman 2018; Beňuš et al.
2014; Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al. 2012).
While entrainment studies have largely focused on twoparty conversations, recent studies have estimated entrainment in multi-party conversations by averaging pairs’ enc 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8681

