The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Back to the Future – Sequential Alignment of Text Representations
Johannes Bjerva,1 Wouter M. Kouw,1,2 Isabelle Augenstein1
1

2

Department of Computer Science, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark
Department of Electrical Engineering, Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven, the Netherlands
{bjerva, augenstein}@di.ku.dk, w.m.kouw@tue.nl

unlabelled data points are observed. This setting occurs in
NLP in, for instance, the prediction of paper acceptance to
conferences (Kang et al. 2018) or named entity recognition
from yearly data dumps of Twitter (Derczynski, Bontcheva,
and Roberts 2016). Changes in language usage cause a data
drift between time-steps and some way of controlling for the
shift between time-steps is necessary.

Abstract
Language evolves over time in many ways relevant to natural language processing tasks. For example, recent occurrences of tokens ’BERT’ and ’ELMO’ in publications refer to neural network architectures rather than persons. This
type of temporal signal is typically overlooked, but is important if one aims to deploy a machine learning model over
an extended period of time. In particular, language evolution
causes data drift between time-steps in sequential decisionmaking tasks. Examples of such tasks include prediction of
paper acceptance for yearly conferences (regular intervals) or
author stance prediction for rumours on Twitter (irregular intervals). Inspired by successes in computer vision, we tackle
data drift by sequentially aligning learned representations.
We evaluate on three challenging tasks varying in terms of
time-scales, linguistic units, and domains. These tasks show
our method outperforming several strong baselines, including
using all available data. We argue that, due to its low computational expense, sequential alignment is a practical solution
to dealing with language evolution.

In this paper, we apply a domain adaptation technique to
correct for shifts. Domain adaptation is a furtive area of research within machine learning that deals with learning from
training data drawn from one data-generating distribution
(source domain) and generalising to test data drawn from another, different data-generating distribution (target domain)
(Kouw and Loog 2019). We are interested in whether a
sequence of adaptations can compensate for the data drift
caused by shifts in the meaning of words or features across
time. Given that linguistic tokens are embedded in some vector space using neural language models, we observe that
in time-varying dynamic tasks, the drift causes token embeddings to occupy different parts of embedding space over
consecutive time-steps. We want to avoid the computational
expense of re-training a neural network every time-step. Instead, in each time-step, we map linguistic tokens using the
same pre-trained language model (a ”BERT” network (Devlin et al. 2018)) and align the resulting embeddings using a
second procedure called subspace alignment (Fernando et al.
2013). We apply subspace alignment sequentially: ﬁnd the
principal components in each time-step and linearly transform the components from the previous step to match the
current step. A classiﬁer trained on the aligned embeddings
from the previous step will be more suited to classify embeddings in the current step. We show that sequential subspace alignment (SSA) yields substantial improvements in
three challenging tasks: paper acceptance prediction on the
PeerRead data set (Kang et al. 2018); Named Entity Recognition on the Broad Twitter Corpus (Derczynski, Bontcheva,
and Roberts 2016); and rumour stance detection on the RumourEval 2019 data set (Gorrell et al. 2018). These tasks
are chosen to vary in terms of domains, timescales, and the
granularity of the linguistic units. In addition to evaluating SSA, we include two technical contributions as we extend the method both to allow for time series of unbounded

Introduction
As time passes, language usage changes. For example, the
names ‘Bert’ and ‘Elmo’ would only rarely make an appearance prior to 2018 in the context of scientiﬁc writing. After
the publication of BERT (Devlin et al. 2018) and ELMo (Peters et al. 2018), however, usage has increased in frequency.
In the context of named entities on Twitter, it is also likely
that these names would be tagged as PERSON prior to 2018,
and are now more likely to refer to an ARTEFACT. As such,
their part-of-speech tags will also differ. Evidently, evolution of language usage affects natural language processing
(NLP) tasks, and as such, models based on data from one
point in time cannot be expected to generalise to the future.
In order to become more robust to language evolution,
data should be collected at multiple points in time. We consider a dynamic learning paradigm where one makes predictions for data points from the current time-step given labelled data points from previous time-steps. As time increments, data points from the current step are labelled and new
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7440

