The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning to Compare for Better Training and
Evaluation of Open Domain Natural Language Generation Models
Wangchunshu Zhou, Ke Xu
State Key Lab of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, China
zhouwangchunshu@buaa.edu.cn, kexu@nlsde.buaa.edu.cn

et al. 2016) in open domain text generation tasks including
story generation and dialogue response generation because
two equally good generated texts may have no n-gram overlap. Human evaluation is generally considered to be the gold
standard evaluation, however, it does not scale well as it is
generally expensive and time-consuming to conduct human
evaluation.
Apart from measuring relative progress between different
models, automated evaluation metrics also play an important role in the training stage of NLG models. It is a common practice to tune the model hyperparameter, detect convergence, perform early-stopping, and select the best checkpoints based on the model’s performance on automated evaluation metrics. While acceptable for tasks where automated
metrics correlate well with human evaluations, including
machine translation and text summarization, this can be erroneous and result in sub-optimal training in open domain
NLG tasks because available automated metrics correlate
poorly with human evaluation, as demonstrated in the experimental section of this paper.
To tackle the aforementioned problems, in this paper, we
propose a self-supervised approach with transfer learning to
learn to compare the quality of two samples as an automated
comparative Turing test. The motivation of our approach is
that we can better assess the quality of generated samples or
trained NLG model by comparing it with another one. Our
model is a text pair classiﬁcation model trained to compare
the task-speciﬁc quality of two samples, which is then used
to evaluate the quality of trained NLG models. As human
preference annotation is generally expensive, our model is
designed to be able to perform self-supervised training using
only generated samples and gold reference samples without human preference annotation. When human preference
annotation is available, our model can be further ﬁne-tuned
to better imitate human judgment. To evaluate the modellevel quality of NLG models based on pairwise comparison in sample-level, we adopt the skill rating system similar to ELO (Elo 1978) and Trueskill (Herbrich, Minka, and
Graepel 2007), which is a method for assigning a numerical skill to players in a player-vs-player game, given a winloss record of games played. In our scenario, the players are
NLG models to be evaluated and a higher rating indicates
a better model. The skill rating system makes it possible to
evaluate all n models without needing to run n2 matches and

Abstract
Automated evaluation of open domain natural language generation (NLG) models remains a challenge and widely used
metrics such as BLEU and Perplexity can be misleading in
some cases. In our paper, we propose to evaluate natural language generation models by learning to compare a pair of
generated sentences by ﬁne-tuning BERT, which has been
shown to have good natural language understanding ability.
We also propose to evaluate the model-level quality of NLG
models with sample-level comparison results with skill rating system. While able to be trained in a fully self-supervised
fashion, our model can be further ﬁne-tuned with a little
amount of human preference annotation to better imitate human judgment. In addition to evaluating trained models, we
propose to apply our model as a performance indicator during
training for better hyperparameter tuning and early-stopping.
We evaluate our approach on both story generation and chitchat dialogue response generation. Experimental results show
that our model correlates better with human preference compared with previous automated evaluation approaches. Training with the proposed metric yields better performance in human evaluation, which further demonstrates the effectiveness
of the proposed model.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in sequence-to-sequence learning architecture (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014) and the transformer
model (Vaswani et al. 2017) have raised increasing interest
in natural language generation (NLG) tasks, including story
generation (Fan, Lewis, and Dauphin 2018), open-domain
dialogue response generation (Sordoni et al. 2015) and abstractive summarization (See, Liu, and Manning 2017). Despite the fast advances of models, there remains a huge gap
in the evaluation of NLG models and it is hard to measure the progress due to the lack of good evaluation metrics.
While perplexity is a good measure of how well a model
ﬁts some data, it does not measure performance at the desired task. Word overlap based metrics such as BLEU (Papineni et al. 2002), METEOR (Banerjee and Lavie 2005) and
ROUGE (Lin 2004) capture quality better than the perplexity and are useful in translation and summarization. However, they still correlate poorly with human evaluation (Liu
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9717

