The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Differentiable Grammars for Videos
AJ Piergiovanni, Anelia Angelova, Michael S. Ryoo
Robotics at Google
{ajpiergi, anelia, mryoo}@google.com

Abstract

3S6_S3

6V5_V3

5U3

This paper proposes a novel algorithm which learns a formal
regular grammar from real-world continuous data, such as
videos. Learning latent terminals, non-terminals, and production rules directly from continuous data allows the construction of a generative model capturing sequential structures
with multiple possibilities. Our model is fully differentiable,
and provides easily interpretable results which are important in order to understand the learned structures. It outperforms the state-of-the-art on several challenging datasets and
is more accurate for forecasting future activities in videos. We
plan to open-source the code.1

S 3LWFK

V 6ZLQJ

U 5XQ

3S6_S3

6V5_V3

3S6_S3

S 3LWFK

V 6ZLQJ

S 3LWFK

Learning a formal grammar from continuous, unstructured
data is a challenging problem. This is especially challenging when the elements (i.e., terminals) of the grammar to
be learned are not symbolic or discrete (Chomsky 1956;
1959), but are higher dimensional vectors, such as representations from real world data sequences such as videos.
Simultaneously, addressing such challenges is necessary
for better automated understanding of sequential data. In
video understanding, such as activity detection, a convolutional neural network (CNN) (e.g., (Carreira and Zisserman
2017)) generates a representation abstracting local spatiotemporal information at every time step, forming a temporal
sequence of representations. Learning a grammar reﬂecting
sequential changes in video representations will enable explicit and high-level modeling of temporal structure and relationships between multiple occurring events in videos.
In this paper, we propose a new approach of modeling a
formal grammar for videos in terms of learnable and differentiable neural network functions. The objective is to formulate not only the terminals and non-terminals of our grammar
as learnable representations but also the production rules,
which are generated here as differentiable functions. We provide the loss function to train our differentiable grammar directly from data, and present methodologies to take advantage of it for recognizing and forecasting sequences2 . Rather

Figure 1: Example regular grammar giving the sequence of
possible activities in a baseball video. For example, a swing
(s) only occurs after a pitch (p). After a swing (s), both pitch
(p) and run (r) are possible continuations of the activity.

than focusing on non-terminals and production rules to generate or parse symbolic data (e.g., text strings), our approach
allows learning of grammar representations directly on top
of higher-dimensional data stream (e.g., representation vector sequences). We conﬁrm such capability experimentally
by focusing on learning a differentiable regular grammar
from continuous representations, which can be applied to
any sequential data including outputs of 3-D CNNs.
Fig. 1 shows an example of consecutive events in video
which are learned as grammar rules, e.g. ”pitch” is followed
by a ”swing”, which in turn can develop in a ”run” event or
a another ”pitch”. This not only allows for better recognition
of human activities from videos by enforcing the learned
grammar to local-level detections, but also enables forecasting of future representations based on the learned production
rules. It also provides semantic interpretability of the video
recognition and prediction process.
Our differentiable grammar could be interpreted as a particular form of recurrent neural network (RNN). The main
difference to the standard RNNs such as LSTMs and GRUs
(Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997; Cho et al. 2014) is that

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://sites.google.com/view/differentiable-grammars
2
Technically the grammar we are learning is a stochastic regular
grammar, we use regular grammar for simplicity in the text.
11874

