The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Structure Learning for Approximate Solution of Many-Player Games
Zun Li, Michael P. Wellman
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
{lizun, wellman}@umich.edu

Kearns, Littman, and Singh 2001). However, it may not be
apparent or easy to specify the exact structure that applies
in a given multiagent scenario, and indeed it may be that
no pre-identiﬁed structural simpliﬁcation holds exactly for a
problem of interest. We therefore investigate in this work the
possibility of learning such structure, and moreover doing so
in an iterative manner interleaved with game-theoretic reasoning about structured game models as they are developed.

Abstract
Games with many players are difﬁcult to solve or even specify
without adopting structural assumptions that enable representation in compact form. Such structure is generally not given
and will not hold exactly for particular games of interest. We
introduce an iterative structure-learning approach to search
for approximate solutions of many-player games, assuming
only black-box simulation access to noisy payoff samples.
Our ﬁrst algorithm, K-Roles, exploits symmetry by learning
a role assignment for players of the game through unsupervised learning (clustering) methods. Our second algorithm,
G3L, seeks sparsity by greedy search over local interactions to
learn a graphical game model. Both algorithms use supervised
learning (regression) to ﬁt payoff values to the learned structures, in compact representations that facilitate equilibrium
calculation. We experimentally demonstrate the efﬁcacy of
both methods in reaching quality solutions and uncovering hidden structure, on both perfectly and approximately structured
game instances.

1

We develop our methods in the framework of empirical
game-theoretic analysis (EGTA) (Wellman 2016; Tuyls et
al. 2018). EGTA assumes as input a representation of the
game in terms of a payoff oracle (e.g., a simulator). The
game analyst may sample this simulation-based game by
querying the oracle to obtain data from which to estimate
or induce a game model, called the empirical game. This
framework makes sense for the problem at hand, because
specifying simulation models does not suffer from the curse
of dimensionality that inhibits scaling explicit game models
to large numbers of agents. The challenge is to make effective
use of the simulator to gain game-theoretic insights on such
large multiagent systems.

Introduction

Many of the real-world multiagent systems we would like
to understand strategically involve an enormous number of
interacting (or potentially interacting) agents. For example,
domains of multiagent research interest—such as ad auctions (Guo et al. 2019), ﬁnancial markets (Nevmyvaka, Feng,
and Kearns 2006), trafﬁc routing (Bazzan 2009), and rumor spreading over social media (Yang et al. 2018)—all
encompass (depending on the scope being considered) thousands or millions of participating agents. Straightforward
game-theoretic representations of these systems do not scale
well: A direct normal-form representation of an N -agent,
M -action game is O(N M N ), which is obviously not feasible to construct or reason about directly for even moderately
large-scale multiagent systems. In response, AI researchers
and others have identiﬁed various kinds of regularity that
may be exhibited in such systems, particularly invoking some
form of homogeneity (symmetry) or locality of interaction
(sparsity) that can be exploited to develop a more compact
game representation (Jiang, Leyton-Brown, and Bhat 2011;

Our hypothesis is that the game-learning process can be
enhanced by a focus on the structure of agent populations
and interactions. For population structure, we appeal to the
partition of agents into distinct roles. Many applications have
obvious role dichotomies: investors and traders in ﬁnancial
markets, commuters and vacationers in road trafﬁc, brand and
sales marketers in advertising. More generally, we expect that
many multiagent systems will at least roughly support classiﬁcation into broad roles. For interaction structure, we appeal
to locality. For example, on a social network, one is directly
inﬂuenced (by rumors, innovations, etc.) primarily through
one’s connections on the network. Both kinds of structure—
role-organized symmetry and locality of inﬂuence—have
been formalized in terms that support compact game representations. Whereas the formal requirements for compact
representation may not strictly hold for games of interest, we
expect that they will often hold approximately to a useful degree. If so, it is worth trying to identify that useful structure in
payoff samples, thereby enabling induction of more compact
and sample-efﬁcient game representations, and accordingly
supporting simpler and more reliable game-theoretic reason-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2119

