The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Quantized Compressive Sampling of Stochastic
Gradients for Efﬁcient Communication in Distributed Deep Learning
Afshin Abdi, Faramarz Fekri
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA
{abdi, fekri}@gatech.edu

In recent years, the size of deep learning problems has increased signiﬁcantly both in terms of the number of available
training samples as well as the complexity of the model.
Hence, training deep models on a single processing node
is unappealing or nearly impossible. One viable approach
to overcome the memory, storage and computational constraints is distributing the training over multiple processing
units (a.k.a. workers). However, exchanging the gradients or
the parameters of the model and synchronizing the workers’

models incur signiﬁcant communication overhead which is a
major bottleneck in distributed deep learning. In recent years,
there has been a great amount of effort on reducing the communication overhead. The majority of existing methods rely
on either relaxing the synchronization among workers (Dean
et al. 2012; Niu et al. 2011; Zhang, Hsieh, and Akella 2016;
Ho et al. 2013; Stich 2019) or reducing the overall transmission rate via sparsiﬁcation or quantization of the gradients.
Sparsiﬁcation- This approach is based on transmitting only
the important or a small subset of the gradients. (Strom
2015) was among the early works to use sparsiﬁcation
in conjunction with thresholded quantization to compress
the gradients. As choosing the right threshold for gradient sparsiﬁcation is difﬁcult in practice and to improve
the performance of distributed learning, other sparsiﬁcation methods have also been proposed such as transmitting
only a ﬁxed portion of the gradients (Dryden et al. 2016;
Aji and Heaﬁeld 2017), TopK SGD (Alistarh et al. 2018),
deep gradient compression (Lin et al. 2018), random (stochastic) sparsiﬁcation of the gradients (Wangni et al. 2018) and
sparsiﬁcation of the gradients in the transform domain (Wang
et al. 2018).
Quantization- Reducing the number of bits in representing
SG is a well-known technique to decrease the communication
bit-rate. For example, quantizing the gradients to one-bit
(Seide et al. 2014) or SignSGD (Bernstein et al. 2018) can
signiﬁcantly reduce the communication overhead. However,
the reduced accuracy of gradients and quantization bias may
impair the convergence rate. Using more quantization levels,
adaptive quantizers (Dryden et al. 2016) or exploiting errorfeedback (Wu et al. 2018; Karimireddy et al. 2019), one
can alleviate such issues. Alternatively, stochastic quantizers
such as QSGD (Alistarh et al. 2017), TernGrad (Wen et al.
2017) and Dithered Quantization (Abdi and Fekri 2019a;
2019b) provide unbiased quantization with performance and
convergence guarantees.
It is worth mentioning that these approaches can be applied
simultaneously as complement of each other to reduce the
communication overhead signiﬁcantly in distributed deep
learning.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Our Contribution In this paper, we claim that the existing
methods for compressing stochastic gradients (or model’s

Abstract
In distributed training of deep models, the transmission volume of stochastic gradients (SG) imposes a bottleneck in
scaling up the number of processing nodes. On the other hand,
the existing methods for compression of SGs have two major
drawbacks. First, due to the increase in the overall variance
of the compressed SG, the hyperparameters of the learning
algorithm must be readjusted to ensure the convergence of
the training. Further, the convergence rate of the resulting algorithm still would be adversely affected. Second, for those
approaches for which the compressed SG values are biased,
there is no guarantee for the learning convergence and thus an
error feedback is often required. We propose Quantized Compressive Sampling (QCS) of SG that addresses the above two
issues while achieving an arbitrarily large compression gain.
We introduce two variants of the algorithm: Unbiased-QCS
and MMSE-QCS and show their superior performance w.r.t.
other approaches. Speciﬁcally, we show that for the same number of communication bits, the convergence rate is improved
by a factor of 2 relative to state of the art. Next, we propose to
improve the convergence rate of the distributed training algorithm via a weighted error feedback. Speciﬁcally, we develop
and analyze a method to both control the overall variance of
the compressed SG and prevent the staleness of the updates. Finally, through simulations, we validate our theoretical results
and establish the superior performance of the proposed SG
compression in the distributed training of deep models. Our
simulations also demonstrate that our proposed compression
method expands substantially the region of step-size values
for which the learning algorithm converges.

1

Introduction

3105

