The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Beyond Unfolding: Exact Recovery of Latent
Convex Tensor Decomposition Under Reshufﬂing
Chao Li,1 Mohammad Emtiyaz Khan,1 Zhun Sun,1
Gang Niu,1 Bo Han,1 Shengli Xie,2,∗ Qibin Zhao1,∗
2

1
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project (AIP), Japan
School of Automation, Guangdong University of Technology, China

a uniqueness solution up to permutation, but the openness
of its solution space and the weak express power are too
restrictive for higher-dimensional problems (Comon, Luciani, and De Almeida 2009). Other alternatives, such as
(heretical) Tucker decomposition (Cichocki et al. 2009;
Song et al. 2013), tensor-train decomposition (Oseledets
2011) and tensor-ring decomposition (Zhao et al. 2016), unfortunately do not possess the exact-recovery property, i.e.,
their components can be arbitrarily rotated without changing
the resultant. Block term decomposition (BTD) (De Lathauwer 2008), a constrained version of Tucker decomposition, inherits the uniqueness property from CPD but has
more ﬂexible decomposition form. However, the model selection for BTD, such as the determination of the multilinear rank for each block, would be highly challenging.
Furthermore, the non-convexity of the aforementioned TD
methods generally leads to unstable convergence to global
minimum (Kolda and Bader 2009).

Abstract
Exact recovery of tensor decomposition (TD) methods is a
desirable property in both unsupervised learning and scientiﬁc data analysis. The numerical defects of TD methods,
however, limit their practical applications on real-world data.
As an alternative, convex tensor decomposition (CTD) was
proposed to alleviate these problems, but its exact-recovery
property is not properly addressed so far. To this end, we focus on latent convex tensor decomposition (LCTD), a practically widely-used CTD model, and rigorously prove a sufﬁcient condition for its exact-recovery property. Furthermore,
we show that such property can be also achieved by a more
general model than LCTD. In the new model, we generalize the classic tensor (un-)folding into reshufﬂing operation,
a more ﬂexible mapping to relocate the entries of the matrix into a tensor. Armed with the reshufﬂing operations and
exact-recovery property, we explore a totally novel application for (generalized) LCTD, i.e., image steganography. Experimental results on synthetic data validate our theory, and
results on image steganography show that our method outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.

Convex-optimization-based approaches were proposed to alleviate these unsatisfactory numerical
problems (Imaizumi, Maehara, and Hayashi 2017;
Tomioka, Hayashi, and Kashima 2010; Yu et al. 2019). In
these methods, it is not necessary to specify the rank of the
decomposition beforehand, and the convexity of the models
guarantees both the convergence to the global minimum
and their statistical performance. However, there is an
important issue that is not properly addressed so far: Are
the convex approaches able to exactly recover the low-rank
components like their non-convex counterparts?

Introduction
Tensor decomposition (TD), a multi-linear extension of matrix factorization, has been successfully employed on various applications (Rabusseau and Kadri 2016; Sharan and
Valiant 2017; He et al. 2017). More importantly, TD methods are also crucial tools for unsupervised discovery of
structures hidden behind the data, e.g., localizing the regions
of brain from EEG waveforms (Becker et al. 2014), user detection from mobile-communication data, and understanding the kinetic-theory description of materials (González et
al. 2010). One of the reasons, behind the success of TD
methods in these tasks, is due to the exact-recovery of their
solutions, i.e., TD methods are able to achieve a demixing of
data in which individual component can tightly correspond
with physical interpretation (Williams et al. 2018).
The numerical properties of TD methods, however, are
not as promising as their exact-recovery property. The most
popular canonical polyadic decomposition (CPD) provides

To answer this question, we theoretically prove a sufﬁcient condition for exact-recovery of latent convex tensor decomposition (LCTD), a practically widely-used convex TD
method (Yamada et al. 2017; Nimishakavi, Jawanpuria, and
Mishra 2018) that decomposes a tensor into a mixture of
low-rank components. Armed with the notion of incoherence among the components, we rigorously prove that the
low-rank components can be exactly recovered when a type
of incoherence measure is sufﬁciently small. Moreover, we
show that the exact-recovery property can be owned by a
more general class of models than LCTD. In the new model,
we introduce the reshufﬂing operation to replace the conventional tensor (un-)folding used in LCTD, and the new reshuf-

∗

Corresponding authors. Email:{chao.li, qibin.zhao}@riken.jp.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4602

