The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Adaptive Activation Network and Functional
Regularization for Efﬁcient and Flexible Deep Multi-Task Learning
Yingru Liu,1 Xuewen Yang,1 Dongliang Xie,2 Xin Wang,1
Li Shen,4 Haozhi Huang,4 Niranjan Balasubramanian3
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Stony Brook University, New York, United States
2
Institute of Network Technology, Beijing University of Posts and Telecomunications, Beijing, China
3
Department of Computer Science, Stony Brook University, New York, United States
4
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
cient, as it requires user to determine the knowledge sharing
architecture. It is tedious and almost impossible to manually search for the optimal architecture for MTL when the
depth of the neural network is large. On the other hand,
soft-sharing methods deﬁne independent but identical network structures for all tasks, but learn the task relationship
by adding regularization on network parameters (Long et
al. 2017; Yang and Hospedales 2017) or inserting connections across networks (Misra et al. 2016; Xiao et al. 2018;
Meyerson and Miikkulainen 2018; Ma et al. 2019; Ruder et
al. 2019). Although theoretically many soft-sharing methods are able to learn the task relationship, they are not scalable in real-world applications, as the model complexity explodes when the number of tasks increases. Modern neural
networks, such as VGG-16 (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014)
and ResNet-50 (He et al. 2016), contain over millions of
trainable parameters. It is impractical to deﬁne an individual network for each task, especially when the number of
tasks is large.

Abstract
Multi-task learning (MTL) is a common paradigm that seeks
to improve the generalization performance of task learning
by training related tasks simultaneously. However, it is still a
challenging problem to search the ﬂexible and accurate architecture that can be shared among multiple tasks. In this paper,
we propose a novel deep learning model called Task Adaptive
Activation Network (TAAN) that can automatically learn the
optimal network architecture for MTL. The main principle
of TAAN is to derive ﬂexible activation functions for different tasks from the data with other parameters of the network
fully shared. We further propose two functional regularization
methods that improve the MTL performance of TAAN. The
improved performance of both TAAN and the regularization
methods is demonstrated by comprehensive experiments.

Introduction and Related Works
Multi-task learning (MTL), the process of learning to solve
multiple tasks at the same time, allows sharing information across related tasks, thereby improving model performance across all the tasks (Caruana 1993; Zamir et al. 2018).
Prior MTL studies can be divided into two categories, one is
based on optimization (Li et al. 2017; Murugesan and Carbonell 2017), and the other is based on parameter sharing
approaches for deep neural networks.
The central problem in MTL is to model both task-speciﬁc
and task-shared knowledge across different tasks, where the
knowledge is encoded in the parameters of the model. Despite the modeling capability of deep learning models, it
is still a challenge to automatically determine the optimal
splitting between task-speciﬁc and task-shared knowledge,
which is critical in the design of neural network architecture
for MTL and a fundamental problem to solve.
Most existing work of MTLs with deep learning can be
categorized into two types: hard-sharing and soft-sharing.
As shown in Figure 1 (a), hard-sharing methods (Caruana
1993) deﬁne the low-level hidden layers as the knowledge
shared across all tasks and the high-level hidden layers as
the task-speciﬁc knowledge. In the extreme case, all hidden layers are shared by all the tasks. This method is inefﬁ-

In light of the challenge in dividing the neural network
architecture between task-shared and task-speciﬁc parts
among different tasks, we propose an efﬁcient deep learning architecture called Task Adaptive Activation Network
(TAAN) to enable ﬂexible and low-cost multi-task learning.
In TAAN, all the tasks share the weight and bias parameters of the neural network, thus its complexity is similar to
that of a single task model. During the training, TAAN automatically discovers the optimal sharing structure through the
learning of task-adaptive activation functions, which avoids
the tedious procedures of determining the splitting point of
the network. As there are no ﬁxed constraints on the network structure and the whole model can be trained in the
end-to-end manner, TAAN is ﬂexible enough to be used either as an individual network or a sub-network in a large system for a large variety of deep learning applications. Based
on the functional analysis of the activation functions learnt,
We further propose two functional regularization methods
to enhance the performance of TAAN. We also prove a relationship between the activation functions and the hidden
features. To the best of our knowledge, such a relationship
between the method and the hidden features is not studied in
the literature work.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4924

