The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Masking Orchestration: Multi-Task
Pretraining for Multi-Role Dialogue Representation Learning
Tianyi Wang,*1 Yating Zhang,*1 Xiaozhong Liu,2 Changlong Sun,1 Qiong Zhang1
∗1

2

Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
Indiana University Bloomington, Bloomington, Indiana, USA
{will.wty, ranran.zyt, qz.zhang}@alibaba-inc.com
liu237@indiana.edu, changlong.scl@taobao.com

Abstract

 

Multi-role dialogue understanding comprises a wide range
of diverse tasks such as question answering, act classiﬁcation, dialogue summarization etc. While dialogue corpora are
abundantly available, labeled data, for speciﬁc learning tasks,
can be highly scarce and expensive. In this work, we investigate dialogue context representation learning with various types unsupervised pretraining tasks where the training objectives are given naturally according to the nature
of the utterance and the structure of the multi-role conversation. Meanwhile, in order to locate essential information
for dialogue summarization/extraction, the pretraining process enables external knowledge integration. The proposed
ﬁne-tuned pretraining mechanism is comprehensively evaluated via three different dialogue datasets along with a number
of downstream dialogue-mining tasks. Result shows that the
proposed pretraining mechanism signiﬁcantly contributes to
all the downstream tasks without discrimination to different
encoders.

 
…

Judge
Plaintiff
Judge
Defendant

Judge

Does the plaintiff supplement the facts of the case?
No
Is there any supplement for the defendant?
No.

  
  
  
   

The court investigation is over. The focus of the dispute in this case is whether the debit is
issued by the defendant himself and whether the h
three defendants should bear the responsibility
of restitution in the scope of inheritance liability. The court debate will be held below, with the
plaintiff's opinion first. The defendant will now make a statement in the debate.

Defendant

In the same opinion as the court's investigation stage, the plaintiff's prosecution is requested
to be dismissed.

Judge

The Court believes that legitimate lending relationships should be protected by law. The fact
that by the defendant borrowed 50,000 $ is clear, and the evidence is indeed sufficient.
Therefore, the defendant should bear the civil liability of repaying the plaintiff's loan and
compensating for the loss of interest within the share of the actual value of inheritance of the
defendant heritage. Therefore, the plaintiff's claim is justified and pp
supported by our court.
Accordingly, in accordance with the provisions of Article 107, Article 206, Article 33 of the
Succession Law and Article 144 of the Civil Procedure, the judgment is as follows: ...
Did the plaintiff and the defendant hear the court's judgment just now?

Plaintiff

Yes
…

Figure 1: Example Dialogue in Court Debate Dataset

Introduction
Multi-role dialogue mining is a novel topic of critical importance, and it offers powerful potentials for a number of
scenarios, e.g, the court debate in civil trial where parties
from different camps (plaintiff, defendant, witness, judge
etc.) are actively involved, the customer service calls arisen
from agent(s) and customer, the business meeting engaged
with multi-members. Unfortunately, compared with classical textual data, the labeled multi-role dialogue corpus
is scarce and expensive. Unsupervised learning, as a critical alternative, can alleviate this problem, while, based on
prior experience(Mikolov et al. 2013a; Devlin et al. 2018;
Radford et al. ; Peters et al. 2018), pretraining for complex
text data can provide an enhanced content representation for
the downstream tasks. In this study, we investigate an innovative problem, multi-role dialogue pretraining for various
kinds of NLP tasks.
Indubitably, multi-role dialogue is more complex in its
discourse structure and sometimes implicit/ambiguous in its
semantics. Two major challenges should be highlighted for
topic. First, different characters may not necessarily share

the same vocabulary space, and classical NLP algorithms
can hardly consume this difference. Take court debate as an
example (see Fig. 1). The judge can be more responsible for
investigating the facts and reading the court rules while the
other litigants answer the questions from the judge. Moreover, with opposite position, plaintiff and defendant’s attitudes, sentiments and descriptions to the same topic can be
quite different. The second barrier comes from the interactive nature of the dialogue where single utterance, without
dialogue-context, barely contains enough semantics. For instance, as Fig. 1 shows, to accurately represent answer from
the defendant, judge’s question can be critical and necessary.
Thus modeling the relationship among adjacent utterances
across various parties is essential for dialogue context representation learning. In addition, given the colloquial dialogue
content, the external knowledge-base can play a nontrivial
role for context representation learning, e.g., the related law
articles and legal knowledge graph can provide important
auxiliary semantic information to the target trial debate.
Motivated by such observations, in this paper, we explore
dialogue context representation learning through four unsupervised pretraining tasks where the training objectives
are given naturally according to the nature of the utterance

∗

Both authors contributed equally to this research.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9217

