The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning Geo-Contextual Embeddings for Commuting Flow Prediction
Zhicheng Liu,1,2 Fabio Miranda,2 Weiting Xiong,3,4 Junyan Yang,3 Qiao Wang,1 Claudio T. Silva2
1

School of Information Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
2
Tandon School of Engineering, New York University, New York, USA
3
School of Architecture, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
4
Media Lab, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Boston, USA
{zhichengliu, qiaowang}@seu.edu.cn, {fmiranda, csilva}@nyu.edu, weitingx@mit.edu, yjy-2@163.com

Abstract
Predicting commuting ﬂows based on infrastructure and landuse information is critical for urban planning and public policy development. However, it is a challenging task given the
complex patterns of commuting ﬂows. Conventional models, such as gravity model, are mainly derived from physics
principles and limited by their predictive power in real-world
scenarios where many factors need to be considered. Meanwhile, most existing machine learning-based methods ignore
the spatial correlations and fail to model the inﬂuence of
nearby regions. To address these issues, we propose Geocontextual Multitask Embedding Learner (GMEL), a model
that captures the spatial correlations from geographic contextual information for commuting ﬂow prediction. Speciﬁcally,
we ﬁrst construct a geo-adjacency network containing the geographic contextual information. Then, an attention mechanism is proposed based on the framework of graph attention
network (GAT) to capture the spatial correlations and encode
geographic contextual information to embedding space. Two
separate GATs are used to model supply and demand characteristics. To enhance the effectiveness of the embedding representation, a multitask learning framework is used to introduce stronger restrictions, forcing the embeddings to encapsulate effective representation for ﬂow prediction. Finally, a
gradient boosting machine is trained based on the learned embeddings to predict commuting ﬂows. We evaluate our model
using real-world dataset from New York City and the experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed
method against the state of the art.

(a)

$

$

?
?

(b)

?

(c)

Figure 1: Overview. (a) Example of the commuting ﬂow network of New York City in 2015. Yellow indicates origin
census geographic units, and red indicates destination units.
(b) Illustration of the commuting ﬂow prediction problem
when residents choose where to work based on supporting
infrastructure, distance, etc. (c) Illustration of our solution
that uses geographic contextual information for commuting
ﬂow prediction.

Introduction
The commute of people from home to work is a phenomenon that has shaped society and cities throughout the
ages, from ancient Egypt to modern New York City (Bram
and McKay 2005; Austin 2017). These daily recurrent
movements form a complex network that is highly correlated
with the socioeconomic factors of cities (Simini et al. 2012;
Spadon et al. 2019). Access to public services, open spaces,
transportation and even entertainment all play a role that inﬂuence where a worker will live, or where a company will
station its ofﬁces.

In order to have more efﬁciently planned cities, it is crucial to understand how commuting ﬂows are impacted by
infrastructure and land use. This information can be used in
urban planning to guide the development of new districts,
or in transportation planning to direct the deployment of
new modes of transport. Consider for instance the example of Manhattan, a dense borough of New York City. Because of its historical concentration of transit hubs and ma-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
808

