The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

ADDMC: Weighted Model Counting with Algebraic Decision Diagrams
Jeffrey M. Dudek, Vu H. N. Phan, Moshe Y. Vardi
Rice University
6100 Main Street
Houston, Texas 77005
{jmd11, vhp1, vardi}@rice.edu

son and Mengin 1999) or probabilistic inference (Shenoy
and Shafer 2008).
In this work, we study two algorithms that follow this
dynamic-programming framework and can be adapted for
model counting: bucket elimination (Dechter 1999) and
Bouquet’s Method (Bouquet 1999). Bucket elimination aims
to minimize the amount of information needed to be carried between subproblems. When this information must be
stored in an uncompressed table, bucket elimination will,
with some carefully chosen sequence of clusters, require the
minimum possible amount of intermediate data, as governed
by the treewidth of the input formula (Bacchus, Dalmao, and
Pitassi 2009). Intermediate data, however, need not be stored
uncompressed. Several works have shown that using compact representations of intermediate data can dramatically
improve bucket elimination for Bayesian inference (Poole
and Zhang 2003; Sanner and McAllester 2005; Chavira and
Darwiche 2007). Moreover, it has been observed that using
compact representations — in particular, Binary Decision
Diagrams (BDDs) — can allow Bouquet’s Method to outperform bucket elimination for SAT-solving (Pan and Vardi
2004). Compact representations are therefore promising to
improve existing dynamic-programming-based algorithms
for model counting (Bacchus, Dalmao, and Pitassi 2009;
Samer and Szeider 2010).
In particular, we consider the use of Algebraic Decision
Diagrams (ADDs) (Bahar et al. 1997) for model counting
in a dynamic-programming framework. An ADD is a compact representation of a real-valued function as a directed
acyclic graph. For functions with logical structure, an ADD
representation can be exponentially smaller than the explicit representation. ADDs have been successfully used as
part of dynamic-programming frameworks for Bayesian inference (Chavira and Darwiche 2007; Gogate and Domingos 2012) and stochastic planning (Hoey et al. 1999). Although ADDs have been used for model counting outside
of a dynamic-programming framework (Fargier et al. 2014),
no prior work uses ADDs for model counting as part of a
dynamic-programming framework.
The construction and resultant size of an ADD depend
heavily on the choice of an order on the variables of the
ADD, called a diagram variable order. Some variable or-

Abstract
We present an algorithm to compute exact literal-weighted
model counts of Boolean formulas in Conjunctive Normal
Form. Our algorithm employs dynamic programming and
uses Algebraic Decision Diagrams as the main data structure. We implement this technique in ADDMC, a new model
counter. We empirically evaluate various heuristics that can
be used with ADDMC. We then compare ADDMC to four stateof-the-art weighted model counters (Cachet, c2d, d4, and
miniC2D) on 1914 standard model counting benchmarks
and show that ADDMC signiﬁcantly improves the virtual best
solver.

1

Introduction

Model counting is a fundamental problem in artiﬁcial intelligence, with applications in machine learning, probabilistic
reasoning, and veriﬁcation (Domshlak and Hoffmann 2007;
Biere, Heule, and van Maaren 2009; Naveh et al. 2007).
Given an input set of constraints, with the focus in this paper
on Boolean constraints, the model counting problem is to
count the number of satisfying assignments. Although this
problem is #P-Complete (Valiant 1979), a variety of tools
exist that can handle industrial sets of constraints, cf. (Sang
et al. 2004; Oztok and Darwiche 2015).
Dynamic programming is a powerful technique that has
been applied across computer science (Howard 1966), including to model counting (Bacchus, Dalmao, and Pitassi
2009; Samer and Szeider 2010). The key idea is to solve
a large problem by solving a sequence of smaller subproblems and then incrementally combining these solutions into
the ﬁnal result. Dynamic programming provides a natural
framework to solve a variety of problems deﬁned on sets
of constraints: subproblems can be formed by partitioning
the constraints into sets, called clusters. This framework has
also been instantiated into algorithms for database-query optimization (McMahan et al. 2004) and SAT-solving (Uribe
and Stickel 1994; Aguirre and Vardi 2001; Pan and Vardi
2004). Techniques for local computation can also be seen as
a variant of this framework, e.g., in theorem proving (Wilc 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1468

