The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Emu: Enhancing Multilingual Sentence Embeddings with Semantic Specialization
Wataru Hirota,1∗ Yoshihiko Suhara,2 Behzad Golshan,2 Wang-Chiew Tan2
1
Osaka University, 2 Megagon Labs
w-hirota@ist.osaka-u.ac.jp, {yoshi, behzad, wangchiew}@megagon.ai

it asks about the opening hour of stores. We expect embeddings of sentences of the same intent to be closer (e.g., to
have higher cosine similarity) to one another than embeddings of sentences with different intents.
We tested several pre-trained (multilingual) sentence embedding models (Pagliardini, Gupta, and Jaggi 2018; Conneau et al. 2017; Artetxe and Schwenk 2019b; Chidambaram
et al. 2019) in both monolingual and cross-lingual settings.
Somewhat surprisingly, every model provided lower similarity scores between S1 and S3 (compared to S1 and S2, or S2
and S3). This is mainly because S1 and S2 are more textually similar (because both sentences contain “what time” and
“tonight”) compared to S1 and S3. This example highlights
that general-purpose multilingual sentence embeddings exhibit textual similarity bias, which is a fundamental limitation as they may not correctly capture the semantic similarity
of sentences.
Motivated by the need for sentence embeddings that better reﬂect the semantics of sentence, we examine multilingual semantic specialization, which tailors pre-trained multilingual sentence embeddings to handle semantic similarity. Although prior work has developed semantic specialization methods for word embeddings (Mrkšić et al. 2017)
and semantic and linguistic properties of sentence embeddings (Zhu, Li, and de Melo 2018; Conneau et al. 2018a), no
prior work has considered semantic specialization of multilingual sentence embeddings.
In this paper, we develop a “lightweight” approach for semantic specialization of multilingual embeddings that can
be applied to any base model. Our approach ﬁne-tunes a
pre-trained multilingual sentence embedding model based
on a classiﬁcation task that considers semantic similarity.
This aligns with common techniques of pre-training methods for NLP (Howard and Ruder 2018; Peters et al. 2018;
Devlin et al. 2019). We explore several loss functions to determine which is appropriate for the semantic specialization
of cross-lingual sentence embeddings. We found that naive
choices of loss functions such as the softmax loss, which is
a common choice for classiﬁcation, may suffer from significant degradation of the original multilingual sentence embedding model.
We also design E MU to specialize multilingual sentence

Abstract
We present E MU, a system that semantically enhances multilingual sentence embeddings. Our framework ﬁne-tunes pretrained multilingual sentence embeddings using two main
components: a semantic classiﬁer and a language discriminator. The semantic classiﬁer improves the semantic similarity of related sentences, whereas the language discriminator
enhances the multilinguality of the embeddings via multilingual adversarial training. Our experimental results based on
several language pairs show that our specialized embeddings
outperform the state-of-the-art multilingual sentence embedding model on the task of cross-lingual intent classiﬁcation
using only monolingual labeled data.

Introduction
Learning multilingual sentence representations (Ruder et
al. 2019) is a key technique for building NLP applications
with multilingual support. A primary advantage of multilingual sentence embeddings is that they enable us to train a
single classiﬁer based on a single language (e.g., English)
and then apply it to other languages without using training models for those languages (e.g., German.) Furthermore, recent advances in multilingual sentence embedding
techniques (Artetxe and Schwenk 2019b; Chidambaram et
al. 2019) have shown to exhibit competitive performance
on several downstream NLP tasks, compared to the twostage approach that relies on machine translation followed
by monolingual sentence embedding techniques.
The main challenge of multilingual sentence embeddings
is that they are sensitive to textual similarity (textual similarity bias) which negatively affects the the semantic similarity
of sentence embeddings (Zhu, Li, and de Melo 2018). The
following example illustrates this point:
S1: What time is the pool open tonight?
S2: What time are the stores on 5th open tonight?
S3: When does the pool open this evening?
S1 and S3 have similar intents. They ask for the opening
hours of the pool in the evening. S2 has a different intent:
∗

This work was done during an internship at Megagon Labs.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7935

