The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Neural Inheritance Relation Guided One-Shot Layer Assignment Search
Rang Meng,1∗ Weijie Chen,2∗ Di Xie,2 Yuan Zhang,2 Shiliang Pu2†
1

College of Control Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University
2
Hikvision Research Institute
r meng@zju.edu.cn, {chenweijie5, xiedi, zhangyuan, pushiliang}@hikvision.com

Abstract
Layer assignment is seldom picked out as an independent
research topic in neural architecture search. In this paper,
for the ﬁrst time, we systematically investigate the impact
of different layer assignments to the network performance
by building an architecture dataset of layer assignment on
CIFAR-100. Through analyzing this dataset, we discover
a neural inheritance relation among the networks with different layer assignments, that is, the optimal layer assignments for deeper networks always inherit from those for
shallow networks. Inspired by this neural inheritance relation, we propose an efﬁcient one-shot layer assignment
search approach via inherited sampling. Speciﬁcally, the
optimal layer assignment searched in the shallow network
can be provided as a strong sampling priori to train and
search the deeper ones in supernet, which extremely reduces
the network search space. Comprehensive experiments carried out on CIFAR-100 illustrate the efﬁciency of our proposed method. Our search results are strongly consistent
with the optimal ones directly selected from the architecture dataset. To further conﬁrm the generalization of our
proposed method, we also conduct experiments on TinyImageNet and ImageNet. Our searched results are remarkably superior to the handcrafted ones under the unchanged
computational budgets. The neural inheritance relation discovered in this paper can provide insights to the universal
neural architecture search.

Figure 1: Different layer assignments, different network performances. (a) presents different layer assignments. All the
networks follow the rule of half the spatial size, double the
channels to keep them with the same FLOPs. (b) and (c) illustrate the performance gap (the bin in these ﬁgures) among
different layer assignments of plain and residual networks on
CIFAR-100, respectively.

Introduction
Network depth is a critical dimension in neural architecture
design. An increasing network depth in convolutional neural networks (CNNs) will bring a remarkable performance
boost, such as the accuracy increase from ResNet-18 to
ResNet-152. However, an important problem is neglected:
Given a ﬁxed network depth, how to assign the layers into
different groups for computing feature maps with different
spatial resolution? Taking ResNet-50(He et al. 2016) as an

example, it assigns [3, 4, 6, 3] stacked residual bottlenecks
to compute feature maps with spatial resolution 56 × 56,
28 × 28, 14 × 14 and 7 × 7, respectively. In this paper,
we name this process as layer assignment for short. Obviously, this is an empirically handcrafted design and cannot
guarantee the best performance. As shown in Fig.1, there exist many layer assignment manners with the same network
depth whose accuracy in a given task are different a lot. Actually, the optimal layer assignment is changeable among
different tasks and it is costly to search the optimal layer
assignment for each task in a trial-and-error way. Therefore,
it is essential to search the optimal layer assignment automatically and efﬁciently.

∗
Equal contributions.This work is done when Rang Meng is an
intern at Hikvision Research Institute.
†
Corresponding Author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5158

