The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Spatial-Temporal Synchronous Graph Convolutional Networks:
A New Framework for Spatial-Temporal Network Data Forecasting
Chao Song,1,2 Youfang Lin,1,2,3 Shengnan Guo,1,2 Huaiyu Wan1,2,3∗
1

School of Computer and Information Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Trafﬁc Data Analysis and Mining, Beijing, China
3
CAAC Key Laboratory of Intelligent Passenger Service of Civil Aviation, Beijing, China
{chaosong, yﬂin, guoshn, hywan}@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

‫ݐ‬ଵ

Spatial-temporal network data forecasting is of great importance in a huge amount of applications for trafﬁc management and urban planning. However, the underlying complex
spatial-temporal correlations and heterogeneities make this
problem challenging. Existing methods usually use separate
components to capture spatial and temporal correlations and
ignore the heterogeneities in spatial-temporal data. In this
paper, we propose a novel model, named Spatial-Temporal
Synchronous Graph Convolutional Networks (STSGCN), for
spatial-temporal network data forecasting. The model is able
to effectively capture the complex localized spatial-temporal
correlations through an elaborately designed spatial-temporal
synchronous modeling mechanism. Meanwhile, multiple
modules for different time periods are designed in the model
to effectively capture the heterogeneities in localized spatialtemporal graphs. Extensive experiments are conducted on
four real-world datasets, which demonstrates that our method
achieves the state-of-the-art performance and consistently
outperforms other baselines.

‫ݐ‬ଶ

6SDWLDOGHSHQGHQF\
7HPSRUDOFRUUHODWLRQ
6SDWLDOWHPSRUDOFRUUHODWLRQ

7LPH

Figure 1: The inﬂuence of the red node in a spatial-temporal
network. The brown arrows denote the edges of the network,
and also indicate the inﬂuence in the spatial dimension. The
blue arrow indicates the inﬂuence of the red node on itself
at the next time step. The green arrows indicate the inﬂuence that across both the spatial and temporal dimensions,
between the red node and its neighbors at the next time step.
t1 and t2 denotes two continuous time steps.
Taking the spatial-temporal network shown in Figure 1
as an example, there are three different inﬂuences in this
network. Each node in the spatial-temporal graph can directly inﬂuence its neighbor nodes at the same time step,
and such inﬂuence is derived from the actual spatial dependencies. Meanwhile, each node can also directly inﬂuence
itself at the next time step due to the temporal correlations
in time series. Besides, each node can even directly inﬂuence
its neighbor nodes at the next time step because of the synchronous spatial-temporal correlations, as shown in Figure
1. The reason for the existence of the three different kinds
of inﬂuences is that the information propagation in a spatialtemporal network occurs both along the spatial and temporal
dimensions simultaneously. Due to the restriction of the spatial distances between nodes and the time range of the time
series, these complex spatial-temporal correlations are usually localized. We refer to these complex inﬂuences as localized spatial-temporal correlations. Modeling such correlations is crucial for spatial-temporal network data prediction.
Previous studies like DCRNN (Li et al. 2017), STGCN (Yu,
Yin, and Zhu 2018) and ASTGCN (Guo et al. 2019a) use
two separate components to capture temporal and spatial dependencies, respectively. These methods only directly capture the ﬁrst two kinds of inﬂuences we mentioned above,

Introduction
Spatial-temporal network data forecasting is a fundamental research problem in spatial-temporal data mining. The
spatial-temporal network is a typical data structure that can
describe lots of data in many real-world applications, such as
trafﬁc networks, mobile base-station networks, urban water
systems, etc. Accurate predictions of spatial-temporal network data can signiﬁcantly improve the service quality of
these applications. With the development of deep learning
on graphs, powerful methods like graph convolutional networks and its variants have been widely applied to these
spatial-temporal network data prediction tasks and achieved
promising performance. However, there is still a lack of effective methods to model the correlations and heterogeneity
in both the spatial and temporal aspects. In this paper, we focus on designing a model to synchronously capture the complex spatial-temporal correlations and take the heterogeneity
into account to improve the accuracy of spatial-temporal network data forecasting.
∗

Corresponding author: hywan@bjtu.edu.cn
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
914

