The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Synthesizing Action Sequences for Modifying Model Decisions
Goutham Ramakrishnan,∗ Yun Chan Lee,∗ Aws Albarghouthi
University of Wisconsin–Madison
{gouthamr, aws}@cs.wisc.edu, yunchan.c.lee@gmail.com

execute so that they favorably change the decision of some
model. Optimality here is with respect to a measure of how
hard it is for a person to perform the provided actions—we
want to provide the simplest, cheapest feedback. There are
many challenges in solving this problem: (i) the combinatorial blow-up in the space of action sequences, (ii) the fact
that actions are parameterized by real values and have variable cost (e.g., increase savings by $X), (iii) and the fact that
action ordering is important, e.g., you can only do A after
you have done B or you can only do A if you are more than
35 years old.
To attack this problem, we make the key observation that
the problem resembles that of generating adversarial examples (Szegedy et al. 2013; Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy
2015; Carlini and Wagner 2017; Papernot et al. 2017), where
we usually want to slightly perturb the pixels of an input
image to modify the classiﬁcation, e.g., make a neural network think a dog is a panda. However, in our case, we are
not looking for an imperceptible perturbation to the input
features, but one that results from the application of realworld actions. With this view in mind, we present a new
technique that adapts and combines (i) search-based program synthesis (Alur et al. 2018) to traverse the space of
action sequences and (ii) optimization-based adversarial example generation (Carlini and Wagner 2017) techniques to
discover action parameters. This combination allows our approach to handle a rich class of (differentiable) models, e.g.,
deep neural networks, and complex domain-speciﬁc actions
and cost models.

Abstract
When a model makes a consequential decision, e.g., denying someone a loan, it needs to additionally generate actionable, realistic feedback on what the person can do to favorably change the decision. We cast this problem through the
lens of program synthesis, in which our goal is to synthesize
an optimal (realistically cheapest or simplest) sequence of actions that if a person executes successfully can change their
classiﬁcation. We present a novel and general approach that
combines search-based program synthesis and test-time adversarial attacks to construct action sequences over a domainspeciﬁc set of actions. We demonstrate the effectiveness of
our approach on a number of deep neural networks.

1

Introduction

Today, predictive models are responsible for an everexpanding spectrum of decisions, some of which are consequential to the lives and well-being of individuals—e.g.,
mortgage underwriting, job screening, healthcare decisions,
criminal risk assessment, and many more. As such, questions about fairness and transparency have taken center stage
in the debate over the increasing use of machine learning to
automate decisions in sensitive domains, and a vibrant research community has emerged to explore and address the
many facets of these questions.
In this paper, we are interested in the problem of providing actionable feedback to the subjects of algorithmic
decision-making. For instance, imagine that you are denied
a mortgage to buy your ﬁrst home, thanks to a model that
consumed a set of features and deemed you too risky. We
envision that such an algorithmic process should additionally give you realistic, actionable feedback that will increase
your chances of receiving a loan. For instance, you might receive the following feedback: increase your down payment
by $1000 and limit credit card debt to a maximum of $5000
for the next two months. This is probably reasonable advice,
in contrast with, say, a much harder to fulﬁll feedback like
change your marital status from single to married.
We view this problem through the lens of program synthesis (Gulwani, Polozov, and Singh 2017): we want to synthesize an optimal sequence of instructions that a human can

Setting and Consequences. At this point, it is important
to recognize the possibility that the solution we propose for
the problem setting may be vulnerable to unethical practices.
Although our technique, in principle, may be used by users
to maliciously game the system, we believe in its importance
and cannot envision a world in which subjects are unable
to understand and act on black-box decisions. One setting
we envision is where users cannot adversarially attack the
decision-maker as they do not have access to the model. The
intention would be to use our technique as a means for the
service provider to give meaningful and actionable feedback
to its users, making the decision process more transparent.

∗

Equal contributions by authors
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Most Relevant Work. To our knowledge, the idea of providing actionable feedback for algorithmic decisions was
5462

