The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Being Optimistic to Be Conservative: Quickly Learning a CVaR Policy
Ramtin Keramati,1 Alex Tamkin,2 Christoph Dann,3 Emma Brunskill2
1

Institute of Computational and Mathematical Engineering (ICME), Stanford University, California, USA
2
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, California, USA
3
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA
{keramati, atamkin, ebrun}@cs.stanford.edu, cdann@cdann.net

2009), often under the name “expected shortfall”. While
there has been recent interest in the RL community in learning to converge or identify good CVaR decision policies in
Markov decision processes (Chow and Ghavamzadeh 2014;
Chow et al. 2015; Tamar, Glassner, and Mannor 2015;
Dabney et al. 2018a), interestingly we are unaware of prior
work focused on how to quickly learn such CVaR MDP
policies, even though sample efﬁcient RL for maximizing expected outcomes is a deep and well studied theoretical (Jaksch, Ortner, and Auer 2010; Dann et al. 2018) and
empirical (Bellemare et al. 2016) topic. Sample efﬁcient exploration seems of equal or even more importance in the case
when the goal is risk-averse outcomes.

Abstract
While maximizing expected return is the goal in most reinforcement learning approaches, risk-sensitive objectives such
as conditional value at risk (CVaR) are more suitable for
many high-stakes applications. However, relatively little is
known about how to explore to quickly learn policies with
good CVaR. In this paper, we present the ﬁrst algorithm
for sample-efﬁcient learning of CVaR-optimal policies in
Markov decision processes based on the optimism in the face
of uncertainty principle. This method relies on a novel optimistic version of the distributional Bellman operator that
moves probability mass from the lower to the upper tail of
the return distribution. We prove asymptotic convergence and
optimism of this operator for the tabular policy evaluation
case. We further demonstrate that our algorithm ﬁnds CVaRoptimal policies substantially faster than existing baselines in
several simulated environments with discrete and continuous
state spaces.

In this paper we work towards sample efﬁcient reinforcement learning algorithms that can quickly identify a policy with an optimal CVaR. Our focus is in minimizing the
amount of experience needed to ﬁnd such a policy, similar in spirit to probably approximately correct RL methods for expected reward. Note that this is different than another important topic in risk-sensitive RL, which focuses
on safe exploration: algorithms that focus on avoiding any
potentially very poor outcomes during learning. These typically rely on local smoothness assumptions and do not typically focus on sample efﬁciency (Berkenkamp et al. 2017;
Koller et al. 2018); an interesting question for future work
is whether one can do both safe and efﬁcient learning of
a CVaR policy. Our work is suitable for the many settings
where some outcomes are undesirable but not catastrophic.

Introduction
A key goal in reinforcement learning (RL) is to quickly learn
to make good decisions by interacting with an environment.
In most cases the quality of the decision policy is evaluated
with respect to its expected (discounted) sum of rewards.
However, in many interesting cases, it is important to consider the full distributions over the potential sum of rewards,
and the desired objective may be a risk-sensitive measure of
this distribution. For example, a patient undergoing a surgery
for a knee replacement will (hopefully) only experience that
procedure once or twice, and may well be interested in the
distribution of potential results for a single procedure, rather
than what may happen on average if he or she were to undertake that procedure hundreds of time. Finance and (machine) control are other cases where interest in risk-sensitive
outcomes are common.
A popular risk-sensitive measure of a distribution of outcomes is the Conditional Value at Risk (CVaR) (Artzner
et al. 1999). Intuitively, CVaR is the expected reward in
the worst α-fraction of outcomes, and has seen extensive
use in ﬁnancial portfolio optimization (Zhu and Fukushima

Our approach is inspired by the popular and effective principle of optimism in the face of uncertainty (OFU) in sample
efﬁcient RL for maximizing expected outcomes (Strehl and
Littman 2008; Brafman and Tennenholtz 2002). Such work
typically works by considering uncertainty over the MDP
model parameters or state-action value function, and constructing an optimistic value function given that uncertainty
that is then used to guide decision making. To take a similar
idea for rapidly learning the optimal CVaR policy, we seek
to consider the uncertainty in the distribution of outcomes
possible and the resulting CVaR value. To do so, we use
the Dvoretzky-Kiefer-Wolfowitz (DKW) inequality—while
to our knowledge this has not been previously used in reinforcement learning settings, it is a very useful concentration

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4436

