The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Hierarchical Knowledge Squeezed Adversarial Network Compression
Peng Li,1,2∗ Changyong Shu,1,2∗ Yuan Xie,1† Yanyun Qu,3† Hui Kong2
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
2
Nanjing Institute of Advanced Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Horizon Robotic, Nanjing, China
3
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart City, School of Information Science and Engineering,
Xiamen University, Fujian, China
{peng03.li, changyong.shu, hui.kong}@horizon.ai, yxie@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, yyqu@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract

Task-driven knowledge squeeze

Deep network compression has been achieved notable
progress via knowledge distillation, where a teacher-student
learning manner is adopted by using predetermined loss. Recently, more focuses have been transferred to employ the adversarial training to minimize the discrepancy between distributions of output from two networks. However, they always emphasize on result-oriented learning while neglecting
the scheme of process-oriented learning, leading to the loss
of rich information contained in the whole network pipeline.
Whereas in other (non GAN-based) process-oriented methods, the knowledge have usually been transferred in a redundant manner. Observing that, the small network can not
perfectly mimic a large one due to the huge gap of network scale, we propose a knowledge transfer method, involving effective intermediate supervision, under the adversarial training framework to learn the student network. Different from the other intermediate supervision methods, we
design the knowledge representation in a compact form by introducing a task-driven attention mechanism. Meanwhile, to
improve the representation capability of the attention-based
method, a hierarchical structure is utilized so that powerful
but highly squeezed knowledge is realized and the knowledge from teacher network could accommodate the size of
student network. Extensive experimental results on three typical benchmark datasets, i.e., CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and ImageNet, demonstrate that our method achieves highly superior
performances against state-of-the-art methods.

Teacher

IS

IS

IS

Backbone loss

Discriminator

Student

IS: intermediate supervision

Figure 1: The overview of proposed Hierarchical Knowledge Squeezed Adversarial Network Compression (HKSANC) via intermediate supervision.

composition (Denton et al. 2014; Yang et al. 2015), network pruning (Han, Mao, and Dally 2015; Belagiannis and
Zisserman 2017), quantization (Courbariaux et al. 2016;
Rastegari et al. 2016), knowledge distillation (KD) (Hinton,
Vinyals, and Dean 2015), and compact network design (Iandola et al. 2016; Zhang et al. 2018).
Among the above categories, KD is somewhat different
due to the utilization of information from the pre-trained
teacher network. (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015) forced
the output of student network to match the soft targets produced by a teacher network via KL divergence. In recent
years, many researchers resort to process-oriented methods, and many kinds of knowledge representation algorithms
have been proposed (Zagoruyko and Komodakis 2016; Yim
et al. 2017). Empirically, the loss learned by adversarial
training usually has advantages over the predetermined one
in the student-teacher strategy, (Belagiannis, Farshad, and
Galasso 2018) and (Xu, Hsu, and Huang 2018) proposed the
GAN-based distillation approaches by introducing the discriminator to match the output distribution between teacher
and student.
Motivations: 1) To inherit the information from teacher
network, the aforementioned GAN-based methods usually
focus on result-oriented learning. While reasonably effective, rich information encoded in the intermediate layers

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) greatly enhance the development of artiﬁcial intelligence via dominant performance in
diverse perception missions. Due to the fact that the highly
computational consumption problem in modern DNNs usually restricts their direct implementation on embedded systems, there is a trend in expediting the development of network compression. The network compression can accelerate neural networks for real-time applications on edgecomputing devices in the following aspects: low-rank dec 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
∗
Equal contribution
†
Corresponding author
11370

