The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Asymmetric Co-Teaching for
Unsupervised Cross-Domain Person Re-Identiﬁcation
Fengxiang Yang,1∗ Ke Li,3 Zhun Zhong,1 Zhiming Luo,2† Xing Sun,3†
Hao Cheng,3 Xiaowei Guo,3 Feiyue Huang,3 Rongrong Ji,1 Shaozi Li1
2

1
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Department, Xiamen University, China
Post Doctoral Mobile Station of Information and Communication Engineering, Xiamen University, China
3
Tencent Youtu Lab, Shanghai, China

tion (UDA), which aims to transfer the knowledge from
the labeled source domain to the unlabeled target domain.
These works mainly lie in two aspects, distribution aligning (Wei et al. 2018; Deng et al. 2018; Chang et al. 2019;
Lin et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2018) and target pseudo label
discovering (Fan, Zheng, and Yang 2018; Song et al. 2018;
Li, Zhu, and Gong 2018a). The former aims to reduce
the distribution gap between domains in a common space,
such as image-level (Wei et al. 2018; Deng et al. 2018)
and attribute-level (Chang et al. 2019; Lin et al. 2018;
Wang et al. 2018) spaces. The latter attempts to leverage
the underlying relations among target samples and predict
pseudo labels for model retraining, e.g. assigning pseudo
labels based on clustering (Fan, Zheng, and Yang 2018;
Song et al. 2018; Li, Zhu, and Gong 2018a) and k-nearest
neighbors (Zhong et al. 2019a; Yang et al. 2018). Among
them, clustering based methods have reported very competitive accuracy for UDA in person re-ID. These methods usually employ an iterative process of predicting pseudo identities for unlabeled target samples according to the clusters
and ﬁne-tuning the model with those predicted samples. Despite their promising results, clustering based methods are
restricted by two main drawbacks. On the one hand, the clustering accuracy can not be guaranteed even using the modern
approaches, so that pseudo labels assigned by clusters can be
noisy. Training the model with noisy labels that assigned to
wrong identities will undoubtedly damage the re-ID performance. On the other hand, most clustering methods tend to
leave low conﬁdence samples as outliers and do not assign
cluster labels to them, e.g., DBSCAN (Ester et al. 1996).
These outliers are usually hard samples that encounter high
image variations. Without considering such samples during
training, the model may have a problem in discriminating
high variation testing samples. However, directly assigning
them to the nearest cluster will bring more noisy labels, hindering the retraining of the model.

Abstract
Person re-identiﬁcation (re-ID), is a challenging task due
to the high variance within identity samples and imaging
conditions. Although recent advances in deep learning have
achieved remarkable accuracy in settled scenes, i.e., source
domain, few works can generalize well on the unseen target
domain. One popular solution is assigning unlabeled target
images with pseudo labels by clustering, and then retraining the model. However, clustering methods tend to introduce
noisy labels and discard low conﬁdence samples as outliers,
which may hinder the retraining process and thus limit the
generalization ability. In this study, we argue that by explicitly adding a sample ﬁltering procedure after the clustering,
the mined examples can be much more efﬁciently used. To
this end, we design an asymmetric co-teaching framework,
which resists noisy labels by cooperating two models to select data with possibly clean labels for each other. Meanwhile, one of the models receives samples as pure as possible, while the other takes in samples as diverse as possible. This procedure encourages that the selected training
samples can be both clean and miscellaneous, and that the
two models can promote each other iteratively. Extensive
experiments show that the proposed framework can consistently beneﬁt most clustering based methods, and boost the
state-of-the-art adaptation accuracy. Our code is available at
https://github.com/FlyingRoastDuck/ACT AAAI20.

1

Introduction

Person re-identiﬁcation (re-ID) (Sun et al. 2018; Zheng,
Yang, and Hauptmann 2016; Li, Zhu, and Gong 2018b) aims
to locate the target person in surveillance videos with a given
probe image. With the rapid evolution of deep learning models, the accuracy of person re-ID has been greatly boosted in
the public datasets. However, models trained on the source
domain often suffer from domain shifts, leading to a performance decline on a different target domain.
To alleviate this issue, recent works (Zhong et al. 2019b;
2018b) make efforts on the unsupervised domain adapta-

Co-Teaching (CT) (Han et al. 2018) is a commonly used
algorithm for training model with noisy labels, which learns
two networks by feeding samples with small losses of one
network to another. However, most co-teaching frameworks
utilize symmetric inputs for both networks, which do not
effectively apply to the context of clustering based cross-

∗

This work was done when Fengxiang Yang was an intern at
Youtu Lab (yangfx@stu.xmu.edu.cn).
†
Corresponding Author (zhiming.luo@xmu.edu.cn, winfredsun@tencent.com)
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12597

