The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Aspect-Aware Multimodal Summarization for Chinese E-Commerce Products
Haoran Li, Peng Yuan, Song Xu, Youzheng Wu, Xiaodong He, Bowen Zhou
JD AI Research
{lihaoran24, yuanpeng29, xusong28, wuyouzheng1, xiaodong.he, bowen.zhou}@jd.com

Abstract

Product Information

We present an abstractive summarization system that produces summary for Chinese e-commerce products. This task
is more challenging than general text summarization. First,
the appearance of a product typically plays a signiﬁcant role
in customers’ decisions to buy the product or not, which requires that the summarization model effectively use the visual information of the product. Furthermore, different products have remarkable features in various aspects, such as “energy efﬁciency” and “large capacity” for refrigerators. Meanwhile, different customers may care about different aspects.
Thus, the summarizer needs to capture the most attractive aspects of a product that resonate with potential purchasers. We
propose an aspect-aware multimodal summarization model
that can effectively incorporate the visual information and
also determine the most salient aspects of a product. We construct a large-scale Chinese e-commerce product summarization dataset that contains approximately 1.4 million manually
created product summaries that are paired with detailed product information, including an image, a title, and other textual
descriptions for each product. The experimental results on
this dataset demonstrate that our models signiﬁcantly outperform the comparative methods in terms of both the ROUGE
score and manual evaluations.

Product Title
Product
Image

(Midea Refrigerator, Double-Door, Small Double-Door Household Air-Cooled
Frost-Free Refrigerator, Quiet and Efficient)

Product Details

(Air-cooled system makes refrigerator frost-free. Soft cooler keeps your
food moist and fresh ...)

(Golden glass panel shows high quality life ...)

(Freezer's space is very large, which can
hold lots of food ...)

Product Summary
(Midea golden double-door refrigerator with glass panel is fashionable. The
technology of stereo air-cooled frost-free makes cold air disperse evenly. The
refrigerator freezes food quickly, and the space is large enough to meet the
requirement of the whole family.)

Figure 1: The product summarization task.

Introduction
Commercial product advertisements, as a critical component of marketing management in e-commerce platforms,
aim to attract consumers’ interests and arouse consumers’
desires to purchase the products. However, most product advertisements are so miscellaneous and tedious that the consumers cannot be expected to be patient enough to carefully
read through them. As shown in Figure 1, advertisements
are composed of numerous pictures with textual product descriptions. In this case, the potential consumers must browse
the web page to retrieve the detailed product characteristics that they care about, which would hurt their consumption experience. A product summary can effectively provide
customers with valuable information about the product in a
short time, which is of practical value for e-commerce scenarios.

Compared with the conventional text summarization
task, it is more challenging to generate summaries for ecommerce products. On one hand, the appearance of a product establishes customers’ ﬁrst impressions of the product,
which has a critical impact on purchasing decisions. Thus,
the summarization system must be able to adequately represent the useful information from product images. On the
other hand, different products have different selling points.
For example, the advantage of compact refrigerators is saving space and that of environmentally friendly refrigerators
is high energy efﬁciency. Therefore, the summary should focus on the most distinctive aspects of the product, which can
maximally promote consumers’ interests.
Recently, there has been a surge of work proposed to
generate summaries for e-commerce products (Wang et al.
2017; Chen et al. 2019). Daultani, Nio, and Chung (2019)

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8188

