The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Residual Continual Learning
Janghyeon Lee,1 Donggyu Joo,1 Hyeong Gwon Hong,2 Junmo Kim1
1

School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST
2
Graduate School of AI, KAIST
{wkdgus9305, jdg105, honggudrnjs, junmo.kim}@kaist.ac.kr

task information is available during target task training.
In many real-world applications, source data are often too
heavy to handle or do not have a public license. If they are
available, joint training of source and target data would be a
better solution. Further, we also assume that not only source
data but also any other forms containing source task information are not available. Recent studies on continual learning do not use the source data directly, but they often refer
to parts of the information about source data, for example in
forms of generative adversarial networks (Shin et al. 2017)
or Fisher information matrices (Kirkpatrick et al. 2017;
Ritter, Botev, and Barber 2018), which somewhat dilutes
the original purpose of continual learning. Second, the size
of a network should not increase. Without this condition,
a network can be expanded while keeping the entire original network, e.g., (Terekhov, Montone, and O’Regan 2015;
Rusu et al. 2016). Such network expansion methods show
good performance in both source and target tasks, but it is
difﬁcult to use them with deep neural networks in practice
because the size of a network becomes heavier as the number of tasks increases.
The main features are as follows.

Abstract
We propose a novel continual learning method called Residual Continual Learning (ResCL). Our method can prevent the
catastrophic forgetting phenomenon in sequential learning of
multiple tasks, without any source task information except
the original network. ResCL reparameterizes network parameters by linearly combining each layer of the original network
and a ﬁne-tuned network; therefore, the size of the network
does not increase at all. To apply the proposed method to general convolutional neural networks, the effects of batch normalization layers are also considered. By utilizing residuallearning-like reparameterization and a special weight decay
loss, the trade-off between source and target performance is
effectively controlled. The proposed method exhibits state-ofthe-art performance in various continual learning scenarios.

Introduction
Deep learning with artiﬁcial neural networks is now one of
the most powerful artiﬁcial intelligence technologies. It exhibits state-of-the-art performance in various machine learning ﬁelds such as computer vision (He et al. 2016a), natural language processing (Wu et al. 2016), and reinforcement learning (Silver et al. 2017). However, it requires large
amounts of training data and time to train such deep networks as network structure becomes complicated. To alleviate this difﬁculty, transfer learning methods such as ﬁnetuning (Yosinski et al. 2014) are used to utilize source task
knowledge and to boost training for target tasks.
As transfer learning methods consider only target task
performance during training, most of source task performance is lost as a side effect called the catastrophic forgetting phenomenon (French 1999; McCloskey and Cohen
1989). This is a serious problem if high performance is required for both source and target tasks. Continual learning
methods should be adopted to resolve this problem.
Our main goal is to achieve good target task performance
while maintaining source task performance. Speciﬁcally, we
focus on image classiﬁcation tasks with Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs). Moreover, we impose two practical
conditions for the problem. First, we assume that no source

• Residual-learning-like reparameterization allows continual learning, and a simple decay loss controls the trade-off
between source and target performance.
• No information about source tasks is needed, except the
original source network.
• The size of a network does not increase at all for inference
(except last task-speciﬁc linear classiﬁers).
• The proposed method can be applied to general CNNs
including Batch Normalization (BN) (Ioffe and Szegedy
2015) layers in a natural way.
• We propose two fair measures for comparing different
continual learning methods, maximum achievable average accuracy for an ideal measure and source accuracy
at required target accuracy for a practical measure.

Related Work

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Learning without Forgetting (LwF) (Li and Hoiem 2018) is a
simple but effective continual learning method. An LwF loss
4553

