The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Robust Tensor Decomposition via Orientation Invariant Tubal Nuclear Norms
Andong Wang,1,2,3 Chao Li,2 Zhong Jin,*1,4 Qibin Zhao*2,3
1

School of Computer Science & Engineering, NJUST, 2 Tensor Learning Unit, RIKEN AIP, 3 School of Automatation, GDUT,
4
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and System for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education, NJUST
Corresponding authors: Zhong Jin (zhongjin@njust.edu.cn), Qibin Zhao (qibin.zhao@riken.jp)

Unfortunately, RMP is NP-hard in general for matrices (2way tensors) (Candès and Tao 2010) and even harder for
higher-way tensors (Hillar and Lim 2009). In low-rank matrix estimation, matrix nuclear norm is proposed as the convex envelop of rank function (Fazel 2002) for tractable
algorithms. Motivated by the great success of matrix nuclear norm, its tensor extensions have been extensively
studied, like tensor trace norm (Yuan and Zhang 2016),
overlapped Schatten-1 norm (SNN) (Tomioka et al. 2011;
Liu et al. 2013), latent Schatten norm (LatentNN) (Tomioka
and Suzuki 2013), squared nuclear norm (SqNN) (Mu et
al. 2014) and tubal nuclear norm (TNN) (Zhang et al.
2014). Among existing tensor nuclear norms1 , TNN is induced by the tensor singular value decomposition (t-SVD)
(Kilmer et al. 2013) and has shown superior performance
in various applications, such as image/video inpainting/denoising (Zhou and Feng 2017; Zhang and Aeron 2017;
Lu et al. 2019), clustering (Xie et al. 2017) and WiFi
ﬁngerprint-based indoor localization (Liu et al. 2016b).
In real multi-way data like images and videos, there is an
ubiquitous “spatial-shifting” correlation making such data
spatial-temporally smooth (Liu et al. 2016a). From a signal
processing standpoint, smoothness in original domain often
reﬂects the existence of some simple patterns in spectral domain (Yokota et al. 2018). TNN is quite suitable to capture
such simple patterns since it exploits spectral low-rankness
for 3-way tensors. However, by computing nuclear norms
of frontal slices after 1D-DFT on the mode-3 ﬁbers, it is
strictly orientation sensitive and fails to capture the complex intra-mode and inter-mode correlations in multiple orientations for higher-order tensors. To improve the limited
representation ability and ﬂexibility of TNN in modeling
multi-orientational correlations, we propose two orientation
invariant tensor norms for K-way (K ≥ 3) tensors and apply
them to RTD. Main contributions of this paper are three-fold:

Abstract
Low-rank tensor recovery has been widely applied to computer vision and machine learning. Recently, tubal nuclear
norm (TNN) based optimization is proposed with superior
performance as compared to other tensor nuclear norms. However, one major limitation is its orientation sensitivity due to
low-rankness strictly deﬁned along tubal orientation and it cannot simultaneously model spectral low-rankness in multiple
orientations. To this end, we introduce two new tensor norms
called OITNN-O and OITNN-L to exploit multi-orientational
spectral low-rankness for an arbitrary K-way (K ≥ 3) tensors. We further formulate two robust tensor decomposition
models via the proposed norms and develop two algorithms as
the solutions. Theoretically, we establish non-asymptotic error
bounds which can predict the scaling behavior of the estimation error. Experiments on real-world datasets demonstrate the
superiority and effectiveness of the proposed norms.

Introduction
Tensor decomposition has become a paradigm in modern
multi-way data analysis. Due to various reasons like sensor
failures, occlusion in videos, or abnormalities, the multi-way
data are often corrupted by noises and gross corruptions. For
example, the embedded noises in hyper-spectral image is
probably a mixture of small dense noises and sparse gross
corruptions (Zhao et al. 2015a). To tackle both small noises
and gross corruptions, the robust tensor decomposition (RTD)
(Gu, Gui, and Han 2014) is studied to robustify traditional
tensor decompositions like CANDECOMP/PARAFAC (CP)
decomposition (Harshman 1970) and Tucker decomposition
(Tucker 1966) which are sensitive to gross corruptions.
In many real-world applications, most variation of the
multi-way data can be linearly dominated by a relatively
small number of latent factors due to intrinsic correlations and
redundancy. Thus, such data can be well approximated by a
“low rank” tensor. Thanks to the multiple deﬁnitions of tensor
rank function, such as CP rank (Harshman 1970), Tucker
rank (Tucker 1966), TT rank (Oseledets 2011) and Tubal
rank (Kilmer et al. 2013), multi-way data can be modeled
with different types of low-rank structures.
To recover a low-rank tensor, one natural way is to solve
the rank minimization problem (RMP) (Liu et al. 2013).

1) We propose two tensor norms via a novel 3d unfolding operation on K-way tensors, which are orientation invariant,
thus can be exploited for the multi-orientational spectral
low-rankness.
2) The new norms are employed to formulate RTD as two
1

In this paper, “tensor nuclear norms” refer to tensor extensions
of matrix nuclear norm instead of the nuclear norm induced by CP
decomposition (Yuan and Zhang 2016).

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6102

