The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Multi-Task Learning for Metaphor Detection
with Graph Convolutional Neural Networks and Word Sense Disambiguation
Duong Minh Le,1,2∗ My Thai,3 Thien Huu Nguyen1,4†
1

VinAI Research, Hanoi, Vietnam
Hanoi University of Science and Technology, Hanoi, Vietnam
3
Department of Computer and Information Science and Engineering, University of Florida, USA
4
Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon 97403, USA
v.duonglm1@vinai.io, mythai@cise.uﬂ.edu, thien@cs.uoregon.edu
2

disease (i.e., the source concept), but applied to the concept
of crime (i.e., the target concept) (Rei et al. 2017).

Abstract
The current deep learning works on metaphor detection have
only considered this task independently, ignoring the useful
knowledge from the related tasks and knowledge resources.
In this work, we introduce two novel mechanisms to improve
the performance of the deep learning models for metaphor
detection. The ﬁrst mechanism employs graph convolutional
neural networks (GCN) with dependency parse trees to directly connect the words of interest with their important context words for metaphor detection. The GCN networks in this
work also present a novel control mechanism to ﬁlter the
learned representation vectors to retain the most important information for metaphor detection. The second mechanism, on
the other hand, features a multi-task learning framework that
exploits the similarity between word sense disambiguation
and metaphor detection to transfer the knowledge between
the two tasks. The extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed techniques, yielding the state-ofthe-art performance over several datasets.

The ubiquity of metaphor has made it an important problem in natural language processing (NLP) and recognizing metaphor correctly is crucial for the text understanding capacity of NLP systems for various purposes (e.g.,
Information Extraction, Opinion Mining, Machine Translation) (Shutova, Teufel, and Korhonen 2013). However,
metaphor detection is a challenging problem, partly due
to the fact that the systems need to understand the literal senses of the expressions and distinguish such senses
from the non-literal meanings based on the analogical comparison in the speciﬁc context of the expressions. In order to capture the context for metaphor detection, the early
work has adopted rule-based and machine learning systems
(Mason 2004; Turney et al. 2011; Tsvetkov et al. 2014;
Hovy et al. 2013) where extensive feature engineering and
system development are required. Recently, deep learning
and word representations have been applied to metaphor
detection to minimize the feature engineering effort, offering the systems with the current state-of-the-art performance for this task (Gao et al. 2018; Wu et al. 2018;
Mao, Lin, and Guerin 2019). In this work, we introduce two
novel techniques for metaphor detection with deep learning
that, to the best of our knowledge, have not been investigated in the previous work, i.e., graph convolutional neural networks (GCN) with dependency trees and multi-task
learning with word sense disambiguation (WSD).

Introduction
We study the problem of metaphor detection (MD) that
aims to identify the metaphorical expressions/words in text.
Metaphor is persuasive in daily communication, providing
the vividness and clarity for our thoughts and information
exchange. In the cognitive level, metaphor helps to conceptualize our concrete experience in the real world and transfer
such knowledge across different domains (Shutova, Kiela,
and Maillard 2016). More speciﬁcally, in an early and inﬂuential work, (Lakoff and Johnson 1980) describes metaphor
as a phenomenon in which a systematic metaphorical association between two distinct concepts/domains is established
in our cognition and presented in the language. For example, the words “curing” and “transmitting” in the phrases
“curing juvenile delinquency” and “corruption transmitting
through the government ranks” (respectively) are metaphorical as they are supposed to originate from the concept of

The ﬁrst intuition for the proposed model is that given a
word of interest in a sentence, some context words are more
important than the others with respect to their contribution
to the determination about metaphor for the given word, and
effective modeling of such important words is critical for
the metaphor detection systems. For instance, in the example
sentence in Figure 1, the word “house” is crucial to correctly
predict “lay” as a metaphorical word (i.e., “lay” is usually
used for live animals instead of static objects like houses).
The other words (e.g., “seemed”, “ﬂoat”, and “mist”), on the
other hand, are not necessary and might even introduce noise
into the representations learned by the deep learning models to determine the literal or metaphorical sense for “lay”
in this case. In order to properly capture the important con-

∗
This work is done when the ﬁrst author is an AI resident at
VinAI Research.
†
Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8139

