The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Unveiling Hidden Intentions
Gerardo Ocampo Diaz, Vincent Ng
Human Language Technology Research Institute
University of Texas at Dallas
Richardson, TX 75083–0688
{godiaz, vince}@hlt.utdallas.edu

et al. 2015) and crowdsourcing in Vietnam (Pham 2013),
and, more recently, the dissemination of pro-government
and anti-activist memes and posts on Twitter and Facebook during the 2019 Hong Kong protests (Gleicher 2019;
Safety 2019). Research and journalistic evidence suggests
that the popularity of engaging in such campaigns is only
increasing worldwide (Bradshaw and Howard 2018), and
that political manipulation in social media is carried out
not only by foreign but also domestic parties (Barrett 2019;
WNYC Studios 2019).

Abstract
Recent years have seen signiﬁcant advances in machine perception, which have enabled AI systems to become grounded
in the world. While AI systems can now ”read” and ”see”,
they still cannot read between the lines and see through the
lens, unlike humans. We propose the novel task of hidden
message and intention identiﬁcation: given some perceptual
input (i.e., a text, an image), the goal is to produce a short
description of the message the input transmits and the hidden
intention of its author, if any. Not only will a solution to this
task enable machine perception technologies to reach the next
level of complexity, but it will be an important step towards
addressing a task that has recently received a lot of public
attention, political manipulation in social media.

1

Several strategies prevail in these political manipulation
campaigns. A common strategy is framing, which refers to
the way the media presents information to the audience with
the goal of inﬂuencing the choices they make about how to
process that information. As an example, consider the recent protests in Hong Kong. A journalist who focused on
reporting the police’s overuse of weapons in curbing the
protests and how many protesters were injured as a result
will likely trigger a negative sentiment towards the police.
In contrast, a journalist who focused on reporting how violent the protesters were (e.g., throwing bricks at the police,
setting ﬁre in the street, preventing tourists from entering
the airport’s security area) will likely trigger a negative sentiment towards the protesters. More sophisticated campaigns
may involve a combination of this and other tactics.

Introduction

In an increasingly online world, information reaches far and
wide. Social media, forums, and messaging platforms have
enabled citizens to speak their mind and facilitated the rapid
proliferation of a wide range of content: from personal anecdotes, videos, and memes to political views and full-blown
opinion and news articles from other users and third parties. The ubiquity and reach of online platforms empowers
individuals to share information and unite behind common
goals. At the same time, however, it exposes them to complexly orchestrated campaigns of manipulation that aim to
inﬂuence public opinion and achieve political goals. Such
objectives might include inducing fear and distrust, smearing or discrediting, raising support for political entities, creating and reinforcing division and discord in societies, and
generating action or inaction among the population.
In recent years, known instances of such political manipulation have increased at an alarming rate. Noteworthy examples include ISIS’ use of social media for propaganda and
recruitment (Farwell 2014), state-sponsored interference in
the 2016 U.S. presidential election (DiResta et al. 2018)
(which included, among other things, spreading false information to prevent people from voting and disseminating
content attacking the presidential candidates), public opinion manipulation through Twitter bots in Venezuela (Forelle

How can artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) be used to counter political manipulation? We propose to use AI to identify the
hidden messages behind a perceptual input, be it an image, a
video, a speech, or a text document, along with the intention
or goal of the author behind it. Speciﬁcally, we deﬁne the
novel task of hidden message and intention identiﬁcation as
follows. Given a perceptual input, the goal is to automatically generate a short description (e.g., a phrase, a clause, or
a sentence) of the message(s) conveyed by the input, as well
as a separate description of the intention(s) that exists behind
each message. Note that the surface message and intention
of an author are different from his/her hidden message and
intentions. Consider again the example on the Hong Kong
protests. Regardless of how the protests were framed, the
(typical) surface intention of the journalists is to report on
the ongoing protest events in Hong Kong, with no particular message being relayed by journalists other than the facts

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13550

