The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Geometry Sharing Network for 3D Point Cloud Classiﬁcation and Segmentation
Mingye Xu,1,2∗ Zhipeng Zhou,1∗ Yu Qiao1,3†
1

ShenZhen Key Lab of Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
SIAT-SenseTime Joint Lab,Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
SIAT Branch, Shenzhen Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Robotics for Society
{my.xu, zp.zhou, yu.qiao}@siat.ac.cn

Abstract
In spite of the recent progresses on classifying 3D point cloud
with deep CNNs, large geometric transformations like rotation and translation remain challenging problem and harm the
ﬁnal classiﬁcation performance. To address this challenge,
we propose Geometry Sharing Network (GS-Net) which effectively learns point descriptors with holistic context to enhance the robustness to geometric transformations. Compared
with previous 3D point CNNs which perform convolution on
nearby points, GS-Net can aggregate point features in a more
global way. Specially, GS-Net consists of Geometry Similarity Connection (GSC) modules which exploit Eigen-Graph
to group distant points with similar and relevant geometric
information, and aggregate features from nearest neighbors
in both Euclidean space and Eigenvalue space. This design
allows GS-Net to efﬁciently capture both local and holistic
geometric features such as symmetry, curvature, convexity
and connectivity. Theoretically, we show the nearest neighbors of each point in Eigenvalue space are invariant to rotation
and translation. We conduct extensive experiments on public
datasets, ModelNet40, ShapeNet Part. Experiments demonstrate that GS-Net achieves the state-of-the-art performances
on major datasets, 93.3% on ModelNet40, and are more robust to geometric transformations.

1

Figure 1: Visualization of Eigen-Graph (Best view in color
and zoom in). Given a red anchor point, traditional convolutions for 3D points operate on a local region as shown
in the red circle. To explore the geometry of point cloud
such as symmetry, curvature, convexity and connectivity,
we use Eigen-Graph to group neighbors in both Euclidean
space and Eigenvalue space. The anchor point’s neighbors
in Euclidean space are colored blue and its neighbors in
Eigenvalue space are colored green, thus we construct the
Eigen-Graph of the anchor point and its neighbors. Obviously, green points provide more information about the geometry of the whole point cloud. It shows that our method
indeed associates the anchor points with points having similar local geometry, even though these points are far away
from each other in Euclidean space.

Introduction

Analysis and classiﬁcation of 3D point cloud is an important
problem in computer vision and graphics, due to its wide
applications in robot manipulation (Rusu et al. 2008), autonomous driving (Qi et al. 2018) etc. The challenge of this
problem comes from several aspects. Firstly, the point cloud
are sparsely sampled from 3D surfaces in an irregular and
off-order way. Secondly, the point cloud usually undergoes
large geometric transformations and deformations. It is important to achieve robustness to transformation and permutation for analyzing and classifying 3D point cloud.
Large research efforts have been devoted to solving the
above problems. One research direction (Su et al. 2015;
Feng et al. 2018; Maturana and Scherer 2015; Wu et al.

2015) aims to represent the irregular 3D point cloud using
regular data, in that way they can use classical convolution
neural network to process the regular data. Two of the most
common regular representations are voxels and multi-view
images. However, both these representations have limitations. Dense voxels representation is inefﬁcient due to the
sparsity of input point clouds, while multi-view images may
lose 3D structures of points and cause occlusion problem.
Another direction focuses on designing convolution operations for irregular points, which are inspired by the prominent success of CNNs on regular grid data, such as audio
and images. PointNet (Qi et al. 2017a) learns a spatial encoding of each point directly on Euclidean space and aggregates all individual point features by max pooling to obtain

∗

M.Xu and Z.Zhou contributed equally.
Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

12500

