The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Solving General Elliptical Mixture Models
through an Approximate Wasserstein Manifold
Shengxi Li,1 Zeyang Yu,1 Min Xiang,1 Danilo Mandic1
1
Imperial College London
South Kensington Campus
London SW7 2AZ, UK
{shengxi.li17, z.yu17, m.xiang13, d.mandic}@imperial.ac.uk

maintain the property of a probability density throughout, to
ensure that d(·, ·) is tractable.
Due to this probability constraint, various advanced numerical algorithms (solvers) have been typically restricted
by either the requirement of a ﬂexible ρ(θ) or a powerful
d(·, ·). Such restrictions, for example, are one of the main
rationales for using the expectation-maximisation (EM) algorithm to minimise the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence
in Gaussian mixture model (GMM) problems (Xu and Jordan 1996). On the other hand, gradient-based numerical algorithms typically rest upon additional techniques that only
work in particular situations (e.g., gradient reduction (Redner and Walker 1984), positive deﬁnite projection (Hosseini
and Sra 2015), re-parametrisation (Jordan and Jacobs 1994)
and Cholesky decomposition (Naim and Gildea 2012)). Besides the GMM, there exist other solutions that allow for
ﬂexible choices of ρ(θ), which still belong to the EM-type
methods (e.g., mixtures of t-distributions (Peel and McLachlan 2000), Laplace distributions (Tan and Jiao 2007) and
hyperbolic distributions (Browne and McNicholas 2015)).
Unfortunately, given other suitable candidates of distributions, those EM-type methods cannot ensure universal convergence (Kent and Tyler 1991; Zhang, Wiesel, and Greco
2013; Sra and Hosseini 2013), which dramatically limits the
power of ﬁnite mixture models.
Another issue that has been highlighted in the literature is the sensitivity to initialisations when solving GMMs
(Xu, Hsu, and Maleki 2016; Jin et al. 2016). One of the
main reasons is due to the use of KL divergence, which
operates based on a “bin-to-bin” comparison between two
density histograms. This means that mixtures which fall
into a spurious local minimum cannot be corrected via the
points outside. Indeed, with random initialisations for the
GMM, Jin has proved that the EM method or any other ﬁrstorder method which minimises the KL divergence are highly
likely to result in arbitrary bad local minima (Jin et al. 2016).
This can also be veriﬁed from the non-smooth optimization
space with various local optimum of the KL divergence as
illustrated in Fig. 1-(b), even for estimating a simple GMM
(Fig. 1-(a)). The gradients on the space are highly concentrated as well, which also leads to ill-posed gradient descent.
On the other hand, by virtue of the reﬂection of sam-

Abstract
We address the estimation problem for general ﬁnite mixture models, with a particular focus on the elliptical mixture
models (EMMs). Compared to the widely adopted Kullback–
Leibler divergence, we show that the Wasserstein distance
provides a more desirable optimisation space. We thus provide a stable solution to the EMMs that is both robust to initialisations and reaches a superior optimum by adaptively optimising along a manifold of an approximate Wasserstein distance. To this end, we ﬁrst provide a unifying account of computable and identiﬁable EMMs, which serves as a basis to rigorously address the underpinning optimisation problem. Due
to a probability constraint, solving this problem is extremely
cumbersome and unstable, especially under the Wasserstein
distance. To relieve this issue, we introduce an efﬁcient optimisation method on a statistical manifold deﬁned under an
approximate Wasserstein distance, which allows for explicit
metrics and computable operations, thus signiﬁcantly stabilising and improving the EMM estimation. We further propose an adaptive method to accelerate the convergence. Experimental results demonstrate the excellent performance of
the proposed EMM solver.

Introduction
This paper establishes a general solution to the ﬁnite mixture
model problem, which has been attracting extensive research
effort for decades, due to both its simple representation and
potential for universal approximation on arbitrary distributions in RM . The ﬁnite mixture model also provides interpretable and statistical descriptions of data, which makes
it a popular choice in a wide range of statistical learning
paradigms, such as semi-supervised learning, capsule networks, and various image processing paradigms (e.g., denoising, matching and registration).
The estimation on a ﬁnite mixture model boils down to a
minimisation problem which considers the mixture of distributions as a parametric model ρ(θ); it is then optimised
through a minimisation of a certain discrepancy measure between ρ(θ) and empirical distributions of observed data ρ∗ ,
namely, minθ d (ρ(θ), ρ∗ ). This minimisation, although not
explicitly stated, is a constrained problem because ρ(θ) must
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4658

