The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Cascading Convolutional Color Constancy
∗

Huanglin Yu,1 Ke Chen,1, Kaiqi Wang,1 Yanlin Qian,2 Zhaoxiang Zhang,3 Kui Jia1
1

South China University of Technology, 2 Tampere University, 3 Chinese Academy of Sciences
{eeyu.huanglin, mswkq}@mail.scut.edu.cn, {chenk, kuijia}@scut.edu.cn
yanlin.qian@tuni.ﬁ, zhaoxiang.zhang@ia.ac.cn

,QSXW

Abstract

2XWSXW

QGVWDJHSUHG
UGVWDJHSUHG
/DEHO

Regressing the illumination of a scene from the representations of object appearances is popularly adopted in computational color constancy. However, it’s still challenging due
to intrinsic appearance and label ambiguities caused by unknown illuminants, diverse reﬂection properties of materials and extrinsic imaging factors (such as different camera
sensors). In this paper, we introduce a novel algorithm –
Cascading Convolutional Color Constancy (in short, C4 ) to
improve robustness of regression learning and achieve stable generalization capability across datasets (different cameras and scenes) in a unique framework. The proposed C4
method ensembles a series of dependent illumination hypotheses from each cascade stage via introducing a weighted
multiply-accumulate loss function, which can inherently capture different modes of illuminations and explicitly enforce
coarse-to-ﬁne network optimization. Experimental results on
the public Color Checker and NUS 8-Camera benchmarks
demonstrate superior performance of the proposed algorithm
in comparison with the state-of-the-art methods, especially
for more difﬁcult scenes.

&

9LVXDOL]DWLRQRI,QWHUPHGLDWH,OOXPLQDQWLRQ3UHGLFWLRQVLQWKH&,(&RORU6SDFH

Figure 1: Visualization of the proposed C4 method in a cascaded structure in the top row, while plots in the bottom row
show dependent illumination hypotheses of different cascade stages in our C4 on an example from the Color Checker
dataset. Our C4 can signiﬁcantly boost illumination estimation performance in a coarse-to-ﬁne reﬁning manner. More
examples are given in the experiment section.

1902) for image correction. Estimating the illumination of
an image can be formulated into learning a regression mapping from the imagery representation to its corresponding
illumination label. Searching and identifying the best hypothesis of the illumination is not trivial in view of appearance inconsistency and label ambiguity. In addition to
unknown surface reﬂection, the large appearance variation
of the captured scene objects can be caused by the sensor
sensitivity and also the illuminant spectrum. Speciﬁcally,
spectral responses of sensors in cameras for color imaging
are not consistent across camera models and brands, e.g.
in the NUS 8-camera dataset (Cheng, Prasad, and Brown
2014) one scene is captured with eight different cameras,
and they have visually varying colors for the identical object
surface. Consequently, a typical solution is to train cameraspeciﬁc estimators, which is less efﬁcient and even impractical due to data-demanding characteristics. Very few algorithms (Qian et al. 2019) focus on the challenging cameraagnostic illumination estimation, achieving robust performance. Therefore, the challenge still exits. Most of the existing algorithms (Bianco, Cusano, and Schettini 2017; Barron 2015; Shi, Loy, and Tang 2016; Barron and Tsai 2017;

Introduction
The colors present in images are biased by the illumination in addition to the intrinsic reﬂection properties of scene
objects and extrinsic spectral sensitivity across cameras,
but they appear to be relatively constant for human visual
perception system. Such a property, referred to as color
constancy, makes object appearance under diverse lighting sources independent of the casting illumination, which
is desired in a large number of high-level vision problems. The color constancy problem can typically be addressed via estimating the color of the illuminant of the
scene ﬁrstly, which then recovers the canonical colors of
scene objects. A large number of computational color constancy algorithms (Qian et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2019;
Cheng et al. 2015; Bianco, Cusano, and Schettini 2017;
Shi, Loy, and Tang 2016; Hu, Wang, and Lin 2017) rely on
accurate and robust illumination predictions and then employ the simple yet effective von Kries model (von Kries
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12725

