The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Complementary Auxiliary Classiﬁers for Label-Conditional Text Generation
Yuan Li,1∗ Chunyuan Li,2† Yizhe Zhang,2 Xiujun Li,2 Guoqing Zheng,2
Lawrence Carin,1 Jianfeng Gao2
1

1

Duke University, 2 Microsoft Research, Redmond
{yl558, lcarin}@duke.edu, 2 {chunyl, yizzhang, xiul, zheng, jfgao}@microsoft.com

et al. 2017). One attractive property of these models is that
they map sentences to global language features in a latent
space, and allow manipulation of generated sentences with
a speciﬁc tense, sentiment or topic.
One prominent challenge for LVMs is to learn smooth
and disentangled latent representations, such that generation from this space results in realistic sentences and can
be effectively controlled in the category it belongs to during conditional decoding. Hu et al. (Hu et al. 2017) proposed Ctrl-Gen, which uses a VAE to represent sentences as
smooth Gaussian distributions, regularized towards a standard normal prior distribution in the latent space. However,
VAE-based methods (Kingma and Welling 2013) are difﬁcult to train due to the notorious posterior collapse and
KL vanishing (Bowman et al. 2015). To solve this problem,
ARAE (Zhao et al. 2017) uses adversarial learning to construct a ﬂexible prior distribution. It further proposes an auxiliary classiﬁer in the latent space to disentangle the learned
latent feature from the conditional labels.
In this paper we re-examine the relationship between disentangled feature learning and label-conditional generation,
and show that the former does not necessarily lead to the latter. We term this issue as a non-identiﬁability issue. This is
manifested when the generator is able to resemble training
samples perfectly but degenerates to ignoring conditional label and solely relying on the latent code, even though the
encoder learns label-agnostic representations.
To solve this issue, we propose Complementary Auxiliary
classiﬁer Regularized Auto-encoder (CARA), where there
are two classiﬁers to predict labels: a classiﬁer in the latent space is used for disentangling feature learning as in
ARAE, and a complementary classiﬁer in the observation
space is proposed to encourage the generator to contain the
conditional label. We prove that the proposed complementary auxiliary classiﬁers introduce a cycle-consistency loss
for conditional labels, leading to maximizing the mutual
information between generated sentences and their corresponding labels. Further, we explore the trade-off between
generation quality and label-conditional accuracy, and propose two practical techniques for improving overall performance: (i) an annealing training schedule for the proposed
complementary auxiliary classiﬁer to gradually incorporate

Abstract
Learning to generate text with a given label is a challenging
task because natural language sentences are highly variable
and ambiguous. It renders difﬁculties in trade-off between
sentence quality and label ﬁdelity. In this paper, we present
CARA to alleviate the issue, where two auxiliary classiﬁers
work simultaneously to ensure that (1) the encoder learns
disentangled features and (2) the generator produces labelrelated sentences. Two practical techniques are further proposed to improve the performance, including annealing the
learning signal from the auxiliary classiﬁer, and enhancing
the encoder with pre-trained language models. To establish a
comprehensive benchmark fostering future research, we consider a suite of four datasets, and systematically reproduce
three representative methods. CARA shows consistent improvement over the previous methods on the task of labelconditional text generation, and achieves state-of-the-art on
the task of attribute transfer.

Introduction
Text generation is an important challenge in natural language processing (NLP). Most previous research in this area
has focused on unsupervised text generation (Bengio et al.
2003; Mikolov et al. 2010), and success has been achieved
recently, such as pre-trained generative training (Radford
et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2019). However, these setups measure the ability of models to generate the coherent content of a sentence, but do not address more natural human
communication in a given context. For example, generating more engaging conversions requires conditioning on personality in image captioning and dialogue systems. Synthesis of coherent sentences requires conditioning on a given
topic/sentiment. These setups can be formulated as labelconditional text generation.
Several attempts have been made to solve this problem.
Most are based on deep latent variable models (LVMs), such
as variational autoencoders (VAE) (Kingma and Welling
2013) and their conditional variants (Hu et al. 2017; Yang
∗

Work performed during an internship at Microsoft Research
Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

8303

