The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Adversarially Robust Distillation
Micah Goldblum,∗ Liam Fowl,∗ Soheil Feizi, Tom Goldstein
University of Maryland
4176 Campus Drive,
College Park, Maryland 20742
goldblum@umd.edu

easily fooled by adversarial examples, in which small perturbations to inputs cause mis-classiﬁcation (Goodfellow,
Shlens, and Szegedy 2014; Szegedy et al. 2013). This phenomenon leads to major security vulnerabilities for highstakes applications like self-driving cars, medical diagnosis,
and copyright control (Santana and Hotz 2016; Lee et al.
2017; Saadatpanah, Shafahi, and Goldstein 2019). In such
domains, efﬁciency and accuracy are not enough – networks
must also be adversarially robust.
We study distillation methods that produce robust student
networks. Unlike conventional adversarial training (Madry
et al. 2017; Shaham, Yamada, and Negahban 2018), which
encourages a network to output correct labels within an ball of training samples, the proposed Adversarially Robust
Distillation (ARD) instead encourages student networks to
mimic their teacher’s output within an -ball of training samples (See Figure 1). Thus, ARD is a natural analogue of adversarial training but in the context of distillation. Formally,
we solve the minimax problem


Abstract
Knowledge distillation is effective for producing small, highperformance neural networks for classiﬁcation, but these
small networks are vulnerable to adversarial attacks. This paper studies how adversarial robustness transfers from teacher
to student during knowledge distillation. We ﬁnd that a large
amount of robustness may be inherited by the student even
when distilled on only clean images. Second, we introduce
Adversarially Robust Distillation (ARD) for distilling robustness onto student networks. In addition to producing small
models with high test accuracy like conventional distillation,
ARD also passes the superior robustness of large networks
onto the student. In our experiments, we ﬁnd that ARD student models decisively outperform adversarially trained networks of identical architecture in terms of robust accuracy,
surpassing state-of-the-art methods on standard robustness
benchmarks. Finally, we adapt recent fast adversarial training methods to ARD for accelerated robust distillation.

1

Introduction

min E(X,y)∼D αt2 KL(Sθt (X + δθ ), T t (X))
θ




State-of-the-art deep neural networks for many computer vision tasks have tens of millions of parameters, hundreds of
layers, and require billions of operations per inference (He et
al. 2016; Szegedy et al. 2016). However, networks are often
deployed on mobile devices with limited compute and power
budgets or on web servers without GPUs. Such applications
require efﬁcient networks with light-weight inference costs
(Dziugaite, Ghahramani, and Roy 2016; Sandler et al. 2018;
Courbariaux et al. 2016; Tai et al. 2015).
Knowledge distillation was introduced as a way to transfer the knowledge of a large pre-trained teacher network
to a smaller light-weight student network (Hinton, Vinyals,
and Dean 2015). Instead of training the student network on
one-hot class labels, distillation involves training the student
network to emulate the outputs of the teacher. Knowledge
distillation yields compact student networks that surpass the
performance achievable by training from scratch without a
teacher (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015).
Classical distillation methods achieve high efﬁciency and
accuracy but neglect security. Standard neural networks are

Adversarially Robust Distillation loss



+(1 − α) (Sθt (X), y)






(1)

,

classiﬁcation loss

where δθ = arg maxδp < (Sθt (X + δ), y), T and S are

teacher and student networks, and D is the data generating
distribution. See Section 5 for a more thorough description.
Below, we summarize our contributions in this paper:
• We show that knowledge distillation using only natural
images can preserve much of the teacher’s robustness to
adversarial attacks (see Table 1), enabling the production
of efﬁcient robust models without the expensive cost of
adversarial training.
• We introduce Adversarially Robust Distillation (ARD) for
producing small robust student networks. In our experiments, ARD students exhibit higher robust accuracy than
adversarially trained models with identical architecture,
and ARD often exhibits higher natural accuracy simultaneously. Interestingly, ARD students may exhibit even
higher robust accuracy than their teacher (see Table 1).

∗

Authors contributed equally.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3996

