The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Efﬁciently Enumerating Substrings with Statistically
Signiﬁcant Frequencies of Locally Optimal Occurrences in Gigantic String
Atsuyoshi Nakamura,1 Ichigaku Takigawa,2,3 Hiroshi Mamitsuka4,5
1

Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, Hokkaido University, Japan
2
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project. Japan
3
Institute for Chemical Reaction Design and Discovery, Hokkaido University, Japan
4
Bioinformatics Center, Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University, Japan
5
Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, Finland
atsu@ist.hokudai.ac.jp, ichigaku.takigawa@riken.jp, mami@kuicr.kyoto-u.ac.jp
substrings in the most well-recognized database, Repbase
(Bao, Kojima, and Kohany 2015), is steadily increasing.

Abstract
We propose new frequent substring pattern mining which can
enumerate all substrings with statistically signiﬁcant frequencies of their locally optimal occurrences from a given single sequence. Our target application is genome sequences,
around a half being said to be covered by interspersed and
consecutive (tandem) repeats, and detecting these repeats is
an important task in molecular life sciences. We evaluate the
statistical signiﬁcance of frequent substrings by using a string
generation model with a memoryless stationary information
source. We combine this idea with an existing algorithm,
ESFLOO-0G.C (Nakamura et al. 2016), to enumerate all statistically signiﬁcant substrings with locally optimal occurrences. We further develop a parallelized version of our algorithm. Experimental results using synthetic datasets showed
the proposed algorithm achieved far higher F-measure in extracting substrings (with various lengths and frequencies) embedded in a randomly generated string with noise, than conventional algorithms. The large-scale experiment using the
whole human genome sequence with 3,095,677,412 bases
(letters) showed that our parallel algorithm covers 75% of the
whole positions analyzed, around 4% and 24% higher than
the recent report and the current cutting-edge knowledge, implying a biologically unique ﬁnding.

1

Currently we can easily access genome sequences of various species. A widely conducted approach of ﬁnding repeats
out of these sequences is the so-called de novo discovery,
which ﬁnds repeats in genome sequences without using prior
information about structures or similarity of the known repeats (Bergman and Quesneville 2007). Most major de novo
approaches can be classiﬁed into three types: 1) clustering
after pairwise alignment (Bao and Eddy 2002; Quesneville,
Nouaud, and Anxolabéhère 2003; Edgar and Myers 2005;
Kurtz et al. 2001; Volfovsky, Haas, and Salzberg 2001), 2)
frequent k-mer extension (Li et al. 2005; Price, Jones, and
Pevzner 2005; Gu et al. 2008) and 3) clustering after the
second approach (Ghodsi, Liu, and Pop 2011).
Frequent pattern mining has been well investigated and
matured in the past 30 years, and frequent subsequence mining (Agrawal and Srikant 1995) would be a possible approach for genome sequences. There are two types of sequence patterns: subsequences and substrings (contiguous
subsequences). In general a subsequence is, given multiple
sequences, evaluated by the number (called support) of sequences (occurrences) with this pattern, while a substring
is, given a single sequence, by the number of occurrences
of this substring in this sequence. The former idea of subsequences is more standard in data mining, while the latter idea of substrings would be more reasonable for ﬁnding repetitions in genomes. In fact there are studies on frequent substring mining to ﬁnd interspersed repeats as occurrences of patterns in a given string (Zhu et al. 2007;
Nakamura et al. 2016). Frequent pattern mining is to enumerate all patterns that satisfy a preﬁxed minimum number
of supports which is called min sup. In other words, each
obtained pattern has a reason of why being a pattern, making frequent pattern mining more advantageous than ﬁnding
patterns by heuristics or clustering. However, there are two
problems when applying frequent pattern mining to huge
genome sequences: 1) determining the min sup, because a
low min sup causes many garbage small patterns and a high
min sup might lose important large patterns with low supports. 2) avoiding heavy computation of enumerating patterns with low supports.

Introduction

Genome sequences are known to be strings that contain
many consecutive (tandem) and interspersed repeats, and
the percentage of these repeats reaches 30-50% in mammalian genomes (Faulkner, Kimura, and et al. 2009). These
interspersed repeats are created by transposition of the socalled retrotransposons, where typical examples are SINEs
(short interspersed nuclear elements), LINEs (long interspersed nuclear elements) and LTRs (long terminal repeats).
More importantly retrotransposons affect genomes directly,
by which retrotransposons are involved with a lot of genome
related biological activities, such as promoting genome evolution, supporting genome structure and so on (Faulkner,
Kimura, and et al. 2009). A lot of efforts are being made
to identify repeats in genomes, and the number of repetitive
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5240

