The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Chemically Interpretable Graph Interaction Network for
Prediction of Pharmacokinetic Properties of Drug-Like Molecules
Yashaswi Pathak,∗ Siddhartha Laghuvarapu,∗ Sarvesh Mehta,∗ U Deva Priyakumar†
Center for Computational Natural Sciences and Bioinformatics
IIIT Hyderabad

bioavailability of a given drug. It is reported that about 40%
of the new chemical entities developed by the pharmaceutical industry suffer from low bioavailability due to which
further development of a signiﬁcant number of these compounds is discontinued. Low bioavailability is primarily due
to poor solubility and permeability. Drug molecules that
can be orally administered have to be hydrophilic enough
for them to be soluble in aqueous biological ﬂuids and hydrophobic enough for them to be able to permeate across the
hydrophobic lipid bilayer environment, which are related to
how well they dissolve in polar and nonpolar solvents respectively. Hence, solubility of drug-like molecules is a crucial property that determines the viability of a drug to be
marketable among other pharmacokinetic properties such as
metabolism, excretion and toxicity. In addition to the role
of solubility in pharmaceutical industry, it is signiﬁcant in
wide ranging areas such as chemistry, biochemistry, food industry, biotechnology industry, etc. Solvation free energy is
also related to a number of physicochemical properties that
are relevant to wide ranging areas of science and technology.

Abstract
Solubility of drug molecules is related to pharmacokinetic
properties such as absorption and distribution, which affects
the amount of drug that is available in the body for its action. Computational or experimental evaluation of solvation
free energies of drug-like molecules/solute that quantify solubilities is an arduous task and hence development of reliable computationally tractable models is sought after in drug
discovery tasks in pharmaceutical industry. Here, we report a
novel method based on graph neural network to predict solvation free energies. Previous studies considered only the solute
for solvation free energy prediction and ignored the nature
of the solvent, limiting their practical applicability. The proposed model is an end-to-end framework comprising three
phases namely, message passing, interaction and prediction
phases. In the ﬁrst phase, message passing neural network
was used to compute inter-atomic interaction within both solute and solvent molecules represented as molecular graphs.
In the interaction phase, features from the preceding step is
used to calculate a solute-solvent interaction map, since the
solvation free energy depends on how (un)favorable the solute and solvent molecules interact with each other. The calculated interaction map that captures the solute-solvent interactions along with the features from the message passing
phase is used to predict the solvation free energies in the ﬁnal
phase. The model predicts solvation free energies involving a
large number of solvents with high accuracy. We also show
that the interaction map captures the electronic and steric
factors that govern the solubility of drug-like molecules and
hence is chemically interpretable.

1

Solvation free energy is the change in free energy for a
molecule to be transferred from gas phase to a given solvent. A large negative value of the solvation free energy indicates high solubility, while lower magnitudes/positive values indicate poor solubility. Experimental measurement of
solvation free energies is a difﬁcult task especially given the
requirement that the molecule has to be synthesized and puriﬁed. It is desirable to have computational models in the
drug discovery toolkit that are able to predict highly accurate solvation free energies within reasonable time and effort so that experimental realization of only those with desired solvation properties are realized in the laboratory thus
minimizing the time and expenditure. Using these calculated
solvation free energies, the solubility and drug permeation
properties can be assessed with ease. Alchemical free energy
methods such as free energy of perturbation and thermodynamic integration methods have been shown to be efﬁcient
methods for the calculation of solvation free energies. Philosophically, the molecule in its gas phase, in its solvated state,
and a number of non-physical intermediate states (hence the
name alchemical) are simulated using molecular dynamics
or Monte Carlo simulations with respect to a parameter from

Introduction

One of the most convenient, least painful and safest ways
of administering drugs is oral administration, which also
aids high patient compliance. However, the major challenge involved in oral drug administration is achieving high
bioavailability, the fraction of the orally administered drug
that is available for its action. Absorption and distribution
are two key pharmacokinetic properties that determine the
∗

Authors contributed equally
Corresponding Author Email: deva@iiit.ac.in; Phone: +91 40
6653 1161
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

873

