The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Causally Denoise Word Embeddings Using Half-Sibling Regression
Zekun Yang∗

Tianlin Liu∗†

Department of Information Systems
College of Business
City University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong SAR, China
zekunyang3-c@my.cityu.edu.hk

Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research
Maulbeerstrasse 66
4058 Basel, Switzerland
tianlin.liu@fmi.ch

Ma 2017), leaving out-of-database word vectors untouched.
Others use heuristic methods to ﬂatten the spectrum of
word vector embedding matrices (Mu and Viswanath 2018;
Liu, Ungar, and Sedoc 2019; Wang et al. 2019; Tang,
Mousavi, and de Sa 2019). Although being effective, these
spectral ﬂattening algorithms are primarily motivated by experimental observations but lack of direct interpretability.
In this paper, we propose a novel word vector postprocessing approach that addresses these limitations. Under a causal
inference framework, the proposed method meets the joint
desiderata of (1) theoretical interpretability, (2) empirical
effectiveness, and (3) computational efﬁciency. Concretely,
the postprocessing pipeline is realized by Half-Sibling Regression (HSR) (Schölkopf et al. 2016), a method for identifying and removing confounding noise of word vectors.
Using a simple linear regression method, we obtain results
that are either on-par or outperform state-of-the-art results
on a wide battery of lexical-level evaluation tasks and downstream sentiment analysis tasks. More speciﬁcally, our contributions are as follows:

Abstract
Distributional representations of words, also known as word
vectors, have become crucial for modern natural language
processing tasks due to their wide applications. Recently, a
growing body of word vector postprocessing algorithm has
emerged, aiming to render off-the-shelf word vectors even
stronger. In line with these investigations, we introduce a
novel word vector postprocessing scheme under a causal inference framework. Concretely, the postprocessing pipeline is
realized by Half-Sibling Regression (HSR), which allows us
to identify and remove confounding noise contained in word
vectors. Compared to previous work, our proposed method
has the advantages of interpretability and transparency due
to its causal inference grounding. Evaluated on a battery of
standard lexical-level evaluation tasks and downstream sentiment analysis tasks, our method reaches state-of-the-art performance.

Introduction
Distributional representations of words have become an indispensable asset in natural language processing (NLP) research due to its wide application in downstream tasks such
as parsing (Bansal, Gimpel, and Livescu 2014), named entity recognition (Lample et al. 2016), and sentiment analysis (Tang et al. 2014). Of these, “neural” word vectors such
as Word2Vec (Mikolov et al. 2013), GloVe (Pennington,
Socher, and Manning 2014), and Paragram (Wieting et al.
2015) are amongst the most prevalently used and on which
we focus in this article.
There has been a recent thrust in the study of word vector postprocessing methods (Faruqui et al. 2015; Fried and
Duh 2015; Mrksic et al. 2016; 2017; Shiue and Ma 2017;
Mu and Viswanath 2018; Liu, Ungar, and Sedoc 2019;
Tang, Mousavi, and de Sa 2019). These methods directly
operate on word embeddings and effectively enhance their
linguistic regularities in light-weight fashions. Nonetheless,
existing postprocessing methods usually come with a few
limitations. For example, some rely on external linguistic
resources such as English WordNet (Faruqui et al. 2015;
Fried and Duh 2015; Mrksic et al. 2016; 2017; Shiue and

• We formulate the word vector postprocessing task as a
confounding noise identiﬁcation problem under a putative causal graph. This formulation brings causal interpretability and theoretical support to our postprocessing
algorithm.
• The proposed method is data-thrifty and computationally simple. Unlike many existing methods, it does not
require external linguistic resources (e.g., synonym relationships); besides, the method can be implemented easily
via simple linear regressions.
• The proposed postprocessing method yields highly competitive empirical results. For example, while achieving
the best performance on 20 semantic textual similarity
tasks, on average, our proposed method brings 4.71%,
7.54%, and 6.54% improvement respectively compared
to the previously best results, and it achieves 7.13%,
22.06%, and 9.83% improvement compared to the original word embedding when testing on Word2Vec, GloVe,
and Paragram.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We ﬁrst
brieﬂy review prior work on word vector postprocessing.
Next, we introduce Half-Sibling Regression as a causal inference framework to remove confounding noise; we then

∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

9426

