The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Estimating the Density of States of Boolean Satisﬁability
Problems on Classical and Quantum Computing Platforms
Tuhin Sahai, Anurag Mishra

Jose Miguel Pasini

Susmit Jha

United Technologies Research Center
Berkeley, CA

United Technologies Research Center
Hartford, CT

Computer Science Laboratory
SRI International

lems can be easily mapped to equivalent Boolean satisﬁability instances (Walsh 2000; Tamura et al. 2009).
The DOS problem in the standard k-satisﬁability (kSAT) setting can be elucidated as follows: instead of deciding whether a given logical formula is satisﬁable or not,
one aims to compute the entire histogram of the number
of clauses satisﬁed over all possible variable assignments.
Note the DOS, for a given instance of an optimization or
decision problem, captures its hardness (distributions with
a low footprint for all satisﬁed clauses are harder to compute or satisfy). The DOS histogram sheds light on the fundamental nature of the feasible solution set and difﬁculty of
solving the optimization problem. Such problems frequently
arise when constructing complex systems for aerospace and
defense applications (Leveson and Weiss 2009).
The lack of methodical approaches that enable the comparison of competing safety-critical system requirements,
while optimizing performance, stymie the development of
next-generation complex systems. Note there are often multiple paths to decompose the overall system safety requirements down to subsystems requirements. Some of these decompositions may lead to costly design and redesign cycles
to achieve desired levels of performance. Decompositions
that have a higher DOS in the satisﬁable range result in
greater freedom to optimize performance and, consequently,
result in quicker design cycles and fewer redesigns. The
ability to quickly estimate the DOS of satisﬁability problems will enable the speciﬁcation engineer to ensure the
prescribed requirements are satisﬁable, internally consistent,
and amenable to design space exploration very early in the
design requirement step.
In this work, we aim to construct novel approaches for
rapidly computing the DOS for a SAT problem (Boolean
formula) (Biere, Heule, and van Maaren 2009). Our approximate approach to estimate DOS of SAT instances exploits
the concentration of measure inequalities (Boucheron, Lugosi, and Massart 2013). These inequalities provide bounds
on the tails of the distributions of random functions and
have been used to construct the theory of generalization in
machine learning (Abu-Mostafa, Magdon-Ismail, and Lin
2012) compute optimal bounds on uncertainty (Owhadi et
al. 2013), compute bias of statistical estimators (Gourgoulias

Abstract
Given a Boolean formula φ(x) in conjunctive normal form
(CNF), the density of states counts the number of variable
assignments that violate exactly e clauses, for all values of
e. Thus, the density of states is a histogram of the number of unsatisﬁed clauses over all possible assignments. This
computation generalizes both maximum-satisﬁability (MAXSAT) and model counting problems and not only provides
insight into the entire solution space, but also yields a measure for the hardness of the problem instance. Consequently,
in real-world scenarios, this problem is typically infeasible
even when using state-of-the-art algorithms. While ﬁnding
an exact answer to this problem is a computationally intensive task, we propose a novel approach for estimating density of states based on the concentration of measure inequalities. The methodology results in a quadratic unconstrained
binary optimization (QUBO), which is particularly amenable
to quantum annealing-based solutions. We present the overall approach and compare results from the D-Wave quantum
annealer against the best-known classical algorithms such as
the Hamze-de Freitas-Selby (HFS) algorithm and satisﬁability modulo theory (SMT) solvers.

1

Introduction

The density of states (DOS) for a given propositional logic
(Boolean) formula not only provides insight into the complete solution space but also serves as an accurate measure of the difﬁculty or hardness of the problem instance.
The ability to compute DOS of Boolean formula has critical applications in system-requirements engineering of complex aerospace products. It provides a metric for requirements engineers to compare constraints, prescribed requirements (Ferrante et al. 2016), and requirements decompositions (Kirkman 1998). This computation is particularly germane to the design and optimization of complex aerospace
systems (Sommerville 2005). Current classical methods
for computing density of states (Wang and Landau 2001;
Ermon, Gomes, and Selman 2010; 2011) have limited scalability. While the focus of this paper is on Boolean formulae,
we note that constrained programming and feasibility probc 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1627

