The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Label Enhancement with Sample Correlations via Low-Rank Representation
Haoyu Tang,1 Jihua Zhu,1∗ Qinghai Zheng,1 Jun Wang,2 Shanmin Pang,1 Zhongyu Li1
1

School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xian 710049, China
2
Shanghai Institute for Advanced Communication and Data Science,
School of Communication and Information Engineering,Shanghai University, Shanghai 200444, China
tanghao258@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, zhujh@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Compared with single-label and multi-label annotations, label distribution describes the instance by multiple labels with
different intensities and accommodates to more-general conditions. Nevertheless, label distribution learning is unavailable in many real-world applications because most existing
datasets merely provide logical labels. To handle this problem, a novel label enhancement method, Label Enhancement
with Sample Correlations via low-rank representation, is proposed in this paper. Unlike most existing methods, a low-rank
representation method is employed so as to capture the global
relationships of samples and predict implicit label correlation
to achieve label enhancement. Extensive experiments on 14
datasets demonstrate that the algorithm accomplishes stateof-the-art results as compared to previous label enhancement
baselines.

Figure 1: An Example of Label Enhancement

a real-valued label vector with quantitative description degrees (i.e., label distribution) is required in these tasks.
To meet this demand, the learning process for the abovementioned model called ”label distribution learning” (LDL)
(Geng 2016) has attracted signiﬁcant attention. In LDL, an
instance is annotated by a label vector, i.e., the label distribution where each value ranging from 0 to 1 is the description
degree of the relevant label and all values add up to 1. As
many pieces of literature have demonstrated(Gao et al. 2017;
Geng, Yin, and Zhou 2013; Zheng, Jia, and Li 2018), label
distributions generally describe attributes of samples more
precisely because differences between the relative importance of each label exist in most cases, and implicit cues
within the label distributions can be effectively leveraged
through LDL for reinforcing the supervised training.
Nevertheless, since manually annotating each instance
with label distribution is time-consuming, it is unavailable in
most training sets practically(Xu, Lv, and Geng 2019). The
requirement of label distribution among different datasets
arises some progress in label enhancement (LE), which was
proposed by (Xu, Tao, and Geng 2018). It is a pre-processing
of the training set, where label distributions are recovered
from the off-the-shelf logical labels and the implicit information of given features, as shown in Fig.1.
This deﬁnition indicates that the essence of LE is to excavate the information from two folds: the topological structure of feature space and the relationships among logical
labels. Several approaches have been proposed according

Introduction
Recently, a growing number of studies have focused on
the challenging label ambiguity problem. Since single-label
learning paradigm where one instance is mapped to one single label has been well studied, multi-label learning (MLL)
is highlighted to address this issue. During past years, a collection of scenarios have applied this learning process (Chen
et al. 2019; Tsoumakas and Katakis 2007; Huang and Zhou
2012; Zhang and Zhou 2013), which simultaneously assigns
multiple labels with identical degrees to each instance. In
particular, in the supervised-learning process, each instance
is described by a label vector where each value, i.e., the
logic label, is either 1 or 0, which represents whether the
instance belongs to the relevant label or whether it does not,
respectively. Since all labels with the same values contribute
equally in the label vector, the relative importance among
multiple associated labels, which is supposed to be different
under most circumstances, cannot be reﬂected well.
Therefore, despite MLL’s success, in some sophisticated
semantics such as facial age estimation and facial expression recognition, the performance of primitive MLL is hindered because a model precisely mapping the instance to
∗

Corresponding Author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5932

