The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Introducing Probabilistic Bézier Curves for N-Step Sequence Prediction
Ronny Hug, Wolfgang Hübner, Michael Arens

Fraunhofer Institute of Optronics, System Technologies, and Image Exploitation (IOSB)∗
Gutleuthausstr. 1, 76275 Ettlingen, Germany
{ronny.hug, wolfgang.huebner, michael.arens}@iosb.fraunhofer.de

Common approaches for tackling sequence prediction include autoregressive models, like the Gaussian Process regression model (Roberts et al. 2013; Montgomery, Jennings, and Kulahci 2015), and (stochastic) neural networks
(Rudenko et al. 2019). While being able to generate (multimodal) sequence predictions, a drawback shared by many
of these models is a computationally intensive inference
scheme. Further, the process of prediction is unconstrained
in most neural network architectures, leading to the generation of artifacts.

Abstract
Representations of sequential data are commonly based on
the assumption that observed sequences are realizations of an
unknown underlying stochastic process, where the learning
problem includes determination of the model parameters. In
this context, a model must be able to capture the multi-modal
nature of the data, without blurring between single modes.
This paper proposes probabilistic Bézier curves (N -Curves)
as a basis for effectively modeling continuous-time stochastic
processes. The model is based on Mixture Density Networks
(MDN) and Bézier curves with Gaussian random variables as
control points. Key advantages of the model include the ability of generating smooth multi-mode predictions in a single
inference step which reduces the need for Monte Carlo simulation. This property is in line with recent attempts to address
the problem of quantifying uncertainty as a regression problem. Essential properties of the proposed approach are illustrated by several toy examples and the task of multi-step sequence prediction. As an initial proof of concept, the model
performance is compared to an LSTM-MDN model and recurrent Gaussian processes on two real world use-cases, trajectory prediction and motion capture sequence prediction.

1

In order to overcome these limitations, this paper proposes a model of a continuous-time stochastic process,
which extends on Mixture Density Networks (Bishop 2006)
and can be learned from time-discrete realizations. For an
initial proof of concept, the index set is given by t ∈ [0, 1],
thus focusing on ﬁxed length sequences. Set into the context of n-step prediction, the generation of multi-modal
predictions should be possible without the need of extensive Monte Carlo simulation, thus performing n-step inference with minimum overhead in a single step. To achieve
this, sequence prediction, including uncertainty estimation,
is treated as a regression problem (Kuleshov, Fenner, and Ermon 2018). The modes of the modeled stochastic process are
described in terms of probabilistic, parametric curves termed
N -Curves. N -Curves are based on Bézier curves with Gaussian distributions as control parameters. Every point on the
N -Curve is a Gaussian random variable, thus resembling the
model of a continuous-time stochastic process, which constrains inference in order to generate sufﬁciently smooth predictions. For generating multi-modal predictions (multiple
sequences), a stochastic process consisting of Gaussian mixture random variables can be deﬁned by combining multiple
N -Curves into a mixture of N -Curves. Further, by basing
the approach on Bézier curves, data of arbitrary dimensionality can be modeled by choosing the control point dimensionality accordingly.

Introduction

Probabilistic models of sequential data have a broad range
of applications related to representation learning, sequence
generation and prediction. Formulated as a sequence learning problem, these tasks can be tackled by learning a model
of a presumed underlying stochastic process {Xt }t∈T ,
where Xt is a random variable and T is an index set. The
model is then learned from given realizations (sample sequences).
This paper focuses on the subtask of multi-step sequence
prediction, where the evolution of a probability density function for n discrete time steps should be inferred, given m
subsequent observations of a sample sequence. Multi-step
predictions of this form are relevant in applications that require ahead-of-time planning, like robot navigation or autonomous driving (Lefèvre, Vasquez, and Laugier 2014).

The paper is structured as follows: First, an overview over
related work is given in section 2. Next, the N -Curve mixture model is derived in section 3. Then, a neural networkbased approach for learning the parameters of an N -Curve
mixture from sequence data is presented in section 4. Experiments are conducted on real world data in order to give

∗
Fraunhofer IOSB is a member of the Fraunhofer Center for
Machine Learning.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10162

