The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

An Attention-Based Graph Neural
Network for Heterogeneous Structural Learning
Huiting Hong,1 Hantao Guo,2∗ Yucheng Lin,1 Xiaoqing Yang,1 Zang Li,1† Jieping Ye1
1

AI Labs, Didi Chuxing, Beijing, China, 2 Peking University, Beijing, China
{honghuiting, yangxiaoqing, lizang, yejieping, linyucheng}@didiglobal.com, guohantao@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we focus on graph representation learning of
heterogeneous information network (HIN), in which various
types of vertices are connected by various types of relations.
Most of the existing methods conducted on HIN revise homogeneous graph embedding models via meta-paths to learn
low-dimensional vector space of HIN. In this paper, we propose a novel Heterogeneous Graph Structural Attention Neural Network (HetSANN) to directly encode structural information of HIN without meta-path and achieve more informative representations. With this method, domain experts will
not be needed to design meta-path schemes and the heterogeneous information can be processed automatically by our
proposed model. Speciﬁcally, we implicitly represent heterogeneous information using the following two methods:
1) we model the transformation between heterogeneous vertices through a projection in low-dimensional entity spaces;
2) afterwards, we apply the graph neural network to aggregate multi-relational information of projected neighborhood
by means of attention mechanism. We also present three extensions of HetSANN, i.e., voices-sharing product attention
for the pairwise relationships in HIN, cycle-consistency loss
to retain the transformation between heterogeneous entity
spaces, and multi-task learning with full use of information.
The experiments conducted on three public datasets demonstrate that our proposed models achieve signiﬁcant and consistent improvements compared to state-of-the-art solutions.

1

A1

P1

C1

P2
C2

A2

Author

Paper

Conference

Paper

The generated linkages between authos
based the meta-path:
A3

P3
C3

A3

A1
A2

P4

(a)

Author

(b)

Figure 1: A toy example of the heterogeneous graph and the
meta-path. (a) A heterogeneous academic graph. (b) Previous meta-path-based method.
structural information of the homogeneous graph. However,
the real-world data tends to be presented as a heterogeneous
graph, which combines different aspects of information together.
Heterogeneous Information Network (HIN). A HIN
(a.k.a. heterogeneous graph) comprises more than two types
of nodes or edges. Fig. 1a illustrates a toy example of HIN,
including three types of nodes (author, paper, and conference) and six types of edges (cite/cited, write/written, and
publish/published). Note that here we regard the relationship
between vertices in HIN as the directed edge, and we set reverse relationships (e.g., written) for the directed relationships (e.g., write) in HIN. Compared with the homogeneous
graph, HIN suffers from two major challenges:

Introduction

Graph embedding pursues informative numerical representations of graphs, which facilitates various applications on
graphs such as classiﬁcation, link prediction and entity
alignment. Most of existing methods perform graph embedding on homogeneous graphs, where all nodes and relationships (a.k.a. linkages or edges) are of the same type. For
example, DeepWalk (Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena 2014)
minimize the distance between the node and its neighboring
nodes in the low-dimensional vector space, to preserve the

• C1: how to model the entity space of multiple types of
nodes? In a homogeneous graph, all nodes are embedded
into the same low-dimensional entity space. In contrast,
various types of nodes in HIN are naturally modeled in
distinct spaces. However, a vertex may connect to multiple types of nodes, e.g., a paper is written by the author
and it will be published by an academic conference. It is
imperative to design the way of interaction between vertices in different type-speciﬁc entity space.

∗
This work was done when the second author was an intern at
AI Labs, Didi Chuxing, Beijing, China.
†
Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• C2: how to preserve the semantic of different relation4132

