The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Viewpoint-Aware Loss with Angular Regularization for Person Re-Identiﬁcation
Zhihui Zhu,1,2∗ Xinyang Jiang,1 Feng Zheng,3 Xiaowei Guo,2 Feiyue Huang,1
Xing Sun,1† Weishi Zheng2‡
1

Tencent YouTu Lab, Shanghai, China
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
3
Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China
zhuzhh27@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, winfredsun@tencent.com, wszheng@ieee.org
2

Abstract
Although great progress in supervised person reidentiﬁcation (Re-ID) has been made recently, due to
the viewpoint variation of a person, Re-ID remains a massive
visual challenge. Most existing viewpoint-based person
Re-ID methods project images from each viewpoint into
separated and unrelated sub-feature spaces. They only
model the identity-level distribution inside an individual
viewpoint but ignore the underlying relationship between
different viewpoints. To address this problem, we propose a
novel approach, called Viewpoint-Aware Loss with Angular
Regularization (VA-reID). Instead of one subspace for each
viewpoint, our method projects the feature from different
viewpoints into a uniﬁed hypersphere and effectively models
the feature distribution on both the identity-level and the
viewpoint-level. In addition, rather than modeling different
viewpoints as hard labels used for conventional viewpoint
classiﬁcation, we introduce viewpoint-aware adaptive
label smoothing regularization (VALSR) that assigns the
adaptive soft label to feature representation. VALSR can
effectively solve the ambiguity of the viewpoint cluster label
assignment. Extensive experiments on the Market1501 and
DukeMTMC-reID datasets demonstrated that our method
outperforms the state-of-the-art supervised Re-ID methods.

1

(a) A person with different viewpoints
Front-view

Side-view

Back-view

(b) Different persons with the same viewpoint

Person A

Person B
push

(d) Unified space

(c) Seperated spaces
࡯࢒࢛࢙࢚ࢋ࢘࡭ǡࢌ࢘࢕࢔࢚

࡯࢒࢛࢙࢚ࢋ࢘࡭ǡ࢈ࢇࢉ࢑

࡯࢒࢛࢙࢚ࢋ࢘࡭ǡ࢙࢏ࢊࢋ

(e) Using the hard label

࡯࢒࢛࢙࢚ࢋ࢘࡭ǡࢌ࢘࢕࢔࢚

࡯࢒࢛࢙࢚ࢋ࢘࡭ǡ࢈ࢇࢉ࢑

࡯࢒࢛࢙࢚ࢋ࢘࡭ǡ࢙࢏ࢊࢋ

(f) Using the soft label (Ours)

Figure 1: Comparisons of different feature learning methods. Our VA-reID method learns the uniﬁed space using the
soft label instead of the hard label. Images with the thick
purple border in the ﬁgure are the ambiguous viewpoint categories.

practical application. In practice, due to the effect of viewpoint variation, images from different viewpoints of the
same identity usually have massive visual appearance differences, and it may even be possible that some images of different identities from the same viewpoints are more similar
in visual appearance than images of the same identity from
different viewpoints. Some examples are shown in Figure 1
(a)(b). This problem greatly limits the practical application
of Re-ID.
A key problem for tackling viewpoint variations is to
learn discriminative feature representations for body images with different viewpoints. However, there are some
inadequacies of the existing viewpoint-based feature learning method (Chen, Xu, and Deng 2018; Chen et al. 2018;
Qian et al. 2018; Saquib Sarfraz et al. 2018). 1) They treat
viewpoint learning and identity discrimination as two separate progresses, In such a case, it is not a principle way to
learn optimal identity classiﬁcation under various viewpoint
variations. 2) They cast viewpoints of persons as hard labels, while in reality the viewpoint of person is ambiguous.

Introduction

Person re-identiﬁcation(Re-ID) which targets at recognizing
pedestrians across non-overlapping camera views, is an important and challenging problem in visual surveillance analysis and has drawn increasing research attention (Zheng et
al. 2015; Zhao et al. 2017; Sun et al. 2018). While Re-ID
has gained considerable development in recent years, existing supervised person re-identiﬁcation still faces some major
visual appearance challenges, such as changes in viewpoint
or poses, low resolution, illumination and etc.
Among these challenges, in this work, we focus on the
problem of viewpoint variations, which is one of the most
important and difﬁcult challenges in Re-ID research and
∗

Major work was done when the author worked in YouTu Lab.
Corresponding Author: winfredsun@tencent.com
‡
Corresponding Author: wszheng@ieee.org
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

13114

