The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Hard Examples for Common Variable Decision Heuristics
Marc Vinyals
Computer Science Department, Technion, Haifa 3200003, Israel
marcviny@cs.technion.ac.il

choice or forced by a clause, until either a solution or a
conﬂict is found. Upon reaching a conﬂict DPLL backtracks and makes the last choice forced to its opposite.
CDCL also backtracks, but analyses the conﬂict to learn a
new clause that precludes the same conﬂict—and potentially
many others—from occurring again. Since part of the state
is kept in the learned clauses it makes sense to occasionally
restart the search, and for memory management reasons to
forget some of the clauses.
A ﬁrst, mild assumption is that the solver restarts often enough. This is a reasonable assumption to make since
solvers restart frequently in practice, but it is still interesting
to study what would be the case without restarts, if only to
understand the power of restarts. The pool resolution subsystem (Van Gelder 2005) captures proofs produced by solvers
that do not restart, and a few candidates for a separation
between pool and general resolution were proposed but all
turned out to have short pool resolution proofs (Bonet, Buss,
and Johannsen 2014; Buss and Kołodziejczyk 2014). Long
story short, we still do not know if restarts are needed.
Another assumption is that the solver never forgets a
clause. This is less realistic since in practice solvers throw
out many of the clauses they learn. A much weaker assumption is needed, in that solvers need to keep at least a few
selected clauses in order to produce optimal proofs (Elffers
et al. 2016), but there is a large stretch between having to
keep a few selected clauses and all clauses, and we do not
know where in this line the truth lies.
The last assumption we consider is that when the solver
chooses which literal to branch on, it makes optimal nondeterministic choices—that is, with external oracle advice.
Of course this is not at all what happens in practice, in
fact furnishing CDCL with a conﬂict-based decision heuristic is considered crucial for CDCL to work well if not
an inextricable part of CDCL (Marques-Silva, Lynce, and
Malik 2009; Katebi, Sakallah, and Marques-Silva 2011;
Biere and Fröhlich 2015), hence we cannot close the question whether CDCL polynomially simulates resolution unless we allow a heuristic that is closer to practice.
For instance, we can relax the non-deterministic assumption to frequent enough random choices and obtain a weaker
conclusion. In this case, and still using the ﬁrst two assumptions, CDCL can simulate bounded-width resolution (Atserias, Fichte, and Thurley 2011). At the same time, it is most

Abstract
The CDCL algorithm for SAT is equivalent to the resolution
proof system under a few assumptions, one of them being
an optimal non-deterministic procedure for choosing the next
variable to branch on. In practice this task is left to a variable decision heuristic, and since the so-called VSIDS decision heuristic is considered an integral part of CDCL, whether
CDCL with a VSIDS-like heuristic is also equivalent to resolution remained a signiﬁcant open question.
We give a negative answer by building a family of formulas
that have resolution proofs of polynomial size but require exponential time to decide in CDCL with common heuristics
such as VMTF, CHB, and certain implementations of VSIDS
and LRB.

1

Introduction

Conﬂict-Driven Clause Learning (CDCL) is nowadays the
top-performing algorithm to solve SAT in practice. When
a CDCL solver ﬁnds a formula to be unsatisﬁable, a proof
of this fact can be read from its execution trace, and
that proof can be formalized in the resolution proof system (Beame, Kautz, and Sabharwal 2004). It is not obvious
whether all resolution proofs can be obtained using a CDCL
solver; for instance, the preceding DPLL algorithm is restricted to producing tree-like resolution proofs, which are
exponentially weaker than general resolution (Goerdt 1993;
Urquhart 1995; Bonet et al. 2000).
Progress towards this question was made showing
that tweaked versions of CDCL polynomially simulate
resolution—in other words, the algorithm can produce
proofs that are only polynomially worse than the optimal
resolution proof—either allowing the solver to not resolve
conﬂicts immediately (Beame, Kautz, and Sabharwal 2004)
or making an additional pre-processing step (Hertel et al.
2008). The question was largely settled by Pipatsrisawat and
Darwiche (2011), who showed that under a few assumptions
CDCL polynomially simulates resolution.
Naturally there has been work towards understanding
which assumptions are needed; to explain them we have
to sketch how the CDCL algorithm works. Similarly to
DPLL, the algorithm assigns values to variables, either by
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1652

