The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning from Weak-Label Data: A Deep Forest Expedition∗
Qian-Wei Wang, Liang Yang, Yu-Feng Li
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization, Nanjing, 210023, China
{wangqw, yangl, liyf}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
'ƌŽƵŶĚͲƚƌƵƚŚůĂďĞůƐ
;ĂŶŶŽƚĂƚĞĚŽŶĞƐŝŶƌĞĚͿ

Weak-label learning deals with the problem where each training example is associated with multiple ground-truth labels simultaneously but only partially provided. This circumstance is frequently encountered when the number of classes
is very large or when there exists a large ambiguity between
class labels, and signiﬁcantly inﬂuences the performance of
multi-label learning. In this paper, we propose LCForest,
which is the ﬁrst tree ensemble based deep learning method
for weak-label learning. Rather than formulating the problem
as a regularized framework, we employ the recently proposed
cascade forest structure, which processes information layerby-layer, and endow it with the ability of exploiting from
weak-label data by a concise and highly efﬁcient label complement structure. Speciﬁcally, in each layer, the label vector of each instance from testing-fold is modiﬁed with the
predictions of random forests trained with the corresponding
training-fold. Since the ground-truth label matrix is inaccessible, we can not estimate the performance via cross-validation
directly. In order to control the growth of cascade forest, we
adopt label frequency estimation and the complement ﬂag
mechanism. Experiments show that the proposed LCForest
method compares favorably against the existing state-of-theart multi-label and weak-label learning methods.

ƐŬǇ
ĐůŽƵĚ
ƌŝǀĞƌ
ďƌŝĚŐĞ
ďƵŝůĚŝŶŐ
ĚƵƐŬ
ďŽĂƚ
ƐĐĞŶĞƌǇ
/ƚĂůǇ
ƵƌŽƉĞĂŶ

Figure 1: An example of weak-label learning scenario. The
image is associated with 10 ground-truth labels, but only 5
of them are provided by annotators.
years (Sun, Zhang, and Zhou 2010; Zhu, Yan, and Ma 2010;
Bucak, Jin, and Jain 2011; Xu, Jin, and Zhou 2013; Wu, Jin,
and Jain 2013; Lin et al. 2013).
Formally, let X = Rd be the d-dimensional instance
space and Y = {y1 , y2 , . . . , yn } be the label space with
n class labels. Given the weak-label training set D =
{(xi , Yi )|1 ≤ i ≤ m}, where xi ∈ X is a d-dimensional
feature vector [xi1 , xi2 , . . . , xid ]T and Yi ⊆ Y is the associated set of labels, the task of weak-label learning is to learn a
function f : X → 2Y . It is worth noting that, in weak-label
learning, since the associated label set of xi is only partially
provided, Yik = 1 means the k-th label is a relevant label for
the i-th instance, while Yik = 0 tells nothing.
The difﬁculties of this problem mainly lie in the following three aspects. Firstly, as a kind of multi-label learning,
effective exploitation of the label correlations is crucial for
weak-label learning (Zhang and Zhou 2014). Secondly, even
if we can ignore the label correlations information. Thus, the
weak-label learning can be decomposed into a series of PU
(Positive and Unlabeled) learning tasks (Li and Liu 2003;
Elkan and Noto 2008), the overwhelming effect caused by
false-negative labels is hard to alleviate. Thirdly, class imbalance problem naturally exists in weak-label learning. The
class imbalance problem here falls into two categories: for
the whole label matrix, the number of relevant labels varies

Introduction
Weak-label learning (Sun, Zhang, and Zhou 2010), which is
a kind of weakly supervised multi-label learning, deals with
the problem where each training example is associated with
multiple ground-truth labels simultaneously but only partially provided. For example, the image in Fig. 1 is associated with 10 ground-truth labels, but only 5 of them are provided by annotators. Weak-label learning is frequently encountered when the number of classes is very large or when
there exists a large ambiguity between classes. The problem
of label incompleteness signiﬁcantly inﬂuences the performance of multi-label learning. To alleviate it, many state-ofthe-art weak-label learning methods were proposed in recent
∗
This research was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (2017YFB1001903) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61772262). Yu-Feng Li is the corresponding author of this work.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6251

