The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Divide and Conquer: Question-Guided
Spatio-Temporal Contextual Attention for Video Question Answering
Jianwen Jiang, Ziqiang Chen, Haojie Lin, Xibin Zhao,∗ Yue Gao∗
BNRist, KLISS, School of Software, Tsinghua University, China
jianwen.alan@gmail.com, {czq18, linhj18}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {zxb, gaoyue}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

QUESTION

Understanding questions and ﬁnding clues for answers are
the key for video question answering. Compared with image question answering, video question answering (Video
QA) requires to ﬁnd the clues accurately on both spatial and
temporal dimension simultaneously, and thus is more challenging. However, the relationship between spatio-temporal
information and question still has not been well utilized in
most existing methods for Video QA. To tackle this problem,
we propose a Question-Guided Spatio-Temporal Contextual
Attention Network (QueST) method. In QueST, we divide
the semantic features generated from question into two separate parts: the spatial part and the temporal part, respectively
guiding the process of constructing the contextual attention
on spatial and temporal dimension. Under the guidance of
the corresponding contextual attention, visual features can
be better exploited on both spatial and temporal dimensions.
To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed method, experiments are conducted on TGIF-QA dataset, MSRVTTQA dataset and MSVD-QA dataset. Experimental results and
comparisons with the state-of-the-art methods have shown
that our method can achieve superior performance.

What does the man do after open a door?

WORDS
about SPACE

What does the man do
after open a door?

SPATIAL
DIMENSION

WORDS
about TIME

What does the man do
after open a door?

TEMPORAL
DIMENSION

VIDEO

Figure 1: The key to Video QA is understanding question
and ﬁnding clues of answer from both spatial and temporal dimensions in a video under guidance of question. For
Video QA, information from video and question can both be
divided into two dimensions, time and space.

Introduction
Recently, the visual question answering (VQA) task (Antol
et al. 2015) has captured great attention due to the wide use
in different areas, such as education, robot and intelligent
assistant. The VQA task can be mainly divided into Image
Question Answering (Image QA) and Video Question Answering (Video QA), targeting on answering a natural language question related to different visual material.
Generally, understanding the question and ﬁnding clues
of the answer to the question in the given visual material
is the key to VQA. For Image QA, there have been extensive efforts concentrated on (Yang et al. 2016; Xu and
Saenko 2016; Wu et al. 2016; Kazemi and Elqursh 2017;
Anderson et al. 2018; Gao et al. 2016; Fukui et al. 2016;
Ben-Younes et al. 2017) in the last decade. For example,
CBP (Gao et al. 2016), MCB (Fukui et al. 2016) and MU-

TAN (Ben-Younes et al. 2017) focus on ﬁnding better methods on fusing visual features with language features, which
help the network to understand the question and visual material accurately. Attention mechanisms (Xu et al. 2015;
Singh, Ying, and Nutkiewicz 2018; Anderson et al. 2018)
have also been used to inform neural network “where are
the clues of answer”.
Compared to Image QA, Video QA is more challenging. In Image QA, most of the clues for the answer can be
found from the spatial feature and the question is primarily
based on the appearance feature of an image. In Video QA,
however, a correct answer requires accurately locating the
clues in not only spatial but also temporal dimension at the
same time. Besides, there are more complex scene changes
in video material, leading to high requirements on reasoning ability from both spatial dimension and temporal dimension. Most existing Video QA methods (Jang et al. 2017;
Xu et al. 2017; Yu, Kim, and Kim 2018; Gao et al. 2018;

∗

Corresponding authors
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11101

