The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Graph-Based Decoding Model for Functional Alignment of Unaligned fMRI Data
Weida Li,1 Mingxia Liu,1,2* Fang Chen,1 Daoqiang Zhang1*
1

College of Computer Science and Technology & MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China
2
School of Information Science and Technology, Taishan University, Taian, China
*
Corresponding Authors: {mingxialiu, dqzhang}@nuaa.edu.cn

samples (time points or volumes) is generally much smaller
than the number of features (voxels) per subject. However,
such aggregation is facing a challenge that both anatomical structure and functional topography vary across subjects
(Haxby et al. 2011). Hence, inter-subject alignment is an indispensable step in fMRI analysis.

Abstract
Aggregating multi-subject functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) data is indispensable for generating valid and
general inferences from patterns distributed across human
brains. The disparities in anatomical structures and functional
topographies of human brains warrant aligning fMRI data
across subjects. However, the existing functional alignment
methods cannot handle well various kinds of fMRI datasets
today, especially when they are not temporally-aligned, i.e.,
some of the subjects probably lack the responses to some
stimuli, or different subjects might follow different sequences
of stimuli. In this paper, a cross-subject graph that depicts the
(dis)similarities between samples across subjects is used as
a priori for developing a more ﬂexible framework that suits
an assortment of fMRI datasets. However, the high dimension of fMRI data and the use of multiple subjects makes
the crude framework time-consuming or unpractical. To address this issue, we further regularize the framework, so that a
novel feasible kernel-based optimization, which permits nonlinear feature extraction, could be theoretically developed.
Speciﬁcally, a low-dimension assumption is imposed on each
new feature space to avoid overﬁtting caused by the highspatial-low-temporal resolution of fMRI data. Experimental
results on ﬁve datasets suggest that the proposed method
is not only superior to several state-of-the-art methods on
temporally-aligned fMRI data, but also suitable for dealing
with temporally-unaligned fMRI data.

Existing studies for inter-subject alignment include
anatomical alignment and functional alignment, which can
work in unison. In fact, anatomical alignment is usually
used as a preprocessing step for fMRI analysis, by aligning anatomical features based on structural MRI images
across subjects. Typical examples include Talairach alignment (Talairach and Tournoux 1988), cortical surface alignment (Fischl et al. 1999) and so on. However, anatomical alignment generated limited accuracy since the size,
shape and anatomical location of functional loci differ across
subjects (Watson et al. 1993; Rademacher et al. 1993). In
contrast, functional alignment tries to directly align functional responses across subjects (Sabuncu et al. 2009; Conroy et al. 2009). As more radical approaches of functional
alignment, Hyperalignment (Haxby et al. 2011) and Shared
Response Model (SRM) (Chen et al. 2015) learn implicitly shared patterns across subjects, which are closely related to multi-view Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA).
Though both of them have been extensively studied and
extended to an assortment, the existing related studies assume that the given fMRI datasets should be temporallyaligned across subjects (Chen et al. 2015; Turek et al. 2018;
Xu et al. 2012). In other words, the sequential fMRI time
points of each subject have to correspond to the same sequence of stimuli, like all subjects watching a movie together. Such a demand makes them not ﬂexible enough
as fMRI datasets today could be not temporally-aligned.
For example, some subjects probably lack the responses to
some stimuli, or different subjects may respond to different sequences of stimuli. Even though this problem could
be somewhat solved by reordering and truncating (or downsampling) the dataset to generate an aligned version (Chen
et al. 2015), these processes may lead to an inevitable loss
of information. A recent study tries to extend SRM into a
semi-supervised one by exploiting labeled samples, the unlabeled samples are, however, required to be temporally-

Introduction
Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) is an imaging technology used to measure neural activity by using the
blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) contrast as an indicator for cognitive states (Logothetis 2002). The informative patterns encoded in fMRI enable investigators to study
how the human brain works (Haxby, Connolly, and Guntupalli 2014). Speciﬁcally, the use of multi-subject fMRI data
is indispensable for accessing the validity and generality of
the ﬁndings across subjects (Talairach and Tournoux 1988;
Watson et al. 1993). From another angle, aggregating multisubject fMRI data is also critical due to the high-spatiallow-temporal (HSLT) resolution of fMRI, i.e., the number of
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2653

