The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Kriging Convolutional Networks
Gabriel Appleby,∗ Linfeng Liu,∗ Li-Ping Liu
Department of Computer Science, Tufts University
{Gabriel.Appleby, Linfeng.Liu, Liping.Liu}@tufts.edu

signiﬁcant fraction of zeros.
Researchers also use ﬂexible machine learning algorithms
(Hengl et al. 2018) for spatial data modeling. Given the huge
success of GNNs and the similarity between spatial data and
graph data, researchers have started to apply Graph Neural Networks (GNN) (Wu et al. 2019) to spatial data (Li
et al. 2017; Yu, Yin, and Zhu 2017; Zhu and Liu 2018;
Yan et al. 2019). GNNs were ﬁrst developed for explicit
graph data, but can model any data that can be transformed
into a graph either by their spatial vicinity or their physical connections (e.g. routes). The main idea is to propagate
information along graph edges, so graph nodes can share information during the learning process. GNNs are relatively
generic, and can ﬁnd nonlinear relationships between the inputs, hidden layers, and neighborhood information of each
node. By design, GNNs are more ﬂexible than kriging.
However, kriging has an advantage over GNNs: kriging
directly uses observed training labels to predict the label of
a new data point. In comparison, there is no straightforward
way to feed training labels as input to a GNN. It is not feasible to directly feed training labels as part of the input because the GNN will directly output the given label of a training data point and learn nothing. Furthermore, spatial data
modeling requires inductive learning – the model needs to
be able to make predictions for new locations that are not
in the graph formed by training data. While kriging is intrinsically inductive, only a few GNNs such as GraphSAGE
(Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017) can work inductively.
Inspired by these two observations, we develop a new
model, the Kriging Convolutional Network (KCN), as an
improvement to GNNs. The KCN is still a type of GNN.
However, it does not form a single large graph over all data
points. Every time a KCN ﬁts the label of a data point (call
it the center), it forms a small graph over the center and its
neighboring training data points. These neighbors are the K
nearest neighbors according to a distance metric. In the input
to the KCN, we hide the label of the center node. The input
consists of feature vectors for all nodes in the graph (K + 1
nodes), as well as the labels of the neighbors. The KCN also
needs the adjacency matrix of the graph, which is deﬁned to
be the spatial kernel matrix or a normalized version of that.
The target value of the KCN is the label of the center node.

Abstract
Spatial interpolation is a class of estimation problems where
locations with known values are used to estimate values at
other locations, with an emphasis on harnessing spatial locality and trends. Traditional kriging methods have strong
Gaussian assumptions, and as a result, often fail to capture
complexities within the data. Inspired by the recent progress
of graph neural networks, we introduce Kriging Convolutional Networks (KCN), a method of combining advantages
of Graph Neural Networks (GNN) and kriging. Compared to
standard GNNs, KCNs make direct use of neighboring observations when generating predictions. KCNs also contain
the kriging method as a speciﬁc conﬁguration. Empirically,
we show that this model outperforms GNNs and kriging in
several applications.

Spatial data is ubiquitous in a wide variety of ﬁelds such
as ecology (Fink et al. 2010), economics (Gao and Liu
2014), and meteorology (Xingjian et al. 2015). A common
task within these ﬁelds is to estimate values at target locations from nearby known values. Improving these estimations should provide clear beneﬁts for these applications. Estimation techniques tailored to spatial data must leverage the
fact that every data point is associated with a location. Most
importantly, these techniques should be able to capture the
spatial correlation among these locations.
In many ﬁelds, the most prevalent method for spatial data
modeling is kriging (Cressie 1991). The fundamental assumption of kriging is that observations at locations are from
an underlying Gaussian process. After estimating the variogram, which is essentially the strength of spatial correlations between data points, kriging uses a linear interpolation
of observed values to predict the value at a new location. The
kriging prediction is the best linear unbiased estimator for
spatial points given its Gaussian assumption. However, this
assumption is quite constrictive, as data in many applications
are not from a Gaussian distribution. For example, we will
show in our experiments that this assumption leads to poor
performance when estimating integer counts that contain a
∗
Equal contribution. The ﬁrst two authors are arranged by the
alphabet order
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3187

