The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Understanding Medical Conversations with Scattered
Keyword Attention and Weak Supervision from Responses
Xiaoming Shi,1∗ Haifeng Hu,2 Wanxiang Che,1† Zhongqian Sun,2 Ting Liu,1 Junzhou Huang2
1

Research Center for Social Computing and Information Retrieval, Harbin Institute of Technology, China
2
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
{xmshi, car, tliu}@ir.hit.edu.cn, {simbahu, sallensun, joehhuang}@tencent.com

Abstract
In this work, we consider the medical slot ﬁlling problem,
i.e., the problem of converting medical queries into structured representations which is a challenging task. We analyze the effectiveness of two points: scattered keywords in
user utterances and weak supervision with responses. We approach the medical slot ﬁlling as a multi-label classiﬁcation
problem with label-embedding attentive model to pay more
attention to scattered medical keywords and learn the classiﬁcation models by weak-supervision from responses. To evaluate the approaches, we annotate a medical slot ﬁlling data and
collect a large scale unlabeled data. The experiments demonstrate that these two points are promising to improve the task.

Figure 1: One turn of a medical conversation between a patient and a doctor.

Introduction
Recent advances in speech recognition and natural language
processing have facilitated broad deployments of spoken dialogue systems (SDS) as natural interfaces for information
access (Mori 1998; Smith and Hipp 1994; Zue and Glass
2000) , of which typical applications range from call center
automation to virtual assistants for smart devices. A Critical component in SDS is spoken language understanding
(SLU), which parses a natural language utterance into logical semantic representations that a computer can process effectively (Young et al. 2013). A typical pipeline of SLU includes: domain classiﬁcation, intent detection, and slot ﬁlling (Tur and De Mori 2011). In this pipeline, slot ﬁlling has
signiﬁcant impact on the overall performance compared to
intent detection (Li et al. 2017).
In the medical domain, dialogue systems that communicate with patients using natural language to obtain additional symptoms automatically attract more and more attention (Wei et al. 2018; Xu et al. 2019). In this work, we focus
on slot ﬁlling on medical dialogues.
Slot ﬁlling is commonly treated as a structured prediction
problem, where supervised learning algorithms, especially
recurrent neural networks (Yao et al. 2013; Mesnil et al.

2015; Kurata et al. 2016; Jaech, Heck, and Ostendorf 2016;
Hakkani-Tür et al. 2016) have demonstrated state-of-the-art
performance. Traditional slot ﬁlling aims to label the explicit
words in a given utterance according to a predeﬁned domain
ontology such that structured semantic representation (a.k.a
slot-value pairs) can be extracted from the predicted labels
(Mesnil et al. 2015; Kurata et al. 2016).
Different from traditional slot ﬁlling tasks, slot ﬁlling for
medical dialogues mainly faces two challenges: i) Medical
dialogue data is unaligned where slot-values of the structured semantic representation do not explicitly occur in any
speciﬁc spans; ii) Medical data annotation requires annotators with professional medical knowledge which leads to the
high annotation cost.
Going deep into the ﬁrst challenge, the unaligned issue
mainly comes from two aspects: users’ colloquial expression
and scattered keyword. Concretely, patients’ health reports
are described in their colloquial language and vary from
each other. What’ more, patients always state their health
status in a disorganized order that keywords for a single
medical concept are dispersed. As an example in Figure 1,
the medical concept “Bellyache” is described as the combination of “abdomen” and “pain” which is scattered in the
original sentence. This unaligned issue between natural language queries and corresponding structured semantic representation has been tracked in (Barahona et al. 2016), treating

∗
Work done while Xiaoming Shi was Research Interns with
Tencent AI Lab.
†
Corresponding Author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8838

