The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Constraint Programming for an Efﬁcient and Flexible Block Modeling Solver
Alex Lucı́a Mattenet,1 Ian Davidson,2 Siegfried Nijssen,1 Pierre Schaus1
1

UCLouvain, ICTEAM, Belgium, 2 Computer Science Department, University of California at Davis, USA
{alex.mattenet, siegfried.nijssen, pierre.schaus}@uclouvain.be,
davidson@cs.ucdavis.edu

error ||X − F M F t ||.
This block modeling formulation has the advantage of
identifying structural equivalence (Lorrain and White 1971):
if the reconstruction error is 0, any instance in cluster i must
have the exact same neighbors in the graph. The reconstruction error (||X − F M F t ||) counts the number of edges that
violate this property.
An example of block model with 3 clusters for a toy graph
with 9 vertices is given in Figure 1. The three clusters are
c1 = {a, h, g}, c2 = {b, i, f }, and c3 = {c, d, e}. The adjacency matrix of the graph is shown with the columns and
rows reordered to group the vertices in their respective cluster. The cost of this block model is 9. The nine entries where
X differs from F M F t are in red italics. The image matrix
M corresponds to an image graph of three vertices (one per
cluster), which gives a simpliﬁed overview of the large-scale
structure of the base graph.
As this block model formulation is very generic, it is useful to incorporate additional constraints such as bounds on
the cluster size, constraints on the structure of the image
graph M (forcing it to be a tree, a ring graph,. . . ), constraints
on the composition of the clusters, and more. This is to combine strong semantic knowledge (the constraints) along with
empirical evidence (the graph). The constraints exclude unwanted or useless models from the search space.
Existing approaches for solving this problem with additional constraints focus on one or two constraint at a time
(Wang et al. 2011; Bai et al. 2017; Ganji et al. 2018a;
Bai, Qian, and Davidson 2018) and are not compatible. It
is impossible to use all of multiple constraints at the same
time because they use incompatible solving methods, and
they are either not usable or not scalable without the predeﬁned constraints.
In this paper, we propose a Constraint Programming approach for the block modeling problem, with a dedicated
global constraint. This constraint and its implementation
within a CP framework makes that our approach is inherently composable with any of the others constraints implemented in the CP solver. Furthermore, the CP solver can be
used both to ﬁnd exact solutions, and to ﬁnd approximations
using Large Neighborhood Search. We compare our CP approach with existing exact methods and local search methods, and show that it outperforms the state of the art.

Abstract
Constraint Programming (CP) is a powerful paradigm for
solving combinatorial problems. In CP, the user creates a
model by declaring variables with their domains and expresses the constraints that need to be satisﬁed in any solution. The solver is then in charge of ﬁnding feasible
solutions—a value in the domain of each variable that satisﬁes all the constraints. The discovery of solutions is done
by exploring a search tree that is pruned by the constraints
in charge of removing impossible values. The CP framework has the advantage of exposing a rich high-level declarative constraint language for modeling, as well as efﬁcient
purpose-speciﬁc ﬁltering algorithms that can be reused in
many problems. In this work, we harness this ﬂexibility and
efﬁciency for the Block Modeling problem. It is a variant of
the graph clustering problem that has been used extensively in
many domains including social science, spatio-temporal data
analysis and even medical imaging. We present a new approach based on constraint programming, allowing discrete
optimization of block modeling in a manner that is not only
scalable, but also allows the easy incorporation of constraints.
We introduce a new constraint ﬁltering algorithm that outperforms earlier approaches. We show its use in the analysis of
real datasets.

This is an extended abstract of an earlier publication at
CP2019 (Mattenet et al. 2019).

Introduction
Block modeling is a problem that originates from the analysis of social networks. The core problem is to take a graph
and divide its vertices into k clusters, in such a way that
vertices in the same cluster have the same pattern of ties to
other vertices. These clusters and the interactions between
them summarize the graph and give insight into its largescale structure.
More formally, in its simplest formulation, the core problem is: given a graph G(V, E) whose n×n adjacency matrix
is X, simplify X into a symmetric trifactorization F M F t .
Here F is an n × k block allocation matrix with the clusters stacked column wise. Here Fi,j ∈ {0, 1} and M is a
k × k image matrix showing the interaction between clusters. The objective function is to minimize the reconstruction
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13685

