The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Guiding Attention in Sequence-to-Sequence Models for Dialogue Act prediction
Pierre Colombo,1,2∗ Emile Chapuis,1∗ Matteo Manica3
Emmanuel Vignon,2 Giovanna Varni,1 Chloe Clavel1
1

1

LTCI, Telecom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, 2 IBM GBS France, 3 IBM Zurich
ﬁrstname.lastname@telecom-paris.fr, 3 tte@zurich.ibm.com, emmanuel.vignon@fr.ibm.com

Speaker
A
A
B
B
B

Abstract
The task of predicting dialog acts (DA) based on conversational dialog is a key component in the development of conversational agents. Accurately predicting DAs requires a precise modeling of both the conversation and the global tag dependencies. We leverage seq2seq approaches widely adopted
in Neural Machine Translation (NMT) to improve the modelling of tag sequentiality. Seq2seq models are known to learn
complex global dependencies while currently proposed approaches using linear conditional random ﬁelds (CRF) only
model local tag dependencies. In this work, we introduce a
seq2seq model tailored for DA classiﬁcation using: a hierarchical encoder, a novel guided attention mechanism and
beam search applied to both training and inference. Compared to the state of the art our model does not require handcrafted features and is trained end-to-end. Furthermore, the
proposed approach achieves an unmatched accuracy score of
85% on SwDA, and state-of-the-art accuracy score of 91.6%
on MRDA.

1

Utterance
Is there anyone who doesn’t know Nancy?
Do you - Do you know Nancy ?
Me?
Mm-hmm
I know Nancy

Table 1: Example of conversation from Switchboard Dialogue Act Corpus. A is speaking with B.

Limitations of current models: Current state-of-the-art
models rely on the use of linear Conditional Random Field
(CRF) combined with a recurrent neural network based encoder (Li et al. 2018a; Chen et al. 2018; Raheja and Tetreault
2019) to model DA sequential dependencies. Unfortunately
such approaches only capture local dependencies between
two adjacent dialogue acts. For instance, if we consider the
example in Table 1 we can see that the last statement ”I
know Nancy” is a response to the ﬁrst question ”Is there
anyone who doesn’t know Nancy” and the knowledge of
the previous backchannel does not help the prediction of the
last dialogue act. Therefore, we must consider dependencies
between labels with a scope that is wider than two successive utterances. In Neural Machine Translation (NMT), the
problem of global dependencies has been addressed using
seq2seq models (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014) that follow the encoder-decoder framework. The encoder embeds
an input sentence into a single hidden vector which contains
both global and local dependencies, and the hidden vector is
then decoded to produce an output sequence. In this work,
we propose a seq2seq architecture tailored towards DA classiﬁcation paving the way for further innovations inspired by
advances in NMT research.
Contributions: In this work (1) we formalise the Dialogue Act Prediction problem in a way that emphasises
the relations between DA classiﬁcation and NMT, (2) we
demonstrate that the seq2seq architecture suits better to
the DA classiﬁcation task and (3) we present a seq2seq
model leveraging NMT techniques that reaches an accuracy of 85%, outperforming the state of the art by a margin of around 2%, on the Switchboard Dialogue Act Cor-

Introduction

In natural language processing research, the dialogue act
(DA) concept plays an important role. DAs are semantic labels associated with each utterance in a conversational dialogue that indicate the speaker’s intention, e.g., question,
backchannel, statement-non-opinion, statement opinion. A
key to model dialogue is to detect the intent of the speaker:
correctly identifying a question gives an important clue to
produce an appropriate response. As can be observed in Table 1, DA classiﬁcation relies on its conversational aspect,
i.e., predicting an utterance’s DA requires the knowledge of
previous sentences and their associated act labels. For example, if a speaker asks a question, the interlocutor will answer
with a response, analogously, a ”Greeting” or a ”Farwell”
will be followed by a similar dialogue act. This means that
in a conversation there is a sequential structure in the emitted dialogue acts. This poses the basis for the adoption of
a novel perspective on the DA classiﬁcation problem, i.e.,
from a multi-classiﬁcation task to a sequence labeling one.
∗

Equal contribution
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7594

