The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Towards Zero-Shot Learning for Automatic Phonemic Transcription
Xinjian Li, Siddharth Dalmia, David R. Mortensen, Juncheng Li, Alan W Black, Florian Metze
Language Technologies Institute, School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
{xinjianl, sdalmia, dmortens, junchenl, awb, fmetze}@cs.cmu.edu

Hermann and Goldwater 2018), which typically uses an unsupervised technique to learn representations which can be
used towards speech processing tasks.
However, those unsupervised approaches could not generate phonemes directly and there has been few works studying zero-shot learning for unseen phonemes transcription,
which consist of learning an acoustic model without any audio data or text data for a given target language and unseen
phonemes. In this work, we aim to solve this problem to
transcribe unseen phonemes for unseen languages without
considering any target data, audio or text.
The prediction of unseen objects has been studied for a
long time in the computer vision ﬁeld. For speciﬁc object
classes such as faces, vehicles and cats, a signiﬁcant number manually labeled data is usually available, but collecting
sufﬁcient data for every object human could recognize is impossible. Zero-shot learning attempts to solve this problem
to classify unseen objects using mid-level side information.
For example, zebra can be recognized by detecting attributes
such as stripped, black and white. Inspired by approaches in
computer vision research, we propose the Universal Phonemic Model (UPM) to apply zero-shot learning to acoustic
modeling. In this model, we decompose the phoneme into
its attributes and learn to predict a distribution over various
articulatory attributes. For example, the phoneme /a/ can be
decomposed into its attributes: vowel, open, front and unrounded. This can then be used to infer the unseen phonemes
for the test language as the unseen phonemes can be decomposed into common attributes covered in the training
phonemes.
Our approach is summarized in Figure 1. First, frames are
extracted and a standard acoustic model is applied to map
each frame into the acoustic space (or hidden space) H. Next
we transform it into the attribute space P which reﬂects the
articulatory distribution of each frame (such as whether it
indicates a vowel or a consonant). Then, we compute the
distribution of phonemes for that frame using a predeﬁned
signature matrix S which describes relationships between
articulatory attributes and phonemes in each language.
To evaluate our UPM approach, we trained the model on
13 languages and tested it on another 7 languages. We also
trained a multilingual acoustic model as a baseline for com-

Abstract
Automatic phonemic transcription tools are useful for lowresource language documentation. However, due to the lack
of training sets, only a tiny fraction of languages have phonemic transcription tools. Fortunately, multilingual acoustic
modeling provides a solution given limited audio training
data. A more challenging problem is to build phonemic transcribers for languages with zero training data. The difﬁculty
of this task is that phoneme inventories often differ between
the training languages and the target language, making it infeasible to recognize unseen phonemes. In this work, we address this problem by adopting the idea of zero-shot learning.
Our model is able to recognize unseen phonemes in the target language without any training data. In our model, we decompose phonemes into corresponding articulatory attributes
such as vowel and consonant. Instead of predicting phonemes
directly, we ﬁrst predict distributions over articulatory attributes, and then compute phoneme distributions with a customized acoustic model. We evaluate our model by training it
using 13 languages and testing it using 7 unseen languages.
We ﬁnd that it achieves 7.7% better phoneme error rate on
average over a standard multilingual model.

Introduction
Over the last decade, automatic speech recognition (ASR)
has achieved great successes in many rich-resourced languages such as English, French and Mandarin. On the other
hand, speech resources are still sparse for the majority of
other languages. They cannot thus beneﬁt directly from recent technologies. As a result, there is an increasing interest
in building speech processing systems for low-resource languages. In particular, phoneme transcription tools are useful for low-resource language documentation by improving
workﬂow for linguists to analyze those languages (Adams et
al. 2018; Michaud et al. 2018).
A more challenging task is to transcribe phonemes in the
language with zero training data. This task has signiﬁcant
implications in documenting endangered languages and preserving the associated cultures (Gippert et al. 2006). This
data setup has mainly been studied in the unsupervised
speech processing ﬁeld (Glass 2012; Versteegh et al. 2015;
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8261

