The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Capturing Sentence Relations for Answer
Sentence Selection with Multi-Perspective Graph Encoding∗
Zhixing Tian,1,2 Yuanzhe Zhang,1 Xinwei Feng,3 Wenbin Jiang,3
Yajuan Lyu,3 Kang Liu,1,2 Jun Zhao1,2
1

Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Baidu Inc., Beijing, China
{zhixing.tian, yzzhang, kliu, jzhao}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
{fengxinwei, jiangwenbin, lvyajuan}@baidu.com

Abstract

Candidates:
Ċ
S1: The film series was rebooted in 2013 with Man of Steel,

This paper focuses on the answer sentence selection task.
Unlike previous work, which only models the relation between the question and each candidate sentence, we propose
Multi-Perspective Graph Encoder (MPGE) to take the relations among the candidate sentences into account and capture the relations from multiple perspectives. By utilizing
MPGE as a module, we construct two answer sentence selection models which are based on traditional representation
and pre-trained representation, respectively. We conduct extensive experiments on two datasets, WikiQA and SQuAD.
The results show that the proposed MPGE is effective for
both types of representation. Moreover, the overall performance of our proposed model surpasses the state-of-the-art
on both datasets. Additionally, we further validate the robustness of our method by the adversarial examples of AddSent
and AddOneSent.

directed by Zack Snyder with Henry Cavill starring as
Superman.
S2: Cavill is the first British and non-American actor to play
the character.
Ċ
S3: Man of Steel was released in theaters on June 14, 2013
Ċ

Question:
Which British actor played Superman in Man of Steelϋ

Figure 1: An example of answer sentence selection. The candidates include S1 , S2 , S3 and the other sentences in the passage, which are omitted. S2 is the answer sentence. Green
dotted lines indicate coreference between words of two candidate sentences. The words in blue indicate the lexical overlap between the candidate sentences and the question.

Introduction
Answer sentence selection is an important subtask of question answering, where given a question and a set of sentences, a model is required to select the most suitable sentence that can answer the question. In this task, most of
the previous work (Wang and Nyberg 2015; Wang, Liu, and
Zhao 2016; Tran and Niedereée 2018) has only focused on
capturing semantic relations between questions and candidate sentences which directly serves the goal of the task. Basically, they encode each candidate independently, and then
conduct a semantic matching between the question and each
candidate. This kind of method simply ignores the relations
among the candidates which are also supportive for obtaining the answer.
To explain the importance of capturing the relations
among candidate sentences, we show an example in Figure
1. In this example, if only focusing on the relations between
the question and each candidate and understanding each candidate independently, the model will tend to select one of
the distractors, S1 and S3 , as the answer. This is because
both of them share more lexical overlap with the question

than does the true answer, S2 . However, if the model captures the relations among the candidates, it will be quite
supportive for obtaining the true answer. Concretely, there
is coreference between the words from S1 or S2 ; by utilizing this relation, the model will know Cavill is Henry Cavill
and the character is exactly the Superman mentioned in the
question. Besides, the name of the ﬁlm Man of Steel presented in S1 , which is also a key phrase in the question,
can be complementary information for understanding the
character mentioned in S2 and facilitate building a closer
connection between the answer S2 and the question. Therefore, capturing the relations among the candidates can help
to understand each candidate in its context and further contributes to selecting the answer sentence indirectly. Tan et
al. (2018) proposed a model which employed Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) at the sentence level to capture the relations among the candidates. The model made considerable
progress against previous work. However, as a variant of
RNN, the ability of GRU is limited to modeling the sentence relation from the perspective of sequence, which is not

∗

This is joint work of CASIA and Baidu.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9032

