The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Peeking Behind the Ordinal Curtain: Improving Distortion via Cardinal Queries
Georgios Amanatidis,1 Georgios Birmpas,2 Aris Filos-Ratsikas,3 Alexandros A. Voudouris2
1

Department of Computer, Control and Management Engineering, Sapienza University of Rome
amanatidis@diag.uniroma1.it
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford
{georgios.birmpas, alexandros.voudouris}@cs.ox.ac.uk
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Liverpool
aris.ﬁlos-ratsikas@liverpool.ac.uk

task of asking individuals to express their preferences in
terms of numerical values is arguably quite demanding. In
contrast, performing simple comparisons between the different options is more easily conceivable. To quantify how
much the lack of cardinal information affects the maximization of social welfare, Procaccia and Rosenschein (2006) deﬁned the notion of distortion as the worst-case ratio between
the optimal social welfare (achievable by using all cardinal
information) and the social welfare of the outcome, which is
chosen having access only to ordinal information. Following their agenda, a plethora of subsequent works studied the
distortion in different settings.

Abstract
The notion of distortion was introduced by Procaccia and
Rosenschein (2006) to quantify the inefﬁciency of using only
ordinal information when trying to maximize the social welfare. Since then, this research area has ﬂourished and bounds
on the distortion have been obtained for a wide variety of fundamental scenarios. However, the vast majority of the existing literature is focused on the case where nothing is known
beyond the ordinal preferences of the agents over the alternatives. In this paper, we take a more expressive approach,
and consider mechanisms that are allowed to further ask a
few cardinal queries in order to gain partial access to the underlying values that the agents have for the alternatives. With
this extra power, we design new deterministic mechanisms
that achieve signiﬁcantly improved distortion bounds and outperform the best-known randomized ordinal mechanisms. We
draw an almost complete picture of the number of queries required to achieve speciﬁc distortion bounds.

1

Somewhat surprisingly, these variants of the distortion
framework studied in this rich line of work differentiate between two extremes: we either have complete cardinal information or only ordinal information. Driven by the original motivation for using ordinal preferences, it seems quite
meaningful to ask whether improved distortion guarantees
can be obtained if one has access to limited cardinal information, especially in settings for which the worst-case distortion bounds are already quite discouraging (Boutilier et
al. 2015). We formulate this idea via cardinal queries, which
elicit cardinal information from the agents. These queries
can be as simple as asking the value of an agent for a possible outcome, or even asking an agent whether an outcome
is at least x times better than some other outcome. Note that
questions of the latter form are much less demanding than
eliciting a complete cardinal utility structure, and thus are
much more realistic as an elicitation device.

Introduction

Social choice theory (Brandt et al. 2016) is concerned with
aggregating the preferences of individuals into a joint decision. In an election, for instance, the winner should represent well (in some precise sense) the viewpoints of the voters. Similarly, the expenditure of public funds is typically
geared towards projects that increase the well-being of society. Most traditional models assume that the preferences of
individuals are expressed through ordinal preference rankings, where each agent sorts all alternatives from the most
to the least preferred. Underlying these ordinal preferences,
it is often assumed that there exists a cardinal utility structure, which further speciﬁes the intensity of the preferences.
That is, there exist numerical values that indicate how much
an agent prefers an outcome to another. Given this cardinal
utility structure, usually expressed via valuation functions,
one can deﬁne meaningful quantitative objectives, with the
most prominent one being the social welfare, i.e., the total
value of the agents for the chosen outcome.
The main rationale justifying the dominance of ordinal
preferences in the classical economics literature is that the

In this paper, we enhance the original distortion setting
of Procaccia and Rosenschein (2006) and Boutilier et al.
(2015) on single winner elections, by allowing the use of
cardinal queries. In this setting, there are n agents that have
cardinal values over m alternatives, and the goal is to elect
a single alternative that (approximately) maximizes the social welfare, while having access only to ordinal information. Caragiannis et al. (2017) proved that no deterministic mechanism can achieve a distortion better that Ω(m2 )
when agents have unit-sum normalized valuation functions
(i.e., the sum of the values of each agent for all alternatives
is 1). Under this assumption, Boutilier et al. (2015) proved
that the distortion of any randomized mechanism is between

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1782

