The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Dialog State Tracking with Reinforced Data Augmentation
Yichun Yin,∗ Lifeng Shang,∗ Xin Jiang, Xiao Chen, Qun Liu
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{yinyichun, shang.lifeng, jiang.xin, chen.xiao2, qun.liu}@huawei.com

Abstract

Original Example
I want some reasonably priced Chinese food.

Neural dialog state trackers are generally limited due to the
lack of quantity and diversity of annotated training data. In
this paper, we address this difﬁculty by proposing a reinforcement learning (RL) based framework for data augmentation that can generate high-quality data to improve the neural state tracker. Speciﬁcally, we introduce a novel contextual
bandit generator to learn ﬁne-grained augmentation policies
that can generate new effective instances by choosing suitable
replacements for speciﬁc context. Moreover, by alternately
learning between the generator and the state tracker, we can
keep reﬁning the generative policies to generate more highquality training data for neural state tracker. Experimental results on the WoZ and MultiWoZ (restaurant) datasets demonstrate that the proposed framework signiﬁcantly improves the
performance over the state-of-the-art models, especially with
limited training data.

Contextual Bandit Generator
Example
I wanted to find some [reasonably priced]
Chinese food.

Policy

State

Rewards
“cost effective”

瀂too expensive瀃

瀂affordable瀃

……
New instance: I wanted to find some [affordable] Chinese food.

Generated Data

Dialogue State Tracker

Figure 1: An overview of our framework. Given a dataset,
we induce new instances using the RL-based Generator to
improve the DST Tracker. The Generator is trained with the
rewards from the Tracker. The learning process is performed
in an alternate manner.

Introduction
With the increasing popularity of intelligent assistants such
as Alexa, Siri and Google Duplex, the research on spoken
dialog systems has gained a great deal of attention in recent years (Gao, Galley, and Li 2018). Dialog state tracking
(DST) (Williams et al. 2013) is an essential component of
most spoken dialog systems, aiming to track user’s goal at
each step in a dialog. Based on that, the dialog agent decides
how to converse with the user. In a slot-based dialog system, the dialogue states are typically formulated as a set of
slot-value pairs and one concrete example is as follows:

Sharma, Choubey, and Huang 2019; Chao and Lane 2019;
Wu et al. 2019). They typically predict the probabilities of
the candidate slot-value pairs with the user utterance, previous system actions or other external information as inputs,
and then determine the ﬁnal value of each slot based on the
probabilities. Although the neural network based methods
are promising with advanced deep learning techniques such
as gating and self-attention mechanisms (Lin et al. 2017;
Vaswani et al. 2017), the data-hungry nature makes them
difﬁcult to generalize well to the scenarios with limited or
sparse training data.
To alleviate the data sparsity in DST, we propose a reinforced data augmentation (RDA) framework to increase
both the amount and diversity of the training data. The RDA
learns to generate high-quality labeled instances, which are
used to re-train the neural state trackers to achieve better performances. As shown in Figure 1, the RDA consists of two
primary modules: Generator and Tracker. The two learnable
modules alternately learn from each other during the training
process. On one hand, the Generator module is responsible
for generating new instances based on a parameterized gen-

User: Grandma wants Italian, any suggestions?
State: inform(food=Italian)
Agent: Would you prefer south or center?
User: It doesn’t matter. Whichever is less expensive.
State: inform(food=Italian,
price=cheap, area=don’t care)
The state-of-the-art models for DST are based on neural
network (Henderson, Thomson, and Young 2014; Mrkšić et
al. 2017; Zhong, Xiong, and Socher 2018; Ren et al. 2018;
∗

Corresponding authors.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9474

