The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Multi-Scale Self-Attention for Text Classiﬁcation
Qipeng Guo,‡∗ Xipeng Qiu,‡† Pengfei Liu,‡ Xiangyang Xue,‡ Zheng Zhang§
‡

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Fudan University
‡
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
§
AWS Shanghai AI Lab
§
New York University Shanghai
{qpguo16, xpqiu, pﬂiu14, xyxue}@fudan.edu.cn, zz@nyu.edu

Tai, Socher, and Manning 2015) and hierarchical attention
(Yang et al. 2016). The principle behind these models is
the characteristic of language: the high-level feature is the
composition of low-level terms. With hierarchical structures,
these models capture the local compositions at lower layers
and non-local composition at high layers. This division of
labor makes the model less data-hungry.
However, for self-attention modules, there is no restriction of composition bias. The dependencies between words
are purely data-driven without any prior, leading to easily
overﬁt on small or moderate size datasets.
In this paper, we propose a multi-scale multi-head selfattention (MSMSA), in which each attention head has a variable scale. The scale of a head restricts the working area
of self-attention. Intuitively, a large scale makes the feature involving more contextual information and being more
smooth. A small scale insists on the local bias and encourages the features to be outstanding and sharp. Based on
MSMSA, we further propose multi-scale Transformer, consisting of multiple MSMSA layers. Different from the multiscale in hierarchical structures, each layer of multi-scale
Transformer consists of several attention heads with multiple scales, which brings an ability to capture the multi-scale
features in a single layer.
Contributions of this paper are:

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce the prior knowledge, multi-scale
structure, into self-attention modules. We propose a MultiScale Transformer which uses multi-scale multi-head selfattention to capture features from different scales. Based
on the linguistic perspective and the analysis of pre-trained
Transformer (BERT) on a huge corpus, we further design
a strategy to control the scale distribution for each layer.
Results of three different kinds of tasks (21 datasets) show
our Multi-Scale Transformer outperforms the standard Transformer consistently and signiﬁcantly on small and moderate
size datasets.

Introduction
Self-Attention mechanism is widely used in text classiﬁcation tasks, and models based on self-attention mechanism
like Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017), BERT (Devlin et al.
2018) achieves many exciting results on natural language
processing (NLP) tasks, such as machine translation, language modeling (Dai et al. 2019), and text classiﬁcation.
Recently, Radford et al. (2018) points out the weakness of
self-attention modules, especially the poor performance on
small and moderate size datasets. Although the pre-training
on huge corpus could help this, we believe the fundamental
reason is that self-attention module lacks suitable inductive
bias, so the learning process heavily depends on the training data. It is hard to learn a model with good generalization
ability from scratch on a limited training set without a good
inductive bias.
Multi-Scale structures are widely used in computer vision (CV), NLP, and signal processing domains. It can
help the model to capture patterns at different scales and
extract robust features. Speciﬁc to NLP domain, a common way to implement multi-scale is the hierarchical structure, such as convolutional neural networks (CNN) (Kalchbrenner, Grefenstette, and Blunsom 2014), multi-scale recurrent neural networks (RNN) (Chung, Ahn, and Bengio
2016) tree-structured neural networks (Socher et al. 2013;

• We introduce the multi-scale structure into self-attention
framework, the proposed model Multi-Scale Transformer
can extract features from different scales.
• Inspired by the hierarchical structure of language, we further develop a simple strategy to control the scale distribution for different layers. Based on the empirical result on
real tasks and the analysis from BERT, we suggest using
more small-scale attention heads in shallow layers and a
balanced choice for different scales in deep layers.
• The building block of Multi-Scale Transformer, multiscale multi-head self-attention provides a ﬂexible way to
introduce scale bias (local or global), and it is a replacement of the multi-head self-attention and position-wise
feed-forward networks.

∗

Work done during internship at AWS Shanghai AI Lab.
Corresponding author: Xipeng Qiu (xpqiu@fudan.edu.cn).
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

• Results on three tasks (21 datasets) show our Multi-Scale
Transformer outperforms the standard Transformer con7847

