The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

CG-GAN: An Interactive Evolutionary
GAN-Based Approach for Facial Composite Generation
Nicola Zaltron

Luisa Zurlo

Sebastian Risi

IT University of Copenhagen
Copenhagen, Denmark
nicolazaltra@gmail.com

IT University of Copenhagen
Copenhagen, Denmark
zurlo.luisa@gmail.com

IT University of Copenhagen
Copenhagen, Denmark
sebr@itu.dk

Originally composites were drawn by forensic artists
in consultation with victims and eyewitnesses, relying on
detailed descriptions of their memories. More recent approaches involved mechanical and digital systems to improve the process and the resulting recognition rate.
There exist two major modern creation techniques. Simple systems merge single features (drawn or picked from a
feature set) into a portrait. Others let the witnesses concentrate on the entire face, by selecting individuals as in a lineup (Zahradnikova, Sutova, and Schreiber 2017). This holistic approach is the result of psychological research suggesting that describing individual features causes lower identiﬁcation rates (Zahradnikova, Sutova, and Schreiber 2017).
CG-GAN is designed to make the process artist-free to
avoid communication issues and potentially lower retention
time, and is empowered by the usage of recent machine
learning techniques. In more detail, the approach is based on
the Latent Variable Evolution (LVE) approach (Bontrager,
Togelius, and Memon 2017), in which a Generative and Adversarial Network (GAN) is trained on a speciﬁc dataset and
the space of images encoded by the GAN is then searched
through an evolutionary computation approach. LVE has
been applied to diverse domains such as the generation of
ﬁngerprints (Bontrager, Togelius, and Memon 2017), image
generation (Bontrager and others 2018) and even the creation of Mario levels (Volz et al. 2018).
Bontrager and others (2018) showed that LVE can enable
users to guide the search through a process known as interactive evolution (Takagi 2001). However, evolving towards a
speciﬁc target image, which is a prerequisite for facial composite generation, has shown challenging (Bontrager and
others 2018). This work goes beyond the previous state-ofthe-art by extending LVE with the ability to freeze certain
features discovered during the search, enabling a more controlled user-recreation of target images. The system exploits
advantages of both constructive and holistic techniques. Figure 1 shows an example of a composite session that has been
carried out with the usage of CG-GAN.

Abstract
Facial composites are graphical representations of an eyewitness’s memory of a face. Many digital systems are available
for the creation of such composites but are either unable to
reproduce features unless previously designed or do not allow holistic changes to the image. In this paper, we improve
the efﬁciency of composite creation by removing the reliance
on expert knowledge and letting the system learn to represent
faces from examples. The novel approach, Composite Generating GAN (CG-GAN), applies generative and evolutionary
computation to allow casual users to easily create facial composites. Speciﬁcally, CG-GAN utilizes the generator network
of a pg-GAN to create high-resolution human faces. Users are
provided with several functions to interactively breed and edit
faces. CG-GAN offers a novel way of generating and handling static and animated photo-realistic facial composites,
with the possibility of combining multiple representations of
the same perpetrator, generated by different eyewitnesses.

Figure 1: Example composite built using CG-GAN.

Introduction
Facial composites are portrait sketches of unknown individuals used in criminal investigation to identify a person. Two cognitive abilities are applied in the process:
recall and recognition. Recall is the recollection of information for the composite construction. Recognition is
the ability to recognize someone seen before, used during
line-ups (Zahradnı́ková, Duchovičová, and Schreiber 2016;
Mancusi 2014). Compared to recall, recognition is an easier and stronger task, therefore most courts of law consider
lineup identiﬁcation as good evidence (Mancusi 2014).

Related work
Facial Composite Generation

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Police agencies are already using software for the creation of
facial composites, such as Faces 4.0, which allows adding
2544

