The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Contextual-Bandit Based Personalized
Recommendation with Time-Varying User Interests
Xiao Xu,1 Fang Dong,2∗ Yanghua Li,2 Shaojian He,2 Xin Li2
1
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
xx243@cornell.edu, {dongfang.df, shaojian.he, xin.l}@alibaba-inc.com, yichen.lyh@taobao.com
2

pected cumulative reward loss against an omniscient player
who knows the reward model and always plays the best arm.
In recent years, contextual bandits (Langford and Zhang
2007; Li et al. 2010a), a variation of the classical MAB
model, has received large attention due to its success in various online services where context information associated
with either users or items is available. It has been assumed
that the unknown reward model of an arm is determined
by the given context. Through leveraging the context information, a number of new learning algorithms have been
developed to achieve better performance compared with
context-free ones in the classical setting (Li et al. 2010a;
Wang, Wu, and Wang 2016).
While most existing studies on contextual bandits assume
a stationary environment where the unknown reward model
is ﬁxed over time given the context information, real-world
applications are usually dynamic due to the time-varying interests of users. For example, it has been observed that the
click behaviors of users over different news articles evolve
over time in both Google News (Liu, Dolan, and Pedersen
2010) and Yahoo News (Zeng et al. 2016). Without the capability of detecting potential changes in the underlying reward model, existing algorithms may lead to sub-optimal decisions using out-of-date observations.

Abstract
A contextual bandit problem is studied in a highly nonstationary environment, which is ubiquitous in various recommender systems due to the time-varying interests of users.
Two models with disjoint and hybrid payoffs are considered
to characterize the phenomenon that users’ preferences towards different items vary differently over time. In the disjoint payoff model, the reward of playing an arm is determined by an arm-speciﬁc preference vector, which is
piecewise-stationary with asynchronous and distinct changes
across different arms. An efﬁcient learning algorithm that is
adaptive to abrupt reward changes is proposed and theoretical
regret analysis is provided to show that a sublinear scaling of
regret in the time length T is achieved. The algorithm is further extended to a more general setting with hybrid payoffs
where the reward of playing an arm is determined by both an
arm-speciﬁc preference vector and a joint coefﬁcient vector
shared by all arms. Empirical experiments are conducted on
real-world datasets to verify the advantages of the proposed
learning algorithms against baseline ones in both settings.

Introduction
Online learning has long been adopted as one of the archetypal formulations in various applications including online advertising (Li et al. 2010b), personalized recommendation (Li
et al. 2010a), and information retrieval (Yue and Joachims
2009). A classic framework for online learning is the multiarmed bandit (MAB) model with a set of K arms (representing all possible actions) and a single player. At each
time, the player chooses one of the K arms to play and obtains a random reward generated from an unknown distribution speciﬁc to the chosen arm (Lai and Robbins 1985;
Auer, Cesa-Bianchi, and Fischer 2002). In order to maximize the total expected reward over a time horizon of length
T , the learner needs to design an arm selection policy that
balances an intrinsic tradeoff between exploring the unknown reward model and exploiting the current knowledge
to maximize the instantaneous gain. The performance of an
arm selection policy is measured by regret, which is the ex-

Main Results
In this paper, we study a more realistic setting with nonstationary user interests under the contextual bandit framework. Speciﬁcally, we assume that the preferences of users
towards items are piecewise-stationary, i.e., the reward
model may undergo abrupt changes but between two consecutive change points, the model remains ﬁxed. Furthermore,
we consider asynchronous and distinct reward changes
across different items, which is a common phenomenon in
real applications. For example, in news recommendation,
changes on the preferences of readers towards different news
categories are triggered by the occurrence of related hot
events, which are unlikely to happen at the same time. In
e-commerce platforms, customers’ life-long interests over
different products also exhibit distinct changes: a customer
is more likely to purchase toys in his childhood while in
adulthood, he may become more interested in sport-related

∗

Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6518

