The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Lexical Simpliﬁcation with Pretrained Encoders
Jipeng Qiang,1 Yun Li,1 Yi Zhu,1 Yunhao Yuan,1 Xindong Wu2,3
1

2

Department of Computer Science, Yangzhou University, Jiangsu, China
Key Laboratory of Knowledge Engineering with Big Data (Hefei University of Technology),
Ministry of Education, Anhui, China
3
Mininglamp Academy of Sciences, Minininglamp Technology, Beijing, China
{jpqiang, liyun, zhuyi, yhyuan}@yzu.edu.cn, xwu@hfut.edu.cn

Abstract
Lexical simpliﬁcation (LS) aims to replace complex words
in a given sentence with their simpler alternatives of equivalent meaning. Recently unsupervised lexical simpliﬁcation
approaches only rely on the complex word itself regardless of
the given sentence to generate candidate substitutions, which
will inevitably produce a large number of spurious candidates. We present a simple LS approach that makes use of
the Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT) which can consider both the given sentence and
the complex word during generating candidate substitutions
for the complex word. Speciﬁcally, we mask the complex
word of the original sentence for feeding into the BERT to
predict the masked token. The predicted results will be used
as candidate substitutions. Despite being entirely unsupervised, experimental results show that our approach obtains
obvious improvement compared with these baselines leveraging linguistic databases and parallel corpus, outperforming
the state-of-the-art by more than 12 Accuracy points on three
well-known benchmarks.

1

Figure 1: Comparison of simpliﬁcation candidates of complex words. Given one sentence ”John composed these
verses.” and complex words ’composed’ and ’verses’, the
top three simpliﬁcation candidates for each complex word
are generated by our method BERT-LS and the state-of-theart two baselines based word embeddings (Glavaš(Glavaš
and Štajner 2015) and Paetzold-NE (Paetzold and Specia
2017a)).

Introduction

Lexical Simpliﬁcation (LS) aims at replacing complex
words with simpler alternatives, which can help various
groups of people, including children (De Belder and Moens
2010), non-native speakers (Paetzold and Specia 2016), people with cognitive disabilities (Feng 2009; Saggion 2017),
to understand text better. The popular LS systems still predominantly use a set of rules for substituting complex words
with their frequent synonyms from carefully handcrafted
databases (e.g., WordNet) or automatically induced from
comparable corpora (Devlin and Tait 1998; De Belder and
Moens 2010). Linguistic databases like WordNet are used
to produce simple synonyms of a complex word. (Lesk
1986; Sinha 2012; Leroy et al. 2013). Parallel corpora
like Wikipedia-Simple Wikipedia corpus were also used
to extract complex-to-simple word correspondences (Biran,
Brody, and Elhadad 2011; Yatskar et al. 2010; Horn, Manduca, and Kauchak 2014). However, linguistic resources are
scarce or expensive to produce, such as WordNet and Simple

Wikipedia, and it is impossible to give all possible simpliﬁcation rules from them.
For avoiding the need for resources such as databases
or parallel corpora, recent work utilizes word embedding
models to extract simpliﬁcation candidates for complex
words (Glavaš and Štajner 2015; Paetzold and Specia 2016;
2017a). Given a complex word, they extracted from the word
embedding model the simpliﬁcation candidates whose vectors are closer in terms of cosine similarity with the complex
word. This strategy achieves better results compared with
rule-based LS systems. However, the above methods generated simpliﬁcation candidates only considering the complex
word regardless of the context of the complex word, which
will inevitably produce a large number of spurious candidates that can confuse the systems employed in the subsequent steps.
Therefore, we present an intuitive and innovative idea
completely different from existing LS systems in this paper.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8649

