The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Replicate, Walk, and Stop on Syntax: An Effective
Neural Network Model for Aspect-Level Sentiment Classiﬁcation
Yaowei Zheng,1,2 Richong Zhang,1,2∗ Samuel Mensah,1,2 Yongyi Mao3
2

1
SKLSDE, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
Beijing Advanced Institution on Big Data and Brain Computing, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada
{hiyouga, samensah}@buaa.edu.cn, zhangrc@act.buaa.edu.cn, ymao@uottawa.ca

Abstract
Aspect-level sentiment classiﬁcation (ALSC) aims at predicting the sentiment polarity of a speciﬁc aspect term occurring
in a sentence. This task requires learning a representation by
aggregating the relevant contextual features concerning the
aspect term. Existing methods cannot sufﬁciently leverage the
syntactic structure of the sentence, and hence are difﬁcult to
distinguish different sentiments for multiple aspects in a sentence. We perceive the limitations of the previous methods
and propose a hypothesis about ﬁnding crucial contextual information with the help of syntactic structure. For this purpose, we present a neural network model named RepWalk
which performs a replicated random walk on a syntax graph,
to effectively focus on the informative contextual words. Empirical studies show that our model outperforms recent models on most of the benchmark datasets for the ALSC task.
The results suggest that our method for incorporating syntactic structure enriches the representation for the classiﬁcation.

The

food
positive

is good but the service is slow .
negative

Figure 1: An example of a restaurant review with two aspect
terms having different sentiments.

To cope with the aforementioned limitation, the syntactic
structure has been introduced to the ALSC problem (Dong
et al. 2014; He et al. 2018a; Zhang, Li, and Song 2019). The
dependency tree is an important syntactic structure which
establishes relationships between “head” words and words
which modify those heads. Therefore, it can easily model
the syntactic interrelationship between each contextual word
and the aspect term.
Several recent studies explore techniques of incorporating
syntactic structure, such as the dependency tree into neural
network models. Empirical results suggest that leveraging
syntactic structure can improve the performance of neural
network models, but these models still suffer from several
drawbacks. AdaRNN (Dong et al. 2014) learns to propagate
sentiments of words toward the target over a converted dependency tree. However, their method destructs the original tree structure and cannot make good use of the natural
structural information of the dependency tree. On the other
hand, He et al. (2018a) assumes that the informative words
are close to the aspect term in the dependency tree and deﬁnes an attention window to focus on closer words. This approach is not optimal and might lead to loss of information
since it is based on a user-deﬁned window size.
In summary, the important question here is how the syntactic structure can be effectively leveraged for ALSC. We
investigate the structure of the dependency tree and ﬁnd that
only a speciﬁc subtree in the whole dependency tree is relevant to the sentiment expressed on the aspect term. For example, Figure 2 shows a dependency tree for the sentence
“The food is good but the service is slow.”. It can easily be
seen that the word “good” in the subtree “The food is good”
plays an important role in identifying the sentiment polarity

Introduction
Aspect level sentiment classiﬁcation (ALSC) is a fundamental task in sentiment analysis (Pang, Lee, and others 2008;
Liu 2012), which tries to infer the sentiment polarity of
a sentence toward a speciﬁc aspect term. Compared to
document-level or sentence-level sentiment classiﬁcation,
the main challenge of this task is to distinguish the different
sentiments toward each aspect term when there are multiple aspects in the sentence. As a concrete example shown in
Figure 1, the sentence expresses a positive sentiment on the
food of a restaurant but a negative sentiment on its service.
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), equipped with attention mechanism and memory module, is the most commonly
used technique for ALSC (Wang et al. 2016b; Tang, Qin, and
Liu 2016; Ma et al. 2017; Chen et al. 2017). These methods
try to capture the semantic relationship between each contextual word and the aspect term along a chain of words.
However, these models still experience the problem of longterm dependencies in the ALSC task, and cannot efﬁciently
identify the difference between multiple aspects existing in
a single sentence.
∗

Corresponding author:zhangrc@act.buaa.edu.cn
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9685

