The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Efﬁcient Residual Dense Block Search for Image Super-Resolution
Dehua Song,1 Chang Xu,3 Xu Jia,1∗ Yiyi Chen,2 Chunjing Xu,1 Yunhe Wang1
1

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab. 2 Huawei CBG
School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney
{dehua.song, x.jia, yiyi.chen, xuchunjing, yunhe.wang}@huawei.com; c.xu@sydney.edu.au
3

super-resolution has dramatically boosted, and with it come
the increases of the number of parameters and the amount of
computation. For example, RDN contains 22M parameters
and requires 10, 192G FLOPs (ﬂoating point operations).
This severely restricts CNN-based super-resolution methods to be deployed on mobile devices that possess limited
computing and storage resources. It is therefore urgent and
important to develop fast, lightweight and accurate superresolution networks for real-world applications.

Abstract
Although remarkable progress has been made on single image super-resolution due to the revival of deep convolutional
neural networks, deep learning methods are confronted with
the challenges of computation and memory consumption in
practice, especially for mobile devices. Focusing on this issue, we propose an efﬁcient residual dense block search algorithm with multiple objectives to hunt for fast, lightweight
and accurate networks for image super-resolution. Firstly, to
accelerate super-resolution network, we exploit the variation
of feature scale adequately with the proposed efﬁcient residual dense blocks. In the proposed evolutionary algorithm, the
locations of pooling and upsampling operator are searched
automatically. Secondly, network architecture is evolved with
the guidance of block credits to acquire accurate superresolution network. The block credit reﬂects the effect of current block and is earned during model evaluation process. It
guides the evolution by weighing the sampling probability of
mutation to favor admirable blocks. Extensive experimental
results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed searching method and the found efﬁcient super-resolution models
achieve better performance than the state-of-the-art methods
with limited number of parameters and FLOPs.

A natural idea to address the aforementioned challenges is
designing efﬁcient operator or block in the networks (Zhang
et al. 2018a; Wang et al. 2018a; 2018b). Recursive operator has been widely investigated to reduce redundant parameters of super-resolution network, such as DRCN (Kim,
Kwon Lee, and Mu Lee 2016b), DRRN (Tai, Yang, and
Liu 2017), and MemNet (Tai et al. 2017). In addition, researchers have tried to construct efﬁcient super-resolution
blocks with squeeze operations and group operations (Ahn,
Kang, and Sohn 2018; Shi et al. 2016). However, blocks
in a hand-crafted super-resolution network usually share the
same architecture, which might not always be an optimal solution for the task, as the ﬂexibility of the block and capacity
of the whole network could be decreased.

Introduction

Given proper search space, neural architecture search
(NAS) is helpful in deriving the optimal architectures for
different tasks. Recently, this automation has led to state of
the art accuracy on classiﬁcation problems (Zoph et al. 2018;
Real et al. 2019; Liu, Simonyan, and Yang 2018). This success has been reproduced in many other computer vision
tasks, e.g. segmentation (Liu et al. 2019) and image restoration (Suganuma, Ozay, and Okatani 2018). NAS has rarely
been investigated for lightweight image super-resolution.
The most relevant work here may be the MoreMNAS (Chu
et al. 2019), which utilized multi-objective NAS to pursue
the tradeoff between restoration and simplicity of superresolution models. However, the efﬁciency of network is imposed strict restriction by the large amounts of computation
of the whole nonlinear mapping process, which is computed
on the same scale entirely. In addition, it searches architecture on inner cell level and outer network level simultaneously with basic operators. It is time-consuming and harmful
to mobile devices due to the non-regularized combinations

Single image super-resolution (SISR) is to generate a highresolution image from its degraded low-resolution version.
It has broad applications in photo editing, surveillance and
medical imaging. SISR is hard due to the fact that reconstructing high resolution image from a low resolution image
is a many-to-one mapping. To address this ill-posed inverse
problem, various methods were introduced like interpolation
based methods, dictionary-based methods and deep learning
based methods.
In recent years, convolutional neural network-based
(CNN-based) super-resolution methods have been extensively studied and have achieved tremendous improvement
in terms of peak signal-to-noise (PSNR). From the pioneering SRCNN (Dong et al. 2014) to the most current RDN
(Zhang et al. 2018b), the overall performance of image
∗

The author should be considered as equal second author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12007

