The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

End-to-End Unpaired Image Denoising with Conditional Adversarial Networks
Zhiwei Hong,1 Xiaochen Fan,2 Tao Jiang,3,1* Jianxing Feng2∗
1

Tsinghua University, 2 Haohua Technology Co., Ltd
3
University of California, Riverside
hzw17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {fanxiaochen, fengjianxing}@harmon.health,
jiang@cs.ucr.edu

Abstract
Image denoising is a classic low level vision problem that
attempts to recover a noise-free image from a noisy observation. Recent advances in deep neural networks have outperformed traditional prior based methods for image denoising.
However, the existing methods either require paired noisy and
clean images for training or impose certain assumptions on
the noise distribution and data types. In this paper, we present
an end-to-end unpaired image denoising framework (UIDNet) that denoises images with only unpaired clean and noisy
training images. The critical component of our model is a
noise learning module based on a conditional Generative Adversarial Network (cGAN). The model learns the noise distribution from the input noisy images and uses it to transform
the input clean images to noisy ones without any assumption
on the noise distribution and data types. This process results
in pairs of clean and pseudo-noisy images. Such pairs are then
used to train another denoising network similar to the existing
denoising methods based on paired images. The noise learning and denoising components are integrated together so that
they can be trained end-to-end. Extensive experimental evaluation has been performed on both synthetic and real data
including real photographs and computer tomography (CT)
images. The results demonstrate that our model outperforms
the previous models trained on unpaired images as well as the
state-of-the-art methods based on paired training data when
proper training pairs are unavailable.

(a) [-1000,400] HU (b) [-1000,-600] HU

(c) [-160,240] HU

Figure 1: An example low dose CT image normalized under different Hounsﬁeld Unit (HU) ranges. The black area
and highlighted area have very different noise distributions
compared with other areas.

medical CT images, their noise may be even more complicated, which is closely related to the radiation dose, resolution, slice thickness, patient size, organ type, etc. Therefore,
it is very challenging to develop a general denoising method
that is applicable to all noisy images.
In the past few decades, many methods have been introduced in the literature trying to solve this problem. These
methods can be roughly divided into two groups, image
prior based models and discriminative learning based models. Image prior based methods such as BM3D (Dabov et
al. 2007), NCSR (Dong et al. 2013) and WNNM (Zoran
and Weiss 2011) are highly engineered approaches that are
mostly based on self-similarity and have achieved impressive results for many years. Despite their good performance
on some speciﬁc types of noise, they suffer from two main
drawbacks. First, image priors used in these methods are
mostly from human knowledge and experience, which are
limited and not general enough to handle noise generated by
complicated processes. Second, these methods involve complex optimization problems and may need to calculate the
similarity between a large number of image patches, which
is time-consuming.
To break the limitations of prior-based methods, several discriminative learning based methods (Chen and Pock
2017; Burger, Schuler, and Harmeling 2012; Schmidt and
Roth 2014) have been proposed recently. They try to learn
the latent noise implicitly from data and have achieved im-

Introduction
Image denoising is a classic low level vision problem but remains as a research hotspot because it is essential in various
image processing and computer vision tasks. Noise corruption is usually inevitable when images are generated, which
may heavily degrade the image quality. Image denoising
aims at restoring the noise-free image from a noisy observation by reducing the latent noise. In many real situations,
noise is generated by a very complicated process. For example, the noise in real photographs may be affected by the incamera processing pipeline and environmental factors such
as low illumination, radial distortion, over-exposure, etc. For
∗

T. Jiang and J. Feng are the co-corresponding authors.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4140

