The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Fact-Aware Sentence Split and Rephrase with Permutation Invariant Training
Yinuo Guo,1 Tao Ge,2 Furu Wei2
1

Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics
School of EECS, Peking University,
2
Microsoft Research Asia
gyn0806@pku.edu.cn
{tage, fuwei}@microsoft.com

Abstract

(a) Examples of Misrepresented Facts
The author of Aenir is Garth Nix and is
Source
available in print.
Aenir, author, Garth Nix
Facts
Aenir, available, in print
The author of Aenir is Garth Nix. [SEP]
Target
Aenir is available in print.
The author of Aenir is Garth Nix. [SEP]
seq2seq
Garth Nix is available in print.

Sentence Split and Rephrase aims to break down a complex
sentence into several simple sentences with its meaning preserved. Previous studies tend to address the issue by seq2seq
learning from parallel sentence pairs, which takes a complex
sentence as input and sequentially generates a series of simple
sentences. However, the conventional seq2seq learning has
two limitations for this task: (1) it does not take into account
the facts stated in the long sentence; As a result, the generated simple sentences may miss or inaccurately state the facts
in the original sentence. (2) The order variance of the simple sentences to be generated may confuse the seq2seq model
during training because the simple sentences derived from the
long source sentence could be in any order.
To overcome the challenges, we ﬁrst propose the Fact-aware
Sentence Encoding, which enables the model to learn facts
from the long sentence and thus improves the precision of
sentence split; then we introduce Permutation Invariant Training to alleviate the effects of order variance in seq2seq
learning for this task. Experiments on the WebSplit-v1.0
benchmark dataset show that our approaches can largely
improve the performance over the previous seq2seq learning approaches. Moreover, an extrinsic evaluation on oiebenchmark veriﬁes the effectiveness of our approaches by an
observation that splitting long sentences with our state-of-theart model as preprocessing is helpful for improving OpenIE
performance.

1

(b) Examples of Sentence Order Variance
Test pilot Alan Bean was born on March
Source
15th, 1932 in Wheeler, Texas and graduated with a B.S. from the University of
Texas in 1955 .
Alan Bean performed as a test pilot. [SEP]
Alan Bean was born on March 15, 1932.
Target (order1)
[SEP] The Alma Mater of Alan Bean is
UT Austin, B.S. 1955. [SEP] Alan Bean
’s birthplace is Wheeler, Texas .
Alan Bean was born in Wheeler, Texas.
[SEP] Alan Bean was a test pilot. [SEP]
seq2seq (order2)
Alan Bean was born on March 15th, 1932.
[SEP] Alan Bean graduated from the University of Texas with a B.S. in 1955.

Figure 1: Examples of sentences generated by the seq2seq
model. (a) illustrates misrepresented facts (yellow) in the
generated results; (b) shows two split order of simple sentences derived from the source. The sentence order variance
may confuse the model during training, tweaking the model
against its previously learning patterns and affecting the stability of training. Best viewed in color.

Introduction

Long and complicated sentences prove to be a stumbling
block for computers to process human languages. If complex text can be made shorter and simpler, sentences will
become easier to understand, which will beneﬁt a number of
natural language processing (NLP) tasks such as Information Extraction.
With this motivation, Sentence Split and Rephrase task
was proposed (Narayan et al. 2017), focusing on simplifying a complicated sentence by splitting and rephrasing it
into simple sentences. Previous studies (Narayan et al. 2017;
Aharoni and Goldberg 2018; Botha et al. 2018) tend to
formulate this problem into a seq2seq learning framework,

which takes the complex sentence as input and sequentially
generates a series of simple sentences. Despite the certain
effectiveness of these approaches, their limitations are obvious: (1) conventional seq2seq learning does not take into
account the facts stated in the original sentence; As a result, the facts are likely to be misrepresented or missed in
the generated simple sentences, as Figure 1(a) illustrates.
(2) The variance of the order of simple sentences to be generated may confuse the seq2seq model because the simple
sentences derived from the long source sentence could be in
any order. As Figure 1(b) shows, if the sentence order in the

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7855

