The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Robust Adversarial Objects against Deep Learning Models
Tzungyu Tsai,1 Kaichen Yang,2 Tsung-Yi Ho,1 Yier Jin2∗
1

National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan
2
University of Florida, USA
s107062519@m107.nthu.edu.tw, bojanykc@uﬂ.edu, tyho@cs.nthu.edu.tw, yier.jin@ece.uﬂ.edu

Abstract
Previous work has shown that Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs), including those currently in use in many ﬁelds, are
extremely vulnerable to maliciously crafted inputs, known
as adversarial examples. Despite extensive and thorough research of adversarial examples in many areas, adversarial
3D data, such as point clouds, remain comparatively unexplored. The study of adversarial 3D data is crucial considering its impact in real-life, high-stakes scenarios including
autonomous driving. In this paper, we propose a novel adversarial attack against PointNet++, a deep neural network that
performs classiﬁcation and segmentation tasks using features
learned directly from raw 3D points. In comparison to existing works, our attack generates not only adversarial point
clouds, but also robust adversarial objects that in turn generate adversarial point clouds when sampled both in simulation
and after construction in real world. We also demonstrate that
our objects can bypass existing defense mechanisms designed
especially against adversarial 3D data.

1

Figure 1: Visualization of the 3D Printed Physical Adversarial Objects Generated by Our Attack Algorithm.
but intentionally selected perturbations to the original inputs that lead the target models to speciﬁc incorrect outputs.
The phenomenon of adversarial examples was ﬁrst found in
deep learning models designed for image classiﬁcation tasks
(Szegedy et al. 2013). Since then adversarial examples have
been proven to exist in DNN models for various applications
such as object detection (Xie et al. 2017), intrusion detection
(Yang et al. 2018), and voice recognition (Yuan et al. 2018).
Despite the fact that deep learning models trained to analyze point cloud data are already deployed in safety-crucial
applications such as autonomous driving, the threat of potential adversarial attacks on these models is rarely discussed.
Though there are some recently proposed adversarial attack
algorithms (Xiang, Qi, and Li 2019; Liu, Yu, and Su 2019)
targeting the PointNets by adding or altering the points, they
fail to pass some trivial defense mechanisms (Zhou et al.
2018). These attack schemes also only concentrate on point
clouds; they fail to construct corresponding meaningful objects, not to mention manufacturing these objects physically.
In this work, we focus on adversarial attacks in whitebox scenario against PointNet++, a point cloud classiﬁcation
network. To address the limitations of the previous attack
algorithms, we propose a novel attack method to generate
robust adversarial 3D objects that preserve their properties
after physically manufactured by 3D printers. Considering
the existing defensive methods designed speciﬁcally to defend against 3D adversarial point clouds, we further show

Introduction

Deep learning achieves great success in many areas such
as image classiﬁcation, object detection, and voice recognition. Inspired by these achievements, many innovative neural network architectures are proposed to process 3D data,
particularly point cloud data. PointNet (Qi et al. 2017a) and
its variation, PointNet++ (Qi et al. 2017b), are popular network models designed for classiﬁcation and segmentation
on point data. In contrast to existing voxel-based or imagebased methods (Maturana and Scherer 2015; Qi et al. 2016)
which transform point data into regular 3D voxel grids or
render points to 2D images, PointNets make predictions
based on the features learned directly from raw 3D points,
thus utilizing more information for better accuracy.
Though deep learning is recognized as a promising way
in processing different tasks, recent works (Szegedy et al.
2013) have shown that deep learning models are vulnerable
to deliberately crafted inputs, known as adversarial examples. Adversarial examples are generated by adding small
∗

Corresponding Author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
954

