The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Optimization of Chance-Constrained Submodular Functions
Benjamin Doerr,1 Carola Doerr,2 Aneta Neumann,3 Frank Neumann,3 Andrew M. Sutton4
1

Laboratoire d’Informatique (LIX), CNRS, École Polytechnique, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, Palaiseau, France
2
Sorbonne Université, CNRS, LIP6, Paris, France
3
Optimisation and Logistics, School of Computer Science, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia
4
Department of Computer Science, University of Minnesota Duluth, Duluth, MN, USA

Our Results

Abstract

Given a set V , we analyze the maximization of submodular
functions f : 2V → R subject to linear chance constraints
Pr[W (S) > B] ≤ α where S ⊆ V and W (S) is the sum of
the random weights of the elements in S. Here, B is a deterministic constraint boundary and α is a tolerance level. The
objective is thus to ﬁnd a set that maximizes f subject to the
probability that its stochastic weights violate the boundary
is at most α.
Our focus is on monotone submodular functions, which
are set functions characterized by the property that the function value cannot decrease by adding more elements. The
optimization of the considered classes of submodular problems with deterministic constraints has already been investigated by (Nemhauser, Wolsey, and Fisher 1978; Leskovec et
al. 2007). The theoretical contribution of this paper extends
these results to the chance constrained setting.
Since the computation of the chance constraint is usually
not efﬁciently feasible, we assume it is evaluated by using
a surrogate function that provides 
an upper bound on the
constraint violation probability Pr[ s∈S W (s) > B]. This
upper bound ensures that the chance constraint is met if the
surrogate provides a value of at most α. As surrogates, we
use popular deviation inequalities such as Chebyshev’s inequality and Chernoff bounds.
We show that using these surrogate functions, popular greedy algorithms are also applicable in the chanceconstrained setting. In particular, we analyze the case of
uniformly distributed weights with identical dispersion and
show that both inequalities only lead to a loss of a factor of
1 − o(1) compared to the deterministic setting.
We complement our theoretical work with an experimental investigation on the inﬂuence maximization problem in
social networks. This investigation empirically analyzes the
behavior of the greedy approaches for various stochastic settings. In particular, it shows the effectiveness of using Chernoff bounds for large inputs if only a small failure rate in
terms of α can be tolerated.

Submodular optimization plays a key role in many real-world
problems. In many real-world scenarios, it is also necessary
to handle uncertainty, and potentially disruptive events that
violate constraints in stochastic settings need to be avoided.
In this paper, we investigate submodular optimization problems with chance constraints. We provide a ﬁrst analysis on
the approximation behavior of popular greedy algorithms for
submodular problems with chance constraints. Our results
show that these algorithms are highly effective when using
surrogate functions that estimate constraint violations based
on Chernoff bounds. Furthermore, we investigate the behavior of the algorithms on popular social network problems and
show that high quality solutions can still be obtained even if
there are strong restrictions imposed by the chance constraint.

Introduction
Many real-world problems optimization problems involve
uncertain components such as the execution length of a job,
the fraction of ore in a cartload of rocks, the probability of
earthquakes, etc. Safe critical systems or expensive productions must limit the potential violation of constraints imposed by such stochastic components. Constraints that explicitly address the probability of violation are known as
chance constraints. Chance-constrained optimization deals
with optimizing a given problem under the condition that
the probability of a constraint violation does not exceed a
given threshold probability α.
In this work we study optimization under chance constraints for submodular functions. Submodular functions
model problems where the beneﬁt of adding components
diminishes with the addition of elements. They form an
important class of optimization problems, and are extensively studied in the literature (Nemhauser and Wolsey
1978; Nemhauser, Wolsey, and Fisher 1978; Vondrák 2010;
Krause and Golovin 2014; Bian et al. 2017; Leskovec et al.
2007; Feldman, Harshaw, and Karbasi 2017; Harshaw et al.
2019). However, to our knowledge, submodular functions
have not yet been studied in the chance-constrained setting.

Related work

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Submodular optimization has been studied for a wide range
of different constraint types, see, for example, (Krause and
1460

