The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Hiding in Multilayer Networks
Marcin Waniek,1,2 Tomasz P. Michalak,2 Talal Rahwan1
1

Computer Science, New York University Abu Dhabi, 2 Institute of Informatics, University of Warsaw
mjwaniek@gmail.com, tpm@mimuw.edu.pl, tr72@nyu.edu

other hand, there have been a plethora of algorithmic solutions for privacy protection (Lane et al. 2014; Kearns et al.
2016). Perhaps the most well-known such solutions come
from the network anonymization and de-anonymization literature (Zhou, Pei, and Luk 2008; Narayanan and Shmatikov
2009; Kayes and Iamnitchi 2015), which studies the problem faced by a data trustee who publishes anonymized network data to be analyzed for various purposes. In this literature, the responsibility of protecting the privacy of the
network members lies solely on the shoulders of the data
trustee, while the network members are implicitly assumed
to be passive in this regard. In contrast, a recent body of work
studies ways in which the network members can themselves
protect their own privacy by acting strategically to evade various tools from the social network analysis toolkit (Michalak, Rahwan, and Wooldridge 2017). In this context, three
fundamental classes of tools have been considered: (1) centrality measures, (2) community detection algorithms; and
(3) link prediction algorithms. More speciﬁcally, Waniek et
al. (2018; 2017) studied how key individuals in a social network could rewire the network to avoid being highlighted by
centrality measures while maintaining their own inﬂuence
within the network. The authors also studied how a group of
individuals could avoid being identiﬁed by community detection algorithms. Furthermore, Yu et al. (2018), Waniek et
al. (2019), and Zhou et al. (2019) studied how to hide one’s
sensitive relationships from link prediction algorithms.

Abstract
Multilayer networks allow for modeling complex relationships, where individuals are embedded in multiple social networks at the same time. Given the ubiquity of such relationships, these networks have been increasingly gaining attention in the literature. This paper presents the ﬁrst analysis
of the robustness of centrality measures against strategic manipulation in multilayer networks. More speciﬁcally, we consider an “evader” who strategically chooses which connections to form in a multilayer network in order to obtain a low
centrality-based ranking—thereby reducing the chance of being highlighted as a key ﬁgure in the network—while ensuring that she remains connected to a certain group of people.
We prove that determining an optimal way to “hide” is NPcomplete and hard to approximate for most centrality measures considered in our study. Moreover, we empirically evaluate a number of heuristics that the evader can use. Our results suggest that the centrality measures that are functions of
the entire network topology are more robust to such a strategic evader than their counterparts which consider each layer
separately.

Introduction
Owing to several incidents in the past few years, most notably those concerning the American presidential elections
of 2016, the general public has become increasingly concerned with the privacy and security of their online activities (Persily 2017). Experts, however, had been warning about such potential risks long ago. For instance, Mislove et al. (2010) famously showed that, by coupling the
social network of a given Facebook user with publiclyknown attributes of some other users, it is possible to infer
otherwise-private information about that user. Worryingly,
this is true not only for typically innocuous data, but also for
potentially-sensitive conﬁdential information such as political preferences (as demonstrated in the case of Cambridge
Analytica), or even sexual orientation (Kitchin 2016).
Various proposals on how to deal with such privacy challenges have already been put forward. Among those proposals is the General Data Protection Regulation, implemented
in May 2018, which is perhaps the most well-known attempt
to use state-enforced, legal instruments (EU 2016). On the

The aforementioned literature on the strategic behaviour
of network members demonstrates that it is indeed possible
to develop reasonably effective heuristics to escape detection by fundamental network analysis tools. However, the
main limitation of this literature is that it focuses only on
standard, single-layered networks. In contract, people often interact with each other via a complicated pattern of relationships, thereby creating multiple subsystems, or “layers”, of connectivity. This is even more so nowadays when
many of us belong to multiple social media platforms simultaneously. Furthermore, multilayer networks are increasingly being recognized not only in the context of human
interactions, but also in many natural and engineered systems (De Domenico et al. 2013). For instance, to travel from
one point to another in many urban transportation networks,
one can choose between a road subnetwork (car or taxis),
bus or tram subnetwork, subway subnetwork, local train

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1021

