The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Generalized Framework for
Edge-Preserving and Structure-Preserving Image Smoothing
Wei Liu,1,2 Pingping Zhang,3 Yinjie Lei,4∗ Xiaolin Huang,1,5 Jie Yang,1,5∗ Ian Reid2
1

Department of Automation, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 The University of Adelaide
Dalian University of Technology, 4 Sichuan University, 5 Institute of Medical Robotics, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{wei.liu02, ian.reid}@adelaide.edu.au, jssxzhpp@mail.dlut.edu.cn, yinjie@scu.edu.cn, {xiaolinhuang, jieyang}@sjtu.edu.cn
3

Abstract
Image smoothing is a fundamental procedure in applications
of both computer vision and graphics. The required smoothing properties can be different or even contradictive among
different tasks. Nevertheless, the inherent smoothing nature
of one smoothing operator is usually ﬁxed and thus cannot
meet the various requirements of different applications. In
this paper, a non-convex non-smooth optimization framework
is proposed to achieve diverse smoothing natures where even
contradictive smoothing behaviors can be achieved. To this
end, we ﬁrst introduce the truncated Huber penalty function
which has seldom been used in image smoothing. A robust
framework is then proposed. When combined with the strong
ﬂexibility of the truncated Huber penalty function, our framework is capable of a range of applications and can outperform
the state-of-the-art approaches in several tasks. In addition, an
efﬁcient numerical solution is provided and its convergence is
theoretically guaranteed even the optimization framework is
non-convex and non-smooth. The effectiveness and superior
performance of our approach are validated through comprehensive experimental results in a range of applications.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: Our method is capable of (a) image detail enhancement, (b) clip-art compression artifacts removal, (c) guided
depth map upsampling and (d) image texture removal.
These applications are representatives of edge-preserving
and structure-preserving image smoothing and require contradictive smoothing properties.

The second group includes tasks like clip-art compression artifacts removal (Nguyen and Brown 2015; Xu et al.
2011), image abstraction and pencil sketch production (Xu
et al. 2011). In contrast to the ones in the ﬁrst group, these
tasks require to smooth out small details while sharpening
strong edges. This is because edges can be blurred in the
compressed clip-art image and they need to be sharpened
when the image is recovered (see Fig. 1(b) for example).
Sharper edges can produce better visual quality in image abstraction and pencil sketch. At the same time, the amplitudes
of strong edges are not allowed to be reduced in these tasks.
Guided image ﬁltering, such as guided depth map upsampling (Park et al. 2011; Ferstl et al. 2013; Liu et al. 2017b)
and ﬂash/no ﬂash ﬁltering (Kopf et al. 2007; Petschnigg et
al. 2004), is categorized into the third group. The structure
inconsistency between the guidance image and target image,
which can cause blurring edges and texture copy artifacts
in the smoothed image (Ham, Cho, and Ponce 2015; Liu et
al. 2017b), should be properly handled by the specially designed smoothing operator. They also need to sharpen edges
in the smoothed image due to the reason that low-quality
capture of depth and noise in the no ﬂash images can lead to
blurred edge (see Fig. 1(c) for example).
Tasks in the fourth group require to smooth the image in
a scale-aware manner, e.g., image texture removal (Xu et al.
2012; Zhang et al. 2014; Cho et al. 2014). This kind of tasks
require to smooth out small structures even when they contain strong edges, while large structure should be properly

Introduction
The key challenge of many tasks in both computer vision
and graphics can be attributed to image smoothing. At the
same time, the required smoothing properties can vary dramatically for different tasks. In this paper, depending on the
required smoothing properties, we roughly classify a large
number of applications into four groups.
Applications in the ﬁrst group require the smoothing operator to smooth out small details while preserving strong
edges, and the amplitudes of these strong edges can be reduced but the edges should be neither blurred nor sharpened. Representatives in this group are image detail enhancement and HDR tone mapping (Farbman et al. 2008;
Fattal, Agrawala, and Rusinkiewicz 2007; He, Sun, and Tang
2013). Blurring edges can result in halos while sharpening
edges will lead to gradient reversals (Farbman et al. 2008).
∗
Jie Yang and Yinjie Lei are the corresponding authors of this
paper.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11620

