The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Hybrid Compositional Reasoning for
Reactive Synthesis from Finite-Horizon Speciﬁcations∗
Suguman Bansal,1 Yong Li,2,3 Lucas M. Tabajara,1 Moshe Y. Vardi1
1

Department of Computer Science, Rice University
2
State Key Laboratory of Computer Science,
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Science
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{suguman, lucasmt}@rice.edu, liyong@ios.ac.cn, vardi@cs.rice.edu
2006; De Giacomo and Vardi 2013). This formalism has
found application in specifying task plans in robotics (He
et al. 2017; Lahijanian et al. 2015), safety-critical objectives (Zhu et al. 2017a), business processes (Pesic, Bosnacki,
and van der Aalst 2010), and the like.

Abstract
LTLf synthesis is the automated construction of a reactive
system from a high-level description, expressed in LTLf, of
its ﬁnite-horizon behavior. So far, the conversion of LTLf formulas to deterministic ﬁnite-state automata (DFAs) has been
identiﬁed as the primary bottleneck to the scalabity of synthesis. Recent investigations have also shown that the size of
the DFA state space plays a critical role in synthesis as well.
Therefore, effective resolution of the bottleneck for synthesis requires the conversion to be time and memory performant, and prevent state-space explosion. Current conversion
approaches, however, which are based either on explicit-state
representation or symbolic-state representation, fail to address these necessities adequately at scale: Explicit-state approaches generate minimal DFA but are slow due to expensive DFA minimization. Symbolic-state representations can
be succinct, but due to the lack of DFA minimization they
generate such large state spaces that even their symbolic representations cannot compensate for the blow-up.
This work proposes a hybrid representation approach for the
conversion. Our approach utilizes both explicit and symbolic
representations of the state-space, and effectively leverages
their complementary strengths. In doing so, we offer an LTLf
to DFA conversion technique that addresses all three necessities, hence resolving the bottleneck. A comprehensive empirical evaluation on conversion and synthesis benchmarks supports the merits of our hybrid approach.

1

Seminal results have established that LTLf synthesis is
2EXPTIME-complete (De Giacomo and Vardi 2015). Since
then, several undertakings have led to algorithmic solutions
for synthesis (De Giacomo and Vardi 2015; Camacho et
al. 2018). The current state-of-the-art reduces synthesis to
a reachability game played on a deterministic ﬁnite-state automaton, or DFA (Zhu et al. 2017b). The DFA is obtained by
converting the input LTLf speciﬁcation into a DFA that recognizes the same language. This conversion has been identiﬁed as a primary scalability bottleneck in synthesis (Zhu
et al. 2017b). This is not surprising as the DFA is known to
be double-exponential in the size of the speciﬁcation in the
worst case (Kupferman and Vardi 1999). In order to be effective for synthesis the conversion must, in addition to being time and memory performant, also prevent state-space
explosion, as recent investigations have discovered that the
efﬁciency of solving the game on a DFA is strongly affected
by the size of the state space (Tabajara and Vardi 2019). This
work contributes towards the development of LTLf-to-DFA
conversion techniques that are aimed at advancing the scalability of LTLf synthesis.
Prior works on LTLf-to-DFA conversion have led to two
contrasting algorithmic approaches. In the ﬁrst approach
(Zhu et al. 2017b), the state-space of the DFA is represented explicitly, the construction is syntax driven, and the
DFA is aggressively minimized. This approach ﬁrst converts
LTLf to an equivalent ﬁrst-order-logic formula and then constructs a DFA for this formula using the M ONA tool (Henriksen et al. 1995). The M ONA algorithm ﬁrst produces the
binary syntax tree of the speciﬁcation, then traverses the
tree bottom-up while constructing the minimal DFA at each
node. Consequently, it constructs the ﬁnal DFA at the root of
the tree in its canonical minimal form. Aggressive minimization can often prevent state-space explosion, as for many
speciﬁcations arising from real-life situations the minimal
DFAs are rarely more than exponential in the size of the
speciﬁcation, as opposed to double exponential (Tabakov,

Introduction

Reactive synthesis is the automated construction, from a
high-level description of its desired behavior, of a reactive system that continuously interacts with an uncontrollable external environment (Church 1957). This declarative
paradigm holds the promise of simplifying the task of designing provably correct reactive systems.
This work looks into the development of reactive synthesis from speciﬁcations in Linear Temporal Logic over ﬁnite
traces (LTLf), or LTLf synthesis, for short. LTLf is a speciﬁcation language that expresses rich and complex temporal
behaviors over a ﬁnite time horizon (Baier and McIlraith
∗

All authors are corresponding authors
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9766

