The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Information Shaping for Enhanced Goal Recognition of Partially-Informed Agents
Sarah Keren, Haifeng Xu, Koﬁ Kwapong, David Parkes, Barbara Grosz
School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Harvard University
{skeren, hxu}@seas.harvard.edu, kwapongk@college.harvard.edu, {parkes, grosz}@eecs.harvard.edu

giving the system (i.e., recognizer) time to react to the dangerous situation ( e.g., by calling for help, reducing the heat,
etc.). In security applications it may be important to early
detect users aiming at a speciﬁc destination (Boddy et al.
2005), giving the system enough time to send human agents
to further investigate potential threats. Early detection is also
important in human-robot collaborative settings (Levine and
Williams 2014), where a robot aims to recognize what component a human user is trying to assemble, so it can gather
the tools needed for the task in a timely fashion. Common
to all these settings, is that actors have incomplete information about their environment. This affects their behavior and
is key to the ability to interpret it. In addition, these settings
can be controlled and modiﬁed in various ways. Speciﬁcally,
it may be possible to modify an agent’s behavior by manipulating its knowledge and therefore obviate its need to act in
order to acquire new information. Such manipulations may
induce behaviors that can be quickly associated to a speciﬁc
goal. For instance, in an assisted cognition setting an auditory signal can inform users about a hot oven. Early notiﬁcation potentially causes users aiming at a different goal (e.g.,
the cupboard) to move away from the oven, supporting early
recognition of dangerous situations.
This work extends the goal recognition design (GRD)
framework, which deals with redesigning agent settings to
facilitate early goal detection (Keren, Gal, and Karpas 2014;
Wayllace et al. 2016). Previous GRD work has assumed the
actor has perfect knowledge of the environment. In this paper, we extend the framework to support actors with incomplete knowledge. We focus on GRD in deterministic environments and use contingent planning (Bonet and Geffner
2011; Brafman and Shani 2012; Muise, Belle, and McIlraith
2014; Albore, Palacios, and Geffner 2009) to represent the
actor. The design objective is to minimize worst case distinctiveness (WCD) (Keren, Gal, and Karpas 2014), which
represents the maximal progress an actor can make in the
system before the recognizer can infer its goal. Note that in
some instances the goal may remain unrecognized, and even
go unattained, in which case we consider the number of actions (or accumulated action cost) until the end of execution.
To minimize WCD we introduce information shaping as a
way to induce desired behaviors. We require that the information conveyed to the actor is not false. Speciﬁcally, we use
sensor extensions to selectively facilitate the actor’s access

Abstract
We extend goal recognition design to account for partially informed agents. In particular, we consider a two-agent setting
in which one agent, the actor, seeks to achieve a goal but has
only incomplete information about the environment. The second agent, the recognizer, has perfect information and aims
to recognize the actor’s goal from its behavior as quickly as
possible. As a one-time ofﬂine intervention and with the objective of facilitating the recognition task, the recognizer can
selectively reveal information to the actor. The problem of
selecting which information to reveal, which we call information shaping, is challenging not only because the space
of information shaping options may be large, but also because more information revelation need not make it easier to
recognize an agent’s goal. We formally deﬁne this problem,
and suggest a pruning approach for efﬁciently searching the
search space. We demonstrate the effectiveness and efﬁciency
of the suggested method on standard benchmarks.

Introduction
Goal recognition is the task of detecting the goals of agents
by observing their behavior (Cohen, Perrault, and Allen
1981; Kautz and Allen 1986; Ramirez and Geffner 2010;
Carberry 2001; Sukthankar et al. 2014). We consider a twoagent goal recognition setting, where the ﬁrst agent, the actor, has partial information about a deterministic environment and seeks to achieve a goal. The second agent, the recognizer, has perfect information, and tries to infer the actor’s
goal as early as possible, by analyzing the actor’s behavior.
As a one time ofﬂine intervention, and with the objective
of facilitating the recognition task, the recognizer can apply a limited number of information shaping modiﬁcations,
implemented as changes to the actor’s sensor model. Such
modiﬁcations can potentially help to differentiate the actor’s
behavior for different goals, making it easier to infer its goal.
The ability to quickly understand what an agent is trying
to achieve, without expecting it to explicitly communicate
its objectives, is important in many applications. For example, in an assistive cognition setting (Kautz et al. 2003), it
may be critical to know as early as possible when a visually impaired user (i.e., the actor) is approaching a hot oven,
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9908

