The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Capturing the Style of Fake News
Piotr Przybyła
Institute of Computer Science, Polish Academy of Sciences
Warsaw, Poland
piotr.przybyla@ipipan.waw.pl

by expert-assigned labels indicating their credibility, using
one of general-purpose text classiﬁcation algorithms. As we
show in the next section, this has indeed been done, sometimes leading to impressive classiﬁcation accuracy. The disadvantage of such solutions is that we have no direct control
over which features of the document (e.g. word occurrences
in bag of words representation) the credibility assessment
is based on. Since some features that provide good performance on the training or test data might not be desirable
in real-life application scenario, it does not sufﬁce to know
that a classiﬁer makes the right decision in most cases – we
would like it to do so for the right reasons. This includes
knowing what features are important for a particular decision (interpretability) and making sure they are not speciﬁc
to the training data (generalisability).
For example, an ML model might learn to recognise the
source a given document comes from (using its name appearing in text) and assign credibility label based on other
documents from the same source, i.e. other articles from the
the website, seen in the training data. While taking into account the reputation of a source is a heuristic heavily used by
humans when assessing information online (Metzger, Flanagin, and Medders 2010) and commonly advised for fake
news spotting (Hunt 2016), it may be misleading in an ML
context. The fake news websites tend to be short-lived (Allcott and Gentzkow 2017), and such a model would be helpless when new sources replace them. The document topic
could be another easily accessible, yet misleading feature.
While fake news outlets indeed concentrate around a few
current themes that are guaranteed to engage the target audience (Bakir and McStay 2017), these topics will be replaced
over time, making a classiﬁer obsolete.
In this study we focus on the style of writing, i.e. the
form of text rather than its meaning (Ray 2015). Since fake
news sources usually attempt to attract attention for a shortterm ﬁnancial or political goal (Allcott and Gentzkow 2017)
rather than to build a long-term relationship with the reader,
they favour informal, sensational, affective language (Bakir
and McStay 2017). This indicator of low credibility could be
used to build a reliable classiﬁer.
Several directions could be pursued to avoid the model
being biased by the sources or topics available in the training

Abstract
In this study we aim to explore automatic methods that can
detect online documents of low credibility, especially fake
news, based on the style they are written in. We show that
general-purpose text classiﬁers, despite seemingly good performance when evaluated simplistically, in fact overﬁt to
sources of documents in training data. In order to achieve a
truly style-based prediction, we gather a corpus of 103,219
documents from 223 online sources labelled by media experts, devise realistic evaluation scenarios and design two
new classiﬁers: a neural network and a model based on stylometric features. The evaluation shows that the proposed classiﬁers maintain high accuracy in case of documents on previously unseen topics (e.g. new events) and from previously
unseen sources (e.g. emerging news websites). An analysis
of the stylometric model indicates it indeed focuses on sensational and affective vocabulary, known to be typical for fake
news.

Introduction
The problem of fake news and the wider issue of credibility in online media continue to attract considerable attention
not only of their consumers and creators, but also of policy makers and the digital industry. One of the responses of
social media sites is to signal untrustworthiness of certain
content, e.g. as disputed in Facebook (Clayton et al. 2019).
Unfortunately, the manual fact-checking involved is too laborious to be applied to every post published on these platforms and elsewhere. That is why we consider text analysis
techniques that could automatically assess the credibility of
documents published online, which could also be useful for
other stakeholders intending to reduce the impact of misinformation, including journalists (Chen, Conroy, and Rubin 2015) and web users (Berghel 2017). The most straightforward approach to the problem is automatic veriﬁcation
of each claim included in a document. This task, however,
has many challenges, namely insufﬁcient level of text understanding methods and limited coverage and currency of
knowledge bases.
It may seem easier to train a machine learning (ML)
model on a collection of online documents, accompanied
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
490

