The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference (IAAI-20)

Implicit Skills Extraction Using Document
Embedding and Its Use in Job Recommendation
Akshay Gugnani,1 Hemant Misra2∗
1

IBM Research - AI, 2 Applied Research, Swiggy, India
aksgug22@in.ibm.com, hemant.misra@swiggy.in
modest progress. The reasons for this could be several, and
some of them are: a) CVs and JDs are typically not written the way well-formatted articles are written in newspapers etc, b) CVs may contain tables and other formatting
features to make them look attractive, but this makes it difﬁcult to obtain relevant information from them, c) matching
skill keywords between CVs and JDs may not yield good
results because of the complex link between the skills, d)
the JDs may be too descriptive or too simplistic, and may
not uncover the essence of the offered positions and roles.
Considering all of these, and also other factors, automated
job search engines need research investment to make them
robust and improve their performance. This paper proposes
methods to overcome some of the above-mentioned challenges.
The fundamental premise this paper builds upon is that
skills are one of the most important aspects while matching
CVs to JDs, and play a major role in recommending JDs
which are the best match for a CV. The following are the
important contributions of this paper:

Abstract
This paper presents a job recommender system to match
resumes to job descriptions (JD), both of which are nonstandard and unstructured/semi-structured in form. First, the
paper proposes a combination of natural language processing (NLP) techniques for the task of skill extraction. The performance of the combined techniques on an industrial scale
dataset yielded a precision and recall of 0.78 and 0.88 respectively. The paper then introduces the concept of extracting implicit skills – the skills which are not explicitly mentioned in
a JD but may be implicit in the context of geography, industry
or role. To mine and infer implicit skills for a JD, we ﬁnd the
other JDs similar to this JD. This similarity match is done in
the semantic space. A Doc2Vec model is trained on 1.1 Million JDs covering several domains crawled from the web, and
all the JDs are projected onto this semantic space. The skills
absent in the JD but present in similar JDs are obtained, and
the obtained skills are weighted using several techniques to
obtain the set of ﬁnal implicit skills. Finally, several similarity measures are explored to match the skills extracted from a
candidate’s resume to explicit and implicit skills of JDs. Empirical results for matching resumes and JDs demonstrate that
the proposed approach gives a mean reciprocal rank of 0.88,
an improvement of 29.4% when compared to the performance
of a baseline method that uses only explicit skills.

1

• A new methodology which combines several natural language processing (NLP) techniques for robust skill extraction from natural occurring texts in CVs and JDs is
proposed

Introduction

• An approach for inferring implicit skills in a JD (skills
not explicitly mentioned in the JD) is introduced, and a
method to extract these implicit skills from other similar
JDs is presented

Formal job search and application typically involves matching one’s proﬁle or curriculum vitae (CV) with the available
job descriptions (JD), and then applying for those job opportunities whose JDs are the closest match to one’s CV, and
also considering his/her needs, constraints, and aspirations.
A few of the things that a person may consider while doing this matching are: a) required skills mentioned in the
JDs and skills possessed by self, b) current salary versus
salary offered in the new job, c) future prospects after joining the new job, etc. Some of the entities are easy to extract
from a JD, for example, the salary offered in a job. However,
some other entities, for example, skill extraction (are Python
and Java an animal and an island in Indonesia, respectively,
or two object-oriented programming languages) and future
prospects of a company (it is subjective as well as dependent upon market conditions), need serious consideration.
Though tremendous progress has been made in general
purpose search engines, job search engines have made only

• A bi-directional matching algorithm to match skills between CVs and JDs is suggested to obtain the most relevant job recommendation for each CV
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section 2,
related work from the areas of skill extraction and job recommendation is brieﬂy described. Data sources used in this
paper and proposed approach are explained in Sections 3
and 4, respectively. The performance of the proposed job
recommendation system is presented in Section 5 followed
by conclusions.

2

Related Work

We have divided the related work into two broad sections:

∗

This author contributed during his tenure in IBM
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1. Skills Extraction or Taxonomy Generation Systems
2. Job Recommendation Systems
13286

