The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Communication, Distortion, and Randomness in Metric Voting
David Kempe
University of Southern California

cial choice rule) chooses a winner based on these submitted
rankings.
Contrasting and complementing the traditional “axiomatic” approach of comparing social choice rules, an approach that has recently gained in popularity is to consider
social choice as an optimization problem with the goal of selecting the “best” candidate for the population (Boutilier et
al. 2015; Caragiannis and Procaccia 2011; Procaccia 2010;
Procaccia and Rosenschein 2006). Each voter has a utility (or cost) for each candidate, and the mechanism’s goal
is to optimize the aggregate utility or cost of all voters.
However, as articulated in (Boutilier and Rosenschein 2016;
Anshelevich, Bhardwaj, and Postl 2015), the social choice
rule has to optimize with crucial information missing: a
voter can only communicate her1 ranking according to the
utility/cost. In other words, the mechanism receives only
ordinal information — which candidate is preferred over
which other candidate — even though it needs to optimize a
cardinal objective function. From an optimization perspective, this means that the mechanism should simultaneously
optimize over all utility/cost functions that are consistent
with the reported rankings, in that they would give rise to the
observed rankings. The worst-case ratio (over all cost/utility
functions) between the mechanism’s cost/utility and that of
the optimum candidate for the speciﬁc function is called the
mechanism’s distortion. (Formal deﬁnitions of all concepts
and terms are given in Section 2.)
In applying this general framework, an important question
is what class of cost/utility functions to consider. A natural approach was suggested in (Anshelevich, Bhardwaj, and
Postl 2015) (see also the expanded/improved journal version
(Anshelevich et al. 2018) and general overview (Anshelevich 2016)): all candidates and voters are jointly embedded
in a metric space, and the cost of voter v for candidate x
is their metric distance d(v, x). The assumption that voters rank candidates by non-decreasing distance in a latent
space2 dates back to earlier work on so-called single-peaked

Abstract
In distortion-based analysis of social choice rules over metric
spaces, voters and candidates are jointly embedded in a metric space. Voters rank candidates by non-decreasing distance.
The mechanism, receiving only this ordinal (comparison) information, must select a candidate approximately minimizing
the sum of distances from all voters to the chosen candidate.
It is known that while the Copeland rule and related rules
guarantee distortion at most 5, the distortion of many other
standard voting rules, such as Plurality, Veto, or k-approval,
grows unboundedly in the number n of candidates.
An advantage of Plurality, Veto, or k-approval with small k
is that they require less communication from the voters; all
deterministic social choice rules known to achieve constant
distortion require voters to transmit their complete rankings
of all candidates. This motivates our study of the tradeoff between the distortion and the amount of communication in deterministic social choice rules.
We show that any one-round deterministic voting mechanism in which each voter communicates only the candidates
she ranks in a given set of k positions must have distortion at least 2n−k
; we give a mechanism achieving an upk
per bound of O(n/k), which matches the lower bound up to
a constant. For more general communication-bounded voting
mechanisms, in which each voter communicates b bits of information about her ranking, we show a slightly weaker lower
bound of Ω(n/b) on the distortion.
For randomized mechanisms, Random Dictatorship achieves
expected distortion strictly smaller than 3, almost matching a
lower bound of 3 − n2 for any randomized mechanism that
only receives each voter’s top choice. We close this gap, by
giving a simple randomized social choice rule which only
uses each voter’s ﬁrst choice, and achieves expected distortion 3 − n2 .

1

Introduction

In voting or social choice, there is a set of n alternatives
(such as political candidates or courses of action) from
which a group (such as a country or an organization) wants
to select a winner. Each voter submits a ranking (or preference order) of the candidates, and the mechanism (or so-

1
For consistency and clarity, we will always refer to voters using female and candidates using male pronouns.
2
It is an interesting “philosophical” question whether these distances are “real,” e.g., in the sense that voters could articulate or
quantify them. Whether this is the case will clearly depend on

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2087

