The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Absum: Simple Regularization Method for Reducing
Structural Sensitivity of Convolutional Neural Networks
Sekitoshi Kanai,1,2 Yasutoshi Ida,1,3 Yasuhiro Fujiwara,4 Masanori Yamada,5 Shuichi Adachi2
1
NTT Software Innovation Center, 2 Keio University, 3 Kyoto University
NTT Communication Science Laboratories, 5 NTT Secure Platform Laboratories
sekitoshi.kanai.fu@hco.ntt.co.jp, yasutoshi.ida@ieee.org,
{yasuhiro.fujiwara.kh, masanori.yamada.cm}@hco.ntt.co.jp, adachi@appi.keio.ac.jp
4

Such attacks are called adversarial attacks and the perturbed
inputs are called adversarial examples (Szegedy et al. 2013).
We can roughly divide adversarial attacks into two types;
white-box attacks, which use the information of target models (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014; Madry et al.
2018; Moosavi-Dezfooli, Fawzi, and Frossard 2016), and
black-box attacks, which do not require the information of
target models (Papernot, McDaniel, and Goodfellow 2016;
Chen et al. 2017; Papernot et al. 2017). Black-box attacks,
rather than white-box attacks, can threaten online deeplearning services since it is difﬁcult to access the target
models in online deep-learning applications (Papernot et al.
2017; Yuan et al. 2019).
Most black-box attacks are transferred attacks, which are
generated as white-box attacks for substitute models instead
of the target model (Papernot, McDaniel, and Goodfellow
2016). This implies that deep models have common sensitivity against speciﬁc perturbations. In fact, Tsuzuku and Sato
(2019) have recently shown that CNNs have the structural
sensitivity from the perspective that convolution can be regarded as the product of the circulant matrix and proposed
single Fourier attack (SFA).1 Fourier basis functions create
singular vectors of circulant matrices, and SFA uses these
singular vectors since the dominant singular vector can be
the worst noise for a matrix-vector product. Although SFA is
a very simple attack composed of a single-frequency component, it is universal adversarial perturbations for CNNs, i.e.,
it can decrease the classiﬁcation accuracy of various CNNbased models without using the information about the model
parameters and without depending on input images. To the
best of our knowledge, a defense method against SFA has
not been proposed. Therefore, such a method is necessary.
To defend CNNs against SFA, we ﬁrst reveal that the
spectral norm constraint (Sedghi, Gupta, and Long 2019)
(hereinafter, we call it SNC) can reduce the structural sensitivity. While SNC was proposed to improve generalization
performance, it can improve robustness in the Fourier domain since singular values of convolution layers correspond
to the magnitude of the frequency response. However, SNC
is not so practical since it requires high computational cost
to compute the spectral norm (the largest singular value).

Abstract
We propose Absum, which is a regularization method for improving adversarial robustness of convolutional neural networks (CNNs). Although CNNs can accurately recognize images, recent studies have shown that the convolution operations in CNNs commonly have structural sensitivity to speciﬁc noise composed of Fourier basis functions. By exploiting
this sensitivity, they proposed a simple black-box adversarial
attack: Single Fourier attack. To reduce structural sensitivity, we can use regularization of convolution ﬁlter weights
since the sensitivity of linear transform can be assessed by
the norm of the weights. However, standard regularization
methods can prevent minimization of the loss function because they impose a tight constraint for obtaining high robustness. To solve this problem, Absum imposes a loose constraint; it penalizes the absolute values of the summation of
the parameters in the convolution layers. Absum can improve
robustness against single Fourier attack while being as simple
and efﬁcient as standard regularization methods (e.g., weight
decay and L1 regularization). Our experiments demonstrate
that Absum improves robustness against single Fourier attack
more than standard regularization methods. Furthermore, we
reveal that robust CNNs with Absum are more robust against
transferred attacks due to decreasing the common sensitivity
and against high-frequency noise than standard regularization
methods. We also reveal that Absum can improve robustness
against gradient-based attacks (projected gradient descent)
when used with adversarial training.

Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved great success in many
applications, e.g., image recognition (He et al. 2016) and
machine translation (Vaswani et al. 2017). Speciﬁcally,
CNNs and rectiﬁed linear units (ReLUs) have resulted in
breakthroughs in image recognition (LeCun et al. 1989;
Nair and Hinton 2010) and are de facto standards for image recognition and other applications (He et al. 2016;
Radford, Metz, and Chintala 2016). Though CNNs can classify image data as accurately as humans, they are sensitive
to small perturbations of inputs, i.e., injecting imperceptible
perturbations can make deep models misclassify image data.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

4394

Yin et al. (2019) concurrently proposed the same attack.

