The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

GMAN: A Graph Multi-Attention Network for Trafﬁc Prediction
Chuanpan Zheng,1,2,3 Xiaoliang Fan,1,2,3∗ Cheng Wang,1,2,3 Jianzhong Qi4
1

Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart Cities, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
2
Digital Fujian Institute of Urban Trafﬁc Big Data Research, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
3
School of Informatics, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
4
School of Computing and Information Systems, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia
zhengchuanpan@stu.xmu.edu.cn, {fanxiaoliang, cwang}@xmu.edu.cn, jianzhong.qi@unimelb.edu.au

Abstract

Spatial correlation

Traffic sensor

Temporal correlation
high

3

3
1

1
2

(a)

2
‫ݐ‬െͳ

3
1

2
‫ݐ‬

3

... 1

... ‫ ݐ‬൅ ݈
Time

2

3
1

2
‫ݐ‬൅݈൅ͳ

Correlation

Long-term trafﬁc prediction is highly challenging due to the
complexity of trafﬁc systems and the constantly changing nature of many impacting factors. In this paper, we focus on the
spatio-temporal factors, and propose a graph multi-attention
network (GMAN) to predict trafﬁc conditions for time steps
ahead at different locations on a road network graph. GMAN
adapts an encoder-decoder architecture, where both the encoder and the decoder consist of multiple spatio-temporal
attention blocks to model the impact of the spatio-temporal
factors on trafﬁc conditions. The encoder encodes the input
trafﬁc features and the decoder predicts the output sequence.
Between the encoder and the decoder, a transform attention
layer is applied to convert the encoded trafﬁc features to generate the sequence representations of future time steps as
the input of the decoder. The transform attention mechanism
models the direct relationships between historical and future
time steps that helps to alleviate the error propagation problem among prediction time steps. Experimental results on two
real-world trafﬁc prediction tasks (i.e., trafﬁc volume prediction and trafﬁc speed prediction) demonstrate the superiority of GMAN. In particular, in the 1 hour ahead prediction,
GMAN outperforms state-of-the-art methods by up to 4% improvement in MAE measure. The source code is available at
https://github.com/zhengchuanpan/GMAN.

low

(b)

Figure 1: Complex spatio-temporal correlations. (a) Sensors
in a road network. (b) Dynamic spatial correlations: sensors
1 and 2 are not always highly correlated, although they are
close in the road network; non-linear temporal correlations:
the trafﬁc condition of sensor 3 at time step t + l + 1 may
be more correlated to that of distant time steps (e.g., t − 1)
rather than recent time steps (e.g., t + l).
widely applied to model such temporal correlations (Ma et
al. 2015; Song, Kanasugi, and Shibasaki 2016).
Recent studies formulate the trafﬁc prediction as a graph
modeling problem, since the trafﬁc conditions are restricted
on road network graphs (Li et al. 2018b; Yu, Yin, and
Zhu 2018; Wu et al. 2019b). Using graph convolutional
networks (GCN) (Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst
2016), these studies achieve promising results for short-term
(5∼15 minutes ahead) trafﬁc prediction. However, the longterm (up to a few hours ahead (Hou and Li 2016)) trafﬁc
prediction still lacks a satisfactory progress in the literature,
mainly due to the following challenges.
1) Complex spatio-temporal correlations.

Introduction
Trafﬁc prediction aims to predict the future trafﬁc conditions
(e.g., trafﬁc volume or speed) in road networks based on
historical observations (e.g., recorded via sensors). It plays
a signiﬁcant role in many real-world applications. For example, the accurate trafﬁc prediction can help transportation
agencies better control the trafﬁc to reduce trafﬁc congestion (Lv et al. 2018; Zheng et al. 2019).
The trafﬁc conditions at nearby locations are expected to
impact each other. To capture such spatial correlations, Convolutional neural networks (CNN) are widely used (Zhang,
Zheng, and Qi 2017; Yao et al. 2018; 2019). Meanwhile, The
trafﬁc condition at a location is also correlated with its historical observations. Recurrent neural networks (RNN) are

• Dynamic spatial correlations. As shown in Figure 1, the
correlations of trafﬁc conditions among sensors in a road
network change signiﬁcantly over time (e.g., before and
during peak hours). How to dynamically select relevant
sensors’ data to predict a target sensor’s trafﬁc conditions
in long-term horizon is a challenging issue.
• Non-linear temporal correlations. Also in Figure 1, the
trafﬁc condition at a sensor may ﬂuctuate tremendously
and suddenly (e.g., because of an accident), affecting the
correlations between different time steps. How to adaptively model the non-linear temporal correlations when

∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1234

