The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

M IDAS: Microcluster-Based Detector of Anomalies in Edge Streams
Siddharth Bhatia,1 Bryan Hooi,1 Minji Yoon,2 Kijung Shin,3 Christos Faloutsos2
1

National University of Singapore, 2 Carnegie Mellon University, 3 KAIST
{siddharth, bhooi}@comp.nus.edu.sg, {minjiy, christos}@cs.cmu.edu, kijungs@kaist.ac.kr

Moreover, fraudulent or anomalous events in many applications occur in microclusters or suddenly arriving groups
of suspiciously similar edges e.g. denial of service attacks in
network trafﬁc data and lockstep behavior. However, existing methods which process edge streams in an online manner, including (Eswaran and Faloutsos 2018; Ranshous et al.
2016), aim to detect individually surprising edges, not microclusters, and can thus miss large amounts of suspicious
activity.
In this work, we propose M IDAS, which detects microcluster anomalies, or suddenly arriving groups of suspiciously similar edges, in edge streams, using constant time
and memory. In addition, by using a principled hypothesis
testing framework, M IDAS provides theoretical bounds on
the false positive probability, which these methods do not
provide.
Our main contributions are as follows:

Abstract
Given a stream of graph edges from a dynamic graph, how
can we assign anomaly scores to edges in an online manner,
for the purpose of detecting unusual behavior, using constant
time and memory? Existing approaches aim to detect individually surprising edges. In this work, we propose M IDAS,
which focuses on detecting microcluster anomalies, or suddenly arriving groups of suspiciously similar edges, such as
lockstep behavior, including denial of service attacks in network trafﬁc data. M IDAS has the following properties: (a)
it detects microcluster anomalies while providing theoretical
guarantees about its false positive probability; (b) it is online,
thus processing each edge in constant time and constant memory, and also processes the data 108 − 505 times faster than
state-of-the-art approaches; (c) it provides 46%-52% higher
accuracy (in terms of AUC) than state-of-the-art approaches.

Introduction

1. Streaming Microcluster Detection: We propose a novel
streaming approach for detecting microcluster anomalies,
requiring constant time and memory.

Anomaly detection in graphs is a critical problem for ﬁnding suspicious behavior in innumerable systems, such as intrusion detection, fake ratings, and ﬁnancial fraud. This has
been a well-researched problem with majority of the proposed approaches (Akoglu, McGlohon, and Faloutsos 2010;
Chakrabarti 2004; Hooi et al. 2017; Jiang et al. 2016;
Kleinberg 1999; Shin, Eliassi-Rad, and Faloutsos 2018) focusing on static graphs. However, many real-world graphs
are dynamic in nature, and methods based on static connections may miss temporal characteristics of the graphs and
anomalies.
Among the methods focusing on dynamic graphs, most of
them have edges aggregated into graph snapshots (Eswaran
et al. 2018; Sun, Tao, and Faloutsos 2006; Sun et al. 2007;
Koutra, Vogelstein, and Faloutsos 2013; Sricharan and Das
2014; Gupta et al. 2012). However, to minimize the effect of
malicious activities and start recovery as soon as possible,
we need to detect anomalies in real-time or near real-time
i.e. to identify whether an incoming edge is anomalous or
not, as soon as we receive it. In addition, since the number
of vertices can increase as we process the stream of edges,
we need an algorithm which uses constant memory in graph
size.

2. Theoretical Guarantees: In Theorem 1, we show guarantees on the false positive probability of M IDAS.
3. Effectiveness: Our experimental results show that M IDAS
outperforms baseline approaches by 46%-52% accuracy
(in terms of AUC), and processes the data 108−505 times
faster than baseline approaches.
Reproducibility: Our code and datasets are publicly available at https://github.com/bhatiasiddharth/MIDAS.

Related Work
In this section, we review previous approaches to detect
anomalous signs on static and dynamic graphs. See (Akoglu,
Tong, and Koutra 2015) for an extensive survey on graphbased anomaly detection.
Anomaly detection in static graphs can be classiﬁed by
which anomalous entities (nodes, edges, subgraph, etc.) are
spotted.
• Anomalous node detection: (Akoglu, McGlohon, and
Faloutsos 2010) extracts egonet-based features and ﬁnds
empirical patterns with respect to the features. Then, it
identiﬁes nodes whose egonets deviate from the patterns,

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3242

