The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Bi-Objective Continual Learning: Learning ‘New’ While Consolidating ‘Known’
Xiaoyu Tao,1 Xiaopeng Hong,1,3∗ Xinyuan Chang,2 Yihong Gong2
1

Faculty of Electronic and Information Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
3
Research Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Peng Cheng Laboratory
{txy666793, cxy19960919}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, {hongxiaopeng, ygong}@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Table 1: A comparison of the CL problem settings

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel single-task continual
learning framework named Bi-Objective Continual Learning
(BOCL). BOCL aims at both consolidating historical knowledge and learning from new data. On one hand, we propose
to preserve the old knowledge using a small set of pillars,
and develop the pillar consolidation (PLC) loss to preserve
the old knowledge and to alleviate the catastrophic forgetting problem. On the other hand, we develop the contrastive
pillar (CPL) loss term to improve the classiﬁcation performance, and examine several data sampling strategies for efﬁcient onsite learning from ‘new’ with a reasonable amount of
computational resources. Comprehensive experiments on CIFAR10/100, CORe50 and a subset of ImageNet validate the
BOCL framework. We also reveal the performance accuracy
of different sampling strategies when used to ﬁnetune a given
CNN model. The code will be released.

Setting
MT
ST-CIL
ST-NIL

task-free
no
yes
yes

classiﬁers
task-speciﬁc
uniﬁed
unique

NC
perhaps
yes
no

NI
perhaps
no
yes

layer for prediction during the test phase. Such setting requires task identity for selecting the task-speciﬁc classiﬁer,
which is hard to be satisﬁed in practical where task information is typically unknown. Another series of work (Rebufﬁ et al. 2017; Castro et al. 2018; Wu et al. 2019) carries
out research under a single-task, class-incremental-learning
(ST-CIL) setting, where the model meets a sequence of new
class training samples and is required to incrementally learn
a uniﬁed classiﬁcation layer for all encountered classes. This
CIL setting is based on the assumption that new training data
comes from new classes.
In practical use, the deployed models are often exposed to
new instances of existing classes with new patterns. It is crucial for the model to learn from them to improve the recognition performance continuously. This scenario is common
in real-world applications, but is seldom explored by current
CL research. In this paper, we organize our study based on
this scenario. We adopt a single-task, new-instance learning (ST-NIL) setting that aims to improve the recognition
performance on existing classes by continuously learning
on new instances. ST-NIL is originally proposed in (Maltoni and Lomonaco 2018) with a naı̈ve baseline that simply
ﬁnetunes the model on new instances. Table 1 compares the
differences of the three settings mentioned above.
To accomplish CL, a straightforward approach is to retrain the model on both old and new data. It is inefﬁcient or
even prohibitive in practical, especially for embedded systems where resources are too limited to perform retraining.
Alternatively, we can ﬁnetune the model on new data. However, this is prone to catastrophic forgetting (French 1999)
that the performance on old data deteriorates drastically.
Hence current CL works mainly focus on mitigating forgetting. Some works attempt to preserve old tasks’ knowledge
by imposing regularization to the network weights (Kirk-

Introduction
In recent years, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
have achieved superior performances in a broad range of
computer vision tasks (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton
2012; He et al. 2015; Wang et al. 2010; Ren et al. 2015;
Redmon et al. 2015; Cheng et al. 2016; Shun et al. 2016;
Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015; Chen et al. 2017;
Liu et al. 2017; Deng et al. 2018; Tusng-Yu, Aruni, and
Subhransu 2015; Wei et al. 2018a; 2018b). Nonetheless,
when a CNN model is put into a continuous use, it will inevitably encounter new data it has never seen before, and
may produce erroneous recognition results. For a model to
stand the test of time, it is crucial to learn from new data and
evolve to adapt to the changes continuously. This ability is
referred to as continual learning (CL) (Parisi et al. 2019) in
the literature.
Recent CL works (Kirkpatrick et al. 2017; Zenke, Poole,
and Ganguli 2017; Li and Hoiem 2018; Lee et al. 2017;
Lopez-Paz and others 2017; Chaudhry et al. 2018) usually conduct their research under a multi-task (MT) setting,
where the model is required to learn a sequence of independent tasks. Each task is assigned with a speciﬁc classiﬁcation
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5989

