The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning MAX-SAT from Contextual Examples for Combinatorial Optimisation
Mohit Kumar,1 Samuel Kolb,1 Stefano Teso,2∗ Luc De Raedt1
1
KU Leuven, 2 University of Trento, Italy
{mohit.kumar, samuel.kolb, luc.deraedt}@cs.kuleuven.be, stefano.teso@unitn.it

to both partial assignments x and to more general temporary
constraints that restrict the outcome of optimisation.
Current learning approaches suffer from two limitations.
First, to the best of our knowledge, they do not learn
from contextual examples. By doing so, they ignore the
fact that the optima can be affected drastically by the context. For instance, maxx:xy|=φ f (xy) can be very different from maxy:xy|=φ f (xy). Furthermore, this is also a
less realistic setting in practice, as examples of good and
bad solutions will always be relative to a context. The
reader may notice a resemblance with structured output
prediction (e.g. (Tsochantaridis et al. 2005)), where one
learns a function f that computes a structured output y =
argmaxy f (x, y) for a given input x. The difference is that
in structured prediction the input and output variables are
ﬁxed, while in combinatorial optimisation they are not.
Second, existing approaches do not jointly learn the hard
constraints and the preference function: they either learn one
or the other, or else learn them sequentially or independently.
But this may break down in applications like personnel rostering. Here, past schedules are often stored in a dataset, but
the reasons why a schedule was found to be unacceptable
is usually not tracked. In cases like this, a negative example
may be either infeasible (because of the hard constraints) or
sub-optimal (because of the preference function). This induces a credit-assignment problem that can only be solved
by learning the constraints and preference function jointly.
See the related work for a more in-depth discussion.
The key contribution of this paper is that we develop a
more realistic setting for learning combinatorial optimisation models from contextual examples that does not suffer from these limitations. Furthermore, we provide results
within this setting for one of the simplest but most fundamental models for combinatorial optimisation, maximum
satisﬁability (MAX-SAT). Our theoretical analysis shows
that MAX-SAT models can be probably approximately correct (PAC) and agnostically learned from contextual data using empirical risk minimization (ERM). Motivated by this,
we introduce HASSLE (HArd and Soft conStraint LEarning)
an implementation of ERM that exploits syntax-guided synthesis techniques, whereby learning is encoded as an optimization problem and solved using efﬁcient solvers.

Abstract
Combinatorial optimization problems are ubiquitous in artiﬁcial intelligence. Designing the underlying models, however,
requires substantial expertise, which is a limiting factor in
practice. The models typically consist of hard and soft constraints, or combine hard constraints with a preference function. We introduce a novel setting for learning combinatorial optimisation problems from contextual examples. These
positive and negative examples show – in a particular context – whether the solutions are good enough or not. We develop our framework using the MAX-SAT formalism. We
provide learnability results within the realizable and agnostic settings, as well as HASSLE, an implementation based on
syntax-guided synthesis and showcase its promise on recovering synthetic and benchmark instances from examples.

Introduction
Combinatorial optimisation is an effective and popular class
of techniques for solving real-life problems like scheduling (Demirović, Musliu, and Winter 2019), routing (Mills
and Tsang 2000), and planning (Robinson et al. 2010). However, encoding the underlying models often proves to be
time-consuming and complicated, as it requires substantial domain and modeling expertise. Therefore, the question
arises as to whether such models can be learned from data.
This question is studied in constraint learning (Bessiere et
al. 2016; De Raedt, Passerini, and Teso 2018), where several algorithms have been developed that automatically acquire theories or mathematical models from examples of
past working (positive) and non-working (negative) solutions or analogous forms of supervision.
Combinatorial optimisation models have two components: 1) a set of hard constraints φ deﬁning the feasible region, and 2) a preference function f that measures the quality of candidate solutions, sometimes deﬁned as a set of soft
constraints. The task of the solver is then to complete a (potentially empty) partial assignment x into a complete assignment xy that is both feasible and optimal, i.e., xy |= φ and
y ∈ argmaxxy|=φ f (xy). We use the term context to refer
∗

This work was carried out as ST was working at KU Leuven.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4493

