The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference (IAAI-20)

Probabilistic Super
Resolution for Mineral Spectroscopy
Alberto Candela,1 David R. Thompson,2 David Wettergreen,1
Kerry Cawse-Nicholson,2 Sven Geier,2 Michael L. Eastwood,2 Robert O. Green2
1

The Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, CA 91109, USA
{albertoc, dsw}@cmu.edu, {David.R.Thompson, Kerry-Anne.Cawse-Nicholson,
Sven.Geier, Michael.L.Eastwood, Robert.O.Green}@jpl.nasa.gov
2

Abstract
AVIRIS
ASTER

0.5

reflectance (offset for clarity)

Earth and planetary sciences often rely upon the detailed examination of spectroscopic data for rock and mineral identiﬁcation. This typically requires the collection of high resolution spectroscopic measurements. However, they tend to
be scarce, as compared to low resolution remote spectra.
This work addresses the problem of inferring high-resolution
mineral spectroscopic measurements from low resolution observations using probability models. We present the Deep
Gaussian Conditional Model, a neural network that performs
probabilistic super resolution via maximum likelihood estimation. It also provides insight into learned correlations between measurements and spectroscopic features, allowing for
the tractability and interpretability that scientists often require
for mineral identiﬁcation. Experiments using remote spectroscopic data demonstrate that our method compares favorably
to other analogous probabilistic methods. Finally, we show
and discuss how our method provides human-interpretable results, making it a compelling analysis tool for scientists.

kaolinite
0.4

0.3

muscovite
0.2

0.1

0
2000

2100

2200

2300

2400

2500

wavelength (nm)

Figure 1: Shortwave infrared spectra from two different
phyllosilicate minerals as measured by both low (red) and
high (blue) resolution instruments. Low resolution measurements fail to capture important spectral features required for
mineral identiﬁcation.

Introduction
Earth and planetary sciences rely upon the analysis of spectroscopic data. Instruments such as the Compact Reconnaissance Imaging Spectrometer for Mars (CRISM) (Murchie
et al. 2007) and the Thermal Emission Imaging System
(THEMIS) (Christensen et al. 2004) have been vital for understanding the geology of Mars, as well as for studying climate and habitability implications (Bishop 2018). Another
example is the Moon Mineralogy Mapper (M3) instrument,
which produced the ﬁrst mineralogical map of the Moon and
also found water ice in the polar regions (Li et al. 2018).
The reason is that spectrometers measure different wavelengths of the electromagnetic spectrum and thus capture
more information than can be seen with the eye. The measured signals are called spectra and contain spectral features that are used for rock and mineral identiﬁcation (Clark
1999). This is because each material reﬂects, emits, or absorbs electromagnetic radiation in a unique way.
The detection of spectral features often requires high resolution spectroscopic measurements (Clark 1999). An ex-

ample of this phenomenon is described in Figure 1, showing how low resolution spectra may sometimes lose valuable information. Unfortunately, high resolution spectra are
often scarce, whereas low resolution spectra are usually
easier to obtain (Hubbard, Crowley, and Zimbelman 2003;
Zhang et al. 2016).
This work addresses the problem of inferring highresolution spectra from low resolution measurements using probabilistic modeling. We present the Deep Conditional Gaussian Model (DCGM), a neural network architecture that emerges from the need for a spectroscopic analysis tool. It leverages ideas from different deep generative
models, which have been highly successful for data generation and super resolution tasks (Goodfellow et al. 2014;
van den Oord et al. 2016; Dahl, Norouzi, and Shlens 2017;
Hu et al. 2018). But unlike most current methods, which use
latent representations and are difﬁcult to evaluate in probabilistic terms (Wu et al. 2017), our approach provides a
means for log-likelihood estimation and for the inspection of
learned statistical dependencies. This is particularly important in situations where a scientist needs to make informed

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13241

