The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Grammar Filtering for Syntax-Guided Synthesis
Kairo Morton,1 William Hallahan,2 Elven Shum,3 Ruzica Piskac,2 Mark Santolucito2
1

George School, 2 Yale University, 3 Deerﬁeld Academy
mortonk@georgeschool.org, {william.hallahan, ruzica.piskac, mark.santolucito}@yale.edu,
eshum20@deerﬁeld.edu

The idea of automated code synthesis is an area of research with a long history (cf. the Church synthesis problem (Church 1963)). However, due to the problem’s undecidability and high computational complexity for decidable fragments, for almost 50 years the research in program synthesis was mainly focused on addressing theoretical questions and the size of synthesized programs was relatively small. However, the state of affairs has drastically
changed in the last decade. By leveraging advances in automated reasoning and formal methods, there has been a renewed interest in software synthesis. The research in program synthesis has recently focused on developing efﬁcient
algorithms and tools, and synthesis has even been used in
industrial software (Gulwani 2011). Today, machine learning plays a vital role in modern software synthesis and there
are numerous tools and startups that rely on machine learning and big data to automatically generate code (cod 2019;
Balog et al. 2017).

Abstract
Programming-by-example (PBE) is a synthesis paradigm that
allows users to generate functions by simply providing inputoutput examples. While a promising interaction paradigm,
synthesis is still too slow for realtime interaction and more
widespread adoption. Existing approaches to PBE synthesis
have used automated reasoning tools, such as SMT solvers,
as well as works applying machine learning techniques. At
its core, the automated reasoning approach relies on highly
domain speciﬁc knowledge of programming languages. On
the other hand, the machine learning approaches utilize the
fact that when working with program code, it is possible to
generate arbitrarily large training datasets. In this work, we
propose a system for using machine learning in tandem with
automated reasoning techniques to solve Syntax Guided Synthesis (SyGuS) style PBE problems. By preprocessing SyGuS PBE problems with a neural network, we can use a data
driven approach to reduce the size of the search space, then allow automated reasoning-based solvers to more quickly ﬁnd
a solution analytically. Our system is able to run atop existing SyGuS PBE synthesis tools, decreasing the runtime of the
winner of the 2019 SyGuS Competition for the PBE Strings
track by 47.65% to outperform all of the competing tools.

With numerous synthesis tools and formats being developed, it was difﬁcult to empirically evaluate and compare
existing synthesis tools. The Syntax Guided Synthesis (SyGuS) format language (Alur et al. 2013; Raghothaman and
Udupa 2019) was introduced in an effort to standardize the
speciﬁcation format of program synthesis, including PBE
synthesis problems. The SyGuS language speciﬁes synthesis
problems through two components - a set of constraints (eg
input-output examples), and a grammar (a set of functions).
The goal of a SyGuS synthesis problem is to construct a program from functions within the given grammar that satisﬁes
the given constraints. With this standardized synthesis format and an ever expanding set of benchmarks, there is now
a yearly competition of synthesis tools (Alur et al. 2019),
which pushes the frontier of scalable synthesis further.

Introduction
The term “program synthesis” refers to automatically generating code to satisfy some speciﬁcation. That speciﬁcation
describes what the code should do, without going into details about how it should be done. The speciﬁcation could
be given as a set of constraints (Manna and Waldinger 1979;
Kuncak et al. 2010), it can be deduced from the program
and its environment (Gvero et al. 2013; Feng et al. 2017),
or it can be inferred from a large corpus (Balog et al. 2017;
Santolucito et al. 2017).
One paradigm of program synthesis is called programming by example (Cypher et al. 1993) (PBE). In the PBE
approach, a user only provides a set of pairs of input-output
examples that illustrate the desired behavior of the code.
From these examples, the PBE engine should then generate
code that generalizes from the examples to create a program
which covers the unspeciﬁed examples as well.

The SyGuS Competition splits synthesis problems into
tracks, for example PBE Strings or PBE BitVectors, assigning a different grammar for each track - and sometimes even
varying the grammar within a single track. As the grammar deﬁnes the search space in SyGuS, this allows benchmark designers to ensure problems are relatively in-scope of
current tools. However, when synthesis is deployed in realworld applications, we must allow for larger grammars that
account for the wide range of use-cases users require (San-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1611

