The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Simultaneous Discover-Identify Approach to Causal Inference in Linear Models
Chi Zhang,1 Bryant Chen,2 Judea Pearl1
1

Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles, California, USA
2
Brex, San Francisco, California, USA*
{zccc, judea}@cs.ucla.edu, bryant@brex.com

(a)

Abstract
Modern causal analysis involves two major tasks, discovery and identiﬁcation. The ﬁrst aims to learn a causal structure compatible with the available data, the second leverages
that structure to estimate causal effects. Rather than performing the two tasks in tandem, as is usually done in the literature, we propose a symbiotic approach in which the two
are performed simultaneously for mutual beneﬁt; information
gained through identiﬁcation helps causal discovery and vice
versa. This approach enables the usage of Verma constraints,
which remain dormant in constraint-based methods of discovery, and permit us to learn more complete structures, hence
identify a larger set of causal effects than previously achievable with standard methods.

a

b

(b)

c

d

a

b

c

d

Figure 1: (a) a DAG where σad /σac = σcd⋅b (b) a DAG where
σad /σac ≠ σcd⋅b
by the data. They perform a sequence of conditional independence tests to efﬁciently rule out impossible edge conﬁgurations. Constraint-based algorithms have signiﬁcant advantage over score-based algorithms in that they are able to
learn entire equivalence classes of models with unobserved
variables, often called “semi-Markovian.”
Existing constraint-based algorithms use conditional independences between model variables to learn the causal
structure. However, since there are usually many structures
consistent with any given set of conditional independences,
these algorithms are only able to produce large equivalence
classes of possible structures.
Verma constraints (Verma and Pearl 1991) impose additional constraints on the probability distribution beyond
conditional independences, and thus allow the discovery
of additional structures. For example, though Figures 1(a)
and 1(b) are conditional-independence-equivalent, they imply different Verma constraints. 1(a) implies the Verma constraint σad /σac = σcd⋅b , while 1(b) does not (hint: σad is
equal to the product of the three coefﬁcients on a → b, b → c,
and c → d in 1(a), while σad is equal to the same product
plus the coefﬁcient on a → d in 1(b)). Several algorithms for
deriving Verma constraints from a model’s structure have
been developed, including algorithms by Tian and Pearl
(2002) and Shpitser and Pearl (2008) for non-parametric
models and algorithms by Chen (2016) and Chen, Kumor,
and Bareinboim (2017) for linear models. These algorithms
can be used to derive Verma constraints from a hypothesized
model structure and test it. However, it is not clear how to
systematically ﬁnd such constraints from data to discover
the model’s structure. Indeed, no constraint-based method
for learning causal structures from Verma constraints currently exists in the literature.

Introduction
Learning causal relationships is one of the most ambitious
goals of scientiﬁc inquiry. Controlled randomized experiments can sometimes be used to both learn the causal structure among variables, as well as the size of the causal effects.
However, such experiments are often too expensive or even
impossible to conduct. Instead, learning causal relationships
from observational data can be attempted; ﬁrst by learning
the causal structure from observational data, called discovery, and then identifying causal effects from the observational data and the partially speciﬁed causal structure. This
paper introduces a method of performing both tasks simultaneously in a mutually beneﬁcial way.
Many algorithms have been developed for causal discovery. These algorithms generally fall into two categories: score-based algorithms (e.g., Heckerman, Geiger,
and Chickering (1995), Chickering (2002), Shpitser et al.
(2012), Fast GES by Ramsey et al. (2017)) and constraintbased algorithms (e.g., IC algorithm by Verma and Pearl
(1991), PC algorithm by Spirtes et al. (2000), FCI algorithm ﬁrst by Spirtes et al. (2000) and improved by Zhang
(2008)). Constraint-based algorithms aim to discover a class
of graphs that encode the same constraints as those implied
* Much of the work by Chen was conducted while at IBM Research AI.
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10318

