The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Distraction-Aware Feature Learning for Human
Attribute Recognition via Coarse-to-Fine Attention Mechanism
Mingda Wu,1 Di Huang,1∗ Yuanfang Guo,2 Yunhong Wang1
1

Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data and Brain Computing, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
IRIP Lab, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
{md99504, dhuang, andyguo, yhwang}@buaa.edu.cn
Abstract

Recently, Human Attribute Recognition (HAR) has become
a hot topic due to its scientiﬁc challenges and application potentials, where localizing attributes is a crucial stage but not
well handled. In this paper, we propose a novel deep learning approach to HAR, namely Distraction-aware HAR (DaHAR). It enhances deep CNN feature learning by improving
attribute localization through a coarse-to-ﬁne attention mechanism. At the coarse step, a self-mask block is built to roughly
discriminate and reduce distractions, while at the ﬁne step, a
masked attention branch is applied to further eliminate irrelevant regions. Thanks to this mechanism, feature learning is
more accurate, especially when heavy occlusions and complex backgrounds exist. Extensive experiments are conducted
on the WIDER-Attribute and RAP databases, and state-ofthe-art results are achieved, demonstrating the effectiveness
of the proposed approach.

Figure 1: Human Attribute Recognition is challenging due to
large variations of body gestures, external occlusions, lighting conditions, image resolutions and blurrinesses.
al. 2017), because these techniques are playing an important role in public security. Input images are recorded by
a diversity of monitoring cameras, and the major difﬁculties lie in low resolutions, high blurrinesses, and complex
backgrounds. In the past several years, interests have been
shown in the general domain (Guo, Fan, and Wang 2017;
Sarfraz et al. 2017; Li et al. 2016b), where input images are
acquired in arbitrary scenarios exhibiting additional variations of gestures, viewpoints, illuminations, and occlusions,
as depicted in Figure 1.
Regardless of differences between domains, HAR methods basically share a common framework, which conducts
attribute-sensitive feature extraction on attribute-related regions for classiﬁcation. In the literature, the majority of
existing efforts to HAR have been made on building effective features, and a large number of works focus on
improving the discrimination and the robustness of representations of appearance properties. Features are evolving from handcrafted ones (Joo, Wang, and Zhu 2013;
Cao et al. 2008) to deep learned ones (Zhu et al. 2017b;
Yu et al. 2016), with promising performance achieved.
To generate qualiﬁed features, attribute-related region localization is very crucial, which aims to locate the regions
that contain useful clues for attribute recognition. With
incorrect localization of such regions, attribute prediction
tends to fail because meaningful features can hardly be captured. In both the surveillance and general domains (especially the latter one), the accuracy of attribute localization
is usually susceptible to pose variations and external occlusions. Therefore, recent attempts develop more sophisticated
schemes to locate attribute-related regions, including ex-

Introduction
Given an input image with a target person, Human Attribute
Recognition (HAR) predicts his or her semantic characteristics, including low-level ones (e.g. wearing logo or plaid),
mid-level ones (e.g. wearing hat or T-shirt), and high-level
ones (e.g. gender, dressing formally). Accurate recognition
of such attributes not only improves machine intelligence on
cognition of humans, but also beneﬁts a large number of applications such as person re-identiﬁcation (Ling et al. 2019;
Han et al. 2018), pedestrian detection (Tian et al. 2015), and
person retrieval (Feris et al. 2014; Wang et al. 2013).
Existing investigations of HAR can be classiﬁed into three
domains, i.e., clothing domain, surveillance domain, and
general domain. The techniques in the clothing domain have
received extensive attentions (Al-Halah, Stiefelhagen, and
Grauman 2017; Saraﬁanos, Vrigkas, and Kakadiaris 2017;
Liu et al. 2016; Chen et al. 2015) due to their potentials in
commercial applications. This type of methods generally require the input images of high resolutions with persons at a
small number of pre-deﬁned poses, and ﬁne-grained clothing style recognition is still challenging. There are also numerous studies in the surveillance domain (Wang et al. 2019;
Gao et al. 2019; Li et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2018; Wang et
∗

Corresponding author: Di Huang.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12394

