The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Cross-Modality Paired-Images Generation
for RGB-Infrared Person Re-Identiﬁcation
Guan-An Wang,1,2 Tianzhu Zhang,4 Yang Yang,1 Jian Cheng,1,2,3
Jianlong Chang,1,2 Xu Liang,1,2 Zengguang Hou1,2,3 *
1

Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Beijing, China
4
University of Science and Technology of China, Beijing, China
{wangguanan2015, liangxu2013, zengguang.hou}@ia.ac.cn, tzzhang@ustc.edu.cn,
{yang.yang, jcheng, jianlong.chang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Abstract

Cross-Modality
Paired-Images
Generation

(a)

RGB-Infrared (IR) person re-identiﬁcation is very challenging due to the large cross-modality variations between RGB
and IR images. The key solution is to learn aligned features to the bridge RGB and IR modalities. However, due
to the lack of correspondence labels between every pair
of RGB and IR images, most methods try to alleviate the
variations with set-level alignment by reducing the distance between the entire RGB and IR sets. However, this
set-level alignment may lead to misalignment of some instances, which limits the performance for RGB-IR Re-ID.
Different from existing methods, in this paper, we propose
to generate cross-modality paired-images and perform both
global set-level and ﬁne-grained instance-level alignments.
Our proposed method enjoys several merits. First, our method
can perform set-level alignment by disentangling modalityspeciﬁc and modality-invariant features. Compared with conventional methods, ours can explicitly remove the modalityspeciﬁc features and the modality variation can be better reduced. Second, given cross-modality unpaired-images of a
person, our method can generate cross-modality paired images from exchanged images. With them, we can directly
perform instance-level alignment by minimizing distances of
every pair of images. Extensive experimental results on two
standard benchmarks demonstrate that the proposed model
favourably against state-of-the-art methods. Especially, on
SYSU-MM01 dataset, our model can achieve a gain of 9.2%
and 7.7% in terms of Rank-1 and mAP. Code is available at
https://github.com/wangguanan/JSIA-ReID.

(c)

sets in RGB/IR
modalities
instances of
person A in
RGB/IR modality

Set-Level
Alignment

Instance-Level
Alignment

instances of
person B in
RGB/IR modality
(d)

(b)

mis-aligned instances
distance of the two sets is
reduced

distance of every pair is
reduced

Figure 1: Illustration of set-level and instance-level alignment (please view in color). (a) There is a signiﬁcant gap
between the RGB and IR sets. (b) Existing methods perform set-level alignment by minimizing distances between
the two sets, which may lead to misalignment of some
instances. (c) Our method ﬁrst generates cross-modality
paired-images. (d) Then, instance-level alignment is performed by minimizing distances between each pair of images.
eras and RGB images, and formulate the person Re-ID as a
single-modality (RGB-RGB) matching problem.
However, the visible cameras are difﬁcult in capturing
valid appearance information under poor illumination environments (e.g. at night), which limits the applicability of person Re-ID in practical. Fortunately, most surveillance cameras can automatically switch from visible (RGB) to nearinfrared (IR) mode, which facilitates such cameras to work
at night. Thus, it is necessary to study the RGB-IR Re-ID
in real-world scenarios, which is a cross-modality matching problem. Compared with RGB-RGB single-modality
matching, RGB-IR cross-modality matching is more difﬁcult due to the large variation between the two modalities. As
shown in Figure 2(b), RGB and IR images are intrinsically
distinct and heterogeneous, and have different wavelength
ranges. Here, RGB images have three channels containing
color information of visible light, while IR images have one
channel containing information of invisible light.
The key solution is to learn aligned features to bridge the
two modalities. However, due to the lack of correspondence

Introduction
Person Re-Identiﬁcation (Re-ID) (Gong et al. 2014; Zheng,
Yang, and Hauptmann 2016) is widely used in various applications such as video surveillance, security and smart city.
Given a query image of a person, Re-ID aims to ﬁnd images
of the person across disjoint cameras. It’s very challenging
due to the large intra-class and small inter-class variations
caused by different poses, illuminations, views, and occlusions. Most of existing Re-ID methods focus on visible cam* corresponding author
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12144

