The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Deep Generative Probabilistic Graph
Neural Networks for Scene Graph Generation
Mahmoud Khademi, Oliver Schulte
School of Computing Science
Simon Fraser University
Burnaby, BC, Canada
{mkhademi, oschulte}@sfu.ca

This paper therefore introduces a new algorithm, Deep Generative Probabilistic Graph Neural Networks (DG-PGNN),
to generate a scene graph for an image.

Abstract
We propose a new algorithm, called Deep Generative Probabilistic Graph Neural Networks (DG-PGNN), to generate a
scene graph for an image. The input to DG-PGNN is an image, together with a set of region-grounded captions and object bounding-box proposals for the image. To generate the
scene graph, DG-PGNN constructs and updates a new model,
called a Probabilistic Graph Network (PGN). A PGN can be
thought of as a scene graph with uncertainty: it represents
each node and each edge by a CNN feature vector and deﬁnes a probability mass function (PMF) for node-type (object category) of each node and edge-type (predicate class)
of each edge. The DG-PGNN sequentially adds a new node
to the current PGN by learning the optimal ordering in a
Deep Q-learning framework, where states are partial PGNs,
actions choose a new node, and rewards are deﬁned based on
the ground-truth. After adding a node, DG-PGNN uses message passing to update the feature vectors of the current PGN
by leveraging contextual relationship information, object cooccurrences, and language priors from captions. The updated
features are then used to ﬁne-tune the PMFs. Our experiments
show that the proposed algorithm signiﬁcantly outperforms
the state-of-the-art results on the Visual Genome dataset for
scene graph generation. We also show that the scene graphs
constructed by DG-PGNN improve performance on the visual question answering task, for questions that need reasoning about objects and their interactions in the scene context.

1

Introduction

Visual understanding of a scene is one of the most important
objectives in computer vision. Over the past decade, there
have been great advances in relevant tasks such as image
classiﬁcation and object detection. However, understanding
a scene is not only recognizing the objects in the scene. The
interactions between objects also play a crucial role in visual
understanding of a scene. To represent the semantic content of an image, previous work proposed to build a graph
called scene graph (Krishna et al. 2016; Lu et al. 2016;
Li et al. 2017), where the nodes represent the objects and the
edges show the relationships between them (see Figure 1).

Figure 1: A scene graph represents semantic content of an
image via a graph. We leverage region-grounded captions to
construct a scene graph. The graph is useful to answer visual
questions such as What color is the umbrella? (the attributes
of node umbrella) and What is the woman in white pants
holding? (the relationship triplet woman-holding-umbrella).
An efﬁcient scene graph generation model needs to leverage visual contextual information as well as language priors.
Previous work proposed to learn a contextualized represen-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11237

