The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Simultaneously Linking Entities and Extracting
Relations from Biomedical Text without Mention-Level Supervision
Trapit Bansal,† Pat Verga,∗‡ Neha Choudhary,∗† Andrew McCallum†
†

†

University of Massachusetts, Amherst
{tbansal, nchoudhary, mccallum}@cs.umass.edu
‡
Google Research
‡
patverga@google.com

Abstract
Understanding the meaning of text often involves reasoning
about entities and their relationships. This requires identifying textual mentions of entities, linking them to a canonical concept, and discerning their relationships. These tasks
are nearly always viewed as separate components within a
pipeline, each requiring a distinct model and training data.
While relation extraction can often be trained with readily
available weak or distant supervision, entity linkers typically
require expensive mention-level supervision – which is not
available in many domains. Instead, we propose a model
which is trained to simultaneously produce entity linking and
relation decisions while requiring no mention-level annotations. This approach avoids cascading errors that arise from
pipelined methods and more accurately predicts entity relationships from text. We show that our model outperforms a
state-of-the art entity linking and relation extraction pipeline
on two biomedical datasets and can drastically improve the
overall recall of the system.

Figure 1: Overview of the graph extraction task. Given a
document represented as a title and abstract. Text mentions
are denoted with color and each can link to one of several
possible entities. The model considers the full set of entity
linking and relation edges (all lines) and predicts the graph
of true entities and relations (solid lines) represented in the
text. Dashed lines show possible (incorrect) edges and solid
lines show the true edges.

Introduction
Making complex decisions in domains like biomedicine and
clinical treatments requires access to information and facts
in a form that can be easily viewed by experts and is computable by reasoning algorithms. The predominant paradigm
for storing this type of data is in a knowledge graph. Much
of these facts are populated from hand curation by human
experts, inevitably leading to high levels of incompleteness (Bodenreider 2004; Bollacker et al. 2008). To address
this, researchers have focused on automatically constructing knowledge bases by directly extracting information from
text (Ji et al. 2010).
This procedure can be broken down into three major components; identifying mentions of entities in text (Ratinov and
Roth 2009; Lample et al. 2016; Strubell et al. 2017), linking
mentions of the same entity together into a single canonical concept (Cucerzan 2007; Gupta, Singh, and Roth 2017;
Raiman and Raiman 2018), and identifying relationships occurring between those entities (Bunescu and Mooney 2007;
Wang et al. 2016; Verga, Strubell, and McCallum 2018).

These three stages are nearly always treated as separate
serial components in an extraction pipeline and current stateof-the-art approaches train separate machine learning models for each component, each with their own distinct training data. More precisely, this data consists of mention-level
supervision, that is individual instances of entities and relations which are identiﬁed and demarcated in text. This type
of data can be prohibitively expensive to acquire, particularly in domains like biomedicine where expert knowledge
is required to understand and annotate relevant information.
In contrast, forms of distant supervision are readily available as database entries in existing knowledge bases. This
type of information encodes global properties about entities
and their relationships without identifying speciﬁc textual
instances of those facts. This form of distant supervision
has been successfully applied to relation extraction models (Mintz et al. 2009; Surdeanu et al. 2012; Riedel et al.
2013). However, all of these methods still consume entity
linking decisions as a preprocessing step, and unfortunately,
accurate entity linkers and the mention-level supervision required to train them do not exist in many domains.

∗

work done while authors were at UMass Amherst
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7407

