The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Structure-Aware Feature Fusion for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Qingchao Chen,∗ Yang Liu∗
Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford, UK
qingchao.chen@eng.ox.ac.uk, yangl@robots.ox.ac.uk

ancy across different domains. Although various distribution
divergence measurements have been investigated to estimate
and reduce domain discrepancy, these methods only focus on
aligning high-level representations, e.g. the fully connected
(FC) layer features, but without exploiting the complex multimode structure and local geometric spatial structures.

Abstract
Unsupervised domain Adaptation (UDA) aims to learn and
transfer generalized features from a labelled source domain
to a target domain without any annotations. Existing methods
only aligning high-level representation but without exploiting
the complex multi-class structure and local spatial structure.
This is problematic as 1) the model is prone to negative transfer when the features from different classes are misaligned; 2)
missing the local spatial structure poses a major obstacle in
performing the ﬁne-grained feature alignment. In this paper,
we integrate the valuable information conveyed in classiﬁer
prediction and local feature maps into global feature representation and then perform a single mini-max game to make
it domain invariant. In this way, the domain-invariant feature
not only describes the holistic representation of the original
image but also preserves mode-structure and ﬁne-grained spatial structural information. The feature integration is achieved
by estimating and maximizing the mutual information (MI)
among the global feature, local feature and classiﬁer prediction simultaneously. As the MI is hard to measure directly
in high-dimension spaces, we adopt a new objective function
that implicitly maximizes the MI via an effective sampling
strategy and a discriminator design. Our STructure-Aware
Feature Fusion (STAFF) network achieves the state-of-the-art
performances in various UDA datasets.

We argue that to solve UDA problem, it is far from sufﬁcient to match only the global feature distribution, because
of the following reasons: 1) The data distribution usually
embody complex multi-mode structures, reﬂecting either the
class boundaries in supervised learning or the cluster boundaries in unsupervised learning. Only matching marginal distribution without exploiting the multi-mode structure may be
prone to negative transfer, especially when the corresponding
mode of the distributions across domains are falsely aligned.
There is no guarantee that samples from different domains
with the same class label will be mapped nearby in the feature space. As a result, the discriminative structure between
classes could be mixed up thus leading to a poor performance
for the target domain. 2) Only matching global feature ignores the local geometric spatial structures. However, the
domain discrepancy may appear at the start from the early
convolutional layers, which makes any adjustment purely at
the tail of the network less effective. In addition, the lack of
local features for different regions, pose a major obstacle in
performing a ﬁne-grained feature alignment.

Introduction
The success of deep neural network relies on a massive
amount of labeled training data. However the learned representation is very sensitive to the input perturbations and
dataset biases, that is, deep networks may easily fail to generalize to new dataset or environment. In practice, manual
labeling of such sufﬁcient training data for every new dataset
is often prohibitive or impossible to collect. Unsupervised
domain adaptation (UDA) aims to solve this problem by
transferring a deep network from a source domain where
sufﬁcient labeled training data is available to a target domain
where only unlabeled data is available.
The main technical difﬁculty of UDA is how to address
the domain shift and formally reduce the distribution discrep-

An intuitive solution for the two aforementioned issues
is that performing feature alignments via multiple adversarial training at the different level of representation, including
local-, global-representation and classiﬁer predictions (mode
informative). However, this is unrealistic and suffer from
unstable numerical optimization due to the easy conﬂict gradients from a set of minimax problems coupled together, not
to say the inefﬁcient design and heavy memory consumption
of multiple discriminator networks. In this paper, rather than
performing multiple minimax problems simultaneously, we
address the challenges from another perspective by formalizing a STructure-Aware Feature Fusion (STAFF) network.
More speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst integrate the informative content
of local feature (ﬁne-grained structural information) and classiﬁer prediction (conveys mode structure) into the global
feature and then perform a single minimax optimization to

∗

Equal contribution
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10567

