The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Semantics-Aware BERT for Language Understanding
∗

Zhuosheng Zhang,1,2,3, Yuwei Wu,1,2,3,4,* Hai Zhao,1,2,3,† Zuchao Li,1,2,3
Shuailiang Zhang,1,2,3 Xi Zhou,5 Xiang Zhou5
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Key Laboratory of Shanghai Education Commission for Intelligent Interaction
and Cognitive Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
3
MoE Key Lab of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
4
College of Zhiyuan, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
5
CloudWalk Technology, Shanghai, China
{zhangzs, will8821}@sjtu.edu.cn, zhaohai@cs.sjtu.edu.cn
easily applied to downstream models as the encoder or used
for ﬁne-tuning.
Despite the success of those well pre-trained language
models, we argue that current techniques which only focus on language modeling restrict the power of the pretrained representations. The major limitation of existing language models lies in only taking plain contextual features
for both representation and training objective, rarely considering explicit contextual semantic clues. Even though well
pre-trained language models can implicitly represent contextual semantics more or less (Clark et al. 2019), they can
be further enhanced by incorporating external knowledge.
To this end, there is a recent trend of incorporating extra knowledge to pre-trained language models (Zhang et al.
2020b).
A number of studies have found deep learning models
might not really understand the natural language texts (Mudrakarta et al. 2018) and vulnerably suffer from adversarial attacks (Jia and Liang 2017). Through their observation,
deep learning models pay great attention to non-signiﬁcant
words and ignore important ones. For attractive question
answering challenge (Rajpurkar et al. 2016), we observe a
number of answers produced by previous models are semantically incomplete (As shown in Section 6.3), which suggests
that the current NLU models suffer from insufﬁcient contextual semantic representation and learning.
Actually, NLU tasks share the similar task purpose as sentence contextual semantic analysis. Brieﬂy, semantic role labeling (SRL) over a sentence is to discover who did what to
whom, when and why with respect to the central meaning
of the sentence, which naturally matches the task target of
NLU. For example, in question answering tasks, questions
are usually formed with who, what, how, when and why,
which can be conveniently formulized into the predicateargument relationship in terms of contextual semantics.
In human language, a sentence usually involves various
predicate-argument structures, while neural models encode
sentence into embedding representation, with little consideration of the modeling of multiple semantic structures. Thus
we are motivated to enrich the sentence contextual semantics in multiple predicate-speciﬁc argument sequences by
presenting SemBERT: Semantics-aware BERT, which is a

Abstract
The latest work on language representations carefully integrates contextualized features into language model training, which enables a series of success especially in various machine reading comprehension and natural language inference tasks. However, the existing language representation
models including ELMo, GPT and BERT only exploit plain
context-sensitive features such as character or word embeddings. They rarely consider incorporating structured semantic information which can provide rich semantics for language representation. To promote natural language understanding, we propose to incorporate explicit contextual semantics from pre-trained semantic role labeling, and introduce an improved language representation model, Semanticsaware BERT (SemBERT), which is capable of explicitly absorbing contextual semantics over a BERT backbone. SemBERT keeps the convenient usability of its BERT precursor in
a light ﬁne-tuning way without substantial task-speciﬁc modiﬁcations. Compared with BERT, semantics-aware BERT is as
simple in concept but more powerful. It obtains new state-ofthe-art or substantially improves results on ten reading comprehension and language inference tasks.

1

Introduction

Recently, deep contextual language model (LM) has been
shown effective for learning universal language representations, achieving state-of-the-art results in a series of ﬂagship natural language understanding (NLU) tasks. Some
prominent examples are Embedding from Language models
(ELMo) (Peters et al. 2018), Generative Pre-trained Transformer (OpenAI GPT) (Radford et al. 2018), Bidirectional
Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT) (Devlin et al. 2018) and Generalized Autoregressive Pretraining (XLNet) (Yang et al. 2019). Providing ﬁne-grained contextual embedding, these pre-trained models could be either
∗

These authors contribute equally. †Corresponding author. This
paper was partially supported by National Key Research and
Development Program of China (No. 2017YFB0304100) and
Key Projects of National Natural Science Foundation of China
(U1836222 and 61733011).
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9628

