The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Incremental Multi-Domain Learning with Network Latent Tensor Factorization
Adrian Bulat,∗,1 Jean Kossaiﬁ,∗,1,2 Georgios Tzimiropoulos,1 Maja Pantic1,2
1
Samsung AI Center Cambridge 2 Imperial College London
adrian@adrianbulat.com, jean.kossaiﬁ@gmail.com, {georgios.t, maja.pantic}@samsung.com

2012; Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; He et al. 2016), detection (Ren et al. 2015) and semantic segmentation (Long,
Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015; He et al. 2017) to name a few.
However, visual perception is not just concerned with being able to learn a single task at a time, assuming an abundance of labelled data, memory and computing capacity.
A more desirable property is to be able to learn a set of
tasks, possibly over multiple different domains, under limited memory and ﬁnite computing power. This setting is a
very general one and many instances of it have been studied
in Computer Vision and Machine Learning under various
names. The main difference comes from whether we vary
the task to be performed (classiﬁcation or regression), or the
domain, which broadly speaking refers to the distribution of
the data or the labels for the considered task.
Herein, we are mostly concerned with the problem of
multi-domain incremental learning. A key aspect of this setting is that the new task should be learned without harming
the classiﬁcation accuracy and representational power of the
original model. This is called learning without catastrophic
forgetting (French 1999; Li et al. 2017). Another important
aspect is to keep newly introduced memory requirements
low: a newly learned model should use as much as possible existing knowledge learned from already learned tasks,
i.e. from a practical perspective, it should re-use or adapt the
weights of an already trained (on a different task) network.
The aforementioned setting has only recently attracted the
attention of the neural network community. Notably, Rebufﬁ, Bilen, and Vedaldi (2017) introduced the Visual Decathlon Challenge which is concerned with incrementally
converting an Imagenet classiﬁcation model to new ones for
another 9 different domain/tasks. To our knowledge there
are only a few methods that have been proposed recently in
order to solve it (Rebufﬁ, Bilen, and Vedaldi 2017; 2018;
Rosenfeld and Tsotsos 2017; Mallya, Davis, and Lazebnik
2018). These works all have in common that incremental
learning is achieved with layer-speciﬁc adapting modules
(which are simply called adapters) applied to each CNN
layer separately. Although the adapters have only a small
number of parameters, because they are layer speciﬁc, the
total number of parameters introduced by the adaptation process scales linearly with the the number of layers, and in

Abstract
The prominence of deep learning, large amount of annotated
data and increasingly powerful hardware made it possible to
reach remarkable performance for supervised classiﬁcation
tasks, in many cases saturating the training sets. However the
resulting models are specialized to a single very speciﬁc task
and domain. Adapting the learned classiﬁcation to new domains is a hard problem due to at least three reasons: (1) the
new domains and the tasks might be drastically different; (2)
there might be very limited amount of annotated data on the
new domain and (3) full training of a new model for each
new task is prohibitive in terms of computation and memory, due to the sheer number of parameters of deep CNNs. In
this paper, we present a method to learn new-domains and
tasks incrementally, building on prior knowledge from already learned tasks and without catastrophic forgetting. We
do so by jointly parametrizing weights across layers using
low-rank Tucker structure. The core is task agnostic while a
set of task speciﬁc factors are learnt on each new domain.
We show that leveraging tensor structure enables better performance than simply using matrix operations. Joint tensor
modelling also naturally leverages correlations across different layers. Compared with previous methods which have focused on adapting each layer separately, our approach results
in more compact representations for each new task/domain.
We apply the proposed method to the 10 datasets of the Visual Decathlon Challenge and show that our method offers
on average about 7.5× reduction in number of parameters
and competitive performance in terms of both classiﬁcation
accuracy and Decathlon score.

1

Introduction

It is now commonly accepted that supervised learning with
deep neural networks can provide satisfactory solutions for
a wide range of problems as long as i) the aim is to focus
on a single task only, and ii) there is a sufﬁcient availability
of labelled training data and computational resources. This
is the setting under which Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) have been employed in order to provide state-ofthe-art solutions for a wide range of Computer Vision problems such as recognition (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton
∗

Denotes equal contribution
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10470

