The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Robust Named Entity Recognition with Truecasing Pretraining
Stephen Mayhew, Nitish Gupta, Dan Roth
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA, 19104
{mayhew, nitishg, danroth}@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract

eliud kipchoge has won in london again.

Although modern named entity recognition (NER) systems
show impressive performance on standard datasets, they perform poorly when presented with noisy data. In particular,
capitalization is a strong signal for entities in many languages, and even state of the art models overﬁt to this feature,
with drastically lower performance on uncapitalized text. In
this work, we address the problem of robustness of NER systems in data with noisy or uncertain casing, using a pretraining objective that predicts casing in text, or a truecaser, leveraging unlabeled data. The pretrained truecaser is combined
with a standard BiLSTM-CRF model for NER by appending
output distributions to character embeddings. In experiments
over several datasets of varying domain and casing quality,
we show that our new model improves performance in uncased text, even adding value to uncased BERT embeddings.
Our method achieves a new state of the art on the WNUT17
shared task dataset.

Truecaser

Eliud Kipchoge has won in London again.

Figure 1: This ﬁgure shows the same sentence in two casing scenarios: on the top, uncased, on the bottom, truecased.
Notice that the words marked as uppercase are also named
entities. This paper explores how truecasing can be used in
named entity recognition.
preprocessing regimen that biases the data towards named
entity mentions.
In our experiments, we show that truecasing remains a
difﬁcult task, and further that although a perfect truecaser
gives high NER scores, the quality of the truecaser does not
necessarily correlate with NER performance. Even so, incorporating predicted casing information from the right truecaser improves performance in both cased and uncased data,
even when used in conjunction with uncased BERT (Devlin
et al. 2019). We evaluate on three NER datasets (CoNLL,
Ontonotes, WNUT17) in both cased and uncased scenarios,
and achieve a new state of the art on WNUT17.

Introduction
Modern named entity recognition (NER) models perform remarkably well on standard English datasets, with F1 scores
over 90% (Lample et al. 2016). But performance on these
standard datasets drops by over 40 points F1 when casing information is missing, showing that these models rely
strongly on the convention of marking proper nouns with
capitals, rather than on contextual clues. Since text in the
wild is not guaranteed to have conventional casing, it is important to build models that are robust to test data case.
One possible solution to keep NER systems from overﬁtting to capitalization is to omit casing information. This
would potentially lead to better performance on uncased
text, but fails to take advantage of an important signal.
We build on prior work in truecasing (Susanto, Chieu, and
Lu 2016) by proposing to use a truecaser to predict missing case labels for words or characters (as shown in Figure
1). Intuitively, since named entities are marked with capitals, a trained truecaser should improve an NER system. We
design an architecture in which the truecaser output is fed
into a standard BiLSTM-CRF model for NER. We experiment with pretraining the truecaser, and ﬁne-tuning on the
NER train set. When designing the truecaser, we suggest a

Truecaser Model
A truecaser model takes a sentence as input and predicts case
values (upper vs. lower) for all characters in the sentence.
We model truecasing as a character-level binary classiﬁcation task, similar to Susanto, Chieu, and Lu (2016). The labels, L for lower and U for upper, are predicted by a feedforward network using the hidden representations of a bidirectional LSTM (BiLSTM) that operates over the characters in
a sentence. For example, in Figure 2, the truecaser predicts
“name was Alan” for the input “name was alan”. Formally,
the output of this model is a categorical distribution dc over
two values (true/false), for each character c,

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

dc = softmax(Whc )
8480

