The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

CircleNet for Hip Landmark Detection
Hai Wu,1 Hongtao Xie,1∗ Chuanbin Liu,1 Zheng-Jun Zha,1 Jun Sun,2 Yongdong Zhang1
1

School of Information Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Anhui Province Children’s Hospital of China
{wuh, lcb592}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {htxie, zhazj, zhyd73}@ustc.edu.cn, sunjun500@aliyun.com

Abstract
Landmark detection plays a critical role in diagnosis of
Developmental Dysplasia of the Hip (DDH). Heatmap and
anchor-based object detection techniques could obtain reasonable results. However, they have limitations in both robustness and precision given the complexities and inhomogeneity of hip X-ray images. In this paper, we propose a
much simpler and more efﬁcient framework called CircleNet
to improve the accuracy of landmark detection by predicting landmark and corresponding radius. Using the CircleNet,
we not only constrain the relationship between landmarks but
also integrate landmark detection and object detection into an
end-to-end framework. In order to capture the effective information of the long-range dependency of landmarks in the
DDH image, here we propose a new context modeling framework, named the Local Non-Local (LNL) block. The LNL
block has the beneﬁts of both non-local block and lightweight
computation. We construct a professional DDH dataset for
the ﬁrst time and evaluate our CircleNet on it. The dataset
has the largest number of DDH X-ray images in the world
to our knowledge. Our results show that the CircleNet can
achieve the state-of-the-art results for landmark detection on
the dataset with a large margin of 1.8 average pixels compared to current methods. The dataset and source code will
be publicly available.

Figure 1: In image of DDH (a), six blue landmarks need to
be detected. The ﬁgure (b) is a schematic diagram of the
clinical diagnosis of the hip joint. We need detect four landmarks (1, 2, 3, 4) to draw Hilgenreiner line (Tönnis 1985)
and Perkin line (Tönnis 1985) to divide areas shown as I, II,
III, IV. When landmarks 5 and 6 are detected, the degree of
DDH depends on which areas they are in.
(see Figure 2). b) The lack of medical facilities and professional doctors in remote rural areas hospitals. How to solve
the shortage of medical resources and improve the accuracy
of DDH diagnosis has become a signiﬁcant problem in the
health ﬁeld of many countries.
Recent years have witnessed the progress of deep learning in object detection (Duan et al. 2019) (Zhou, Zhuo, and
Krahenbuhl 2019) (Wang et al. 2019b) and landmark detection, especially in medical image analysis (Payer et al.
2016) (Xu et al. 2017) (Xie et al. 2019) (Liu et al. 2019).
Because of noise, lower contrast, blurry boundaries and various shapes of bones in hip X-ray images, it is difﬁcult to
obtain precise landmarks. Meanwhile, segmentation (Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox 2015) (Xu et al. 2017) is a common method in medical image processing. Due to the complex morphological structures of skeletons in hip X-ray images, it is difﬁcult to mark the accurate bone contours for
segmentation operation. In addition to landmark detection,
we need to ﬁnd 5- and 6-centered femoral head regions (red
circles in Figure 3) to better judge whether the hip is dislocated. For example, two red circles in Figure 3 have big difference in size, which means the patient may have symptom
of DDH. This suggests that we need cross-domain research

Introduction
In medical image analysis, landmarks have signiﬁcant clinical and scientiﬁc value. Clinical measurements, derived
from the landmarks in X-ray images, are used for diagnosis
and surgeries. Developmental Dysplasia of the Hip (DDH)
is one of the most common diseases of skeletal system in
infants and children. Current common method is proposed
by Tonnis (Tönnis 1985). The key to the Tonnis’s method
is detecting six landmarks (see Figure 1(a)) to estimate the
degree (see Figure 1(b)) of DDH.
The accuracy of detection directly affects the diagnosis results. Many children do not receive timely treatment based
on two reasons. a) The characteristic of lower contrast in
hip X-ray images and the diversities of bone morphology
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12370

