The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Towards Oracle Knowledge Distillation with Neural Architecture Search
Minsoo Kang,1,3∗ Jonghwan Mun,2,3∗ Bohyung Han1,3
1

Computer Vision Lab., ASRI, Seoul National University, Korea
2
Computer Vision Lab., POSTECH, Korea
3
Neural Processing Research Center (NPRC), Seoul National University, Korea
1
{kminsoo, bhhan}@snu.ac.kr 2 jonghwan.mun@postech.ac.kr

independently (or sometimes jointly). When we consider Independent Ensemble (IE) in deep neural networks, multiple
neural networks of an identical architecture are trained with
different random seeds and the ﬁnal output is determined
by model averaging or majority voting. Although ensemble
modeling is effective to achieve high accuracy with moderate amount of effort, its inferences based on simple model
averaging or majority voting still have substantial gaps with
oracle predictions achieved by the best model selection in
the ensemble, and its applicability to resource-hungry system is limited due to the large model size and heavy power
consumption.

Abstract
We present a novel framework of knowledge distillation that
is capable of learning powerful and efﬁcient student models
from ensemble teacher networks. Our approach addresses the
inherent model capacity issue between teacher and student
and aims to maximize beneﬁt from teacher models during distillation by reducing their capacity gap. Speciﬁcally, we employ a neural architecture search technique to augment useful
structures and operations, where the searched network is appropriate for knowledge distillation towards student models
and free from sacriﬁcing its performance by ﬁxing the network capacity. We also introduce an oracle knowledge distillation loss to facilitate model search and distillation using an ensemble-based teacher model, where a student network is learned to imitate oracle performance of the teacher.
We perform extensive experiments on the image classiﬁcation datasets—CIFAR-100 and TinyImageNet—using various networks. We also show that searching for a new student
model is effective in both accuracy and memory size and that
the searched models often outperform their teacher models
thanks to neural architecture search with oracle knowledge
distillation.

Although KD with ensemble learning addresses the aforementioned issues partly by transferring the information in an
ensemble model to a single network, it is still challenging
to train the competitive student compared to the ensemble
teacher with a large number of networks. Table 1 presents
our observation about the performance of KD with respect to
the number of models for ensemble. The accuracy of teacher
and student improves gradually in general as the number of
models increases while students mostly fail to reach accuracy of teachers and its differences are getting larger. This is
partly because a large gap in model capacity between student
and teacher hinders learning process of KD as discussed in
(Mirzadeh et al. 2019), and the simple objective function to
ﬁt the representations of the teacher given by model averaging is not effective to take full advantage of teacher models.
In other words, the limited capacity in the student network
becomes a bottleneck of KD, which implies that increasing
capacity of student models would be beneﬁcial to reduce the
performance gap between teacher and student.

Introduction
Knowledge Distillation (KD) aims to transfer representations from one model to another, where the source plays a
role as a teacher while the target becomes a student mimicking the representations of the teacher. KD is widely used
to learn a compact student model with the help of a powerful
teacher model, e.g., a very deep neural network or an ensemble of multiple neural networks. Existing algorithms related
to KD (Heo et al. 2019; Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015;
Park et al. 2019; Romero et al. 2015; Zagoruyko and Komodakis 2017; Zhang et al. 2018) are typically interested in
how to improve accuracy by designing an effective training
procedure.
Model ensemble (Breiman 1996; Freund, Schapire, and
Abe 1999; Guzman-Rivera, Batra, and Kohli 2012; Lee et
al. 2017; 2016; 2015; Mun et al. 2018) is a useful technique to boost performance using multiple models trained

We propose an advanced framework for knowledge distillation from ensemble models, which aims to maximize accuracy and efﬁciency of student networks at the same time.
Contrary to the existing methods assuming that a student
model is ﬁxed, we adapt its structure and size, and make
it more appropriate for knowledge distillation by alleviating
the model capacity gap issue. We also address how to effectively extract information from a teacher especially when the
teacher is an ensemble of multiple models. To this end, students are made to learn the most accurate information from
teacher, which is realized by transferring knowledge from

∗

Both authors contributed equally
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4404

