The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Deep Learning–Powered Iterative Combinatorial Auctions
Jakob Weissteiner

Sven Seuken

University of Zurich
weissteiner@iﬁ.uzh.ch

University of Zurich
seuken@iﬁ.uzh.ch

efﬁciency guarantees in large CA domains. Instead, many
recent proposals for CAs have focused on iterative combinatorial auctions (ICAs) where the auctioneer interacts with
bidders over multiple rounds, eliciting a limited amount of
information, aiming to ﬁnd a highly efﬁcient allocation.
ICAs have found widespread application in practice.
For example, just between 2008 and 2014, the combinatorial clock auction (CCA) (Ausubel, Cramton, and Milgrom 2006) has been used to conduct more than 15 spectrum auctions and has generated more than $20 Billion in
total revenue (Ausubel and Baranov 2017). Another important application of ICAs are auctions for building offshore
wind farms (Ausubel and Cramton 2011). Given the value
of the resources allocated in these real-world ICAs, increasing their efﬁciency by 1-2% points already translates into
welfare gains of millions of dollars. Therefore, improving
the efﬁciency of ICAs is an important research challenge.

Abstract
In this paper, we study the design of deep learning-powered
iterative combinatorial auctions (ICAs). We build on prior
work where preference elicitation was done via kernelized
support vector regressions (SVRs). However, the SVR-based
approach has limitations because it requires solving a machine learning (ML)-based winner determination problem
(WDP). With expressive kernels (like gaussians), the MLbased WDP cannot be solved for large domains. While linear or quadratic kernels have better computational scalability, these kernels have limited expressiveness. In this work,
we address these shortcomings by using deep neural networks (DNNs) instead of SVRs. We ﬁrst show how the DNNbased WDP can be reformulated into a mixed integer program
(MIP). Second, we experimentally compare the prediction
performance of DNNs against SVRs. Third, we present experimental evaluations in two medium-sized domains which
show that even ICAs based on relatively small-sized DNNs
lead to higher economic efﬁciency than ICAs based on kernelized SVRs. Finally, we show that our DNN-powered ICA
also scales well to very large CA domains.

1

1.1

Machine Learning and Mechanism Design

Researchers have proposed various ways to further increase
the efﬁciency of CAs by integrating machine learning (ML)
methods into the mechanism. This research goes back to
Blum et al. (2004) and Lahaie and Parkes (2004), who studied the relationship between computational learning theory
and preference elicitation in CAs. More recently, Brero and
Lahaie (2018) and Brero, Lahaie, and Seuken (2019) introduced a Bayesian CA where they integrated ML into a CA
to achieve faster convergence. In a different strand of research, Dütting et al. (2015; 2017), Narasimhan, Agarwal,
and Parkes (2016) and Golowich, Narasimhan, and Parkes
(2018) used ML to directly learn a new mechanism (following the automated mechanism design paradigm).
Most related to the present paper is the work by Brero, Lubin, and Seuken (2017; 2018; 2019), who proposed an MLpowered ICA. The core of their auction is an ML-powered
preference elicitation algorithm. As part of their algorithm,
they used kernelized support vector regressions (SVRs) to
learn the nonlinear value functions of bidders. Recently,
Brero, Lubin, and Seuken (2019) showed that their MLbased ICA achieves even higher efﬁciency than the CCA.
However, because of runtime complexity issues, Brero, Lubin, and Seuken (2018; 2019) focused on SVRs with linear

Introduction

Combinatorial auctions (CAs) are used to allocate multiple heterogeneous items to bidders in domains where these
items may be substitutes or complements. Speciﬁcally, in a
CA, bidders are allowed to submit bids on bundles of items
rather than on individual items. CAs are widely used in practice, including for the sale of airport landing and take-off
slots (Rassenti, Smith, and Bulﬁn 1982), in industrial procurement (Bichler et al. 2006), and for the sale of spectrum
licenses (Cramton 2013).
One of the main challenges in large CAs is that the bundle space grows exponentially in the number of items. This
typically makes it impossible for the bidders to report their
full value function, even for medium-sized domains. Thus,
careful preference elicitation is needed in CAs.
Nisan and Segal (2006) have shown that to achieve full
efﬁciency and support general value functions, exponential
communication in the number of items is needed in the
worst case. Thus, practical auction designs cannot provide
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2284

