The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Designing Evaluation Rules That Are Robust to Strategic Behavior
Jon Kleinberg

Manish Raghavan

Cornell University

Cornell University

tension between effort the agent invests to raise the true underlying attributes that the evaluator cares about, and effort
that may serve to improve the proxy features without actually improving the underlying attributes. This tension underlies the formulation of Goodhart’s Law, widely known
in the economics literature, which states that once a proxy
measure becomes a goal in itself, it is no longer a useful
measure (Hardt et al. 2016). This principle also underpins
concerns about strategic gaming of evaluations in search engine rankings (Davis 2006), credit scoring (Bambauer and
Zarsky 2018; Foust and Pressman 2008), academic paper
visibility (Beel, Gipp, and Wilde 2009), reputation management (Zarsky 2007), and many other domains.

Abstract
Machine learning is often used to produce decision-making
rules that classify or evaluate individuals. When these individuals have incentives to be classiﬁed a certain way, they
may behave strategically to inﬂuence their outcomes. We develop a model for how strategic agents can invest effort to
change the outcomes they receive, and we give a tight characterization of when such agents can be incentivized to invest
speciﬁed forms of effort into improving their outcomes as opposed to “gaming” the classiﬁer. We show that whenever any
“reasonable” mechanism can do so, a simple linear mechanism sufﬁces. This work is based on “How Do Classiﬁers
Induce Agents To Invest Effort Strategically?” published in
Economics and Computation 2019 (Kleinberg and Raghavan
2019).

Incentivizing a desired effort investment. Viewing
strategic behavior as completely undesirable, however, implicitly takes the position that the true qualities we wish to
measure cannot be improved. In many settings, this doesn’t
accord with the fact that much of the effort people invest
leads to improvements that in fact beneﬁt both themselves
and the measured evaluation. For example, if a student seeks
to improve their GPA by learning the material, we would
typically view this as a productive form of strategic behavior, both for the student and the evaluation process. But if
the student tried to improve their GPA by learning a set of
highly speciﬁc test-taking heuristics, we might instead see
this as changing their feature value (GPA) without improving their underlying mastery of the material. Thus, different
forms of behavior can modify appearances in many ways,
only some of which a decision-maker may wish to encourage.
These considerations are at the heart of the following class
of design problems, illustrated schematically in Figure 1.
An evaluator creates a decision rule to assess an agent in
terms of a set of features, and this leads the agent to make
choices about how to invest effort across their actions to
improve these features. From the evaluator’s point of view,
some forms of agent effort are valuable (like learning educational material), while others are not (like learning testtaking heuristics, or cheating). Hence, some decision rules
work better than others in creating appropriate incentives:
the evaluator would like to create a decision rule whose incentives lead the agent to invest in forms of effort that the
evaluator considers valuable.

Introduction
Algorithmic decision-making is becoming increasingly
common in a number of social contexts, including hiring,
education, lending, and criminal risk assessment. Policies in
these domains are often implemented by automated systems,
evaluating individuals based on features, which serve as
proxies to measure a person’s underlying attributes. Accompanying the growing prevalence of such automated decisionmaking tools has been a push for transparency: algorithmic systems should be open to examination, and simple
enough that people affected by them can understand their
decisions. Proponents of transparency argue that it acts as
a safeguard to prevent algorithmic systems from introducing biases or other undesirable properties, and that “secret”
decision-making rules can create inequalities between insiders who know how the system works and outsiders who
don’t.
On the other hand, there are concerns that knowing exactly how decisions are being made will simply lead individuals to “game” the rule by strategically manipulating
their appearances so as to receive favorable outcomes. Such
concerns are a necessary consequence of the fact that an
evaluator can only observe an individual via features that
serve as imperfect measurements of his or her true qualities. From the evaluator’s perspective, this creates a basic
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13673

