The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Gradient Boosts the Approximate Vanishing Ideal
Hiroshi Kera, Yoshihiko Hasegawa
Department of Information and Communication Engineering,
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology,
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan

algebraic variety where noisy data points approximately lie.
An approximate vanishing ideal of a set of points X ⊂ Rn is
a set of approximate vanishing polynomials, each of which
almost takes a zero value for any x ∈ X. Roughly,

Abstract
In the last decade, the approximate vanishing ideal and its basis construction algorithms have been extensively studied in
computer algebra and machine learning as a general model
to reconstruct the algebraic variety on which noisy data approximately lie. In particular, the basis construction algorithms developed in machine learning are widely used in
applications across many ﬁelds because of their monomialorder-free property; however, they lose many of the theoretical properties of computer-algebraic algorithms. In this paper, we propose general methods that equip monomial-orderfree algorithms with several advantageous theoretical properties. Speciﬁcally, we exploit the gradient to (i) sidestep the
spurious vanishing problem in polynomial time to remove
symbolically trivial redundant bases, (ii) achieve consistent
output with respect to the translation and scaling of input,
and (iii) remove nontrivially redundant bases. The proposed
methods work in a fully numerical manner, whereas existing algorithms require the awkward monomial order or exponentially costly (and mostly symbolic) computation to realize
properties (i) and (iii). To our knowledge, property (ii) has not
been achieved by any existing basis construction algorithm of
the approximate vanishing ideal.

Iapp (X) = {g ∈ Pn | ∀x ∈ X, g(x) ≈ 0} ,
where Pn is the set of all n-variate polynomials over R.
Various basis construction algorithms for the approximate
vanishing ideal have been proposed, ﬁrst in computer algebra and then in machine learning (Heldt et al. 2009;
Fassino 2010; Livni et al. 2013; Limbeck 2013; Király,
Kreuzer, and Theran 2014; Kera and Hasegawa 2018). However, existing algorithms suffer from the tradeoff between
practicality and theoretical soundness. Basis construction algorithms developed in machine learning are more practically convenient and are used in various ﬁelds (Zhao and
Song 2014; Hou, Nie, and Tao 2016; Kera and Iba 2016;
Iraji and Chitsaz 2017; Wang and Ohtsuki 2018). This is
because these algorithms work with numerical computation
and without the monomial order, which is a preﬁxed prioritization of monomials. Different monomial orders can yield
different results, but it is unknown how to properly select a
monomial order from exponentially many candidates. However, while enjoying the monomial-order-free property, the
basis construction algorithms in machine learning lack various theoretical (and advantageous) properties of computeralgebraic algorithms, which use the practically awkward
monomial order and symbolic computation.
In this paper, we propose general and efﬁcient methods that enable monomial-order-free basis construction algorithms in machine learning to have various advantageous
theoretical properties. In particular, we address the three theoretical issues listed below. To our knowledge, none of the
existing basis construction algorithms can resolve the ﬁrst
and third issues in polynomial time without using a monomial order. Furthermore, the second issue has not been addressed by any existing basis construction methods.
The spurious vanishing problem—A polynomial g can approximately vanish for a point x, i.e., g(x) ≈ 0 not because
x is close to the roots of g but merely because g is close
to the zero polynomial (i.e., the coefﬁcients of the monomi-

Introduction
A set of data points lies in an algebraic variety1 —this is a
common assumption in various methods in machine learning. For example, linear analysis methods such as principal component analysis are designed to work with data lying in linear subspace, which is a class of algebraic varieties. Broader classes of algebraic varieties are considered
in subspace clustering (Vidal, Yi Ma, and Sastry 2005), matrix completion (Ongie et al. 2017; Li and Wang 2017),
and classiﬁcation (Livni et al. 2013; Globerson, Livni, and
Shalev-Shwartz 2017). In the last decade, the approximate
vanishing ideal (Heldt et al. 2009) has been considered for
the machine-learning problem in the most general setting,
namely, retrieving a polynomial system that describes the
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
An algebraic variety here refers to a set of points that can be
described as the solutions of a polynomial system and it is not necessarily irreducible.
4428

