The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Dynamic Graph Representation for Occlusion Handling in Biometrics
Min Ren,1,2 Yunlong Wang,2 Zhenan Sun,2 Tieniu Tan2
1

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 2 CRIPAC NLPR CASIA, Beijing, P.R. China
{min.ren, yunlong.wang}@cripac.ia.ac.cn, {znsun, tnt}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
The generalization ability of Convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) for biometrics drops greatly due to the adverse effects of various occlusions. To this end, we propose a novel
uniﬁed framework integrated the merits of both CNNs and
graphical models to learn dynamic graph representations for
occlusion problems in biometrics, called Dynamic Graph
Representation (DGR). Convolutional features onto certain
regions are re-crafted by a graph generator to establish the
connections among the spatial parts of biometrics and build
Feature Graphs based on these node representations. Each
node of Feature Graphs corresponds to a speciﬁc part of the
input image and the edges express the spatial relationships between parts. By analyzing the similarities between the nodes,
the framework is able to adaptively remove the nodes representing the occluded parts. During dynamic graph matching, we propose a novel strategy to measure the distances of
both nodes and adjacent matrixes. In this way, the proposed
method is more convincing than CNNs-based methods because the dynamic graph method implies a more illustrative
and reasonable inference of the biometrics decision. Experiments conducted on iris and face demonstrate the superiority
of the proposed framework, which boosts the accuracy of occluded biometrics recognition by a large margin comparing
with baseline methods.

Figure 1: Iris samples and face samples in unconstrained environments.

clusion is the most common challenges problem in unconstrained situations (Jozer et al. 2013) (Azeem et al. 2014)
(He et al. 2018) as shown in Figure 1. In these situations,
gaps between intra-class samples are signiﬁcantly enlarged.
The generalization abilities of CNNs on occluded cases
drops greatly due to the adverse effects of various occlusions.
Masking strategy is commonly seen in literatures for occlusion problems in biometrics. The features of occluded
areas are suppressed during matching by masking out the
invalid regions. However, detection and labelling of occlusion as masks are error-prone and the errors are accumulated into inaccurate recognition results. More importantly,
the features of occluded areas can not be suppressed after feature extraction by masks in CNNs which are end-toend frameworks. And the results of experiments demonstrate
that masking the occluded areas before feature extraction is
harmful.
In this paper, we propose a novel uniﬁed framework
named Dynamic Graph Representation (DGR) for occluded
biometrics. Basically, CNNs are adopted to extract convolutional representations, graph models are leveraged to overcome the occlusion problem. Dynamic graphs are built to remove the nodes of occluded part adaptively. As a result, the
similarity between intra-class samples are signiﬁcantly increased. The discriminative regions and the relationships between the regions are explicitly modeled by graphical blocks
in the proposed framework.

Introduction
Deep learning methods have gained great success in recent
years, especially in the area of computer vision. Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have been widely applied as
a powerful tool for image classiﬁcation and feature extraction (LéCun et al. 1998) (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton
2012) (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014) (Szegedy et al. 2015)
(He et al. 2016) (Gao et al. 2017) (Hu et al. 2018). CNNs are
also universally applied to biometrics, including iris recognition (Liu et al. 2016) (Zhao and Kumar 2017) (Zhang et al.
2018), face recognition (Taigman et al. 2014) (Sun, Wang,
and Tang 2014) (Schroff, Kalenichenko, and Philbin 2015)
(Liu et al. 2017) (Wu et al. 2018) (Deng et al. 2018) and so
on.
However, tasks of biometrics are different from natural
image classiﬁcation. They are greatly inﬂuenced by illumination, expression, occlusion and so on. Among them, occ 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11940

