The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Complexity of Computing the Shapley Value in Games with Externalities
Oskar Skibski
Institute of Informatics, University of Warsaw, Poland
oskar.skibski@mimuw.edu.pl

Abstract

MQ-value
EF-value
HY-value
SS-value
MY-value

We study the complexity of computing the Shapley value
in games with externalities. We focus on two representations based on marginal contribution nets (embedded MCnets and weighted MC-nets) and ﬁve extensions of the Shapley value to games with externalities. Our results show that
while weighted MC-nets are more concise than embedded
MC-nets, they have slightly worse computational properties
when it comes to computing the Shapley value: two out of
ﬁve extensions can be computed in polynomial time for embedded MC-nets and only one for weighted MC-nets.

Embedded MC-nets
in P (∗ )
in P (Th.8)
#P-complete (Th.10)
#P-complete (Th.13)
#P-complete (Th.14)

Weighted MC-nets
in P (Th.6)
#P-complete (Th.9)
#P-complete (Th.10)
#P-complete (Th.13)
#P-complete (Th.14)

Table 1: Summary of complexity results for computing extended Shapley value in games represented as embedded and
weighted MC-nets. (∗ ) Proved by Michalak et al. (2010a).

nets (Michalak et al. 2010a) and weighted MC-nets (Michalak et al. 2010b), are extensions of the well-known logicbased representation: marginal contribution nets (Ieong and
Shoham 2005). For the former representation, Michalak et
al. (2010a) proved that one extension of the Shapley value
can be computed in polynomial time. For the latter one,
only partial results (polynomial results under restrictive additional assumptions) have been proposed for three extensions. More recently, Skibski et al. (2020) proposed a new
representation, partition decision trees, and proved that all
ﬁve extensions of the Shapley value listed above can be computed in polynomial time under this representation.
In this paper, we ﬁll a gap in the literature by determining
what is the complexity of computing all the ﬁve extensions
of the Shapley value in games represented as embedded and
weighted MC-nets. Speciﬁcally, we show that only two out
of ﬁve extensions can be computed in polynomial time for
embedded MC-nets and only one can be computed in polynomial time for weighted MC-nets (unless P = NP). For all
other values we show that computation is #P-complete (see
Table 1).
Interestingly, our results are strongly based on graph theory techniques. Speciﬁcally, we show that every embedded/weighted MC-nets rule can be represented as (one or
more) graphs and that each extended Shapley value can be
expressed as the weighted sum over all proper vertex coloring in these graphs. Building upon these general results, for
each value we analyze the resulting weighted sum. That is,
we show the MQ-value is a weighted sum over 2-colorings
and EF-value—over independent sets in a part of the graph.
In turn, SS-value under some assumptions is proved to be
equal to the number of matchings in a bipartite graph.

Introduction
Coalitional games are a standard model of cooperation in
multi-agent systems (Chalkiadakis, Elkind, and Wooldridge
2011). In the classic form the proﬁt of a coalition is assumed to be independent of the coalitions formed by the
other players. However, this simplifying assumption does
not hold in many settings. For example, if agents in a system have conﬂicted goals or limited resources, then coalitions naturally affect each other (Dunne 2005). There are
also examples of externalities in economics, in oligopolistic markets in particular, where cooperation of some companies affect the proﬁts of the competitors (Yi 2003). That
is why, in the last decade coalitional games with externalities have gained attention both in economic (Kóczy 2018;
Abe and Funaki 2017) and AI literature (Rahwan et al. 2012;
Michalak et al. 2010a).
Externalities present new challenges both conceptually
and computationally. On the conceptual side, it is unclear
how to extend most solution concepts to games with externalities. In particular, there are several non-equivalent
well-established methods of extending the Shapley value to
games with externalities proposed by Pham Do and Norde
(2007) (EF-value), McQuillin (2009) (MQ-value), Hu and
Yang (2010) (HY-value), Feldman (1996) (SS-value) and
Myerson (1977b) (MY-value). On the computational side,
externalities highly increase the size of the game itself.
To cope with the extensive space requirement of games
with externalities, three different representations were proposed in the literature. The ﬁrst two, called embedded MCc 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2244

