The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Towards Omni-Supervised Face Alignment for Large Scale Unlabeled Videos
Congcong Zhu,1,2 Hao Liu,2,3∗ Zhenhua Yu,2,3 Xuehong Sun2,3
1

School of Computer Engineering and Science, Shanghai University, Shanghai, 200444, China
2
School of Information Engineering, Ningxia University, Yinchuan, 750021, China
3
Collaborative Innovation Center for Ningxia Big Data and Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Co-founded by Ningxia Municipality and Ministry of Education, Yinchuan, 750021, China
congcong.zhu nxu@outlook.com, {liuhao, zhyu, sunxh}@nxu.edu.cn
Abstract

In this paper, we propose a spatial-temporal relational reasoning networks (STRRN) approach to investigate the problem of omni-supervised face alignment in videos. Unlike existing fully supervised methods which rely on numerous annotations by hand, our learner exploits large scale unlabeled
videos plus available labeled data to generate auxiliary plausible training annotations. Motivated by the fact that neighbouring facial landmarks are usually correlated and coherent across consecutive frames, our approach automatically
reasons about discriminative spatial-temporal relationships
among landmarks for stable face tracking. Speciﬁcally, we
carefully develop an interpretable and efﬁcient network module, which disentangles facial geometry relationship for every
static frame and simultaneously enforces the bi-directional
cycle-consistency across adjacent frames, thus allowing the
modeling of intrinsic spatial-temporal relations from raw face
sequences. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that
our approach surpasses the performance of most fully supervised state-of-the-arts.

(a) Spatial Dendritic Relational Constraint

(b) Temporal Cycle-Consistent Relation

Figure 1: Insight of our proposed STRRN. Our method processes the large scale unlabeled video by automatically distilling the spatial-temporal knowledge, i.e., a) exploiting the
facial geometry relationship by holding a dendritic structure,
b) enforcing the bi-directional cycle-consistency temporally
on consecutive frames. We leveraged these self-supervised
spatial-temporal relations to generate extra reliable training
annotations for model update.

Introduction
Face alignment (a.k.a., facial landmark detection) aims to
detect multiple facial landmarks for the given facial image
or video sequence, which has dominated a crucial step in
many facial analysis tasks such as face identiﬁcation and
recognition (Hu, Lu, and Tan 2014; Liu et al. 2019a) and
face animation (Roth, Tong, and Liu 2015; Liu et al. 2016).
While signiﬁcant works have been devoted to face alignment
recently (Liu et al. 2019b; Wu et al. 2018; Kumar and Chellappa 2018), the practical performance hardly meets the precise requirements in the scenario of performing large scale
unlabeled videos. The major reasons are two-fold: 1) Existing methods intensely rely on the sheer volume of training
annotations. 2) It is tedious to annotate the spatial-temporal
structures on the massive set of frames. Hence, we are supposed to propose an accurate and robust face alignment algorithm to automatically annotate the large amounts of unlabeled face videos.

Throughout recent literatures, face alignment is dominated by the regression-based approaches (Trigeorgis et al.
2016; Wu et al. 2018; Kumar and Chellappa 2018; Guo, Lu,
and Zhou 2018; Liu et al. 2019b; 2018), which typically seek
discriminative feature-to-shape mappings with preserving
the shape constraint. Methods such as LAB (Wu et al. 2018)
and PCD-CNN (Kumar and Chellappa 2018) impose the relative geometry among multiple landmarks, making the plugin module pose-invariant for accurate performance. However, these fully-supervised methods require large amounts
of precise hand-crafted annotations for training and cannot
be directly adopted for unlabeled data. Besides the spatial
relationship, video-based methods such as CCR (SánchezLozano et al. 2016) and TSTN (Liu et al. 2018) enforces
the consistency relation temporally across adjacent frames,
which improves the stableness versus the jitter problem during tracking. One major issue in this type of method is

∗

Corresponding Author is Hao Liu.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13090

