The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Bi-Level Actor-Critic for Multi-Agent Coordination∗
Haifeng Zhang,1 Weizhe Chen,2 Zeren Huang,2 Minne Li,1 Yaodong Yang,3
Weinan Zhang,2 Jun Wang1
1

University College London
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
Huawei R&D UK
{haifeng.zhang, junwang}@ucl.ac.uk, {chenweizhe, sjtu hzr, wnzhang}@sjtu.edu.cn, minne.li@cs.ucl.ac.uk
yaodong.yang@huawei.com
2

Field Q-learning (Yang et al. 2018). These model-free approaches train the agents centrally to converge to a Nash
equilibrium and then execute the agents distributively. However, these approaches can not guarantee a particular converged Nash equilibrium, which leads to uncertainty and
sub-optimality.

Abstract
Coordination is one of the essential problems in multiagent systems. Typically multi-agent reinforcement learning
(MARL) methods treat agents equally and the goal is to solve
the Markov game to an arbitrary Nash equilibrium (NE) when
multiple equilibra exist, thus lacking a solution for NE selection. In this paper, we treat agents unequally and consider
Stackelberg equilibrium as a potentially better convergence
point than Nash equilibrium in terms of Pareto superiority, especially in cooperative environments. Under Markov games,
we formally deﬁne the bi-level reinforcement learning problem in ﬁnding Stackelberg equilibrium. We propose a novel
bi-level actor-critic learning method that allows agents to
have different knowledge base (thus intelligent), while their
actions still can be executed simultaneously and distributedly.
The convergence proof is given, while the resulting learning
algorithm is tested against the state of the arts. We found that
the proposed bi-level actor-critic algorithm successfully converged to the Stackelberg equilibria in matrix games and ﬁnd
a asymmetric solution in a highway merge environment.

To tackle this problem, we reconsider the coordination
problem from an asymmetric angle. Although the original
game model is symmetric that agents make decisions simultaneously, we are still able to deﬁne a priority of decision
making for the agents in the training phase and keep simultaneous decision making in the execution phase. In this
asymmetric game model, the Stackelberg equilibrium (SE)
(Von Stackelberg 2010) is naturally set up as the learning
objective rather than the Nash equilibrium (NE). The SE
optimizes the leader’s policy given that the follower always
plays the best-response policy. Despite its discrimination on
the follower, we surprisingly ﬁnd the SE is Pareto superior
than the NE in a wide range of environments. For example,
in the cooperative games, the SE is guaranteed to be Pareto
optimal, whereas only one of the NEs achieves this point, as
Table 1a shows. In a non-cooperative case shown in Table
1b, the SE is not included in the set of the NEs and is Pareto
superior to any NE. In general, our empirical study shows
the SE is likely to be Pareto superior to the average NE in
games with high cooperation level.

Introduction
In a multi-agent system, the effect of any agent’s action on
the environment also depends on the actions taken by other
agents and coordination is needed to consistently break ties
between equally good actions or strategies (Bu et al. 2008).
This problem is essential especially in the circumstances
where the agents are not able to communicate. In game theory, coordination game is deﬁned as the game with multiple Nash equilibria. Various criteria for Nash equilibrium
selection were proposed in the game theory literature such
as salience (Vanderschraaf 1995) and fairness (Rabin 1993),
where the agents are assumed to know the game model before applying these criteria. For the environments where
agents are not able to know the game model but can learn
it through interactions with the environments, multi-agent
reinforcement learning approaches were proposed to ﬁnd a
Nash equilibrium, including Nash Q-learning (Hu and Wellman 2003), MADDPG (Lowe et al. 2017) and the Mean-

For solving the SE, a wide variety of bi-level optimization
methods were proposed (Dempe 2018). However, our problem setting differs from the traditional bi-level optimization
problem in two aspects: 1) we consider a multi-state environment where the objective function is a summation of the
sequential discounted rewards; 2) our game model is unknown and can only be learned through interactions. Actually, the traditional bi-level optimization problem can be
regarded as a stateless model-based version of our problem.
We formally deﬁne our problem as the bi-level reinforcement learning problem and propose a novel bi-level actorcritic algorithm to solve it. We train the actor of the follower
and the critics of both agents centrally to ﬁnd an SE and
then execute the agents distributively. Our experiments in
the small environments and a simulated highway merge environment demonstrate the efﬁciency of our algorithm, out-

∗
Weinan Zhang and Jun Wang are the corresponding authors of
this paper.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7325

