The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

CSPN++: Learning Context and Resource Aware
Convolutional Spatial Propagation Networks for Depth Completion
Xinjing Cheng, Peng Wang,∗ Chenye Guan, Ruigang Yang
Robotics and Auto-driving Lab (RAL), Baidu Research
{chengxinjing, wangpeng54, guanchenye, yangruigang}@baidu.com

Abstract
Depth Completion deals with the problem of converting a
sparse depth map to a dense one, given the corresponding color image. Convolutional spatial propagation network
(CSPN) is one of the state-of-the-art (SoTA) methods of
depth completion, which recovers structural details of the
scene. In this paper, we propose CSPN++, which further improves its effectiveness and efﬁciency by learning adaptive
convolutional kernel sizes and the number of iterations for
the propagation, thus the context and computational resource
needed at each pixel could be dynamically assigned upon
requests. Speciﬁcally, we formulate the learning of the two
hyper-parameters as an architecture selection problem where
various conﬁgurations of kernel sizes and numbers of iterations are ﬁrst deﬁned, and then a set of soft weighting parameters are trained to either properly assemble or select from
the pre-deﬁned conﬁgurations at each pixel. In our experiments, we ﬁnd weighted assembling can lead to signiﬁcant
accuracy improvements, which we referred to as ”contextaware CSPN”, while weighted selection, ”resource-aware
CSPN” can reduce the computational resource signiﬁcantly
with similar or better accuracy. Besides, the resource needed
for CSPN++ can be adjusted w.r.t. the computational budget automatically. Finally, to avoid the side effects of noise
or inaccurate sparse depths, we embed a gated network inside CSPN++, which further improves the performance. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of CSPN++ on the KITTI depth
completion benchmark, where it signiﬁcantly improves over
CSPN and other SoTA methods 1 .

!
Figure 1: Output assembling or selection over an unrolled
CSPN. The color of each dot indicates the computational resources need at the point, where blue indicates low resource
usage while red indicates high resource usage.

moving robots such as self-driving vehicles, home/indoor
robots, or applications such as augmented reality.
One of the state-of-the-art (SoTA) methods for this task is
CSPN (Cheng, Wang, and Yang 2018a), which is an efﬁcient
local linear propagation model with learned afﬁnity from a
convolutional neural network (CNN). CSPN claims three
important properties should be considered for the depth
completion task, 1) depth preservation, where the depth
value at sparse points should be maintained, 2) structure
alignment, where the detailed structures, such as edges and
object boundaries in estimated depth map, should be aligned
with the given image, and 3) transition smoothness, where
the depth transition between sparse points and their neighborhoods should be smooth.
In real applications, depths from devices like LiDAR, or
algorithms such as SfM or SLAM could be noisy (Van Gansbeke et al. 2019) due to system or environmental errors.
Datasets like KITTI adopt stereo and multiple frames to
compensate the errors for evaluation. Here in this paper,
we do not assume that the sparse depth map is the ground
truth, rather, we consider that it may include errors as well.
So the depth value at sparse points should be conditionally
maintained with respect to its accuracy. Secondly, all pixels
are considered equally in CSPN, while intuitively the pixels
at geometrical edges and object boundaries should be more
focused for structure alignment and transition smoothness.
Therefore, in CSPN++, we propose to ﬁnd a proper propa-

Introduction
Image guided depth completion, or depth completion for
short in this paper, is the task of converting a sparse depth
map from devices such as LiDAR or algorithms such as
structure-from-motion (SfM) and simultaneously localization and mapping (SLAM) to a per-pixel dense depth map
with the help of reference images. The technique has a wide
range of applications for the perception of indoor/outdoor
∗

denotes the corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://www.cvlibs.net/datasets/kitti/eval depth.php?
benchmark=depth completion
10615

