The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Indirect Stochastic Gradient Quantization
and Its Application in Distributed Deep Learning
Afshin Abdi, Faramarz Fekri
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA
{abdi, fekri}@gatech.edu

been proposed to mitigate the communication bottleneck by
reducing the overall transmission rate such as:

Abstract
Transmitting the gradients or model parameters is a critical bottleneck in distributed training of large models. To mitigate this
issue, we propose an indirect quantization and compression of
stochastic gradients (SG) via factorization. The gist of the idea
is that, in contrast to the direct compression methods, we focus
on the factors in SGs, i.e., the forward and backward signals
in the backpropagation algorithm. We observe that these factors are correlated and generally sparse in most deep models.
This gives rise to rethinking of the approaches for quantization and compression of gradients with the ultimate goal of
minimizing the error in the ﬁnal computed gradients subject
to the desired communication constraints. We have proposed
and theoretically analyzed different indirect SG quantization
(ISGQ) methods. The proposed ISGQ reduces the reconstruction error in SGs compared to the direct quantization methods
with the same number of quantization bits. Moreover, it can
achieve compression gains of more than 100, while the existing traditional quantization schemes can achieve compression
ratio of at most 32 (quantizing to 1 bit). Further, for a ﬁxed
total batch-size, the required transmission bit-rate per worker
decreases in ISGQ as the number of workers increases.

1

1. Quantization. Reducing the number of bits in representing
SG is a well-known technique to decrease the communication bit-rate. For example, quantizing the gradients to
one-bit such as (Seide et al. 2014) or SignSGD (Bernstein
et al. 2018) can signiﬁcantly reduce the communication
overhead. However, the reduced accuracy of gradients and
quantization bias may impair the convergence rate. Using
different quantization levels and/or adaptive quantizers,
one can alleviate such issues (Dryden et al. 2016). Stochastic quantizers such as QSGD (Alistarh et al. 2017), TernGrad (Wen et al. 2017) and Dithered qunatization (Abdi
and Fekri 2019a; 2019b) are alternative unbiased quantization approaches with performance guarantees which
provide a trade-off between the gradient precision and the
model accuracy.
2. Sparsiﬁcation. Another approach is transmitting only the
important or a small subset of the gradients. (Strom 2015)
was among the early works to use sparsiﬁcation in conjunction with thresholded quantization to further compress
the gradients. As choosing the right threshold for gradient sparsiﬁcation is difﬁcult in practice and to improve
the performance of distributed learning, other sparsiﬁcation methods have been proposed such as transmitting
only a ﬁxed portion of the gradients (Dryden et al. 2016;
Aji and Heaﬁeld 2017), TopK SGD (Alistarh et al. 2018),
deep gradient compression (Lin et al. 2018) and random
(stochastic) sparsiﬁcation of the gradients (Wangni et al.
2018).

Introduction

In recent years, the size of deep learning problems is increased signiﬁcantly both in terms of the number of available
training samples as well as the number of model’s parameters. However scaling up of neural networks requires massive
amounts of storage, memory and computational power for
training. As such, large-scale distributed machine learning
in which the training samples are distributed among different repository or processing units (referred to as workers)
has started to be a viable approach for tackling the memory,
storage and computational constraints.
Since most common deep learning algorithms are based on
computing the gradients, in this paper, we focus on parallel
(distributed) computation of stochastic gradients (SG). The
requirement to exchange the locally computed SGs incurs
signiﬁcant communication overhead which is a major bottleneck in distributed learning. Variety of approaches have

Contribution. In this paper, we focus on the quantization of SGs. The main drawbacks of the existing quantization methods are the limited compression gain of at most
32 (quantizing 32 bit ﬂoating point number to only 1 bit),
and scalability as the total transmission bits increases almost
linearly with the number of workers. To overcome these issues, we observe that the cost function of a neural network
w.r.t. the parameters of a layer, W , can be reformulated
as Ex [f (W x)] where x is the ‘virtual’ input of that layer.
Therefore, we ﬁrst consider the SG quantization of this class
of functions and develop a new algorithm, indirect stochastic

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3113

