The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

CSI: A Coarse Sense Inventory for 85% Word Sense Disambiguation
Caterina Lacerra,∗ Michele Bevilacqua,∗ Tommaso Pasini, Roberto Navigli
Sapienza University of Rome
Department of Computer Science
{lacerra, bevilacqua, pasini, navigli}@di.uniroma1.it

Hargraves 2007), we argue that the reason for this unsatisfactory performance does not lie solely in the complexity of the task but also in the ﬁne granularity of the sense
inventory adopted, i.e., WordNet (Fellbaum 1998). For example the noun street has separate WordNet senses for the
‘thoroughfare (usually including sidewalks)’ and ‘the part
of a thoroughfare between the sidewalks’. Such ﬁne-grained
distinctions introduce noise and sparsity for machine learning algorithms in a task where reliable data is very costly
to produce. Moreover, the inter-annotator agreement with
WordNet ranges from 0.6 to 0.8 (Navigli 2009), making
it clear that, unless super-human performance is expected,
WSD systems will not exceed this ceiling. To overcome
these issues, in this paper we present Coarse Sense Inventory
(CSI), a new organization of concepts based on a large-scale
mapping of WordNet synsets to domain-based semantic labels. CSI labels are tailored to WSD, with each label shared
across different words and part-of-speech (POS) tags. The
inventory has been developed starting from the categories
of a general domain thesaurus, i.e., Roget’s (2011), which
have been clustered into coarser labels, leading to an inventory whose high-level semantics is domain-based (describing what each label is about) rather than hypernymy-based
(what the label is a kind of ). The experimental results provide evidence that CSI is better suited for WSD than other
existing competitors; moreover, CSI leads a supervised neural system to reach an F1 of almost 86% overall and helps the
model to generalise over unseen or under-represented words.
In this work, we provide four main contributions:

Abstract
Word Sense Disambiguation (WSD) is the task of associating a word in context with one of its meanings. While many
works in the past have focused on raising the state of the
art, none has even come close to achieving an F-score in the
80% ballpark when using WordNet as its sense inventory.
We contend that one of the main reasons for this failure is
the excessively ﬁne granularity of this inventory, resulting in
senses that are hard to differentiate between, even for an experienced human annotator. In this paper we cope with this
long-standing problem by introducing Coarse Sense Inventory (CSI), obtained by linking WordNet concepts to a new
set of 45 labels. The results show that the coarse granularity of CSI leads a WSD model to achieve 85.9% F1, while
maintaining a high expressive power. Our set of labels also
exhibits ease of use in tagging and a descriptiveness that other
coarse inventories lack, as demonstrated in two annotation
tasks which we performed. Moreover, a few-shot evaluation
proves that the class-based nature of CSI allows the model to
generalise over unseen or under-represented words.

1

Introduction

Word Sense Disambiguation (WSD) is the task of assigning the correct meaning from among a ﬁnite set of possible
choices to a word in a context (Navigli 2009). It is a key task
in Natural Language Processing (Navigli 2018), providing
semantic information that is potentially beneﬁcial for downstream applications, such as information extraction (Delli
Bovi, Espinosa Anke, and Navigli 2015) and machine translation (Pu et al. 2018). While much effort has been devoted
to building new algorithms or data (Pasini and Navigli 2018;
Scarlini, Pasini, and Navigli 2019) for this task, state-ofthe-art systems have yet to break the 80% accuracy ceiling on standard WSD benchmark datasets (Raganato, Delli
Bovi, and Navigli 2017; Bevilacqua and Navigli 2019; Vial,
Lecouteux, and Schwab 2019; Scarlini, Pasini, and Navigli
2020), showing that the WSD task is far from being solved.
Following the literature in the ﬁeld (Hovy et al. 2006;
Palmer, Dang, and Fellbaum 2007; Navigli, Litkowski, and

1. We introduce CSI, a new coarse-grained sense inventory
where semantic labels are shared across the lexicon.
2. Our new sense inventory achieves better qualitative results on two manual annotation tasks than its alternatives:
our labels enable a higher inter-annotator agreement and
are more descriptive than those of the competitors.
3. CSI outperforms all the compared coarse-grained sense
inventories on all-words WSD, attaining a better tradeoff between performance and expressiveness.
4. CSI paves the way to few-shot learning in WSD, as it
reaches better performances than its alternative inventories on unseen and under-represented words.

∗

The authors contributed equally.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8123

