The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Getting Closer to AI Complete Question
Answering: A Set of Prerequisite Real Tasks
Anna Rogers, Olga Kovaleva, Matthew Downey, Anna Rumshisky
Department of Computer Science, University of Massachusetts Lowell
Lowell, MA 01854
{arogers, okovalev, mdowney, arum}@cs.uml.edu

based information with world knowledge, and deciding
that neither source provides sufﬁcient information;

Abstract
The recent explosion in question answering research produced a wealth of both factoid reading comprehension
(RC) and commonsense reasoning datasets. Combining them
presents a different kind of task: deciding not simply whether
information is present in the text, but also whether a conﬁdent guess could be made for the missing information. We
present QuAIL, the ﬁrst RC dataset to combine text-based,
world knowledge and unanswerable questions, and to provide question type annotation that would enable diagnostics
of the reasoning strategies by a given QA system. QuAIL
contains 15K multi-choice questions for 800 texts in 4 domains. Crucially, it offers both general and text-speciﬁc questions, unlikely to be found in pretraining data. We show that
QuAIL poses substantial challenges to the current state-ofthe-art systems, with a 30% drop in accuracy compared to the
most similar existing dataset.

1

• attempt to balance the types of reasoning and domains in
the dataset and provide reasoning type annotation, which
would be used for model diagnostics;
• collect a new corpus with information that is unlikely to
have occurred in typical pretraining data.
QuAIL contains 15K questions across 4 domains and
is publicly available1 . Experiments with 7 baseline systems show QuAIL to be challenging, with the system that
achieves state-of-the-art results on the most similar dataset
experiencing up to 30% drop in accuracy.

2

Related Work

The QA ﬁeld is exploding: at the time of submission of this
paper there were already over 80 datasets, with at least 40
published or announced in 2018-2019. It comprises two subﬁelds: open-world QA and reading comprehension (RC).
In open-world QA there are multiple possible sources of
information (typically web snippets) that may or may not
contain the correct answer. The questions are collected independently of texts that contain the answers, and tend to focus on generic factoid information, such as trivia (e.g. TriviaQA, (Joshi et al. 2017)) and search engine queries (e.g.
NaturalQuestions (Kwiatkowski et al. 2019)).
RC datasets come in several ﬂavors: cloze/span-selection
task, multiple-choice questions, and (the most rare) freeform
answers. Most RC datasets are in the cloze and spanselection categories, as they are easy to generate. These include the popular SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al. 2016), CBT (Hill
et al. 2015), and CNN/Daily Mail (Hermann et al. 2015)
datasets that have long dominated QA research. The obvious
limitation of extractive datasets is that they can only target
information explicitly mentioned in the text, and often get
solved with shallow lexical matching. Interesting recent attempts to force more complex reasoning include unanswerable questions (Rajpurkar, Jia, and Liang 2018), reasoning
over long texts (Kocisky et al. 2018), and multiple documents ((Yang et al. 2018)).

Introduction

Evaluation of NLP systems relies heavily on high-level reasoning tasks such as natural language inference and question
answering (QA). They are used as de-facto Turing test proxies: if a model can perform such reasoning, then we know
that it does indeed capture a lot of language knowledge.
However, for that to work, the benchmarks need to cover a
large (if not complete) set of reasoning strategies employed
by humans.
It is clear by now that (1) the existing datasets typically
explore a speciﬁc type of reasoning and are unbalanced for
question types, and (2) even the most successful NLP models rely on annotation artifacts. Furthermore, much of reading comprehension (RC) datasets target common knowledge
(e.g. ”What is the birth place of Dante”?), which could have
directly occurred in pretraining data of large models, such as
BERT or XLNet.
QuAIL (Question answering for Artiﬁcial IntelLigence)
is a new benchmark that aims to achieve the following:
• explore the full spectrum of uncertainty in QA: information directly present in the text, a combination of textc 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

8722

http://text-machine.cs.uml.edu/projects/quail/

