The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

One Homonym per Translation
Bradley Hauer, Grzegorz Kondrak
Department of Computing Science
University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada
{bmhauer, gkondrak}@ualberta.ca

Abstract

#2
#5
#6
#8
#9

The study of homonymy is vital to resolving fundamental problems in lexical semantics. In this paper, we propose four hypotheses that characterize the unique behavior
of homonyms in the context of translations, discourses, collocations, and sense clusters. We present a new annotated
homonym resource that allows us to test our hypotheses on
existing WSD resources. The results of the experiments provide strong empirical evidence for the hypotheses. This study
represents a step towards a computational method for distinguishing between homonymy and polysemy, and constructing
a deﬁnitive inventory of coarse-grained senses.

1

BANK1n
ﬁnancial institution
stock held in reserve
funds held by a house
container for money
building

#1
#3
#4
#7
#10

BANK2n
sloping land
long ridge or pile
arrangement of objects
slope in a road
ﬂight maneuver

Table 1: The senses of the noun ‘bank’ from WordNet 3.0,
grouped by its two homonyms.
and polysemy, and is widely considered to be excessively
ﬁne-grained for many practical applications (Navigli 2018),
as evidenced by a low inter-annotator agreement (Snyder
and Palmer 2004). This has inspired substantial prior work
on clustering ﬁne-grained senses to create more coarsegrained sense inventories (Hovy et al. 2006; Navigli 2006;
Snow et al. 2007; Dandala et al. 2013; McCarthy, Apidianaki, and Erk 2016).
Following the observation that different senses of a word
often correspond to distinct words in another language
(Resnik and Yarowsky 1997), another branch of prior work
has sought to use translations to deﬁne sense inventories (Resnik and Yarowsky 1999; Diab and Resnik 2002;
Ng, Wang, and Chan 2003; Chan, Ng, and Chiang 2007;
Apidianaki 2008; Bansal, DeNero, and Lin 2012; Taghipour
and Ng 2015). In order to be successful, such an approach
would have to resolve the challenging issues of mapping
senses to translations in a set of diverse target languages,
as well as projecting them onto a standard sense inventory,
such as WordNet.
In summary, clustering ﬁne-grained senses and deﬁning sense distinctions using translations are two competing
methodologies for creating coarse-grained sense inventories.
Regardless of which one is adopted, an understanding of the
nature and characteristics of homonymous senses is a necessary step toward a principled method of deﬁning senses
and sense distinctions. In particular, distinctions between
homonymous senses must be preserved in any sense inventory. This motivates our study, which contributes to such an
understanding by directly linking homonymy to the concepts
of translation and sense clustering, and thus bridging the gap
between the two approaches.
The contributions of this work are both theoretical and
empirical. The main goal is to create theoretical foundations

Introduction

Many words are semantically ambiguous, in that they have
multiple senses. The relationship between two senses of a
word is called polysemy if they are semantically related, and
homonymy otherwise (Jurafsky and Martin 2009). Senses
that belong to the same homonym are polysemous (e.g. #2
and #5 in Table 1), while senses of distinct homonyms are
homonymous (e.g. #2 and #1 in Table 1).
The differentiation of homonymous and polysemous word
senses is one of the central problems of lexicography
(Mel’čuk 2013). A textbook on thoeretical semantics devotes an entire chapter to the problem, concluding that it
may be insoluble, as the intuitions of native speakers cannot
be relied upon (Lyons 1995). Psycho-linguistics furnishes
evidence for a common representation of closely related
senses in the mental lexicon (Brown 2008), which suggests
that NLP applications would beneﬁt from the ability to distinguish homonym-level meaning differences (Utt and Padó
2011). In fact, standard NMT systems make a substantial
number of errors on homonyms (Liu, Lu, and Neubig 2018).
The study of homonymy is also of utmost importance
to the problem of establishing the set of senses for a
given word. In word sense disambiguation (WSD), which
is the task of selecting the intended sense of an ambiguous word token, the quality and granularity of the sense inventory greatly inﬂuences the design, evaluation, and utility of any system. The standard sense inventory, WordNet
(Fellbaum 1998), makes no distinction between homonymy
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7895

