The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Multi-Label Classiﬁcation with Label Graph Superimposing
Ya Wang,$∗ Dongliang He,‡∗ Fu Li,‡ Xiang Long,‡ Zhichao Zhou,‡ Jinwen Ma,$† Shilei Wen‡
$

School of Mathematical Sciences and LMAM, Peking University, China
Department of Computer Vision Technology (VIS), Baidu Inc., Beijing, China
{wangyachn, jwma}@math.pku.edu.cn, {hedongliang01, lifu, longxiang, zhouzhichao01, wenshilei}@baidu.com
‡

Abstract

  
   

 

Images or videos always contain multiple objects or actions. Multi-label recognition has been witnessed to achieve
pretty performance attribute to the rapid development of deep
learning technologies. Recently, graph convolution network
(GCN) is leveraged to boost the performance of multi-label
recognition. However, what is the best way for label correlation modeling and how feature learning can be improved
with label system awareness are still unclear. In this paper,
we propose a label graph superimposing framework to improve the conventional GCN+CNN framework developed for
multi-label recognition in the following two aspects. Firstly,
we model the label correlations by superimposing label graph
built from statistical co-occurrence information into the graph
constructed from knowledge priors of labels, and then multilayer graph convolutions are applied on the ﬁnal superimposed graph for label embedding abstraction. Secondly, we
propose to leverage embedding of the whole label system
for better representation learning. In detail, lateral connections between GCN and CNN are added at shallow, middle and deep layers to inject information of label system
into backbone CNN for label-awareness in the feature learning process. Extensive experiments are carried out on MSCOCO and Charades datasets, showing that our proposed solution can greatly improve the recognition performance and
achieves new state-of-the-art recognition performance.

  

(a) Examples on MS-COCO
 

 
 


  
   

  

(b) Examples on Charades

Introduction

Figure 1: Examples of label relationship in multi-label
datasets. (a) illustrates the co-occurrence of “Sports Ball”
and “Tennis Racket” on the MS-COCO datasets, we can see
the frequency that “Tennis Racket” co-occurs with “Sports
Ball” is as high as 0.42. Similarly, (b) showcases an example of “Sitting on Couch” and “Watching Television” from
the Charades dataset.

Multi-label is a natural property of images or videos, it is
usually the case that a image or video contains multiple objects or actions. In the computer vision community, multilabel recognition is a fundamental and practical task, and has
attracted increasing research efforts. Given the great success of single label image/video classiﬁcation brought by
deep convolutional networks (He et al. 2015; Carreira and
Zisserman 2017; He et al. 2016a; Feichtenhofer et al. 2018;
Wu et al. 2019), multi-label recognition can achieve pretty
performance by naively treating each label as an independent individual and applying multiple binary classiﬁcation

to predict whether a label presents or not. However, we argue that the following two aspects should be taken into consideration for such a task.
First of all, labels co-occur in images or videos with priors. As illustrated in Figure 1, with great chance, “Sports
Ball” comes together with “Tennis Racket” and a man “Sitting on Couch” is “Watching Television” simultaneously.
Then, a question is naturally raised, how to model the re-

∗
equal contribution. This work was done when Ya Wang was a
full-time research intern at Baidu.
†
Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12265

