The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Transfer Learning for Anomaly Detection
through Localized and Unsupervised Instance Selection
Vincent Vercruyssen, Wannes Meert, Jesse Davis
DTAI group, KU Leuven, Belgium
ﬁrstname.lastname@kuleuven.be

collecting examples of real-world anomalies is often expensive (e.g., a machine breaking), meaning that is not a viable
strategy to permit anomalous behavior for the sake of data
generation. This has spurred interest in semi-supervised approaches to anomaly detection, usually in conjunction with
active learning to efﬁciently collect the labels.
Real-world anomaly detection tasks often involve monitoring numerous assets, each of which is only slightly different. Such a situation may arise when monitoring machines
in a factory, resource usage in a chain of retail stores, or
windturbine farms. These use cases entail monitoring a large
number of assets as a big retail chain could have 100s if
not 1000s of stores. Therefore, even when using a strategy
like active learning, it may be impossible to collect labels
for each individual asset. Given that these use cases involve
multiple similar anomaly detection tasks, it may be possible to employ transfer learning to transfer labeled instances
from one task to another. This could then alleviate the need
to collect labels for each task separately.
Motivated by these types of applications, this paper proposes L OC IT, a novel transfer learning algorithm tailored
towards anomaly detection. It works in two steps. First,
given a partially labeled source dataset and an unlabeled target dataset, L OC IT selects a subset of the labeled source
instances to transfer to the target dataset. It picks those
instances that have similar localized data distributions in
both the source and target dataset. Second, it assigns an
anomaly score using a semi-supervised nearest-neighbor approach that considers both the transferred, labeled source
instances and the unlabeled target instances. Empirically,
L OC IT outperforms a multitude of existing transfer learning
and anomaly detection methods on a new transfer learning
benchmark for anomaly detection. Moreover, it outperforms
its competitors on a real-world anomaly detection problem of identifying anomalous water usage in multiple retail
stores. Finally, we provide an implementation of L OC IT.1

Abstract
Anomaly detection attempts to identify instances that deviate
from expected behavior. Constructing performant anomaly
detectors on real-world problems often requires some labeled data, which can be difﬁcult and costly to obtain. However, often one considers multiple, related anomaly detection
tasks. Therefore, it may be possible to transfer labeled instances from a related anomaly detection task to the problem
at hand. This paper proposes a novel transfer learning algorithm for anomaly detection that selects and transfers relevant labeled instances from a source anomaly detection task
to a target one. Then, it classiﬁes target instances using a
novel semi-supervised nearest-neighbors technique that considers both unlabeled target and transferred, labeled source
instances. The algorithm outperforms a multitude of state-ofthe-art transfer learning methods and unsupervised anomaly
detection methods on a large benchmark. Furthermore, it outperforms its rivals on a real-world task of detecting anomalous water usage in retail stores.

1

Introduction

Anomaly or outlier detection is a fundamental data analysis
task that involves identifying instances in a dataset that differ
from what was expected (Chandola, Banerjee, and Kumar
2009). Anomaly detection is important in practice as anomalies often correspond to substantial problems that could have
signiﬁcant costs, such as abnormal web trafﬁc (Robberechts
et al. 2018), or credit card fraud (Chan et al. 1999).
Anomaly detection can naturally be posed as an unsupervised learning task (Ramaswamy, Rastogi, and Shim 2000;
Breunig et al. 2000). Typically, unsupervised approaches exploit the underlying assumption that anomalies occur infrequently, which means they fall in low-density regions of the
instance space, or that anomalies are far away from normal
instances to identity them. However, real-world data regularly violate this assumption, degrading the unsupervised approaches’ performance (e.g., system maintenance can occur
infrequently and irregularly, but is not anomalous). Labeled
data offers the possibility to correct the mistakes made by
unsupervised detectors. Unfortunately, a fully supervised approach to anomaly detection is infeasible due to the fact that

2

Preliminaries

Transfer Learning for Anomaly Detection. Transfer
learning aims to learn a model for one dataset (the target do-

Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

6054

https://github.com/Vincent-Vercruyssen/LocIT

