The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Image-Adaptive GAN Based Reconstruction
Shady Abu Hussein,∗ Tom Tirer,∗ Raja Giryes
School of Electrical Engineering
Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel

from y to x for a speciﬁc observation model (e.g. superresolution with certain scale factor and bicubic anti-aliasing
kernel (Dong et al. 2014)). Yet, recent works have suggested
to use neural networks for handling only the image prior in
a way that does not require exhaustive ofﬂine training for
each different observation model. This can be done by using
CNN denoisers (Zhang et al. 2017; Meinhardt et al. 2017;
Rick Chang et al. 2017) plugged into iterative optimization
schemes (Venkatakrishnan, Bouman, and Wohlberg 2013;
Metzler, Maleki, and Baraniuk 2016; Tirer and Giryes
2018), training a neural network from scratch for the imaging task directly on the test image (based on internal recurrence of information inside a single image) (Shocher, Cohen,
and Irani 2018; Ulyanov, Vedaldi, and Lempitsky 2018), or
using generative models (Bora et al. 2017; Yeh et al. 2017;
Hand, Leong, and Voroninski 2018).

Abstract
In the recent years, there has been a signiﬁcant improvement
in the quality of samples produced by (deep) generative models such as variational auto-encoders and generative adversarial networks. However, the representation capabilities of these
methods still do not capture the full distribution for complex
classes of images, such as human faces. This deﬁciency has
been clearly observed in previous works that use pre-trained
generative models to solve imaging inverse problems. In this
paper, we suggest to mitigate the limited representation capabilities of generators by making them image-adaptive and
enforcing compliance of the restoration with the observations
via back-projections. We empirically demonstrate the advantages of our proposed approach for image super-resolution
and compressed sensing.

Introduction
The developments in deep learning (Goodfellow, Bengio,
and Courville 2016) in the recent years have led to significant improvement in learning generative models. Methods
like variational auto-encoders (VAEs) (Kingma and Welling
2013), generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014) and latent space optimizations (GLOs)
(Bojanowski et al. 2018) have found success at modeling
data distributions. However, for complex classes of images,
such as human faces, while these methods can generate
nice examples, their representation capabilities do not capture the full distribution. This phenomenon is sometimes referred to in the literature, especially in the context of GANs,
as mode collapse (Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou 2017;
Karras et al. 2017). Yet, as demonstrated in (Richardson
and Weiss 2018), it is common to other recent learning approaches as well.
Another line of works that has gained a lot from the developments in deep learning is imaging inverse problems,
where the goal is to recover an image x from its degraded
or compressed observations y (Bertero and Boccacci 1998).
Most of these works have been focused on training a convolutional neural network (CNN) to learn the inverse mapping

Methods that use generative models as priors can only
handle images that belong to the class or classes on which
the model was trained. However, the generative learning
equips them with valuable semantic information that other
strategies lack. For example, a method which is not based
on a generative model cannot produce a perceptually pleasing image of human face if the eyes are completely missing
in an inpainting task (Yeh et al. 2017). The main drawback
in restoring complex images using generative models is the
limited representation capabilities of the generators. Even
when one searches over the range of a pre-trained generator
for an image which is closest to the original x, he is expected
to get a signiﬁcant mismatch (Bora et al. 2017).
In this work, we propose a strategy to mitigate the limited representation capabilities of generators when solving
inverse problems. The strategy is based on a gentle internal
learning phase at test time, which essentially makes the generator image-adaptive while maintaining the useful information obtained in the ofﬂine training. In addition, in scenarios
with low noise level, we propose to further improve the reconstruction by a back-projection step that strictly enforces
compliance of the restoration with the observations y. We
empirically demonstrate the advantages of our proposed approach for image super-resolution and compressed sensing.

∗

The authors have contributed equally to this work.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3121

