The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Probabilistic Reasoning Across the Causal Hierarchy
Duligur Ibeling,1 Thomas Icard2
1

Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
2
Department of Philosophy, Stanford University
{duligur, icard}@stanford.edu

of basic conditional “if. . . then. . . ” statements; L3 , the language of probabilistic counterfactuals, encodes probabilities
for arbitrary boolean combinations of such conditional statements. Using standard ideas from logic and existing results,
we can address questions about deﬁnability and expressiveness. For instance, it is easy to prove in our framework that
each language is strictly more expressive than those below
it in the hierarchy (Prop. 1, 2 below). We can also interpret
well-known insights from the graphical models and causal
learning literatures as graph deﬁnability results for appropriate probabilistic logical languages, analogously to correspondence theory in modal logic (van Benthem 2001).
In possession of a precise syntax and semantics for probabilistic causal reasoning, questions of axiomatization naturally arise. That is, we would like to identify a perspicuous
set of basic principles that underly all such reasoning. One of
our main technical contributions is a series of ﬁnitary (sound
and complete) axiomatizations for each level of the causal
hierarchy (Thm. 5), relying on methods from semialgebraic
geometry. As a corollary to these completeness results, we
also reveal a “small-model property” with the consequence
that satisﬁability and validity for L1 , L2 , and L3 can be decided in polynomial space (Thm. 11).
Finally, in the last part of the paper we consider an alternative interpretation for our three logical languages. Probabilistic programs, with an appropriate notion of causal intervention, provide a procedural semantics for probabilistic
counterfactual claims and queries. We establish an equivalence between these models and a natural subclass of computable structural causal models (Thm. 12). The equivalence
in turn implies soundness and completeness of our axiomatizations with respect to this interpretation as well.

Abstract
We propose a formalization of the three-tier causal hierarchy
of association, intervention, and counterfactuals as a series of
probabilistic logical languages. Our languages are of strictly
increasing expressivity, the ﬁrst capable of expressing quantitative probabilistic reasoning—including conditional independence and Bayesian inference—the second encoding docalculus reasoning for causal effects, and the third capturing a fully expressive do-calculus for arbitrary counterfactual
queries. We give a corresponding series of ﬁnitary axiomatizations complete over both structural causal models and probabilistic programs, and show that satisﬁability and validity for
each language are decidable in polynomial space.

Introduction and Summary
Intelligence commonly involves prediction, anticipating future events on the basis of past observations (e.g., “Will the
water pipes freeze again this winter?”). Intelligent planning
and decision-making additionally require predicting what
would happen under a hypothetical action (“Will the pipes
freeze if we keep the heat on?”). An even more sophisticated ability—critical for tasks like explanation—is to reason counterfactually about what would have happened given
knowledge about what in fact happened (“Would the pipes
have frozen if we had left the heat on, given that the heat
was off and the pipes in fact froze?”). These three modes of
reasoning constitute a causal hierarchy (Shpitser and Pearl
2008; Pearl 2009), highlighting the signiﬁcance of structural
causal knowledge for ﬂexible thought and action.
The aim of the present article is to gain conceptual as
well as technical insight into this hierarchy by employing
tools from logic. Loosely following earlier work (Shpitser
and Pearl 2008), we propose a characterization of its levels
in terms of logical syntax. Semantically, all three languages
are interpreted over the same class of models, namely structural causal models (and later probabilistic programs). The
languages differ in how much they can express about these
models. L1 , the language of association, expresses only
“pure” probabilistic facts and relationships; L2 , the language
of probabilistic intervention, allows expressing probabilities

Relation to Previous Work
While deterministic causal counterfactuals and probabilistic
logics have both received extensive treatment independently,
the present contribution appears to be the ﬁrst systematic
study of probabilistic counterfactuals. Our work thus synthesizes and improves upon a long line of previous work.
Axioms for causal conditionals interpreted over structural
causal models are well understood (Galles and Pearl 1998;
Halpern 2000; Pearl 2009; Zhang 2013; Ibeling and Icard

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10170

