The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

One-Shot Learning for Long-Tail Visual Relation Detection
Weitao Wang,1 Meng Wang,1,2∗ Sen Wang,3 Guodong Long,4 Lina Yao,5 Guilin Qi,1,2 Yang Chen1,2
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
2
MOE Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration, China
3
The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia
4
The University of Technology Sydney, Sydney, Australia
5
The University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia
{wangweitao, meng.wang, gqi, chenyang.list}@seu.edu.cn,
sen.wang@uq.edu.au, guodong.long@uts.edu.au, lina.yao@unsw.edu.au
Abstract
on

The aim of visual relation detection is to provide a comprehensive understanding of an image by describing all
the objects within the scene, and how they relate to each
other, in <object-predicate-object> form; for example,
<person-lean on-wall>. This ability is vital for image
captioning, visual question answering, and many other applications. However, visual relationships have long-tailed distributions and, thus, the limited availability of training samples
is hampering the practicability of conventional detection approaches. With this in mind, we designed a novel model for
visual relation detection that works in one-shot settings. The
embeddings of objects and predicates are extracted through
a network that includes a feature-level attention mechanism.
Attention alleviates some of the problems with feature sparsity, and the resulting representations capture more discriminative latent features. The core of our model is a dual graph
neural network that passes and aggregates the context information of predicates and objects in an episodic training
scheme to improve recognition of the one-shot predicates and
then generate the triplets. To the best of our knowledge, we
are the ﬁrst to center on the viability of one-shot learning
for visual relation detection. Extensive experiments on two
newly-constructed datasets show that our model signiﬁcantly
improved the performance of two tasks PredCls and SGCls
from 2.8% to 12.2% compared with state-of-the-art baselines.

Head
Predicates

park next

lean on

attach to

pull

Tail Predicates

Figure 1: Frequencies of predicates in VRD dataset. There
are a large portion of predicates that have few triplets.

that most predicates, such as “attach to”, will have very
few training samples, if any, compared to the most popular
predicates, such as “on”.
For this reason, most current models (Lu et al. 2016;
Zhang et al. 2017; 2019a; 2019b) only perform well with
the most popular predicates. Dornadula et al. (Dornadula et
al. 2019) recently introduced a new model that treats a predicate as a neural network transformation between two object
representations. The proposed model can, rather effectively,
detect visual relationships in few-shot learning scenarios.
However, detecting these relationships with one-shot learning is yet to be mastered. Intuitively, the fewer the number
of available training instances, the more a detection model
is needed. Therefore, we have focused our research efforts
on detecting visual relationships from one sample only, i.e.,
one-shot learning.
Our solution centers on a novel model for detecting the visual relationships in an image. The visual features of objects
and predicates are extracted ﬁrst, and embeddings are generated through the feature extraction network that includes a
feature-level attention mechanism. Attention alleviates some
of the problems with feature sparsity, and the resulting representations capture more discriminative latent features. A

Introduction
A common way to deﬁne the visual relationships in an
image with a triplet, where two objects are connected by
a predicate – for example, <person-adjacent to-bike>
or <clock-attach to-building>. Identifying these relationships is useful for a wide range of image understanding tasks, such as captioning (Fang et al. 2015), retrieval
(Johnson et al. 2015), reasoning (Shi, Zhang, and Li 2019;
Wang et al. 2018), and visual question answering (Xiong,
Merity, and Socher 2016). Conventional models for automatically detecting these relationships typically require a
relatively large number of training instances to determine
the predicates. However, as shown in Figure 1, visual relationships tend to have long-tailed distributions, which means
∗

Corresponding Author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12225

