The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Sentiment Classiﬁcation in Customer Service
Dialogue with Topic-Aware Multi-Task Learning
Jiancheng Wang,1 Jingjing Wang,1∗ Changlong Sun,2 Shoushan Li,1
Xiaozhong Liu,2 Luo Si,2 Min Zhang,1 Guodong Zhou1
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University, China
2
Alibaba Group, China
jcwang@stu.suda.edu.cn, {djingwang, lishoushan, minzhang, gdzhou}@suda.edu.cn
{changlong.scl, xiaozhong.lxz, luo.si}@alibaba-inc.com
Abstract
Sentiment analysis in dialogues plays a critical role in dialogue data analysis. However, previous studies on sentiment
classiﬁcation in dialogues largely ignore topic information,
which is important for capturing overall information in some
types of dialogues. In this study, we focus on the sentiment
classiﬁcation task in an important type of dialogue, namely
customer service dialogue, and propose a novel approach
which captures overall information to enhance the classiﬁcation performance. Speciﬁcally, we propose a topic-aware
multi-task learning (TML) approach which learns topicenriched utterance representations in customer service dialogue by capturing various kinds of topic information. In the
experiment, we propose a large-scale and high-quality annotated corpus for the sentiment classiﬁcation task in customer
service dialogue and empirical studies on the proposed corpus show that our approach signiﬁcantly outperforms several
strong baselines.

1

Figure 1: A dialogue example in E-commerce customer service, where mark C denotes a customer and mark A denotes
a service agent.

ment if only considering their content, i.e. ignoring the dialogue context. However, both the utterances actually express
the negative sentiment if they are considered in the context
of the whole dialogue under the goods delivery topic since
the motivation of both the utterances is to inquire the reason for slow shipping and delivery. In this case, topic-related
semantic clues from the whole dialogue context may help
determine their sentiment, such as “shipped”, “tracking information”, “last week”, “warehouse”. (2) Different Roles:
The customer (speaker C) and the service agent (speaker A)
play different roles in a customer service dialogue. While the
customer (C) tends to inquire questions or express dissatisfaction with the service, the agent (A) needs to address the
issue for better service or promoting products. Such rolebased motivations can be speculated from their utterances in
the dialogue context, such as “shipped” for the customer and
“patient” for the agent, and can further help determine their
utterance sentiments.
In order to overcome above two challenges, we propose
a new topic-aware multi-task learning approach to sentiment classiﬁcation in customer service dialogue by capturing various kinds of topic information, i.e., overall topic inference, customer-role topic inference, and agent-role topic
inference. On one hand, overall topic inference captures the
global topic information for the entire dialogue to model the
overall dialogue motivation. On the other hand, customerrole topic inference and agent-role topic inference capture

Introduction

In an active traditional/online business environment, customer service is of critical importance, and customer service
dialogue mining can be an essential piece of business intelligence. In this background, sentiment analysis in customer
service dialogue plays a critical role in various applications,
such as service satisfaction analysis (Geetha 2017) and intelligent agent (Cui et al. 2017). In this study, we focus on
sentiment classiﬁcation in customer service dialogue, which
aims to assign a proper sentiment label to each utterance in
a customer service dialogue.
Different from in the dialogues of chit-chat in daily life,
there exist two inherent challenges to perform sentiment
classiﬁcation in customer service dialogue: (1) Overall Dialogue Motivation: a customer or service agent normally initiates a dialogue with a strong and clear motivation and tends
to talk around some speciﬁc topics which can be critical to
detecting the utterance’s sentiment in the dialogue context.
Take the exemplar dialogue as shown in Figure 1, both the
fourth and sixth utterances seem to express the neutral senti∗

Corresponding Author: Jingjing Wang.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9177

