The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Domain Generalization Using a Mixture of Multiple Latent Domains
Toshihiko Matsuura,1 Tatsuya Harada1,2
1
The University of Tokyo, 2 RIKEN
{matsuura, harada}@mi.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract

Conventional
domain generalization

Domain generalization using a
mixture of multiple latent domains

When domains, which represent underlying data distributions, vary during training and testing processes, deep neural
networks suffer a drop in their performance. Domain generalization allows improvements in the generalization performance for unseen target domains by using multiple source
domains. Conventional methods assume that the domain to
which each sample belongs is known in training. However,
many datasets, such as those collected via web crawling, contain a mixture of multiple latent domains, in which the domain of each sample is unknown. This paper introduces domain generalization using a mixture of multiple latent domains as a novel and more realistic scenario, where we try
to train a domain-generalized model without using domain
labels. To address this scenario, we propose a method that
iteratively divides samples into latent domains via clustering, and which trains the domain-invariant feature extractor shared among the divided latent domains via adversarial
learning. We assume that the latent domain of images is reﬂected in their style, and thus, utilize style features for clustering. By using these features, our proposed method successfully discovers latent domains and achieves domain generalization even if the domain labels are not given. Experiments show that our proposed method can train a domaingeneralized model without using domain labels. Moreover,
it outperforms conventional domain generalization methods,
including those that utilize domain labels.

Multiple source domains

Mixture of multiple latent domains

Photo

Art

Sketch

Model training

Model training

Unseen target domain

Unseen target domain

Figure 1: Unlike conventional domain generalization, domain generalization using a mixture of multiple latent domains aims to train a domain-generalized model without domain labels (e.g., Photo, Art, Sketch), which represent the
domain to which each sample belongs.
domains. Considering the situation where a DNN is used for
autonomous driving or robots in the real world, it is desirable to perform well under different conditions (e.g., illumination, types of objects) from the data given in training.
Because we can access no samples in the target domain, domain generalization can be considered a more difﬁcult and
a more important task than domain adaptation (Long et al.
2015; Ganin and Lempitsky 2015), in which we can access
labeled/unlabeled samples of the target domain in training.
To achieve domain generalization, several domain generalization methods have been proposed, including methods
that train the feature extractor so that the feature distributions among multiple source domains are matched (Li et al.
2018a; 2018b), or methods that train models for each domain and which combine them in testing (Mancini et al.
2018b; D’Innocente and Caputo 2018). These conventional
methods require domain labels, which represent the domain
to which each sample in multiple source domains belongs.
However, most datasets, such as those collected via web
crawling, are a mixture of multiple latent domains, and it
is difﬁcult to know the domain labels. For example, there
are several types of image search results for “dog”, such
as close-up photos of a face, photos of a dog ﬁgure in na-

Introduction
In the development of deep neural networks (DNNs), many
methods that achieve good performance in computer vision
tasks have been proposed (Ren et al. 2015; Chen et al. 2018).
A domain represents an underlying data distribution, and
these methods assume that the domains given in training
(source domain) and in testing (target domain) are the same.
However, it is known that DNNs suffer a drop in their performance due to domain shift (Torralba and Efros 2011).
To address this problem, extensive research has been carried out on domain generalization, which aims to train a
domain-generalized model that performs well for the unseen
target domain by using labeled data from multiple source
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11749

