The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

COTSAE: CO-Training of Structure and
Attribute Embeddings for Entity Alignment
Kai Yang,1,2,4 Shaoqin Liu,1,2,4 Junfeng Zhao,1,2,4∗ Yasha Wang,1,2,3 Bing Xie1,2
1

Key Laboratory of High Conﬁdence Software Technologies, Ministry of Education, Beijing 100871, China
2
School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
3
National Engineering Research Center For Software Engineering, Peking University, 100871
4
Peking University Information Technology Institute (Tianjin Binhai), Tianjin 300450, China
{smileyk, liu shaoqin, zhaojf, wangyasha, xiebing}@pku.edu.cn
For example, the entity ”www.dbpedia.org/resource/TheThree-Troubledoers” in Dbpedia KG and the entity
”www.wikidata.org/entity/Q7769108” in Wikidata KG both
refer to the American movie ”The Three Troubledoers.” Entity alignment is to ﬁnd these entity pairs between KGs by
learning the semantics of entities.
According to (Lacostejulien et al. 2013), the semantic of
entity is implicated by two kinds of information. One is the
relations between the entities, which is also called structure
information; the other is the attribute information describing
the self-characteristics of the entities. Two kinds of information are independent of each other in one KG, but describe
the internal and external semantics of entities, respectively.
Due to the different application scenarios, some KGs may
focus on the construction of entity relations, and some KGs
pay more attention to the integrity of entity attributes.
Currently, the works of entity alignment mainly focus on
the utilization of structural information. They try to learn
the entity embeddings to represent the structural semantics on the relational triples h, r, t in KGs. For example,
JAPE(Hao et al. 2016) uses TransE(Bordes et al. 2013) to
interpret a relationship r as a transition from its head entity
h to its tail entity t, h+r ≈ t. They use the pre-aligned ”seed
alignments” as the ”bridge” of embedding spaces by keeping
the embeddings of the ”seed entities” same in different KGs.
Then entities with similar embeddings could be considered
as the same entities to be aligned. Since such methods do
not depend on the content of the KGs, they are mostly used
to solve the cross-lingual entity alignment. However, TransE
model only constrains that the learned representations must
be compatible within each relationship triple, which causes
the disorganized distribution of some entities due to the sparsity of their relationship triples (Sun, Wei, and Li 2017).
Moreover, it is difﬁcult for the seed entities to guarantee the
coverage of all relation types, which also severely limits the
accuracy of such works.
The attribute information can give an alternative view
of entities especially in the mono-lingual entity alignment.
Recently, using attribute embeddings to align entities concentrates on the attribute types (Sun, Wei, and Li 2017;
Hao et al. 2017; Xu et al. 2019). For example, in attribute
triple (Tom,age,“12”), the ”age” is an attribute type of the

Abstract
Entity alignment is a fundamental and vital task in Knowledge Graph (KG) construction and fusion. Previous works
mainly focus on capturing the structural semantics of entities by learning the entity embeddings on the relational triples
and pre-aligned ”seed entities”. Some works also seek to incorporate the attribute information to assist reﬁning the entity embeddings. However, there are still many problems not
considered, which dramatically limits the utilization of attribute information in the entity alignment. Different KGs
may have lots of different attribute types, and even the same
attribute may have diverse data structures and value granularities. Most importantly, attributes may have various ”contributions” to the entity alignment. To solve these problems, we
propose COTSAE that combines the structure and attribute
information of entities by co-training two embedding learning components, respectively. We also propose a joint attention method in our model to learn the attentions of attribute
types and values cooperatively. We veriﬁed our COTSAE on
several datasets from real-world KGs, and the results showed
that it is signiﬁcantly better than the latest entity alignment
methods. The structure and attribute information can complement each other and both contribute to performance improvement.

Introduction
In the past few decades, more and more knowledge graphs
(KGs) have been built in the domain of ﬁnance, entertainment, government, science, and biomedicine, as they could
play essential roles in information retrieval, recommendation system, machine comprehension, and knowledgebased QA-system. Different institutions construct their
KGs according to different needs and data sources, that
leads to the diverse forms of KGs, even in the same domain. However, these KGs also have many repetitions
and can complement each other. Before merging different KGs into a more uniﬁed one, the primary task is
to identify the entities in different KGs that refer to the
same real-world object, which is called entity alignment.
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3025

