The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Pointwise Rotation-Invariant Network with
Adaptive Sampling and 3D Spherical Voxel Convolution
Yang You,1∗ Yujing Lou,1∗ Qi Liu,1
Yu-Wing Tai,2 Lizhuang Ma,1 Cewu Lu,1 Weiming Wang1†
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
2
Tencent, China
{qq456cvb, louyujing, enerald, wangweiming, ma-lz, lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn, yuwingtai@tencent.com

Abstract
Point cloud analysis without pose priors is very challenging
in real applications, as the orientations of point clouds are
often unknown. In this paper, we propose a brand new pointset learning framework PRIN, namely, Pointwise RotationInvariant Network, focusing on rotation-invariant feature extraction in point clouds analysis. We construct spherical signals by Density Aware Adaptive Sampling to deal with distorted point distributions in spherical space. In addition, we
propose Spherical Voxel Convolution and Point Re-sampling
to extract rotation-invariant features for each point. Our network can be applied to tasks ranging from object classiﬁcation, part segmentation, to 3D feature matching and label
alignment. We show that, on the dataset with randomly rotated point clouds, PRIN demonstrates better performance
than state-of-the-art methods without any data augmentation. We also provide theoretical analysis for the rotationinvariance achieved by our methods.

 

  







 

Figure 1: PointNet++ part segmentation results on rotated
shapes. When trained on objects with canonical orientations
and evaluated on rotated ones, PointNet++ is unaware of
their orientations and fails to segment their parts out.

propose a global feature extracted from continuous meshes,
while they are not suitable for point clouds since they project
3D meshes onto their enclosing spheres using a ray casting scheme. Difﬁculty lies in how to apply spherical convolution in continuous domain to sparse point clouds. Besides, by projecting onto unit sphere, their method is limited
to processing convex shapes, ignoring any concave structures. Therefore, we propose a pointwise rotation-invariant
network (PRIN) to handle these problems. Firstly, we observe the discrepancy between unit spherical space and Euclidean space, and propose Density Aware Adaptive Sampling (DAAS) to avoid biases. Secondly, we come up with
Spherical Voxel Convolution (SVC) without loss of rotationinvariance, which is able to capture any concave information. Furthermore, we propose Point Re-sampling module that helps to extract rotation-invariant features for each
point.
PRIN is a network that directly takes point clouds with
random rotations as the input, and predicts both categories
and pointwise segmentation labels without data augmentation. It absorbs the advantages of both Spherical CNN
and PointNet-like network by keeping rotation-invariant features, while maintaining a one-to-one point correspondence
between the input and output. PRIN learns rotation-invariant
features at spherical voxel grids. Afterwards, these features
could be aggregated into a global descriptor or per-point descriptor to achieve model classiﬁcation or part segmentation,
respectively.
We experimentally compare PRIN with various state-ofthe-art approaches on the benchmark dataset: ShapeNet part

Introduction
Deep learning on point clouds has received tremendous interest in recent years. Since depth cameras capture point
clouds directly, efﬁcient and robust point processing methods like classiﬁcation, segmentation and reconstruction have
become key components in real-world applications. Robots,
autonomous cars, 3D face recognition and many other ﬁelds
rely on learning and analysis of point clouds.
Existing works like PointNet (Charles et al. 2017) and
PointNet++ (Qi et al. 2017) have achieved remarkable results in point cloud learning and shape analysis. But they
focus on objects with canonical orientations. In real applications, these methods fail to be applied to rotated shape analysis since the model orientation is often unknown as a priori,
as shown in Figure 1. In addition, existing frameworks require massive data augmentation to handle rotations, which
induces unacceptable computational cost.
Spherical CNN (Cohen et al. 2018) and a similar
method (Esteves et al. 2018) try to solve this problem and
∗

Contributed equally to this paper.
Weiming Wang is the corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

12717

