The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning-Based Efﬁcient Graph Similarity
Computation via Multi-Scale Convolutional Set Matching
Yunsheng Bai,∗1 Hao Ding,∗2† Ken Gu,1 Yizhou Sun,1 Wei Wang1
1

University of California, Los Angeles, 2 AWS AI Labs
yba@ucla.edu, haodin@amazon.com, ken.qgu@gmail.com, {yzsun, weiwang}@cs.ucla.edu

and malware detection (Xu et al. 2017); in anomaly detection, similarity between communication graphs could help
identify network intrusions from the graph-based connection
records (Noble and Cook 2003); in social network analysis, similarity between different user message graphs may
reveal interesting behavioral patterns (Koutra, Vogelstein,
and Faloutsos 2013).
Among various deﬁnitions of graph similarity/distance,
Graph Edit Distance (GED) (Bunke 1983) and Maximum
Common Subgraph (MCS) (Bunke and Shearer 1998) are two
popular and domain-agnostic metrics. However, the computation of exact GED and MCS is known to be NP-hard (Zeng
et al. 2009; Bunke and Shearer 1998), incurring signiﬁcant
computational burden in practice (Blumenthal and Gamper
2018). For example, a recent study shows that even the stateof-the-art algorithms cannot reliably compute the exact GED
between graphs of more than 16 nodes within a reasonable
time (Blumenthal and Gamper 2018).
Given the great signiﬁcance yet huge challenge of computing the exact graph distance/similarity, various approximate algorithms have been proposed to compute the graph
distance/similarity in a fast but heuristic way, including traditional algorithmic approaches (Riesen and Bunke 2009;
Fankhauser, Riesen, and Bunke 2011; Daller et al. 2018)
as well as more recent data-driven neural network approaches (Riba et al. 2018; Ktena et al. 2017; Bai et al. 2019;
Li et al. 2019).
Compared with traditional algorithmic approaches which
typically involve knowledge and heuristics speciﬁc to a metric, the neural network approaches learn graph similarity
from data: During training, the parameters are learned by
minimizing the loss between the predicted similarity scores
and the ground truth; during testing, unseen pairs of graphs
can be fed into these models for fast approximation of their
similarities.
However, a major limitation of most current neural network
models is that they rely on graph-level embeddings to model
the similarity of graphs: Each graph is ﬁrst represented as
a ﬁxed-length vector, and then the similarity of two graphs
can be modeled as a vector operation on the two embeddings,
e.g. cosine similarity. However, real-world graphs typically
come in very different sizes, which the ﬁxed-length vector

Abstract
Graph similarity computation is one of the core operations
in many graph-based applications, such as graph similarity
search, graph database analysis, graph clustering, etc. Since
computing the exact distance/similarity between two graphs
is typically NP-hard, a series of approximate methods have
been proposed with a trade-off between accuracy and speed.
Recently, several data-driven approaches based on neural networks have been proposed, most of which model the graphgraph similarity as the inner product of their graph-level representations, with different techniques proposed for generating one embedding per graph. However, using one ﬁxeddimensional embedding per graph may fail to fully capture
graphs in varying sizes and link structures—a limitation that
is especially problematic for the task of graph similarity computation, where the goal is to ﬁnd the ﬁne-grained difference
between two graphs. In this paper, we address the problem
of graph similarity computation from another perspective,
by directly matching two sets of node embeddings without
the need to use ﬁxed-dimensional vectors to represent whole
graphs for their similarity computation. The model, G RAPH S IM, achieves the state-of-the-art performance on four realworld graph datasets under six out of eight settings (here we
count a speciﬁc dataset and metric combination as one setting), compared to existing popular methods for approximate
Graph Edit Distance (GED) and Maximum Common Subgraph (MCS) computation.

1

Introduction

Recent years we have witnessed the growing importance of
graph-based applications in the domains of chemistry, bioinformatics, recommender systems, social network study, static
program analysis, etc. One of the fundamental problems related to graphs is the computation of distance/similarity between two graphs. It not only is a core operation in graph similarity search and graph database analysis (Zeng et al. 2009;
Wang et al. 2012), but also plays a signiﬁcant role in a wide
range of applications. For example, in computer security,
similarity between binary functions is useful for plagiarism
∗

The two ﬁrst authors made equal contributions.
This work is done before Hao Ding joined AWS AI Labs.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

3219

