The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

DCMN+: Dual Co-Matching Network for Multi-Choice Reading Comprehension
Shuailiang Zhang,1,2,3 Hai Zhao,1,2,3∗ Yuwei Wu,1,2,3
Zhuosheng Zhang,1,2,3 Xi Zhou,4 Xiang Zhou4
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Key Laboratory of Shanghai Education Commission for Intelligent Interaction
and Cognitive Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
3
MoE Key Lab of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
4
CloudWalk Technology, Shanghai, China
{zsl123, will8821, zhangzs}@sjtu.edu.cn, zhaohai@cs.sjtu.edu.cn,
{zhouxi, zhouxiang}@cloudwalk.cn
Passage: Runners in a relay race pass a stick in one
direction. However, merchants passed silk, gold, fruit,
and glass along the Silk Road in more than one direction. They earned their living by traveling the famous
Silk Road. ... The Silk Road was made up of many
routes, not one smooth path. They passed through
what are now 18 countries. The routes crossed mountains and deserts and had many dangers of hot sun,
deep snow and even battles...
Question: The Silk Road became less important because .
A. it was made up of different routes
B. silk trading became less popular
C. sea travel provided easier routes
D. people needed fewer foreign goods

Abstract
Multi-choice reading comprehension is a challenging task
to select an answer from a set of candidate options when
given passage and question. Previous approaches usually only
calculate question-aware passage representation and ignore
passage-aware question representation when modeling the relationship between passage and question, which cannot effectively capture the relationship between passage and question.
In this work, we propose dual co-matching network (DCMN)
which models the relationship among passage, question and
answer options bidirectionally. Besides, inspired by how humans solve multi-choice questions, we integrate two reading strategies into our model: (i) passage sentence selection that ﬁnds the most salient supporting sentences to answer the question, (ii) answer option interaction that encodes
the comparison information between answer options. DCMN
equipped with the two strategies (DCMN+) obtains state-ofthe-art results on ﬁve multi-choice reading comprehension
datasets from different domains: RACE, SemEval-2018 Task
11, ROCStories, COIN, MCTest.

Table 1: An example passage with related question and options from RACE dataset. The ground-truth answer and the
evidence sentences in the passage are in bold.

Introduction

as commonsense reasoning and passage summarization, as
illustrated by the example in Table 1.
Pre-trained language models such as BERT (Devlin et al.
2019) and XLNet (Yang et al. 2019) have achieved signiﬁcant improvement on various MRC tasks. Recent works on
MRC may be put into two categories, training more powerful language models or exploring effective applying pattern of the language models to solve speciﬁc task. There
is no doubt that training a better language model is essential and indeed extremely helpful (Devlin et al. 2019;
Yang et al. 2019) but at the same time it is time-consuming
and resource-demanding to impart massive amounts of general knowledge from external corpora into a deep language
model via pre-training (Sun et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2019b).
For example, training a 24-layer transformer (Devlin et al.
2019) requires 64 TPUs for 4 days. So from the practical viewpoint, given limited computing resources and a
well pre-trained model, can we improve the machine reading comprehension during ﬁne-tuning instead of via expensive full pre-training? This work starts from this viewpoint
and focuses on exploring effective applying pattern of lan-

Machine reading comprehension (MRC) is a fundamental
and long-standing goal of natural language understanding
which aims to teach machine to answer question automatically according to given passage (Hermann et al. 2015; Rajpurkar et al. 2016; Nguyen et al. 2016; Zhang et al. 2018).
In this paper, we focus on multi-choice MRC tasks such as
RACE (Lai et al. 2017) which requests to choose the right
option from a set of candidate answers according to given
passage and question. Different from MRC datasets such as
SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al. 2016) and NewsQA (Trischler et
al. 2017) where the expected answer is usually in the form
of a short span from the given passage, answer in multichoice MRC is non-extractive and may not appear in the
original passage, which allows rich types of questions such
∗
Corresponding author. This paper was partially supported
by National Key Research and Development Program of China
(No. 2017YFB0304100), Key Projects of National Natural Science
Foundation of China (U1836222 and 61733011).
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9563

