The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Persuading Voters: It’s Easy to Whisper, It’s Hard to Speak Loud
Matteo Castiglioni, Andrea Celli, Nicola Gatti
Politecnico di Milano, Piazza Leonardo da Vinci 32, I-20133, Milan, Italy
name.surname@polimi.it

Information is the foundation of any democratic election, as
it allows voters for better choices. In many settings, uninformed voters have to rely on inquiries of third party entities
to make their decision. For example, in most trials, jurors are
not given the possibility of choosing which tests to perform
during the investigation or which questions are asked to witnesses. They have to rely on the prosecutor’s investigation
and questions. The same happens in elections, in which voters gather information from third-party sources. With the advent of modern media environments, malicious actors have
unprecedented opportunities to garble this information and
inﬂuence the outcome of the election via misinformation

and fake news (Allcott and Gentzkow 2017). Reaching voters with targeted messages has never been easier. Hence, we
pose the question: can a malicious actor inﬂuence the outcome of a voting process only by the provision of information
to voters who update their beliefs rationally?
We describe the problem through the Bayesian persuasion framework by Kamenica and Gentzkow (2011). At
its core, the model involves an informed sender trying to
inﬂuence the behavior of self-interested receivers through
the provision of payoff-relevant information. Kamenica and
Gentzkow (2011) study how a single sender, having access
to some private information, can design a signaling scheme
to persuade a single receiver to select a favorable action.
The model assumes the sender’s commitment, which is realistic in many settings (Kamenica and Gentzkow 2011;
Dughmi 2017). One argument to that effect is that reputation and credibility may be a key factor for the long-term
utility of the sender (Rayo and Segal 2010).
A number of recent works study social inﬂuence as a
means of election control (Sina et al. 2015; Faliszewski et
al. 2018; Wilder and Vorobeychik 2018; 2019). The crucial
difference in our model is that voters are strategic players,
who update their beliefs rationally. This property forces the
sender to carefully craft the signaling scheme to preserve
persuasiveness (i.e., incentive compatibility). Other mechanisms for election interference that have been studied are
bribery (Faliszewski et al. 2009; Erdélyi, Reger, and Yang
2017), and adding/deleting voters/candidates (Loreggia et
al. 2015; Faliszewski, Hemaspaandra, and Hemaspaandra
2011; Liu et al. 2009; Chen et al. 2017). Both these mechanisms differ from ours in the provision of tangible incentives
(the former) or the modiﬁcation of the election setting (the
latter). In our model, the malicious actor (i.e., the sender),
can inﬂuence the outcome of the election only by deciding
who gets to know what.
We extend the fundamental model of Arieli and
Babichenko (2019) to describe general voting problems.
Speciﬁcally, our model comprises of multiple receivers, an
arbitrary number of actions and states of nature, and no interagent externalities. 1 We adopt the sender’s perspective, and

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Without inter-agent externalities, the utility of a voter depends
only on her appreciation of the candidate she selected, and on the

Abstract
We focus on the following natural question: is it possible to
inﬂuence the outcome of a voting process through the strategic provision of information to voters who update their beliefs rationally? We investigate whether it is computationally
tractable to design a signaling scheme maximizing the probability with which the sender’s preferred candidate is elected.
We resort to the model recently introduced by Arieli and
Babichenko (2019) (i.e., without inter-agent externalities),
and focus on, as illustrative examples, k-voting rules and plurality voting. There is a sharp contrast between the case in
which private signals are allowed and the more restrictive setting in which only public signals are allowed. In the former,
we show that an optimal signaling scheme can be computed
efﬁciently both under a k-voting rule and plurality voting. In
establishing these results, we provide two contributions applicable to general settings beyond voting. Speciﬁcally, we extend a well-known result by Dughmi and Xu (2017) to more
general settings and prove that, when the sender’s utility function is anonymous, computing an optimal signaling scheme is
ﬁxed-parameter tractable in the number of receivers’ actions.
In the public signaling case, we show that the sender’s optimal expected return cannot be approximated to within any
factor under a k-voting rule. This negative result easily extends to plurality voting and problems where utility functions
are anonymous.

Introduction

1870

