The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Recurrent Model for Collective Entity Linking with Adaptive Features*
Xiaoling Zhou,1 Yukai Miao,1 Wei Wang,1,2 Jianbin Qin3
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, UNSW, Australia
2
College of Computer Science and Technology, DGUT, China
3
Shenzhen Institute of Computer Science, Shenzhen University, China
xiaolingz@cse.unsw.edu.au, {yukai.miao, weiw}@unsw.edu.au, jqin@sics.ac.cn

high-quality knowledge bases, but also aids information retrieval, information extraction and many other kinds of artiﬁcial intelligence applications such as reasoning and question
answering (Kataria et al. 2011).
NED is a challenging problem due to entity ambiguity and
mention variations. As mentioned before, a mention New
York can refer to a state as well as a ﬁlm entity. Likewise,
the city New York can be referred to by various mentions
such as New York, New York City, Big Apple or NY.
Traditional machine learning techniques (Hoffart et al.
2011; Lazic et al. 2015; Globerson et al. 2016) were ﬁrst
employed to solve the NED task. They are based on wellunderstood machine learning models (e.g., SVM (Ratinov et
al. 2011)) and can be trained efﬁciently on commodity computers. Recently, deep learning based methods (Yamada et
al. 2016; Gupta, Singh, and Roth 2017; Ganea and Hofmann
2017; Le and Titov 2018) become the prevalent solution, as
they outperform machine learning based methods. The performance advantages are due to the features learned by powerful deep learning models (e.g., entity embeddings learned
from the entire Wikipedia corpus). Nevertheless, deep learning also brings about several weaknesses: (1) the models are
large and complex; (2) they require large amount of training data, hence incurring high model training and parameter
tuning costs even with hardware accelerations (e.g., GPUs).
After comparing these two paradigms, we wonder
whether we can have a traditional machine learning-based
method that enjoys state-of-the-art performances. We answer in the afﬁrmative, and in this paper, we propose a simple yet highly effective model that does not use deep learning models or features. As such, our model offers several
unique advantages: it is lightweight both in terms of the
model size and the (re-)training time (even without GPUs),
easy to ﬁne-tune and incorporate existing and new engineered features, and easy to deploy and customize in many
real application scenarios.
Our model consists of a local model and a series of
global models. Given a mention m, the local model uses
a Learning-to-Rank model trained on traditional and novel
adaptive local features to compute the ordered candidate entities. The (ﬁrst) global model takes into consideration the
ranked lists of other mentions in the same document by computing certain coherence features from top-ranked entities of
the other mentions, and reranks the candidates for mentions

Abstract
The vast amount of web data enables us to build knowledge
bases with unprecedented quality and coverage. Named Entity Disambiguation (NED) is an important task that automatically resolves ambiguous mentions in free text to correct target entries in the knowledge base. Traditional machine learning based methods for NED were outperformed and made
obsolete by the state-of-the-art deep learning based models.
However, deep learning models are more complex, requiring
large amount of training data and lengthy training and parameter tuning time.
In this paper, we revisit traditional machine learning techniques and propose a light-weight, tuneable and time-efﬁcient
method without using deep learning or deep learning generated features. We propose novel adaptive features that focus
on extracting discriminative features to better model similarities between candidate entities and the mention’s context.
We learn a local ranking model based on traditional and the
new adaptive features based on the learning-to-rank framework. While arriving at linking decisions individually via the
local model, our method also takes into consideration the
correlation between decisions by running multiple recurrent
global models, which can be deemed as a learned local search
method. Our method attains performances comparable to the
state-of-the-art deep learning-based methods on NED benchmark datasets while being signiﬁcantly faster to train.

1

Introduction

Thanks to the huge amount of data on the Web, we are able
to automatically create knowledge bases with high quality and coverage, such as YAGO (Suchanek, Kasneci, and
Weikum 2008), and Knowledge Vault (Dong et al. 2014). A
crucial step in building a knowledge base is to deal with the
natural language ambiguity. For example, the same string, or
mention, can refer to different entities in different documents
— New York can be the state in U.S. , or the ﬁlm directed by
Kabir Khan in 2009, among other possibilities.
The task of eliminating this kind of ambiguity and linking the entity mention in text to its targeted entity entry in
a knowledge base is called Named Entity Disambiguation
(NED), or Entity Linking. It not only enables us to build
* X. Zhou and J. Qin are the co-corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

329

