The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Distilling Knowledge from Well-Informed
Soft Labels for Neural Relation Extraction
Zhenyu Zhang, Xiaobo Shu, Bowen Yu, Tingwen Liu,∗
Jiapeng Zhao, Quangang Li, Li Guo
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{zhangzhenyu1996, shuxiaobo, yubowen, liutingwen, zhaojiapeng, liquangang, guoli}@iie.ac.cn

RE is a natural choose to leverage the rich correlated information among relations. In fact, exploring the supervision with soft labels has been concerned in many machine
learning areas, especially computer vision (Park et al. 2019;
Yang et al. 2019), these successful prior work have conﬁrmed that soft labels are more informative than hard labels.
But to the best of our knowledge, there are few references to
explore the supervision with soft labels in the RE task.

Abstract
Extracting relations from plain text is an important task with
wide application. Most existing methods formulate it as a supervised problem and utilize one-hot hard labels as the sole
target in training, neglecting the rich semantic information
among relations. In this paper, we aim to explore the supervision with soft labels in relation extraction, which makes it
possible to integrate prior knowledge. Speciﬁcally, a bipartite
graph is ﬁrst devised to discover type constraints between entities and relations based on the entire corpus. Then, we combine such type constraints with neural networks to achieve a
knowledgeable model. Furthermore, this model is regarded
as teacher to generate well-informed soft labels and guide the
optimization of a student network via knowledge distillation.
Besides, a multi-aspect attention mechanism is introduced to
help student mine latent information from text. In this way,
the enhanced student inherits the dark knowledge (e.g., type
constraints and relevance among relations) from teacher, and
directly serves the testing scenarios without any extra constraints. We conduct extensive experiments on the TACRED
and SemEval datasets, the experimental results justify the effectiveness of our approach.

As suggested in (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015; Yim et
al. 2017), knowledge distillation is an effective way to explore and incorporate soft labels, which involves a teacher
network to provide soft training signals for a student network. However, the performance of teacher typically determines the upper bound of student (Mishra and Marr 2018;
Clark et al. 2019). In light of this, it is necessary to train a
prominent teacher by introducing extra knowledge to generate better-informed soft labels. Inspired by previous work
which improves RE with type constraints (Vashishth et al.
2018; Lei et al. 2018), we decide to enhance the teacher network with such type knowledge. To be speciﬁc, every relation puts some constraints on the type of subject and object
entities, and vice versa (Koch et al. 2014). For instance, the
relation cities of residence can only occur between a person
and a city. Nevertheless, most of prevalent approaches acquire such constraints from knowledge base (e.g. Freebase),
making it hard to obtain appropriate rules and apply in real
testing scenarios, because the target relations may not be
found in existing knowledge bases in some cases. For example, all relations in the SemEval dataset cannot be retrieved
from existing knowledge base (Hendrickx et al. 2010). To
overcome this limitation, in this paper we acquire type constraints directly from the corpus.

Introduction
Relation extraction (RE), deﬁned as the task of detecting semantic relations among two entities in a sentence, is a key
component of many natural language processing (NLP) applications, such as knowledge base population (Zhang et al.
2018; Distiawan et al. 2019) and question answering (Deng
et al. 2019; Mitra et al. 2019).
Most existing work solves the RE task by ﬁtting the outputs of a model to hard labels (i.e, one-hot vectors) (Zhang
et al. 2017; Zhang, Qi, and Manning 2018; Guo, Zhang,
and Lu 2019), regardless of the rich semantic correlations
among relations. For example, the relation cities of residence is often considered similar to city of birth rather
than founded by, yet such information can not be carried
by hard labels (Lopez-Paz et al. 2016). With this in mind,
using soft labels (i.e, probability distributions containing
the relevance over relations) as additional supervision for

Methodologically, we explore soft labels to improve RE
from two perspectives: excavate type constraints from the
entire corpus to acquire soft rules (the global perspective),
and combine soft rules with the teacher network to generate
well-informed soft labels for each instance (the local perspective). For a sentence with a relational fact {subject, relation, object}, we combine the entity type of subject and object to achieve a pattern. To exploit the type constraints with
a global point of view, we ﬁrst count the co-occurrence number of patterns and relations across the corpus, and then nor-

∗

Corresponding author: Tingwen Liu (liutingwen@iie.ac.cn)
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9620

