The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Calculus for Stochastic Interventions:
Causal Effect Identiﬁcation and Surrogate Experiments
Juan D. Correa, Elias Bareinboim
Computer Science Department
Columbia University
{jdcorrea, eb}@cs.columbia.edu

effect of an intervention can be computed without directly
experimenting in the system, which is known as the problem
of identiﬁcation of causal effects (Pearl 2000, Def. 3.2.4).
The most studied and well-understood type of intervention
is called atomic, which is the most basic, simplest, and fundamental among many. In modern causal inference, atomic
interventions are usually modeled through the do-operator
(Pearl 1995), which is denoted by do(X=x). Formally,
do(X=x) represents the symbolic operation of replacing the
underlying causal mechanism that naturally dictates the behavior of a variable X with a constant value x1 .
The identiﬁcation task relies on assumptions about the underlying causal system, which can be encoded in the form
of a causal graphical model. For concreteness, consider the
causal diagram in Fig. 1(a), where X represents the choice
to smoke, W age, Z a set of risk factors leading to tendency
to smoke (e.g., peer pressure, education, SES, psychological age), and Y the development or not of lung cancer.
The task here is to compute the average effect of X on Y
based on the observational (i.e., non-interventional) distribution P (W, Z, X, Y ). Using the do-operator, this quantity can
be formally written as P (Y |do(X = x)), which describes
the behavior of Y when X is ﬁxed to x (smoking or not)
regardless of Z or any other confounding factors.
Considering the example again, the difference between
two do-distributions, P (Y |do(X = 1))−P (Y |do(X = 0)),
amounts to the causal variability of Y due to X, i.e., free
of the inﬂuence of spurious factors. This difference can be
thought of as a hypothetical regime corresponding to the
new causal diagram as in Fig. 1(b), where the arrows incoming to X are removed. Graphically, we will explicitly annotate the diagram with a regime node σX to indicate that the

Abstract
Some of the most prominent results in causal inference have
been developed in the context of atomic interventions, following the semantics of the do-operator and the inferential
power of the do-calculus. In practice, many real-world settings require more complex types of interventions that cannot
be represented by a simple atomic intervention. In this paper, we investigate a general class of interventions that covers
some non-trivial types of policies (conditional and stochastic), which goes beyond the atomic class. Our goal is to develop general understanding and formal machinery to be able
to reason about the effects of those policies, similar to the
robust treatment developed to handle the atomic case. Specifically, in this paper, we introduce a new set of inference rules
(akin to do-calculus) that can be used to derive claims about
general interventions, which we call σ-calculus. We develop
a systematic and efﬁcient procedure for ﬁnding estimands of
the effect of general policies as a function of the available observational and experimental distributions. We then prove that
our algorithm and σ-calculus are both sound for the tasks of
identiﬁcation (Pearl, 1995) and z-identiﬁcation (Bareinboim
and Pearl, 2012) under this class of interventions.

1

Introduction

Causal relations are considered highly valuable and desirable throughout data-driven sciences due to their inherent interpretability and robustness to changing conditions. In machine learning, for example, they play a key role due to their
amenability to extrapolation to new, unforeseen situations,
and also their capability to support robust decision-making.
Making sense of the world and constructing coherent and
transparent explanations about it, almost invariably, hinge
on our ability to learn and reason with cause and effect relationships (Pearl 2000; Spirtes, Glymour, and Scheines 2001;
Bareinboim and Pearl 2016; Pearl and Mackenzie 2018).
One of the most common ways of learning about causal
relations is through controlled experimentation. In practice,
however, performing interventions is not always feasible due
to its potentially harmful side effects, ﬁnancial, and ethical
considerations. This leads to one of the fundamental challenges in causal inference, namely, to determine whether the

1

This basic primitive has appeared in different contexts in the
causal inference literature. It was introduced in econometrics by
(Haavelmo 1943) and then (Strotz and Wold 1960). In the context
of potential outcomes in statistics, it was formalized by (Neyman
1923) to describe randomized experiments, and then later on connected with observational studies by (Rubin 1974). In mathematical logic, it was discussed by (Lewis 1973) in the context counterfactuals in a possible-worlds semantics. It was given a more general
and algorithmic treatment in artiﬁcial intelligence through the use
of graphical models (Pearl 1993b; Spirtes, Glymour, and Scheines
1993).

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10093

