The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Translation-Based Matching Adversarial
Network for Cross-Lingual Natural Language Inference
†

Kunxun Qi,†,‡ Jianfeng Du†

∗

Guangzhou Key Laboratory of Multilingual Intelligent Processing,
Guangdong University of Foreign Studies, Guangzhou 510420, China
‡
Platform and Content Group, Tencent, Shenzhen 518000, China
kunxunqi@foxmail.com, jfdu@gdufs.edu.cn
for achieving XNLI are two-fold. On one hand, knowledge
transfer between two languages is difﬁcult, usually relying on large parallel corpora (Hermann and Blunsom 2014;
Conneau et al. 2018). On the other hand, XNLI needs to
transfer not only information about individual sentences but
also matching information between two sentences from the
source language to the target language.
Neural models have become dominant in XNLI. Most of
the neural model based methods such as (Conneau et al.
2018; Artetxe and Schwenk 2019) encode sentences in different languages into the same embedding space through
parallel corpora. They hardly work for low-resource languages in which parallel corpora are rare. Recently more
advanced methods such as multilingual BERT (Devlin et al.
2019) and XLM (Lample and Conneau 2019) have been proposed, which rely on pre-trained language models. These
pre-training based methods learn a cross-lingual language
model from a large multilingual corpus and then ﬁne-tune
the model on training data in one language. Although these
methods do not rely on parallel corpora, they still have limitations since ﬁne-tuning is performed in a single language.
When the model is ﬁne-tuned on the original training data
in one language, matching information between two sentences can hardly be transferred to other languages. When
the model is ﬁned-tuned on the training data that have been
translated to another language, sentence information on the
original training data is ignored and translation errors can
easily be propagated into the model.
Inspired by the promising results for adversarial training
to domain adaption (Ganin et al. 2016; Chen et al. 2018;
Wang and Pan 2018), we also adapt adversarial training to
XNLI. We develop an adversarial training framework named
TMAN (short for Translation-based Matching Adversarial
Network) for XNLI. As shown in Figure 1, TMAN translates training data in the source language to the target language and merges these two sets of data. The merged set is
then fed into an NLI model to generate matching representations between premises and hypotheses. To better capture
language-invariant features, TMAN introduces a discriminator for classifying languages (source or target) to compete against the discriminator for classifying inferential relationships (entailment, neutral or contradiction). We employ
TMAN to enhance two pre-trained language models, multilingual BERT (Devlin et al. 2019) and XLM (Lample and

Abstract
Cross-lingual natural language inference is a fundamental
task in cross-lingual natural language understanding, widely
addressed by neural models recently. Existing neural model
based methods either align sentence embeddings between
source and target languages, heavily relying on annotated parallel corpora, or exploit pre-trained cross-lingual language
models that are ﬁne-tuned on a single language and hard to
transfer knowledge to another language. To resolve these limitations in existing methods, this paper proposes an adversarial training framework to enhance both pre-trained models
and classical neural models for cross-lingual natural language
inference. It trains on the union of data in the source language
and data in the target language, learning language-invariant
features to improve the inference performance. Experimental
results on the XNLI benchmark demonstrate that three popular neural models enhanced by the proposed framework signiﬁcantly outperform the original models.

Introduction
Cross-lingual language understanding (XLU) plays a crucial
role in multilingual systems. In general XLU aims to train a
model primarily on the data in one language and then apply
it to natural language understanding in other languages. Natural language inference (NLI), also known as recognizing
textual entailment (RTE), is one of the typical tasks in natural language understanding. It aims to determine the inferential relationship between two natural language sentences,
one called the premise and the other called the hypothesis.
The importance of NLI in XLU has been identiﬁed in recent studies such as (Conneau et al. 2018). Cross-lingual natural language inference (XNLI) is considered as a better task
for evaluating XLU than other tasks such as cross-lingual
document classiﬁcation, since XNLI is more challenging
and has also large-scale benchmark data. By now NLI
has been widely used in information retrieval (Clinchant,
Goutte, and Gaussier 2006), question answering (Harabagiu
and Hickl 2006), machine translation (Poliak et al. 2018)
and other applications. Upgrading NLI to XNLI can adapt
these applications to multilingual scenarios and improve
the performance for low-resource languages. The challenges
∗

Jianfeng Du is the corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8632

