The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Likelihood Ratios and Generative Classiﬁers for
Unsupervised Out-of-Domain Detection in Task Oriented Dialog
∗

Varun Gangal,1,2 Abhinav Arora,2 Arash Einolghozati,2 Sonal Gupta2
1

Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213
2
Facebook Conversational AI, Menlo Park, CA 94303
vgangal@andrew.cmu.edu {abhinavarora, arashe, sonalg}@fb.com

2017) and can have high values even for OOD inputs. This
necessitates having an auxiliary mechanism to detect them.
This task is not in entirety novel, and has historically
been explored in related forms under various names such
as one class classiﬁcation, open classiﬁcation etc. The recent stream of work on this started with (Hendrycks and
Gimpel 2017), which proposed benchmark datasets for doing this on vision problems. (Liang, Li, and Srikant 2018)
ﬁnd that increasing the softmax temperature τ makes the resultant probability more discriminative for OOD Detection.
(Lee et al. 2018b) propose using distances to per-class Gaussians in the intermediate representation learnt by the classiﬁer. Speciﬁcally, a Gaussian is ﬁt for each training class
from all training points in that class . (Ren et al. 2019) show
that “correcting” likelihood with likelihood from a “background” model trained on noisy inputs is better at discriminating out of distribution examples. Recently, (Lin and Xu
2019) propose using an old measure from the data mining
literature named LOF (Breunig et al. 2000) in the space of
penultimate activations learnt by a classiﬁer.
Apart from (Lin and Xu 2019) and few others, a majority
of the prior work uses vision problems and datasets, often
image classiﬁcation as the setting in which to perform OOD
Detection. Certain methods, such as input gradient reversal
from (Liang, Li, and Srikant 2018) or an end-to-end differentiable Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) as in (Lee
et al. 2018a) are not directly applicable for natural language
inputs. Furthermore, image classiﬁcation has available several benchmarks with a similar label space (digits and numbers) but differing input distributions, such as MNIST, CIFAR and SVHN. Most of these works exploit this fact for
their experimental setting by picking one of these datasets
as ID and the other as OOD. In this work, we attempt to
address these lacunae and speciﬁcally explore which OOD
detection approaches work well on natural language, in particular, intent classiﬁcation.
This problem is greatly relevant for task oriented dialog
systems since intent classiﬁcation can receive user intents
which are sometimes not in any of the domains deﬁned by
the current ontology or downstream functions. In particular,
unsupervised OOD detection approaches are important as
it is difﬁcult to curate this kind of data for training because

Abstract
The task of identifying out-of-domain (OOD) input examples
directly at test-time has seen renewed interest recently due to
increased real world deployment of models. In this work, we
focus on OOD detection for natural language sentence inputs
to task-based dialog systems. Our ﬁndings are three-fold:
First, we curate and release ROSTD (Real Out-of
-Domain Sentences From Task-oriented Dialog) - a dataset
of 4K OOD examples for the publicly available dataset from
(Schuster et al. 2019). In contrast to existing settings which
synthesize OOD examples by holding out a subset of classes,
our examples were authored by annotators with apriori instructions to be out-of-domain with respect to the sentences
in an existing dataset.
Second, we explore likelihood ratio based approaches as an
alternative to currently prevalent paradigms. Speciﬁcally, we
reformulate and apply these approaches to natural language
inputs. We ﬁnd that they match or outperform the latter on
all datasets, with larger improvements on non-artiﬁcial OOD
benchmarks such as our dataset. Our ablations validate that
speciﬁcally using likelihood ratios rather than plain likelihood is necessary to discriminate well between OOD and indomain data.
Third, we propose learning a generative classiﬁer and computing a marginal likelihood (ratio) for OOD detection. This
allows us to use a principled likelihood while at the same time
exploiting training-time labels. We ﬁnd that this approach
outperforms both simple likelihood (ratio) based and other
prior approaches. We are hitherto the ﬁrst to investigate the
use of generative classiﬁers for OOD detection at test-time.

1

Introduction

With increased use of ML models in real life settings, it has
become imperative for them to self-identify, at test-time, examples on which they are likely to fail due to them differing
signiﬁcantly from the model’s training time distribution.
In particular, for state-of-the-art deep classiﬁers such as
those used in vision and language tasks, it has been observed
that the raw probability value is over calibrated (Guo et al.
∗

Work done by author while interning at Facebook Conv AI
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7764

