The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Justifying All Differences Using Pseudo-Boolean Reasoning
Jan Elffers,1,2 Stephan Gocht,1,2 Ciaran McCreesh,3 Jakob Nordström2,4
1

Lund University, Lund, Sweden
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark
3
University of Glasgow, Glasgow, Scotland
4
KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden
{jan.elffers, stephan.gocht}@cs.lth.se, ciaran.mccreesh@glasgow.ac.uk, jn@di.ku.dk
2

proof logging is the standard approach to this problem: in
order to take part in the SAT competitions (Heule, Järvisalo,
and Suda 2019), a solver must be able to output a “certiﬁcate” or “proof log” alongside a claimed unsatisﬁable result.
This log is a (potentially very large) ﬁle in a standard format known as DRAT (Heule, Hunt Jr., and Wetzler 2013b;
2013a; Wetzler, Heule, and Hunt Jr. 2014), which may be
veriﬁed by an external tool. Importantly, the proof verifying
tools used are much simpler than the solvers, giving us conﬁdence in their correctness. Proof logging for Boolean satisﬁability has been key to the social acceptance of computerproduced proofs of mathematical conjectures (e.g. Heule,
Kullmann, and Marek 2016, Lamb 2016).
Due to their use of rich global constraints like “all
different”, constraint programming solvers cannot simply
reuse this approach: compiling constraint programming to
Boolean satisﬁability results in weaker reasoning for many
constraints (Bessiere et al. 2009b), and although it is theoretically possible to use the DRAT format to justify rich propagation, developing any approach that is feasible in practice
has remained stubbornly out of reach.
In this work, we instead propose the use of a new proof
format based upon pseudo-Boolean reasoning and cutting
planes proofs (Cook, Coullard, and Turán 1987). We show
that this format can easily and efﬁciently capture all of the
reasoning carried out by the all different propagator. This
allowing us to develop, for the ﬁrst time, an efﬁcient veriﬁcation system for non-trivial constraint programming inference techniques: we describe a tool which can verify these
proofs, as well as the implementation of a small constraint
solver which produces them. We conclude with a discussion
of the broader implications for constraint programming.

Abstract
Constraint programming solvers support rich global constraints and propagators, which make them both powerful and
hard to debug. In the Boolean satisﬁability community, prooflogging is the standard solution for generating trustworthy
outputs, and this has become key to the social acceptability
of computer-generated proofs. However, reusing this technology for constraint programming requires either much weaker
propagation, or an impractical blowup in proof length. This
paper demonstrates that simple, clean, and efﬁcient proof logging is still possible for the all-different constraint, through
pseudo-Boolean reasoning. We explain how such proofs can
be expressed and veriﬁed mechanistically, describe an implementation, and discuss the broader implications for proof logging in constraint programming.

Introduction
Constraint programming solvers are increasingly being used
for fully automated decision making without a human in
the loop, even in safety-critical applications. Unfortunately,
these solvers will sometimes have bugs, and these bugs are
hard to detect using conventional testing methods (Akgün
et al. 2018; Gillard, Schaus, and Deville 2019). Meanwhile,
formal proofs of correctness can be useful in verifying the
mathematical description of some of the algorithms underlying these solvers, but are not yet suitable for verifying a
full implementation of a high-performance modern solver. It
would therefore be reassuring to have a different way to be
conﬁdent that a solver has produced a correct answer.
When a constraint programming solver outputs “yes” for
a decision instance, it is usually relatively easy to verify that
the answer it provides is valid—for example, by having a
different person implement a solution checker, which is typically much simpler than writing a program which ﬁnds a
solution. Similarly, for optimisation problems, verifying the
feasibility of a solution is simple. However, for “no” decision
instances, and for verifying optimality, a solver likely took
a large number of complicated steps to reach that conclusion, and there is no simple way of demonstrating that those
steps were valid. In the Boolean satisﬁability community,

Pseudo-Boolean Models
An instance of the pseudo-Boolean (PB) decision problem,
or a PB formula, is deﬁned by a set of {0, 1}-valued variables {x1 , . . . , xn } and a set of linear constraints
n over these
variables, each of which is of the form i=1 ai i ≥ A,
where the ai s and A are all integers, and each i is either an
unnegated literal xi or a negated literal xi . Using the equality xi + xi = 1, which encodes the semantics of negation,
we can always rewrite a PB constraint so that all ai are non-

Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1486

