The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Multi-Instance Multi-Label Action Recognition and
Localization Based on Spatio-Temporal Pre-Trimming for Untrimmed Videos
Xiao-Yu Zhang,1∗ Haichao Shi,1,2∗ Changsheng Li,3† Peng Li4†
1

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology
4
China University of Petroleum (East China)
{zhangxiaoyu, shihaichao}@iie.ac.cn, changsheng li 507@hotmail.com, lipeng@upc.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Weakly supervised action recognition and localization for
untrimmed videos is a challenging problem with extensive
applications. The overwhelming irrelevant background contents in untrimmed videos severely hamper effective identiﬁcation of actions of interest. In this paper, we propose
a novel multi-instance multi-label modeling network based
on spatio-temporal pre-trimming to recognize actions and locate corresponding frames in untrimmed videos. Motivated
by the fact that person is the key factor in a human action,
we spatially and temporally segment each untrimmed video
into person-centric clips with pose estimation and tracking
techniques. Given the bag-of-instances structure associated
with video-level labels, action recognition is naturally formulated as a multi-instance multi-label learning problem. The
network is optimized iteratively with selective coarse-to-ﬁne
pre-trimming based on instance-label activation. After convergence, temporal localization is further achieved with localglobal temporal class activation map. Extensive experiments
are conducted on two benchmark datasets, i.e. THUMOS14
and ActivityNet1.3, and experimental results clearly corroborate the efﬁcacy of our method when compared with the stateof-the-arts.

Figure 1: The workﬂow overview of PreTrimNet.
The overwhelming action-irrelevant contents in
untrimmed videos are formidable obstacles to effective action identiﬁcation. Directly modeling the untrimmed
video as a whole can be quite misleading, and will inevitably result in deteriorated performance. As we know,
trimmed videos are noise-free high-quality data to develop
accurate action recognizers. Likewise, it is more reasonable
to “denoise” the untrimmed video by eliminating the
action-irrelevant contents and retaining segmented clips
that are dominated by potential actions. Traditional clip
generation methods (such as those with sliding windows,
pre-deﬁned durations, ﬂexible boundaries, etc.) are mostly
based on low-level features and only conﬁned to temporal
segmentation, leaving the spatial contents unmodiﬁed.
This paper aims to explore spatio-temporal segmentation
of untrimmed videos, with more reliable evidence. As we
know, a human action is closely related to the person that is
engaged in the movement. By spatially and temporally locating the key persons, untrimmed videos can be segmented
into person-centric clips accordingly, based on which model
learning can be implemented in a more reliable way. Generally speaking, an untrimmed video corresponds to multiple
person-centric clips, each of which focuses on a certain
person performing a speciﬁc action. Taking the untrimmed
video as a bag and the multiple clips as instances in the
bag, action recognition can be conveniently formulated as
a multi-instance multi-label learning problem, which is
inherently proﬁcient in discovering instance-label relation.
Motivated by the above considerations, in this paper,

Introduction
Action recognition and localization is a heated research
topic with intensive attention for high-level video understanding. Compared with trimmed videos which are temporally aligned with speciﬁc actions of interest, untrimmed
videos are typically ﬂooded with irrelevant background contents, and thus far more challenging to analyze. In the meantime, frame-level full supervision is accompanied with prohibitive labeling effort, and apparently unfeasible for large
scale video sets. As a result, we focus on the more practical
weak supervision scenario, and aims to identify actions and
the corresponding temporal intervals in untrimmed videos
with video-level annotation.
∗
These authors contributed equally to this study and share the
ﬁrst authorship.
†
Corresponding authors.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12886

