The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Appearance and Motion Enhancement for Video-Based Person Re-Identiﬁcation
Shuzhao Li,1 Huimin Yu,1,2∗ Haoji Hu1
1

College of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
The State Key Laboratory of CAD and CG, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
{leeshuz, yhm2005, haoji hu}@zju.edu.cn

identifying someone apart from the appearance. Besides,
video format data is more accessible in practical scenarios.
To this end, more and more researchers have shifted their attention to the video-based setting, which is also the topic we
mainly focus on in this paper.

Abstract
In this paper, we propose an Appearance and Motion Enhancement Model (AMEM) for video-based person reidentiﬁcation to enrich the two kinds of information contained in the backbone network in a more interpretable way.
Concretely, human attribute recognition under the supervision of pseudo labels is exploited in an Appearance Enhancement Module (AEM) to help enrich the appearance and semantic information. A Motion Enhancement Module (MEM)
is designed to capture the identity-discriminative walking patterns through predicting future frames. Despite a complex
model with several auxiliary modules during training, only
the backbone model plus two small branches are kept for
similarity evaluation which constitute a simple but effective
ﬁnal model. Extensive experiments conducted on three popular video-based person ReID benchmarks demonstrate the
effectiveness of our proposed model and the state-of-the-art
performance compared with existing methods.

To take full advantage of the temporal cues provided by
video data, multiple common methods for video analysis
have been integrated into the ReID system, including RNN,
optical ﬂow learning, and 3D CNN. Although these are powerful tools for temporal feature extraction and action recognition, they may be not well suited for person ReID task
when directly applied since all data contains only one action
category – walking, which is similar among different samples, and the subtle difference contained in walking styles
is hard to capture without speciﬁc design. Attention models
also play important roles in fusing multiple image features
into a sequence-level one, whereas neglecting most of the
temporal cues. Apart from this, considering the special property of human walking pattern from which people can easily identify someone, gait recognition has aroused wide attention over the years. However, most approaches take Gait
Energy Image (GEI) as input which makes strong assumptions on the initial walking tracklets, such as the uncluttered
background, aligned sequence, silhouette extraction and so
on. These are difﬁcult to acquire especially from the surveillance data in complex scenarios. To this end, we seek to design a novel model to simultaneously capture the temporal
cues and take into account the specialty of walking patterns
from different people.

Introduction
Person Re-identiﬁcation (ReID) aims at matching images of
a person in different non-overlapping cameras, which has
attracted increasing attention during recent years due to its
wide application in practical scenarios, such as criminal retrieval, video surveillance and so on. Many researches have
been conducted on this topic while it is still full of challenges including human pose variation, occlusions and different camera viewpoints.
Currently, the prominent progress of person ReID is
mainly gathered in the static image setting, which only exploits a static image and its spatial information to perform
the matching process. Despite easier to implement and less
complexity, image-based methods present many disadvantages compared with video-based methods. On one hand,
the single image is sensitive to pose variation and occlusions while the multiple images contained in one sequence
provide more samples against these problems. On the other
hand, using only one image cannot capture the motion pattern of people walking, which is another important clue for

Attribute learning for Person ReID task has been studied
in recent years and proven to be of great help when treated as
one kind of mid-level semantic feature. While in most existing works, attributes are only exploited in the image-based
setting, few works consider to incorporate it into video analysis. The reasons may lie in two aspects. On one hand, there
are no existing video datasets containing attribute labels and
it takes heavy manual labor to make explicit annotations.
On the other hand, some attributes may occur only in certain frames in one sequence due to the pose variation or occlusions, it will be ambiguous to decide the sequence-level
labels. To deal with these, we propose to take advantage of
the existing image-based attribute dataset to assist the learn-

∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11394

