The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Adversarial Attack on Deep Product Quantization Network for Image Retrieval
Yan Feng,1,2,∗ Bin Chen,1,2,∗ Tao Dai,1,2,† Shu-Tao Xia1,2
1

2

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, China
PCL Research Center of Networks and Communications, Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{y-feng18, cb17}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, daitao.edu@gmail.com, xiast@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

5XOMOTGR7[KX_

Deep product quantization network (DPQN) has recently received much attention in fast image retrieval tasks due to its
efﬁciency of encoding high-dimensional visual features especially when dealing with large-scale datasets. Recent studies
show that deep neural networks (DNNs) are vulnerable to input with small and maliciously designed perturbations (a.k.a.,
adversarial examples). This phenomenon raises the concern
of security issues for DPQN in the testing/deploying stage as
well. However, little effort has been devoted to investigating
how adversarial examples affect DPQN. To this end, we propose product quantization adversarial generation (PQ-AG), a
simple yet effective method to generate adversarial examples
for product quantization based retrieval systems. PQ-AG aims
to generate imperceptible adversarial perturbations for query
images to form adversarial queries, whose nearest neighbors
from a targeted product quantizaiton model are not semantically related to those from the original queries. Extensive
experiments show that our PQ-AQ successfully creates adversarial examples to mislead targeted product quantization
retrieval models. Besides, we found that our PQ-AG signiﬁcantly degrades retrieval performance in both white-box and
black-box settings.

,KGZ[XK+^ZXGIZUX
67
)UJKHUUQ

)44
6KXZ[XHGZOUT

*KKV67,KGZ[XK9VGIK

*674
'J\KXYGXOGR7[KX_
5XOMOTGR7[KX_

'ZZGIQ

'J\KXYGXOGR7[KX_

8KZXOK\GR

Figure 1: An example of adversarial attack against DPQN.
Although the added perturbation is almost invisible, it successfully causes the query to shift a lot in deep PQ feature
space, and fools the DPQN to retrieve semantically irrelevant images.

(DNNs) with PQ, and achieve impressive performance and
efﬁciency.
On the other hand, recent studies show that DNNs are vulnerable to input images with carefully designed yet imperceptible perturbations, i.e., adversarial examples, which can
cause DNN classiﬁer to produce conﬁdently wrong predictions (Szegedy et al. 2014). To date, much attention has been
drawn to crafting adversarial examples in image classiﬁcation task, while little effort has been devoted to investigating
how adversarial examples affect DPQN for image retrieval.
This raises the concern of security issues of DPQN in practice. As shown in Fig. 1, DPQN based image retrieval system
is successfully misled by an adversarial query image with
imperceptible perturbations. Note that the well-known adversarial attacks for image classiﬁcation can be interpreted
as maximizing the classiﬁcation error via tuning the input
image according to the direction of gradients. However, attacking DPQN retrieval systems can be much more challenging than the classiﬁcation task for two main reasons:
1) in an image retrieval task, a query image is searched
through a database on visual features in the absence of class
labels; 2) the optimization of adversarial attacks generally
relies on back-propagation that requires differentiable oper-

Introduction
The massive application of large scale and high dimensional
image data has attracted great attention to the study of efﬁcient image retrieval methods. In order to strike the balance between storage and precision, approximate nearest
neighbor (ANN) based retrieval methods (Datar et al. 2004;
Gionis et al. 1999; Muja and Lowe 2009; G, T, and P
2006) have been widely studied. Among these methods,
product quantization (PQ) based retrieval (Jégou, Douze,
and Schmid 2013; Ge et al. 2013) becomes popular due
to the efﬁciency and effectiveness of PQ for coding highdimensional visual features. Recently proposed deep product quantization network (DPQN) based methods (Cao et al.
2016; Klein and Wolf 2019; Yu et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2019)
combine the representative power of deep neural networks
∗

The ﬁrst two authors contribute equally to this work.
Corresponding author: Tao Dai
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

10786

