The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Facial Action Unit Intensity Estimation via Semantic
Correspondence Learning with Dynamic Graph Convolution
Yingruo Fan, Jacqueline C.K. Lam, Victor O.K. Li
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering,
The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
{yingruo, jcklam, vli}@eee.hku.hk

Abstract
Facial Action Intensity

Facial Action Intensity

The intensity estimation of facial action units (AUs) is challenging due to subtle changes in the person’s facial appearance. Previous approaches mainly rely on probabilistic models or predeﬁned rules for modeling co-occurrence relationships among AUs, leading to limited generalization. In contrast, we present a new learning framework that automatically
learns the latent relationships of AUs via establishing semantic correspondences between feature maps. In the heatmap
regression-based network, feature maps preserve rich semantic information associated with AU intensities and locations.
Moreover, the AU co-occurring pattern can be reﬂected by
activating a set of feature channels, where each channel encodes a speciﬁc visual pattern of AU. This motivates us to
model the correlation among feature channels, which implicitly represents the co-occurrence relationship of AU intensity
levels. Speciﬁcally, we introduce a semantic correspondence
convolution (SCC) module to dynamically compute the correspondences from deep and low resolution feature maps, and
thus enhancing the discriminability of features. The experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness and the superior
performance of our method on two benchmark datasets.

AU6: Cheek Raiser

AU12: Lip Corner Puller

(a)

5
4
3
2
1
0

AU12: Lip Corner Puller

5
4
3
2
1
0

(b)

Figure 1: Co-occurrencs of different AU intensity levels. (a)
High intensity AU12 activates the occurrence of AU6; (b)
Low intensity AU12 occurs independently.

levels of expressiveness due to their own physical characteristics. The six-level intensities data of AUs are also highly
imbalanced as the highest level occurs rarely. Thus, compared to FER (Fan, Lam, and Li, 2018c) and AU recognition
tasks (Li et al., 2019), discerning different intensities of AUs
remains a far more challenging task.
The co-occurrences of different AU intensity levels may
inﬂuence the overall estimation results. The facial appearance changes caused by a certain AU are also affected by
the intensities of other AUs. As an example in Figure 1, AU6
(Cheek Raiser) and AU12 (Lip Corner Puller) are typically
activated together in the case of the happy expression. More
speciﬁcally, a high intensity of AU12 can increase the probability of AU6 occuring and vice versa. By contrast, a low
intensity of AU12 might present independently without activating other AUs.
To infer the co-occurrences of AUs, prior studies undertaken by Walecki et al. (2016) and Wang et al. (2018) are
typically based on probabilistic graphical models that directly learn the AU dependencies. Intuitively, the feature
level information should contain more comprehensive descriptions than the ﬁnal outputs. Hence, we formulate the
problem into a heatmap regression-based framework, where
the feature maps preserve rich semantic information associated with AU intensities and locations. We infer that
through activating various feature channels simultaneously,
the framework would produce the ﬁnal AU co-occurrence
pattern accordingly. This conjecture naturally leads to the

Introduction
Facial action unit intensity estimation aims to estimate intensity levels of facial muscle actions, named Action Units
(AUs). Progress in this area can facilitate the applications
of chatbot (Lin et al., 2019b), empathic design (Lin et al.,
2019a), facial expression recognition (FER) (Fan, Lam, and
Li, 2018a), etc. In real-world scenarios, human facial expressions can be deconstructed using the varied combinations
of AUs and their intensities. Therefore, estimating intensity
levels of AUs is an important step for further interpreting
facial expressions. To provide a comprehensive encoding
method, the facial action coding system (FACS) (Eckman
and Friesen, 1978) deﬁnes rules for scoring AU intensity on
a six-point ordinal scale. However, large-scale acquisition
of facial AU intensity data is often difﬁcult and time consuming, since trained specialists are required to annotate the
data. Furthermore, the facial appearance changes are subtle
in terms of AU intensity, and individuals may have different
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12701

