The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Adaptive Greedy versus Non-Adaptive Greedy for Inﬂuence Maximization∗
Wei Chen,1 Binghui Peng,2 Grant Schoenebeck,3 Biaoshuai Tao3
1

Microsoft Research, China, 2 Columbia University, 3 University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
weic@microsoft.com, bp2601@columbia.edu, {schoeneb, bstao}@umich.edu

tic diffusion model deﬁning how each node is infected by
its neighbors, and a limited budget k, how to pick k seeds
such that the expected number of total infected nodes in this
graph at the end of the diffusion is maximized. This problem
has signiﬁcant applications in viral marketing, outbreak detection, rumor controls, etc, and has been extensively studied (cf. Chen, Lakshmanan, and Castillo; Li et al. (2013;
2018)).
For I NF M AX, most of the existing work has considered submodular diffusion models, especially the independent cascade model and the linear threshold model (Kempe,
Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003). Likewise, we also focus on
submodular diffusion models. In submodular diffusion models, a vertex v’s marginal probability of becoming infected
after a new neighbor t is infected given S as the set of v’s
already infected neighbors is at least the marginal probability that v is infected after t is newly infected given T ⊇ S as
the set of v’s already infected neighbors (see the paragraph
before Theorem 2.4 for more details). Intuitively, this means
that the inﬂuence of infected nodes are substitutes and never
have synergy.
When submodular I NF M AX is considered, nearly all the
known algorithms/heuristics are based on a greedy algorithm that iteratively picks the seed that has the largest
marginal inﬂuence. Some of them improve the running time
of the original greedy algorithm by skipping vertices that are
known to be suboptimal (Leskovec et al. 2007; Goyal, Lu,
and Lakshmanan 2011a), while the others improve the scalability of the greedy algorithm by using more scalable algorithms to approximate the expected total inﬂuence (Borgs
et al. 2014; Tang, Xiao, and Shi 2014; Tang, Shi, and Xiao
2015; Cheng et al. 2013; Ohsaka et al. 2014) or computing
a score of the seeds that is closely related to the expected total inﬂuence (Chen, Wang, and Yang 2009; Chen, Yuan, and
Zhang 2010a; 2010b; Goyal, Lu, and Lakshmanan 2011b;
Jung, Heo, and Chen 2012; Galhotra, Arora, and Roy 2016;
Tang et al. 2018; Schoenebeck and Tao 2019b). Arora, Galhotra, and Ranu (2017) benchmark most of the aforementioned variants of the greedy algorithms.
In this paper, we study the adaptive inﬂuence maximization problem, where seeds are selected iteratively and feedback is given to the seed-picker after selecting each seed.

Abstract
We consider the adaptive inﬂuence maximization problem:
given a network and a budget k, iteratively select k seeds in
the network to maximize the expected number of adopters.
In the full-adoption feedback model, after selecting each
seed, the seed-picker observes all the resulting adoptions. In
the myopic feedback model, the seed-picker only observes
whether each neighbor of the chosen seed adopts. Motivated
by the extreme success of greedy-based algorithms/heuristics
for inﬂuence maximization, we propose the concept of greedy
adaptivity gap, which compares the performance of the adaptive greedy algorithm to its non-adaptive counterpart. Our
ﬁrst result shows that, for submodular inﬂuence maximization, the adaptive greedy algorithm can perform up to a
(1 − 1/e)-fraction worse than the non-adaptive greedy algorithm, and that this ratio is tight. More speciﬁcally, on one
side we provide examples where the performance of the adaptive greedy algorithm is only a (1 − 1/e) fraction of the performance of the non-adaptive greedy algorithm in four settings: for both feedback models and both the independent cascade model and the linear threshold model. On the other side,
we prove that in any submodular cascade, the adaptive greedy
algorithm always outputs a (1 − 1/e)-approximation to the
expected number of adoptions in the optimal non-adaptive
seed choice. Our second result shows that, for the general
submodular cascade model with full-adoption feedback, the
adaptive greedy algorithm can outperform the non-adaptive
greedy algorithm by an unbounded factor. Finally, we propose a risk-free variant of the adaptive greedy algorithm that
always performs no worse than the non-adaptive greedy algorithm.

1

Introduction

The inﬂuence maximization problem (I NF M AX) is an optimization problem that asks which seeds a viral marketing campaign should target (e.g. by giving free products) so
that propagation from these seeds inﬂuences the most people in a social network. That is, given a graph, a stochas∗
Full version of this paper at: http://arxiv.org/abs/1911.08164.
Grant Schoenebeck and Biaoshuai Tao are pleased to acknowledge
the support of National Science Foundation AitF #1535912 and
CAREER #1452915.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

590

