The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Radial and Directional Posteriors for Bayesian Deep Learning∗
Changyong Oh,†1 Kamil Adamczewski,1,2 Mijung Park1,3
1

Empirical Inference Department, Max-Planck-Institute for Intelligent Systems
2
Max Planck ETH Center for Learning System
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Tübingen
{changyong.om, mijung.park}@tuebingen.mpg.de, kamil.m.adamczewski@gmail.com

Neklyudov 2017; Molchanov, Ashukha, and Vetrov 2017).
Capturing dependencies between the weight parameters and
their uncertainties is likely to yield better models in terms
of predictability. For instance, Louizos and Welling (2016)
and Sun (2017) propose Gaussian posteriors with covariance matrices of certain structures such that each covariance can capture the dependencies among the input and output dimensions of each layer. Rather than proposing a new
variational family, Lakshminarayanan, Pritzel, and Blundell
(2017) use an ensemble of neural network models and Ritter, Botev, and Barber (2018) make use of the Laplace approximation to a trained network to obtain uncertainty estimates. In this work, we follow this train of thought and
along with these papers empirically show that the methods
that model weight dependencies improve prediction performance in terms of test likelihoods.
An important application of the learned uncertainty estimates is model selection via model pruning. The concept of
pruning, sparsifying, or compressing a network makes sense
for deep neural network models as neural network models
are often over-parameterized. The task of compressing a network has received much attention due to the immense demand on the efﬁcient deployment of deep models on mobile
devices. For instance, Louizos, Ullrich, and Welling (2017)
consider group Horseshoe priors and log-Normal posteriors for pruning out neurons, and Ghosh (2018) improve the
result of Louizos, Ullrich, and Welling (2017) by adopting
regularized Horseshoe priors and more structured posteriors.
Neklyudov (2017) takes a slightly different approach which
is pruning units via truncated log-Normal priors over unit
scales. After removing redundant parameters, all of these
methods provide signiﬁcantly compressed networks.

Abstract
We propose a new variational family for Bayesian neural networks. We decompose the variational posterior into two components, where the radial component captures the strength
of each neuron in terms of its magnitude; while the directional component captures the statistical dependencies among
the weight parameters. The dependencies learned via the directional density provide better modeling performance compared to the widely-used Gaussian mean-ﬁeld-type variational family. In addition, the strength of input and output
neurons learned via our posterior provides a structured way
to compress neural networks. Indeed, experiments show that
our variational family improves predictive performance and
yields compressed networks simultaneously.

1

Introduction

Neural networks have recently become revolutionary tools
to solve numerous statistical problems in science and industry. However, the uncertainty of the network weight estimates is often neglected, although there is a growing necessity to model the uncertainty in many application domains such as medical decision-making and climate prediction (Slingo and Palmer 2011).
Reasoning about uncertainties in the neural network models was initiated by a few seminal papers (Neal 2012;
MacKay 1995; Dayan and Hinton 1996). These works aimed
to develop Bayesian methods for neural network models,
suggesting a new research direction, called Bayesian neural
networks (BNNs) (Blundell et al. 2015; Hernández-Lobato
and Adams 2015; Gal and Ghahramani 2016; Louizos and
Welling 2016). These, however, rely on prior and posterior pairs that are often chosen for convenience in inference, namely, computational tractability. The so-called
mean-ﬁeld variational family in these works assumes the
posterior distributions to be all factorizing, and hence neglects the possibility of modelling statistical dependencies
(i.e., correlations) among weight parameters (Graves 2011;
Blundell et al. 2015; Kingma, Salimans, and Welling 2015;

Our contributions In this paper, we propose a new variational family with the aim of not only tackling the modelling
side of BNNs in terms of capturing correlations among
weight parameters but also addressing the issue of sparsiﬁcation of over-parameterized neural network models. We
provide a detailed description of our contributions below.

∗
At https://arxiv.org/abs/1902.02603v3, supplementary material is accessible.
†
Work done while at MPI-IS, now at University of Amsterdam(c.oh@uva.nl)
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• Proposing a novel variational family: Our variational
family has two components by decomposing a weight
vector into its magnitude (radius) and angle (direction);
and hence our variational prior and posterior distributions
5298

