The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Individual-Based Stability in Hedonic Diversity Games
Niclas Boehmer∗

Edith Elkind

TU Berlin
Berlin, Germany
niclas.boehmer@tu-berlin.de

University of Oxford
Oxford, UK
elkind@cs.ox.ac.uk

duced framework of hedonic diversity games (HDG) (Bredereck, Elkind, and Igarashi 2019). In these games, agents can
be split into two classes (say, red and blue), and each agent
has preferences over the fraction of red agents in her group.
The outcome of a game is a partition of agents into groups.
This model is relevant for analyzing a variety of application
scenarios, ranging from interdisciplinary collaborations to
racial segregation.
In their work, Bredereck et al. aim to understand whether
HDGs admit stable outcomes, for several common notions
of stability for hedonic games, such as Nash stability, individual stability and core stability; the ﬁrst two concepts
are based on deviations by individual agents, while the third
concept captures resilience against group deviations. Bredereck et al. show that an HDG may fail to have a Nash stable
outcome or a core stable outcome and that deciding if an
HDG has a core stable outcome is NP-complete. For individual stability, they get a positive result under the additional
assumption that agents’ preferences are single-peaked, i.e.,
each agent i has a preferred ratio of red agents in her group
(say, ρi ), and for any two ratios ρ, ρ such that ρ < ρ ≤ ρi
or ρi ≤ ρ < ρ she prefers a group with ratio ρ to a group
with ratio ρ. Speciﬁcally, Bredereck et al. show that every
HDG with single-peaked preferences admits an individually
stable outcome and describe a polynomial-time algorithm
for ﬁnding some such outcome. Their work leaves open the
question whether HDGs with non-single-peaked preferences
always have an individually stable outcome.

Abstract
In hedonic diversity games (HDGs), recently introduced by
Bredereck, Elkind, and Igarashi (2019), each agent belongs
to one of two classes (men and women, vegetarians and meateaters, junior and senior researchers), and agents’ preferences
over coalitions are determined by the fraction of agents from
their class in each coalition. Bredereck et al. show that while
an HDG may fail to have a Nash stable (NS) or a core stable
(CS) outcome, every HDG in which all agents have singlepeaked preferences admits an individually stable (IS) outcome, which can be computed in polynomial time. In this
work, we extend and strengthen these results in several ways.
First, we establish that the problem of deciding if an HDG
has an NS outcome is NP-complete, but admits an XP algorithm with respect to the size of the smaller class. Second, we
show that, in fact, all HDGs admit IS outcomes that can be
computed in polynomial time; our algorithm for ﬁnding such
outcomes is considerably simpler than that of Bredereck et
al. We also consider two ways of generalizing the model of
Bredereck et al. to k ≥ 2 classes. We complement our theoretical results by empirical analysis, comparing the IS outcomes found by our algorithm, the algorithm of Bredereck et
al. and a natural better-response dynamics.

1

Introduction

A number of French exchange students at a Spanish university have signed up for a game theory class. All students taking the class are advised to form study groups to discuss the
material and to work on problem sheets. Now, some French
students see this as an excellent opportunity to improve their
Spanish and would like to join study groups where no one
else speaks French. Other students have less conﬁdence in
their ability to communicate in Spanish and therefore want
to be in a group where at least a few other students speak
French; in fact, some of the students prefer to be in an exclusively French-speaking group. Spanish students, too, have
different preferences over the fraction of French students in
their groups: some are eager to meet new friends, while others are worried that language issues will affect their learning.
Many important aspects of the setting described in the
previous paragraph can be captured by the recently intro-

Our Contribution In this paper, we answer two open
questions from the paper of Bredereck et al., as well as extend their model to an arbitrary number of agent classes.
First (Section 3), we show that deciding if an HDG has
a Nash stable outcome is NP-complete. Our hardness result
holds even if agents have dichotomous preferences, i.e., approve some ratios and disapprove the remaining ratios; in
fact, it remains true if each agent approves at most 4 ratios.
On the other hand, we show that the existence of a Nash stable outcome can be decided in polynomial time if the size of
one of the classes can be bounded by a constant.
We then turn our attention to individual stability (Section 4). We describe a polynomial-time algorithm that ﬁnds
an individually stable outcome of any HDG; our algorithm
is signiﬁcantly simpler than that of Bredereck et al. How-

∗
Most of this research was done when the ﬁrst author was an
MSc student at the University of Oxford.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1822

