The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

DAMN: Defeasible Reasoning Tool for Multi-Agent Reasoning
Abdelraouf Hecham,1 Madalina Croitoru,1 Pierre Bisquert2
1

LIRMM, University Of Montpellier, France, {hecham, croitoru}@lirmm.fr
2
IATE, INRA, Montpellier, France, pierre.bisquert@inra.fr

• Importing knowledge bases using DLGP formats (Baget
et al. 2015), or a JSON ﬁle.

Abstract
This demonstration paper introduces DAMN: a defeasible
reasoning platform available on the web. It is geared towards
decision making where each agent has its own knowledge
base that can be combined with other agents to detect and
visualize conﬂicts and potentially solve them using a semantics. It allows the use of different defeasible reasoning semantics (ambiguity blocking/propagating with or without team
defeat) and integrates agent collaboration and visualization
features.

A presentation video explaining all of the features is available online at http://tiny.cc/mx2hcz.

Technical Details
Let us consider the following knowledge: kowalski is undeniably a penguin with potentially broken wings, penguins
are bird who do not ﬂy, generally birds ﬂy (a less trustworthy rule), and one cannot say that birds with broken wings
ﬂy. The associated SG, with the queries f ly(kowalski) and
notF ly(kowalski) is shown in Figure 1.

Relevance and Related Work
One of the aims of knowledge representation and conﬂicttolerant reasoning is to help with the decision making process where the knowledge of different stakeholder agents
can be put together in order to help reach a decision
or at least detect conﬂicts. In order to reason with combined knowledge, a conﬂict-tolerant reasoning mechanism
is needed. Defeasible reasoning (Nute 1988) allows to reason with incomplete knowledge where conclusions can be
challenged by additional information. It provides different
semantics given its systematic reliance on a set of intuitions
and rules of thumb (ambiguity propagating. blocking, team
defeat), which have been long debated between logicians.
Statement Graphs (SG) (Hecham, Bisquert, and Croitoru
2018) have been deﬁned in order to represent different semantics of Defeasible Logics (Antoniou et al. 2000) in a
single formal framework.
This demonstration paper presents a platform called
DAMN1 that implements SG and provides a data engineer
with the following features:
• Multi-agent integration: allowing agents to have their own
knowledge bases (having, potentially, nothing in common).
• Real-time agent collaboration with access control.
• Defeasible reasoning on the combined knowledge featuring ambiguity propagating/blocking, with or without team
defeat, used to solve contradictions between agents.
• Visualization of the resulting reasoning graph.

Figure 1: Statement Graph example.
DAMN Workﬂow. The typical workﬂow of the DAMN
platform is: (1) Each user creates a project that will contain
the different knowledge bases; (2) The user can add or
remove agents along with their knowledge bases (that can
be imported from DLGP ﬁles); (3) The user can invite other
users to update the KB of some or all agents in real-time;
(4) The user can build the SG using the KB of some or all

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://hamhec.github.io/damn/home
13612

