The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Relation-Aware Pedestrian Attribute
Recognition with Graph Convolutional Networks
Zichang Tan,1,2 Yang Yang,1,2 Jun Wan,1,2 * Guodong Guo,3,4 Stan Z. Li1,2,5
1

CBSR&NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Institute of Deep Learning, Baidu Research, Beijing, China
4
National Engineering Laboratory for Deep Learning Technology and Application, Beijing, China
5
Faculty of Information Technology, Macau University of Science and Technology, Macau, China
{zichang.tan, yang.yang, jun.wan, szli}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, guoguodong01@baidu.com
this phenomenon, a reliable solution of enhancing the recognition performance is to explore the relations among multiple pedestrian attributes. Most previous works (Wang et al.
2017; Sarfraz et al. 2017; Lin et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2018;
Li et al. 2018a) exploit the relations among multiple attributes by only using a simple multi-task learning (MTL)
framework, where the information exchanges among different attributes are only allowed in the shared low-level layers.
Since MTL employs the losses followed by the ﬁnal layers
to guide its learning, the explicit information exchanges and
propagation among different attributes may be insufﬁcient.
Thus, such a framework lacks a thorough and comprehensive representation of the relations among attributes.

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a new end-to-end network, named
Joint Learning of Attribute and Contextual relations (JLAC),
to solve the task of pedestrian attribute recognition. It includes two novel modules: Attribute Relation Module (ARM)
and Contextual Relation Module (CRM). For ARM, we construct an attribute graph with attribute-speciﬁc features which
are learned by the constrained losses, and further use Graph
Convolutional Network (GCN) to explore the correlations
among multiple attributes. For CRM, we ﬁrst propose a graph
projection scheme to project the 2-D feature map into a
set of nodes from different image regions, and then employ
GCN to explore the contextual relations among those regions.
Since the relation information in the above two modules is
correlated and complementary, we incorporate them into a
uniﬁed framework to learn both together. Experiments on
three benchmarks, including PA-100K, RAP, PETA attribute
datasets, demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed JLAC.

Exploration of the contextual relations in different image
regions is also helpful for attribute recognition. A conceivable example is that when recognizing the gender of a pedestrian, one tends to focus on multiple regions like the regions
around the head, human body and carrying things, and consider their contextual relations. Although the deep convolutional networks have achieved a great success in pedestrian
attribute recognition, the contextual relations have not been
fully exploited. This is because that the receptive ﬁelds of
units in those deep convolutional networks are severely limited according to the work (Luo et al. 2016), which may fail
to learn the global context and capture the long range dependencies in different regions.

Introduction
Visual analysis of pedestrian attributes, e.g., gender, age and
body shape, has received increasing attention in recent years
(Wang et al. 2017; Sarfraz et al. 2017; Lin et al. 2019;
Liu et al. 2017; Zhao et al. 2018; Xiang et al. 2019), due to its
wide range of potential applications, such as person retrieval
(Feris et al. 2014), person re-identiﬁcation (Lin et al. 2019;
Zheng et al. 2015) and so on. Although signiﬁcant efforts
have been devoted to pedestrian attribute recognition, it remains a challenging problem because of low resolution, occlusions and complex variations (e.g., human poses, camera
viewing angles and background) in surveillance scenes.
In the ﬁeld of pedestrian attribute recognition, dozens of
attributes are often required to be analyzed together, like
gender, age, sunglasses, clothing types and hair style. In
those attributes, some of them are closely related. For example, the attribute ”skirt” is often associated with the attribute ”female”, and the attribute of clothing types can provide certain information for judging the age. Observed with

To deal with the above-mentioned problems, we resort
to Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) (Kipf and Welling
2017) which has a strong ability of modeling the dependencies and propagating messages between the concepts on a
graph structure. Speciﬁcally, we construct two graph modules, named attribute relation module (ARM) and contextual relation module (CRM), to discover and capture the attribute and contextual relations, respectively. In these two
modules, the key issue is how to construct the graph structure. In ARM, we ﬁrst learn the attribute-speciﬁc features
by the constrained losses with each feature corresponding
to an attribute. Then, each learned feature would be treated
as a node in the graph. In CRM, we deﬁne the clusters of
regions/pixels as the nodes of the graph. In consideration
of the variations of human poses and camera viewing angles, we let the network learn to cluster the regions by itself

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12055

