The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference (IAAI-20)

Improving Lives of Indebted Farmers Using Deep Learning:
Predicting Agricultural Produce Prices Using Convolutional Neural Networks
Hangzhi Guo,1 Alexander Woodruff,2 Amulya Yadav2
2

1
Wenzhou Kean University, Wenzhou, China 325060
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802
guoha@kean.edu, {arw5550, amulya}@psu.edu

since 1995. As of 2014, 60,000 farmers committed suicide
in the Indian state of Maharashtra alone, with an average of
10 suicides every day (NCRB 2019).
There are a myriad of factors that lead to farmer suicides,
e.g., crop failures, low farm productivity, an inability to
achieve proﬁts, inefﬁcient cold chain management resulting
in wastage of agricultural produce, lack of irrigation facilities, and insurmountable debt. However, one key factor that
contributes to farmer suicides is the uncertainty associated
with agricultural prices and markets, i.e., variations in global
market conditions can lead to abrupt ﬂuctuations in prices of
agricultural produce at a local level (Barik 2018). Due to this
uncertainty over prices, indebted small-scale farmers who
often lack advanced technological resources and knowledge
about global market conditions are unable to make accurate
decisions about when (and where) to sell their produce. As
a result, they are unable to earn desired proﬁts on their produce and repay their agricultural loans (see Figures 1a and
1b), which causes many of these farmers to commit suicide
(Panagariya 2008).

Abstract
Farmer suicides have become an urgent social problem which
governments around the world are trying hard to solve. Most
farmers are driven to suicide due to an inability to sell their
produce at desired proﬁt levels, which is caused by the
widespread uncertainty/ﬂuctuation in produce prices resulting from varying market conditions. To prevent farmer suicides, this paper takes the ﬁrst step towards resolving the
issue of produce price uncertainty by presenting PECAD, a
deep learning algorithm for accurate prediction of future produce prices based on past pricing and volume patterns. While
previous work presents machine learning algorithms for prediction of produce prices, they suffer from two limitations:
(i) they do not explicitly consider the spatio-temporal dependence of future prices on past data; and as a result, (ii) they
rely on classical ML prediction models which often perform
poorly when applied to spatio-temporal datasets. PECAD addresses these limitations via three major contributions: (i) we
gather real-world daily price and (produced) volume data of
different crops over a period of 11 years from an ofﬁcial Indian government administered website; (ii) we pre-process
this raw dataset via state-of-the-art imputation techniques to
account for missing data entries; and (iii) PECAD proposes a
novel wide and deep neural network architecture which consists of two separate convolutional neural network models
(trained for pricing and volume data respectively). Our simulation results show that PECAD outperforms existing stateof-the-art baseline methods by achieving signiﬁcantly lesser
root mean squared error (RMSE) - PECAD achieves ∼25%
lesser coefﬁcient of variance than state-of-the-art baselines.
Our work is done in collaboration with a non-proﬁt agency
that works on preventing farmer suicides in the Indian state of
Jharkhand, and PECAD is currently being reviewed by them
for potential deployment.

(a) Farmers Protesting by (b) Huge Demand for Loan
Throwing their Unsold Produce Waiver at Farmer Rally

Figure 1: Agrarian Distress in India
Thus, immediate steps need to be taken to alleviate issues of these farmers. Recent advances in Machine Learning
(ML) techniques have made it possible to apply learning algorithms successfully to different social problems (Tambe
and Rice 2018). As a ﬁrst step in solving problems of
farmers outlined above, this paper proposes an AI/ML approach to answer the following question: Can data-driven
approaches use historical pricing and volume patterns at
different markets to predict future prices of agricultural produce at these markets? These AI/ML approaches can then

Introduction
In the last two decades, the issue of agrarian distress (and
other related socio-economic problems such as indebtedness, loss of agricultural income, etc.) have led to a significant increase in suicide rates among small-scale farmers,
especially in developing countries such as India, Pakistan,
etc. Around 300,000 Indian farmers have committed suicide
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13294

