The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Fine-Grained Entity Typing for Domain Independent Entity Linking
Yasumasa Onoe, Greg Durrett
Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Austin
{yasumasa, gdurrett}@cs.utexas.edu

entities. These models partially learn to attain high performance by memorizing the entity distribution of the training
set rather than learning how to link entities more generally.
As a result, apparently strong systems in one domain may
not generalize to other domains without ﬁne-tuning.
In this work, we aim to use feature-rich neural models for
entity linking1 in a way that can effectively generalize across
domains. We do this by framing the entity linking problem
as a problem of prediction of very ﬁne-grained entity types.
Ambiguous entity references (e.g., different locations with
the same name, the same movie released in different years)
often differ in critical properties that can be inferred from
context, but which neural bag-of-words and similar methods
may not effectively tease out. We use an inventory of tens of
thousands of types to learn such highly speciﬁc properties.
This represents a much larger-scale tagset than past work using entity typing for entity linking, which has usually used
hundreds of types (Gupta, Singh, and Roth 2017, Murty et
al. 2018, Raiman and Raiman 2018). Critically, type prediction is the only learned component of our model: our ﬁnal
entity prediction uses a very simple heuristic based on summing posterior type probabilities.
To train our typing model, we collect data from Wikipedia
targeting a range of types in a domain of interest. This type
set is lightly specialized to the target domain, but importantly, the set is determined on the basis of purely unlabeled
data in the domain (lists of candidates for the identiﬁed mentions). Moreover, because we use such a large type inventory, our model captures a wide range of types and can handle entity linking in both narrow settings such as CoNLLYAGO and broader domain settings such as WikilinksNED.
Our typing model itself is adapted from past work on ultraﬁne grained entity typing in a different setting (Choi et al.
2018, Onoe and Durrett 2019). As a high-capacity neural
network model, this model can train on millions of examples and effectively predict even rare types.
Our contributions are as follows: (1) Formulating entity
linking as purely an entity typing problem. (2) Constructing a distantly-supervised typing dataset based on Wikipedia

Abstract
Neural entity linking models are very powerful, but run the
risk of overﬁtting to the domain they are trained in. For this
problem, a “domain” is characterized not just by genre of text
but even by factors as speciﬁc as the particular distribution of
entities, as neural models tend to overﬁt by memorizing properties of frequent entities in a dataset. We tackle the problem
of building robust entity linking models that generalize effectively and do not rely on labeled entity linking data with
a speciﬁc entity distribution. Rather than predicting entities
directly, our approach models ﬁne-grained entity properties,
which can help disambiguate between even closely related
entities. We derive a large inventory of types (tens of thousands) from Wikipedia categories, and use hyperlinked mentions in Wikipedia to distantly label data and train an entity
typing model. At test time, we classify a mention with this
typing model and use soft type predictions to link the mention to the most similar candidate entity. We evaluate our
entity linking system on the CoNLL-YAGO dataset (Hoffart
et al. 2011) and show that our approach outperforms prior
domain-independent entity linking systems. We also test our
approach in a harder setting derived from the WikilinksNED
dataset (Eshel et al. 2017) where all the mention-entity pairs
are unseen during test time. Results indicate that our approach
generalizes better than a state-of-the-art neural model on the
dataset.

Introduction
Historically, systems for entity linking to Wikipedia relied
on heuristics such as anchor text distributions (Cucerzan
2007, Milne and Witten 2008), tf-idf (Ratinov et al. 2011),
and Wikipedia relatedness of nearby entities (Hoffart et al.
2011). These systems have few parameters, making them
relatively ﬂexible across domains. More recent systems have
typically been parameter-rich neural network models (Sun et
al. 2015, Yamada et al. 2016, Francis-Landau, Durrett, and
Klein 2016, Eshel et al. 2017). Many of these models are
trained and evaluated on data from the same domain such
as the CoNLL-YAGO dataset (Hoffart et al. 2011) or WikilinksNED (Eshel et al. 2017, Mueller and Durrett 2018), for
which the training and test sets share similar distributions of

1

Throughout this work, when we say entity linking, we refer
to the task of disambiguating a given entity mention, not the full
detection and disambiguation task which this sometimes refers to.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8576

