The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Embedding Compression with Isotropic Iterative Quantization
Siyu Liao,1 Jie Chen,2 Yanzhi Wang,3 Qinru Qiu,4 Bo Yuan1
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Rutgers University
2
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research
3
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Northeastern University
4
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Department, Syracuse University
siyu.liao@rutgers.edu, chenjie@us.ibm.com, yanz.wang@northeastern.edu
qiqiu@syr.edu, bo.yuan@soe.rutgers.edu

2014). Word2Vec is a classical algorithm based on either
skip grams or a bag of words, both of which are unsupervised and can directly learn word embeddings from a
given corpus. GloVe is another embedding learning algorithm, which combines the advantage of a global factorization of the word co-occurrence matrix, as well as that of the
local context. Both approaches are effective in many NLP
applications, including word analogy and name entity recognition.
Neural networks with word embeddings are frequently
used in solving NLP problems, such as sentiment analysis
(dos Santos and Gatti 2014) and name entity recognition
(Lample et al. 2016). An advantage of word embeddings is
that interactions between words may be modeled by using
neural network layers (e.g., attention architectures).
Despite the success of these word embeddings, they often constitute a substantial portion of the overall model. For
example, the pre-trained Word2Vec (Mikolov et al. 2013b)
contains 3M word vectors and the storage is approximately
3GB. This cost becomes a bottleneck in deployment on
resource-constrained platforms.
Thus, much work studies the compression of word embeddings. (Shu and Nakayama 2017) propose to represent
word vectors by using multiple codebooks trained with
Gumbel-softmax. (Grzegorczyk and Kurdziel 2017) learn
binary document emebddings via a bag-of-word-like process. The learned vectors are demonstrated to be effective
for document retrieval.
In information retrieval, iterative quantization (ITQ)
(Gong et al. 2013) transforms vectors into binary ones,
which are found to be successful in image retrieval. The
method maximizes the bit variance meanwhile minimizing
the quantization loss. It is theoretically sound and also computationally efﬁcient. However, (Grzegorczyk and Kurdziel
2017) ﬁnd that directly applying ITQ in NLP tasks may not
be effective.
In (Mu, Bhat, and Viswanath 2017), authors propose an
alternate approach that improves the quality of word embeddings without incurring extra training. The main idea
lies in the concept of isotropy used to explain the success
of pointwise mutual information (PMI) based embeddings.
The authors demonstrate that the isotropy could be improved

Abstract
Continuous representation of words is a standard component
in deep learning-based NLP models. However, representing
a large vocabulary requires signiﬁcant memory, which can
cause problems, particularly on resource-constrained platforms. Therefore, in this paper we propose an isotropic iterative quantization (IIQ) approach for compressing embedding
vectors into binary ones, leveraging the iterative quantization
technique well established for image retrieval, while satisfying the desired isotropic property of PMI based models.
Experiments with pre-trained embeddings (i.e., GloVe and
HDC) demonstrate a more than thirty-fold compression ratio
with comparable and sometimes even improved performance
over the original real-valued embedding vectors.

1

Introduction

Words are basic units in many natural language processing
(NLP) applications, e.g., translation (Bahdanau, Cho, and
Bengio 2014) and text classiﬁcation (Joulin et al. 2016). Understanding words is crucial but can be very challenging.
One difﬁculty lies in the large vocabulary commonly seen in
applications. Moreover, their semantic permutations can be
numerous, constituting rich expressions at the sentence and
paragraph levels.
In statistical language models, word distributions are
learned for unigrams, bigrams, and generally n-grams. A
unigram distribution presents the probability for each word.
The histogram is already sufﬁciently complex given a large
vocabulary. Then, the complexity of bigram distributions is
quadratic in the vocabulary size and that of n-gram ones is
exponential. The combinatorial nature motivates researchers
to develop alternative representations which otherwise explode.
Instead of word distributions, continuous representations
with ﬂoating-point vectors are much more convenient to
handle: they are differentiable, and their differences can
be used to draw semantic analogy. A variety of algorithms
were proposed over the years for learning these word vectors. Two representative ones are Word2Vec (Mikolov et
al. 2013a) and GloVe (Pennington, Socher, and Manning
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8336

