The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Diversiﬁed Bayesian Nonnegative Matrix Factorization
Maoying Qiao,1∗ Jun Yu,2 Tongliang Liu,3 Xinchao Wang,4 Dacheng Tao3
1

The Commonwealth Scientiﬁc and Industrial Research Organisation, Australia
2
Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou, China
3
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, School of Computer Science,
Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney, Darlington, NSW 2008, Australia
4
Stevens Institute of Technology, Hoboken, New Jersey 07030
maoying.qiao@csiro.au, yujun@hdu.edu.cn, {tongliang.liu, dacheng.tao}@sydney.au.,
xinchao.wang@stevens.edu
spectral unmixing, audio source separating, music analysis,
and community detection.
Studies have been conducted to seek unique and exact
solutions to NMF, despite the non-convexity nature of the
problem. Most of these studies are based on the separability assumption (Chen et al. 2019; Degleris and Gillis 2019).
This condition states that the columns of the bases W , which
should be a subset of dataset X, i.e., W ⊆ X, span a convex
hull/simplex/conical hull/cone which includes all data points
X (Zhou, Bian, and Tao 2013). However, this condition is
too strict to be satisﬁed in practice. Conditions focusing on
relaxing the separability assumption have been developed,
such as a near-separable condition, a subset-separable condition (Ge and Zou 2015), and a geometric assumption (Liu,
Gong, and Tao 2017). However, all these exact solutions do
not consider the low-rank condition of W , which is practically important when NMF plays the role as a dimensionality reduction tool.
In practice, approximate solutions with good generalizability are desired. To seek such solutions to NMF, a variety
of regularization penalties, based on either the characteristics of the data or domain-speciﬁc prior knowledge, have
been imposed. For example, two most widely used penalties
in machine learning, i.e., sparseness and smoothness, have
been exploited (Tao et al. 2017). Additionally, from the geometric perspective, a large-cone regularizer on the bases
W has also been developed (Liu, Gong, and Tao 2017). All
these regularized solutions have either empirically or theoretically demonstrated improvement to the original solutions
(Lee and Seung 2001) in their generalizability. Furthermore,
these penalty-based models account for the low-dimensional
requirement, via balancing a trade-off among a regularization penalty, the low-rank requirement of bases W , as well
as the model ﬁtness measured by reconstruction error (Liu,
Gong, and Tao 2017), KL divergence (Lee and Seung 2001),
Itakura-Saito divergence (Ivek 2015), or the earth mover’s
distance (Sandler and Lindenbaum 2011).
In this paper, we propose a diversiﬁed Bayesian NMF
model, termed DivBNMF, to enhance the solutions. Our approach can be seen as a Bayesian extension of the large-cone
regularized NMF (LCNMF) (Liu, Gong, and Tao 2017) yet
exhibits several advantages. First, thanks to the kernel trick

Abstract
Nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF) has been widely
employed in a variety of scenarios due to its capability of
inducing semantic part-based representation. However, because of the non-convexity of its objective, the factorization
is generally not unique and may inaccurately discover intrinsic “parts” from the data. In this paper, we approach this issue using a Bayesian framework. We propose to assign a diversity prior to the parts of the factorization to induce correctness based on the assumption that useful parts should be
distinct and thus well-spread. A Bayesian framework including this diversity prior is then established. This framework
aims at inducing factorizations embracing both good data ﬁtness from maximizing likelihood and large separability from
the diversity prior. Speciﬁcally, the diversity prior is formulated with determinantal point processes (DPP) and is seamlessly embedded into a Bayesian NMF framework. To carry
out the inference, a Monte Carlo Markov Chain (MCMC)
based procedure is derived. Experiments conducted on a synthetic dataset and a real-world MULAN dataset for multilabel learning (MLL) task demonstrate the superiority of the
proposed method.

Introduction
Nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF) has attracted attention due to its non-negativity constraints. These constraints
induce non-subtractive part-based representations to effectively interpret data (Lee and Seung 1999). For example,
in the multi-label learning task, NMF factorizes an image
dataset X into shared image parts as bases W and the corresponding individual constituent weights as new image representations H. Ideally, when the shared image parts in W
are associated with distinct labels, the constituent weights H
based on these parts then encode label information and help
improve the accuracies of the following classiﬁcation task.
With this promising prospect, many efforts have been dedicated to effectively discovering meaningful parts from the
data in a vast number of application scenarios. Examples include document clustering based on topic discovery, hyper∗
Part of this work was done when MQ was with Hangzhou Dianzi University.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5420

