The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Urban2Vec: Incorporating Street View Imagery and
POIs for Multi-Modal Urban Neighborhood Embedding
Zhecheng Wang,1∗ Haoyuan Li,2∗ Ram Rajagopal1
1

Stanford University, 2 Renmin University of China
{zhecheng, ramr}@stanford.edu, 2016201695@ruc.edu.cn

Data gathered through such time-consuming surveys can
lag behind real-world urban change particularly in regions
where the resources for data collection are limited. To provide decision makers with timely yet comprehensive information, we need a time-saving, cost-efﬁcient, and general
approach to characterize urban areas.
Since the intrinsic characteristics of urban neighborhoods
are well embedded in their physical appearance, business activities, and even geo-tagged text information, recent datadriven methods have leveraged these widely-available data
to predict or interpret the demographic and socioeconomic
patterns. For example, point-of-interest (POI) categories
have been used to infer region functions (Yuan, Zheng, and
Xie 2012); text data from Twitter has been leveraged to
predict income, occupation, and unemployment rates (Antenucci et al. 2014; Aletras and Chamberlain 2018); imagery
data, including street view images and satellite images, have
been utilized to predict perceived safety, house price, and demographic makeup (Naik et al. 2014; Law, Paige, and Russell 2018; Gebru et al. 2017). However, these methods are
all based on task-speciﬁc supervised learning. Representations learned for one task are not necessarily useful in other
tasks. Furthermore, directly applying supervised learning on
high-dimensional raw data, such as images, requires massive
labeled data for training, which is impractical in the cases
when labels are sparse.
Learning multipurpose representations of urban neighborhoods without requiring massive amounts of labeled data
has led to research that represents neighborhoods as vectors while preserving the associations with urban attributes.
Analog to word embeddings in NLP (Mikolov et al. 2013;
Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014) and graph embeddings in social network analysis (Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and
Skiena 2014; Grover and Leskovec 2016), the key idea in
neighborhood embeddings is to deﬁne a “similarity” metrics between objects, capture it from data, and encode it into
vector representations. For example, Zhang et al. (2017) and
Yao et al. (2018) extract “similarity” between regions from
urban mobility ﬂow, and optimize the neighborhood embedding to represent the neighborhood function via either
skip-gram or matrix factorization techniques. By contrast,
Wang et al. (2018) obtained the region embedding with the
“similarity” measurement derived from the POI categories
and inter-POI connectivity inside each neighborhood. Be-

Abstract
Understanding intrinsic patterns and predicting spatiotemporal characteristics of cities require a comprehensive representation of urban neighborhoods. Existing works relied on either inter- or intra-region connectivities to generate neighborhood representations but failed to fully utilize the informative yet heterogeneous data within neighborhoods. In
this work, we propose Urban2Vec, an unsupervised multimodal framework which incorporates both street view imagery and point-of-interest (POI) data to learn neighborhood embeddings. Speciﬁcally, we use a convolutional neural network to extract visual features from street view images while preserving geospatial similarity. Furthermore, we
model each POI as a bag-of-words containing its category,
rating, and review information. Analog to document embedding in natural language processing, we establish the semantic similarity between neighborhood (“document”) and the
words from its surrounding POIs in the vector space. By
jointly encoding visual, textual, and geospatial information
into the neighborhood representation, Urban2Vec can achieve
performances better than baseline models and comparable
to fully-supervised methods in downstream prediction tasks.
Extensive experiments on three U.S. metropolitan areas also
demonstrate the model interpretability, generalization capability, and its value in neighborhood similarity analysis.

Introduction
More than 50% of the world population live in urban areas and this share is projected to be 68% by 2050 (Ritchie
and Roser 2019). Generally, an urban area consists of a
large number of spatially-distributed neighborhoods. Each
neighborhood is a complex mixture of multiple components including its physical environment, local business, and
the people living there. Representing and understanding the
characteristics and dynamics of urban neighborhoods are essential for various downstream tasks, such as urban planning, business model development, and social welfare improvement. Survey is a common but costly method to uncover neighborhood characteristics. For example, U.S. Census Bureau spends $250 million per year on the American Community Survey (ACS) which collects demographic
statistics of different neighbourhoods (Gebru et al. 2017).
∗

Equal contribution
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1013

