The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Conclusion-Supplement Answer Generation for Non-Factoid Questions
Makoto Nakatsuji, Sohei Okui
NTT Resonant Inc.
Granparktower, 3-4-1 Shibaura, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-0023, Japan
nakatsuji.makoto@gmail.com, okui@nttr.co.jp

Long short term memory (LSTM) sequence-to-sequence
models (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014; Vinyals and Le
2015; Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014) try to generate
short replies to the short utterances often seen in chat systems. Evaluations have indicated that these models have the
possibility of supporting simple forms of general knowledge QA, e.g. “Is the sky blue or black?”, since they
learn commonly occurring sentences in the training corpus. Recent machine reading comprehension (MRC) methods (Nguyen et al. 2016; Rajpurkar et al. 2016) try to return a single short answer to a question by extracting answer spans from the provided passages. Unfortunately, they
may generate unsatisfying answers to regular non-factoid
questions because they can easily become confused when
learning several different long answers to the same nonfactoid question, as pointed out by (Jia and Liang 2017;
Wang et al. 2018).

Abstract
This paper tackles the goal of conclusion-supplement answer
generation for non-factoid questions, which is a critical issue in the ﬁeld of Natural Language Processing (NLP) and
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI), as users often require supplementary information before accepting a conclusion. The current
encoder-decoder framework, however, has difﬁculty generating such answers, since it may become confused when it
tries to learn several different long answers to the same nonfactoid question. Our solution, called an ensemble network,
goes beyond single short sentences and fuses logically connected conclusion statements and supplementary statements.
It extracts the context from the conclusion decoder’s output
sequence and uses it to create supplementary decoder states
on the basis of an attention mechanism. It also assesses the
closeness of the question encoder’s output sequence and the
separate outputs of the conclusion and supplement decoders
as well as their combination. As a result, it generates answers
that match the questions and have natural-sounding supplementary sequences in line with the context expressed by the
conclusion sequence. Evaluations conducted on datasets including “Love Advice” and “Arts & Humanities” categories
indicate that our model outputs much more accurate results
than the tested baseline models do.

This paper tackles a new problem: conclusion-supplement
answer generation for non-factoid questions. Here, the conclusion consists of sentences that directly answer the question, while the supplement consists of information supporting the conclusion, e.g., reasons or examples. Such
conclusion-supplement answers are important for helping
questioners decide their actions, especially in NLU. As described in (Ennis 1991), users prefer a supporting supplement before accepting an instruction (i.e., a conclusion).
Good debates also include claims (i.e., conclusions) about a
topic and supplements to support them that will allow users
to reach decisions (Rinott et al. 2015). The following example helps to explain how conclusion-supplement answers
are useful to users: “Does separation by a long distance ruin
love?” Current methods tend to answer this question with
short and generic replies, such as, “Distance cannot ruin true
love”. The questioner, however, is not likely to be satisﬁed
with such a trite answer and will want to know how the
conclusion was reached. If a supplemental statement like
“separations certainly test your love” is presented with the
conclusion, the questioner is more likely to accept the answer and use it to reach a decision. Furthermore, there may
be multiple answers to a non-factoid question. For example,
the following answer is also a potential answer to the question: “distance ruins most relationships. You should keep in

Introduction
Question Answering (QA) modules play particularly important roles in recent dialog-based Natural Language Understanding (NLU) systems, such as Apple’s Siri and Amazon’s
Echo. Users chat with AI systems in natural language to get
the answers they are seeking. QA systems can deal with two
types of question: factoid and non-factoid ones. The former
sort asks, for instance, for the name of a thing or person
such as “What/Who is X?”. The latter sort includes more
diverse questions that cannot be answered by a short fact.
For instance, users may ask for advice on how to make a
long-distance relationship work well or for opinions on public issues. Signiﬁcant progress has been made in answering factoid questions (Wang, Smith, and Mitamura 2007;
Yu et al. 2014); however, answering non-factoid questions
remains a challenge for QA modules.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8520

