The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Inefﬁciency of K-FAC for Large Batch Size Training
Linjian Ma,1∗ Gabe Montague,1∗ Jiayu Ye,1∗
Zhewei Yao,1 Amir Gholami,1 Kurt Keutzer,1 Michael W. Mahoney1
1

University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, USA
{linjian, gabe montague, yejiayu, zheweiy, amirgh, keutzer, mahoneymw}@berkeley.edu

Yao et al. 2018b). However, multiple different groups have
provided solutions for large batch size, reducing training
time of ImageNet from 720 hours on a Titan X (Iandola
et al. 2016) down to minutes/seconds (Goyal et al. 2017a;
Yao et al. 2018a; Devarakonda, Naumov, and Garland 2017;
You, Gitman, and Ginsburg 2017; You et al. 2017; Jia
et al. 2018; Yamazaki et al. 2019; Osawa et al. 2018;
Ginsburg, Gitman, and You 2018; Mu et al. 2018). An important practical consideration in methods is the sensitivity
to hyperparameters. While it is possible to train ImageNet
in minutes, but often the cost of hyper-parameter tuning and
some times ad-hoc rules has made large batch training not a
feasible method in practice. Generally, we ﬁnd that this sensitivity is quite strong, and the required tuning process is expensive in terms of both analyst time and in-search training
time. If performing large batch training requires signiﬁcant
hyperparameter tuning for each batch-size, then one would
not achieve any effective speed up in total training time (i.e.,
hyperparameter tuning time plus ﬁnal training time).

Abstract
There have been several recent work claiming record times
for ImageNet training. This is achieved by using large batch
sizes during training to leverage parallel resources to produce
faster wall-clock training times per training epoch. However,
often these solutions require massive hyper-parameter tuning,
which is an important cost that is often ignored. In this work,
we perform an extensive analysis of large batch size training
for two popular methods that is Stochastic Gradient Descent
(SGD) as well as Kronecker-Factored Approximate Curvature (K-FAC) method. We evaluate the performance of these
methods in terms of both wall-clock time and aggregate computational cost, and study the hyper-parameter sensitivity by
performing more than 512 experiments per batch size for each
of these methods. We perform experiments on multiple different models on two datasets of CIFAR-10 and SVHN. The
results show that beyond a critical batch size both K-FAC
and SGD signiﬁcantly deviate from ideal strong scaling behaviour, and that despite common belief K-FAC does not exhibit improved large-batch scalability behavior, as compared
to SGD.

1

Using a large batch size changes the dynamics of the
training. It has been demonstrated both theoretically (Ma,
Bassily, and Belkin 2017; Martin and Mahoney 2018; 2019)
and empirically (Yao et al. 2018b; Golmant et al. 2018;
McCandlish et al. 2018; Shallue et al. 2018; Keskar et al.
2016) that, in many cases, training with large-batch SGD
comes with signiﬁcant drawbacks. This includes degraded
testing performance, worse implicit regularization, and diminishing returns in terms of training loss reduction. Among
other things, there exists a critical batch size beyond which
these effects are most acute. For practitioners operating on
a data-driven computational budget, large batch size comes
with the additional inconvenience of increased sensitivity to hyperparameters and thus increased tuning time and
cost (Shallue et al. 2018).

Introduction

As the boundaries of parallelism are pushed by modern hardware and distributed systems, researchers are increasingly
turning their attention toward leveraging these advances for
faster training of deep neural networks (DNNs). When using
the prevailing Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) method, a
batch of training data is split across computational processing units, which together compute a stochastic gradient used
to update the parameters of the DNN.
To allow for efﬁcient parallel scalability to a large number
of processors, one would like to use a large batch of training data to compute the stochastic gradient estimate (Gholami et al. 2018). Using a larger batch size allows scaling of the training to more GPUs, thus reducing training
time for a ﬁxed number of epochs as opposed to small
batch training. However, large batch training of DNNs often
results in sub-optimal generalization performance as compared to training with small batch size (Keskar et al. 2016;

There has been recent efforts in using approximate
second-order optimization method known as KroneckerFactored Approximate Curvature (K-FAC) (Martens and
Grosse 2015) for large batch training. K-FAC views the parameter space as a manifold of distribution space, in which
distance between parameter vectors is measured by a variant of the Kullback–Leibler divergence between their corresponding distributions. In certain circumstances, K-FAC has

∗

Equal contribution. Authors ordered alphabetically.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5053

