The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

The Complexity of Computing Maximin Share Allocations on Graphs
Gianluigi Greco, Francesco Scarcello
University of Calabria
87036 Rende (CS), Italy
{gianluigi.greco, francesco.scarcello}@unical.it

Lemaı̂tre 2016) but still very compelling notion is the maximin share proposed by Budish (2011). The idea is that every agent i ∈ N must get a bundle Bi ⊆ V of goods for
which she gets an utility that is not worse than the utility
she could guarantee to herself if asked to divide the set of
goods in |N | bundles and then to keep the worst one. In fact,
there are experimental and theoretical evidences showing
that maximin share allocations can be singled out in many
relevant settings (Kurokawa, Procaccia, and Wang 2016;
Bouveret and Lemaı̂tre 2016); moreover, while their existence cannot be guaranteed in general (Procaccia and
Wang 2014), allocations that “nearly satisfy” the maximin
share criterion always exist and can be computed efﬁciently (Procaccia and Wang 2014; Amanatidis et al. 2017;
Barman and Krishna Murthy 2017; Ghodsi et al. 2018;
Nguyen, Nguyen, and Rothe 2017; Farhadi et al. 2019).
In this paper, we study maximin share allocations in the
setting proposed by Bouveret et al. (2017), where bundles
are subject to constraints captured by a connectivity condition over an underlying graph. More precisely, the nodes
of the graph are the available goods and a bundle is allowed if the subgraph induced by such goods/nodes is connected. This condition emerges in many applications, often
in presence of spatial constraints (e.g., when dividing ofﬁces among research groups) or temporal constraints (when
goods represent time slots).
Fair allocation under connectivity constraints is receiving growing attention in the literature (Suksompong 2017;
Lonc and Truszczynski 2018; Bouveret, Cechlárová, and
Lesca 2018; Igarashi and Peters 2018; Bilò et al. 2019). Nevertheless, our knowledge is still quite partial when focusing on maximin share allocations: The problem of deciding
whether a maximin share allocation exists is known to be
NP-hard, and to belong to the complexity class ΔP
2 (Lonc
and Truszczynski 2018). Moreover, computing such allocations is known to be tractable on trees (Bouveret et al.
2017) and on simple cycles (Lonc and Truszczynski 2018),
but it was open whether it remains tractable on classes of
graphs having more general structural properties, in particular for those classes of graphs having a limited degree of
cyclicity—as it can be formalized by the notion of bounded
treewidth (Robertson and Seymour 1986).

Abstract
Maximin share is a compelling notion of fairness proposed
by Buddish as a relaxation of more traditional concepts for
fair allocations of indivisible goods. In this paper we consider
this notion within a setting where bundles of goods must induce connected subsets over an underlying graph. This setting
received much attention in earlier literature, and our study
answers a number of questions that were left open. First,
we show that computing maximin share allocations is FΔP
2complete, even when focusing on consistent scenarios, that
is, where such allocations are a-priori guaranteed to exist.
Moreover, the problem remains intractable if all agents have
the same type, i.e., have the same utility functions, and if either the values returned by the utility functions are polynomially bounded, or the underlying graphs have a low degree of
cyclicity (more precisely, have bounded treewidth). However,
if these conditions hold all together, then computing maximin share allocations (or checking that none exists) becomes
tractable. The result is established via machineries based on
logspace alternating machines that use partial representations
of connected bundles, which are interesting in their own.

Introduction
Since the late forties, fair allocation of indivisible goods
has been attracting much attention in the areas of mathematics, economics, and political science (Steihaus 1948;
Brams and Taylor 1996). More recently, due to the intriguing computational and algorithmic questions that naturally
arise within this context, fair division gained popularity in
the AI community too—see, e.g., (Bouveret et al. 2016;
Lang and Rothe 2016). The setting is very simple, but has
a tremendously wide spectrum of applicability: we are given
a set N of agents expressing some preferences over a set V
of indivisible goods, and we want to allocate these goods
to the agents in a way that is perceived as a “fair” one. For
instance, we might require that no agent envies other agents.
Actually, most of the well-established notions of fairness,
such as envy-freeness (or equitability or proportionality, just
to name two further), are rather demanding in practice, so
that deﬁning meaningful relaxations is a very active topic of
research. A noticeable example of a weaker (Bouveret and
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2006

