The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Hypergraph Label Propagation Network
Yubo Zhang,1 Nan Wang,1 Yufeng Chen,1 Changqing Zou,2 Hai Wan,1 Xinbin Zhao,1 Yue Gao1∗
1

BNRist, KLISS, School of Software, Tsinghua University, China 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{zhangyb17, cyf19}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, wangnanstc@yeah.net, {aaronzou1125, wan.whyhigh}@gmail.com,
{zxb, gaoyue}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
In recent years, with the explosion of information on the
Internet, there has been a large amount of data produced,
and analyzing these data is useful and has been widely employed in real world applications. Since data labeling is
costly, lots of research has focused on how to efﬁciently label
data through semi-supervised learning. Among the methods,
graph and hypergraph based label propagation algorithms
have been a widely used method. However, traditional hypergraph learning methods may suffer from their high computational cost. In this paper, we propose a Hypergraph Label
Propagation Network (HLPN) which combines hypergraphbased label propagation and deep neural networks in order
to optimize the feature embedding for optimal hypergraph
learning through an end-to-end architecture. The proposed
method is more effective and also efﬁcient for data labeling
compared with traditional hypergraph learning methods. We
verify the effectiveness of our proposed HLPN method on a
real-world microblog dataset gathered from Sina Weibo. Experiments demonstrate that the proposed method can signiﬁcantly outperform the state-of-the-art methods and alternative
approaches.

(a) Whole dataset.

(b) Sampled dataset.

Figure 1: Distribution of the real-world hand-written digit
dataset USPS. Left: distribution of the whole dataset; right:
distribution of the sampled dataset.

the density of the whole data, including the labeled and unlabeled data, iteratively. Recently much research has been
conducted on the label propagation algorithm, e.g., deploying short-cutting label propagation on the distributed system
(Stergiou, Rughwani, and Tsioutsiouliklis 2018), adaptive
label propagation through embedding (Zhang et al. 2018),
applying to the fast-move data stream with a few labeled examples (Wagner et al. 2018), etc.
Label propagation algorithms roughly consist of connection construction of the graph and label propagation by random walk according to the propagation probability. There
are two major challenges in these algorithms in real practice.
The ﬁrst challenge is how to construct effective connections
among the data points. In real world, the distribution of either structural or non-structural data in the topological space
may not purely satisfy the assumptions of manifold or clustering. Therefore it is essential to explore the optimal topological relevance structure where the two vertices connected
in the graph likely belong to the same category. The second challenge is how to compute the propagation probabilities for the random walk in the graph. Although acceptable
performances can be achieved in many cases with the uniform distribution assumption, optimizing the computation
of propagation probability is challenging and can effectively
improve the performance.
To address these two challenges in existing label propagation methods, we ﬁrst introduce our intuitive thought. Fig.

Introduction
Deep learning methods have beneﬁted from large-scale labeled datasets and have shown great superiority in many application scenario such as visual object detection (He et al.
2016), natural language understanding (Wang et al. 2016),
etc. However, in many real-world situations, labeled data
is much more costly than unlabeled data. Therefore, semisupervised learning which models the classiﬁer with the
unlabeled data with the clustering or manifold assumption
(Zhou et al. 2004) has attracted much attention in the past
decade to solve this problem.
Label propagation (Zhu and Ghahramani 2002) is a classical and effective semi-supervised learning procedure. It
propagates labels from the labeled data points to the unlabeled ones through various algorithms. Zhu et al (Zhu and
Ghahramani 2002) proposed to propagate the labels along
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6885

