The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Privacy Enhanced Multimodal Neural Representations for Emotion Recognition
Mimansa Jaiswal, Emily Mower Provost
University of Michigan
{mimansa, emilykmp}@umich.edu

However, data transmitted from users’ devices are vulnerable to data hacking and re-identiﬁcation (Barbaro, Zeller,
and Hansell 2006). Eavesdroppers can use these data for
identiﬁcation of an individual and to gain access to sensitive
information. A way to counter this issue in data collected
by mobile or smart home applications is to generate a data
representation on the device and then to transfer that representation to the server for additional processing. The beneﬁt
is that these representations can increase privacy by partially
obfuscating the actual content of the conversation (Bengio,
Courville, and Vincent 2013). However, they still contain
sensitive demographic information.

Abstract
Many mobile applications and virtual conversational agents
now aim to recognize and adapt to emotions. To enable this,
data are transmitted from users’ devices and stored on central servers. Yet, these data contain sensitive information that
could be used by mobile applications without user’s consent
or, maliciously, by an eavesdropping adversary. In this work,
we show how multimodal representations trained for a primary task, here emotion recognition, can unintentionally leak
demographic information, which could override a selected
opt-out option by the user. We analyze how this leakage differs in representations obtained from textual, acoustic, and
multimodal data. We use an adversarial learning paradigm
to unlearn the private information present in a representation
and investigate the effect of varying the strength of the adversarial component on the primary task and on the privacy metric, deﬁned here as the inability of an attacker to predict speciﬁc demographic information. We evaluate this paradigm on
multiple datasets and show that we can improve the privacy
metric while not signiﬁcantly impacting the performance on
the primary task. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst
work to analyze how the privacy metric differs across modalities and how multiple privacy concerns can be tackled while
still maintaining performance on emotion recognition.

1

The implications of sensitive information leakage is profound: research has shown that discrimination occurs across
variables of age, race, and gender in hiring, policing and
credit ratings (Hajian and Domingo-Ferrer ). (Abadi et al.
) showed how adding random noise to aggregated dataset
or individual samples can ensure defense against privacy attacks. But, previous research has shown that privacy induced
using additional noise can often be exploited if the adversary
has access to the network used to generate anonymity (Kifer
and Machanavajjhala 2011). Therefore to ensure robustness,
we consider a scenario of the attacker having access to the
same embedding sub-network to generate the representations that will be used to train its attack network.

Introduction

Virtual conversational agents strive to emulate humanlike interaction to have more naturally ﬂowing conversation (Metcalf et al. 2019). These agents often employ models that classify aspects of communication, including the
classiﬁcation of the emotional content of speech. (Huang
et al. 2018). The resulting predictions can then be used to
bias response generation. Emotion classiﬁcation is also used
in mobile and web applications to identify heightened risk
of suicidal ideation or mood ﬂuctuations (Khorram et al. ;
Matton, McInnis, and Provost 2019; Gideon et al. 2019), for
the purpose of tracking or intervention. Data are sent from
users’ devices, including mobile applications (Khorram et
al. ) and Alexa or Google home devices (Piersol and Beddingﬁeld 2019), and are stored on central servers for analysis.

In this work, we focus on privacy in the context of emotion recognition. Emotion recognition provides an important test case because emotion production varies significantly across gender and race. As a result, the outputs
of emotion recognition models are often highly correlated
with these secondary demographic signals (Chaplin 2015;
Soto and Levenson 2009). We design approaches to ﬁrst
measure leakage and then to counteract this leakage. We
measure privacy in two ways: 1) using a privacy metric,
which we deﬁne as the incapability of an attacker to recover demographic information from representations, and
2) by determining an adversary’s ability to perform membership identiﬁcation (Li et al. ), deﬁned as the ability to
determine if a given user was in a dataset from which the
emotion recognition models were trained (this can be harmful if the training data are collected in a sensitive context,
such as counselling or therapy). We ask the following seven

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7985

