The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Dynamic Embedding on Textual Networks via a Gaussian Process
Pengyu Cheng, Yitong Li, Xinyuan Zhang, Liqun Chen, David Carlson, Lawrence Carin
Duke University
pengyu.cheng@duke.edu

Most of the aforementioned textual network embedding
methods focus on a ﬁxed graph structure (Tu et al. 2017;
Zhang et al. 2018a; Shen et al. 2019). When new network
nodes are added to the graph, these frameworks require that
the whole model be re-trained to update the existing nodes
and add representations for the new nodes, leading to high
computational complexity. However, networks are often dynamic; in social networks, users and relationships between
users change over time (e.g., new users, new friends, unfriending, etc.). It is impractical to update the full model
whenever a new user is added. This paper seeks to address
this challenge and learn an embedding method that adapts to
a changed graph, without re-training.

Abstract
Textual network embedding aims to learn low-dimensional
representations of text-annotated nodes in a graph. Prior work
in this area has typically focused on ﬁxed graph structures;
however, real-world networks are often dynamic. We address this challenge with a novel end-to-end node-embedding
model, called Dynamic Embedding for Textual Networks
with a Gaussian Process (DetGP). After training, DetGP can
be applied efﬁciently to dynamic graphs without re-training
or backpropagation. The learned representation of each node
is a combination of textual and structural embeddings. Because the structure is allowed to be dynamic, our method uses
the Gaussian process to take advantage of its non-parametric
properties. To use both local and global graph structures,
diffusion is used to model multiple hops between neighbors. The relative importance of global versus local structure
for the embeddings is learned automatically. With the nonparametric nature of the Gaussian process, updating the embeddings for a changed graph structure requires only a forward pass through the learned model. Considering link prediction and node classiﬁcation, experiments demonstrate the
empirical effectiveness of our method compared to baseline
approaches. We further show that DetGP can be straightforwardly and efﬁciently applied to dynamic textual networks.

1

Prior dynamic embedding methods usually focus on predicting how the graph structure changes over time, by training on multiple time steps (Zhou et al. 2018; Seo et al. 2018;
Du et al. 2018). In such a model, a dynamic network embedding is approximated by multiple steps of ﬁxed network
embeddings. In contrast, our method only needs to train on
a single graph and it can quickly adapt to related graph
structures. Additionally, in prior work textual information
is rarely included in dynamic graphs. Two exceptions have
looked at dynamic network embeddings with changing node
attributes (Li et al. 2017; 2018). However, both require pretrained node features, whereas we show that it is more powerful to learn the text encoder in a joint framework with the
structural embedding.

Introduction

Learning latent representations for graph nodes has attracted
considerable attention in machine learning, with applications in social networks (Fan et al. 2019; Perozzi, Al-Rfou,
and Skiena 2014), knowledge bases (Trivedi et al. 2017),
recommendation systems (Ying et al. 2018), and bioinformatics (Zitnik and Leskovec 2017). Textual networks additionally contain rich semantic information, so text can be included with the graph structure to predict downstream tasks,
such as link prediction (Zhang et al. 2018a), node classiﬁcation (Kipf and Welling 2017), and graph generation (Kipf
and Welling 2016). For instance, social networks have links
between users, and typically each user has a proﬁle (text).
The goal of textual network embedding is to learn node embeddings by jointly considering textual and structural information in the graph.

We propose Dynamic Embedding for Textual Networks
with a Gaussian Process (DetGP), a novel end-to-end model
for performing unsupervised dynamic textual network embedding. DetGP learns textual and structural features jointly
for both ﬁxed and dynamic networks. The textual features
indicate the intrinsic attributes of each node based on the
text alone, while the structural features reveal the node relationships of the whole community. The structural features
utilize both the textual features and the graph topology. This
is achieved by smoothing the kernel function in a Gaussian process (GP) with a multi-hop graph transition matrix.
This GP-based structure can handle newly added nodes or
dynamic edges due to its non-parametric properties (Rasmussen 2006). To facilitate fast computation, we learn inducing points to serve as landmarks in the GP (Yu and Chu

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7562

