The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Weakly-Supervised Video Re-Localization with Multiscale Attention Model
Yung-Han Huang,1,2 Kuang-Jui Hsu,1,2,3 Shyh-Kang Jeng,2 Yen-Yu Lin1,4
1

Academia Sinica, 2 National Taiwan University, 3 Qualcomm, 4 National Chiao Tung University
{R06946015, skjeng}@ntu.edu.tw, kuangjui@qti.qualcomm.com, lin@cs.nctu.edu.tw

Abstract
Video re-localization aims to localize a sub-sequence, called
target segment, in an untrimmed reference video that is similar to a given query video. In this work, we propose an
attention-based model to accomplish this task in a weakly supervised setting. Namely, we derive our CNN-based model
without using the annotated locations of the target segments
in reference videos. Our model contains three modules. First,
it employs a pre-trained C3D network for feature extraction.
Second, we design an attention mechanism to extract multiscale temporal features, which are then used to estimate the
similarity between the query video and a reference video.
Third, a localization layer detects where the target segment
is in the reference video by determining whether each frame
in the reference video is consistent with the query video. The
resultant CNN model is derived based on the proposed coattention loss which discriminatively separates the target segment from the reference video. This loss maximizes the similarity between the query video and the target segment while
minimizing the similarity between the target segment and the
rest of the reference video. Our model can be modiﬁed to
fully supervised re-localization. Our method is evaluated on
a public dataset and achieves the state-of-the-art performance
under both weakly supervised and fully supervised settings.

Figure 1: Given a query video and a reference video, video
re-localization aims to localize a segment, i.e., frames between indices 35 and 40, inside the reference that contains
the same action category, i.e., biking, as the query.

of pre-deﬁned categories. They often fail on actions of unseen classes.
To address this issue, Feng et al. (Feng et al. 2018) introduce a new task called video re-localization. As shown
in Figure 1, the inputs of video re-localization are one
trimmed query video and one untrimmed reference video,
and the query is a short clip that a user is interested in. In
the following, we assume the query is a human action unless
otherwise speciﬁed. The goal of video re-localization is to
search a segment in the reference such that this segment has
the same semantic meaning as the query. The segment to be
retrieved may not belong to a pre-deﬁned category but the
category the same as the query. Thus, the major difﬁculty of
video re-localization lies in dealing with unseen categories.
Despite effectiveness, video re-localization relies on framelevel action annotations. Annotating the exact locations of an
action in the untrimmed video is time-consuming and expensive, and the high annotation cost of training data collection
hinders the advances in video re-localization. To address this
limitation, we propose a new approach trained with videolevel, instead of frame-level, annotations, so the annotation
cost is signiﬁcantly reduced.
Inspired by the co-attention loss in (Hsu, Lin, and Chuang
2018) for co-segmentation, we extend this loss with the temporal cue for weakly supervised video re-localization. The
co-attention loss considers merely spatial information, but
the proposed temporal co-attention loss is designed to derive
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in a weakly super-

Introduction
Video content understanding receives more and more attention since the number of videos in real world grows
rapidly. One of the fundamental tasks for video analysis
is action recognition (K. Simonyan and Zisserman 2014;
Tran et al. 2015; Li et al. 2019; Hussein, Gavves, and Smeulders 2019; Girdhar et al. 2019; Diba1 et al. 2018). Most
approaches for action recognition are developed to identify a human action inside a trimmed video. However, most
real-world videos are untrimmed, which may hinder the
advances in action recognition. Temporal action detection,
i.e., action localization (Shou et al. 2017; Gao et al. 2017b;
Zhao et al. 2017), has been proposed to work on untrimmed
videos. Its goal is to separate the video clip of a speciﬁc action category from the rest. However, methods for temporal
action detection are developed to detect the action segments
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11077

