The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning Agent Communication under Limited Bandwidth by Message Pruning
Hangyu Mao,1 Zhengchao Zhang,1 Zhen Xiao,1 Zhibo Gong,2 Yan Ni1
1
Peking University, 2 Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.
{hy.mao, zhengchaozhang, xiaozhen, niyan.ny}@pku.edu.cn, gongzhibo@huawei.com

We are interested in the limited bandwidth problem due
to two reasons. On the one hand, it is ubiquitous in the real
world. For example, in the wired packet routing systems, the
links have a limited transmission capacity; in the wireless Internet of Things, the sensors have a limited battery capacity.
Once we ﬁgure out a principled method to address this problem, many ﬁelds may beneﬁt from this work. On the other
hand, this problem has been largely ignored by the existing
DRL methods. There is a great need to devote attention to
this problem.
We take two steps to address this problem. Firstly, we aggregate the merits of the existing methods to form a basic
model named Actor-Critic Message Learner (ACML). However, the basic ACML is still not practical because it does
not change the communication pattern of the existing methods. That is to say, ACML and many previous methods send
messages incessantly, regardless of whether the message is
beneﬁcial for the agent team. Secondly, we extend ACML
with a gating mechanism to design a more ﬂexible and practical Gated-ACML model. The gating mechanism is trained
based on a novel auxiliary task, which tries to open the gate
to encourage communication when the message is beneﬁcial
enough for the agent team, and close the gate to discourage communication otherwise. As a result, after the gating
mechanism has been well-trained, it can prune unbeneﬁcial
messages adaptively to control the message quantity around
a desired threshold. Consequently, Gated-ACML is applicable to multi-agent systems with limited bandwidth.
Our contributions are summarized as follows.
(1) We are the ﬁrst to formally study the limited bandwidth problem using DRL. We give the ﬁrst detailed analyses about how gating mechanism can serve this purpose.
(2) We apply the gating mechanism to several previous
methods, equipping them the ability to address bandwidth
restricted settings.
(3) We evaluate the gating mechanism on several simulators driven by the real-world tasks. Experiments show that
it can prune a lot of messages with little impact on performance, or with great improvement on performance in speciﬁc scenarios. These are very fundamental ﬁndings in the
community. It could be the best contribution of our work beyond the gating mechanism.

Abstract
Communication is a crucial factor for the big multi-agent
world to stay organized and productive. Recently, Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) has been applied to learn the
communication strategy and the control policy for multiple
agents. However, the practical limited bandwidth in multiagent communication has been largely ignored by the existing DRL methods. Speciﬁcally, many methods keep sending
messages incessantly, which consumes too much bandwidth.
As a result, they are inapplicable to multi-agent systems with
limited bandwidth. To handle this problem, we propose a gating mechanism to adaptively prune less beneﬁcial messages.
We evaluate the gating mechanism on several tasks. Experiments demonstrate that it can prune a lot of messages with
little impact on performance. In fact, the performance may be
greatly improved by pruning redundant messages. Moreover,
the proposed gating mechanism is applicable to several previous methods, equipping them the ability to address bandwidth
restricted settings.

Introduction
Communication is an essential human intelligence. It is a
critical factor to keep the world in order. Recently, inspired
by the communication among humans, Deep Reinforcement
Learning (DRL) has been adopted to learn the communication among multiple artiﬁcial agents.
However, it remains an open question to apply the existing methods to real-world multi-agent systems because realworld applications usually impose many constraints on communication, e.g., the bandwidth limitation for transmitting
messages and the protection of private messages. In order
to develop practical communication strategies, these constraints need to be resolved.
In this paper, we focus on addressing the limited bandwidth problem in multi-agent communication. As we know,
the bandwidth (and more generally, the resource) for transmitting the communication messages is limited (Roth, Simmons, and Veloso 2005; 2006; Becker et al. 2009; Wu, Zilberstein, and Chen 2011; Zhang and Lesser 2013). Thus, the
agents should generate as few messages as possible on the
premise of maintaining the performance.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5142

