The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Regret Minimisation in Multi-Armed Bandits Using Bounded Arm Memory
Arghya Roy Chaudhuri, Shivaram Kalyanakrishnan
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology
Bombay, Mumbai 400076, India
{arghya, shivaram}@cse.iitb.ac.in

based on this empirical evidence. Hence, even if a constant
number of statistics are recorded for each arm, the memory
size needed to run such algorithms is linear in the number of
arms. In this paper, we consider a setup in which algorithms
may only store statistics from a ﬁxed, speciﬁed, number of
arms, M ≥ 2.
Our setting is motivated by a number of practical applications, and is also of independent theoretical interest. In
crowd-sourcing (Tran-Thanh et al. 2014) instead of tasking
all the available workers simultaneously, an experimenter is
often constrained to recruit a ﬁxed number of workers for a
given duration and assign jobs sequentially among them. In
on-line advertising (Schwartz, Bradlow, and Fader 2017) an
ad agency might have a large number of products to advertise,
but the budget or space only to display a small, ﬁxed number
of ads for some speciﬁed period.
Researchers have long been drawn to the design of learning agents with a bounded memory size—starting with
problems in hypothesis testing (Robbins 1956; Isbell 1959;
Cover, Freedman, and Hellman 1976). In the context of bandits, Cover (1968) considers the realisation of an algorithm
as a ﬁnite state machine, which for two-armed Bernoulli
instances, asymptotically converges to the optimal average
reward. The model we present in this paper does allow the
memory size to depend on the horizon—but restricts that
the memory be populated based on rewards from a bounded
number of arms. To the best of our knowledge, the earliest
analysis of such a constraint was undertaken by Herschkorn,
Peköz, and Ross (1996). They present a non-recalling algorithm, which can store statistics from only a single arm (that
is, M = 1). For inﬁnite bandit instances with Bernoulli arms,
their algorithm maximises the almost sure average reward
over an inﬁnite horizon. Berry et al. (1997) improve these
results when the sampling distribution over the inﬁnite set of
Bernoulli arms is uniform. Peköz (2003) demonstrates peculiarities that arise in this setting if the the reward distributions
of the arms are not stochastically-ordered.
With M = 1, an algorithm essentially has to begin afresh
when it replaces the arm in its memory with a new one.
Hence, the design of algorithms in this regime mainly focuses on an optimal schedule for sampling and erasing from
memory. The algorithms are also restricted to 0-1 reward

Abstract
Regret minimisation in stochastic multi-armed bandits is a
well-studied problem, for which several optimal algorithms
have been proposed. Such algorithms depend on (sufﬁcient
statistics of) the empirical reward distributions of the arms
to decide which arm to pull next. In this paper, we consider
the design of algorithms that are constrained to store statistics
from only a bounded number of arms. For bandits with a ﬁnite
set of arms, we derive a sub-linear upper bound on the regret
that decreases with the “arm memory” size M . For instances
with a large, possibly inﬁnite, set of arms, we show a sub-linear
bound on the quantile regret.
Our problem formulation generalises that of Liau et al. (2018),
who ﬁx M = O(1), and so do not obtain bounds that depend
on M . More importantly, our algorithms keep exploration and
exploitation tightly coupled, without a dedicated exploration
phase as employed by Liau et al. (2018). Although this choice
makes our analysis harder, it leads to much-improved practical
performance. For bandits with a large number of arms and
no known structure on the rewards, our algorithms serve as
a viable option. Unlike many other approaches to restrict the
memory of bandit algorithms, our algorithms do not need any
additional technical assumptions.

1

Introduction

We consider the well-studied problem of regret minimisation in stochastic multi-armed bandits (Robbins 1952;
Berry and Fristedt 1985), which has applications in areas
as diverse as drug-testing (Armitage 1960; Colton 1963),
crowd-sourcing (Tran-Thanh et al. 2014), and on-line advertising (Li et al. 2010). Having to maximise its rewards
by sequentially sampling unknown distributions, an agent
must strike an optimal balance between exploring all the distributions and exploiting the most rewarding ones. Several
algorithms have been proposed in the literature (Auer, CesaBianchi, and Fischer 2002; Audibert and Bubeck 2009) with
their loss (or regret) within a constant factor of optimal (Lai
and Robbins 1985; Auer et al. 2003). Invariably, these algorithms maintain statistics of the pulls performed on each
arm (such as the number of pulls and the observed mean
reward); on every round, they determine the next arm to pull
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10085

