The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A General Framework for Implicit and
Explicit Debiasing of Distributional Word Vector Spaces
Anne Lauscher,1 Goran Glavaš,1 Simone Paolo Ponzetto,1 Ivan Vulić2
1

Data and Web Science Research Group
University of Mannheim
{anne, goran, simone}@informatik.uni-mannheim.de
2
Language Technology Lab
University of Cambridge
iv250@cam.ac.uk
1954).1 While biases may be useful for diachronic or sociological analyses (Garg et al. 2018), they (1) raise ethical
issues, since biases are ampliﬁed by machine learning models using embeddings as input (Zhao et al. 2017), and (2)
impede tasks like coreference resolution (Zhao et al. 2018a;
Rudinger et al. 2018) and abusive language detection (Park,
Shin, and Fung 2018).
A number of methods for attenuating and eliminating
human-like biases in word vectors have been proposed recently (Bolukbasi et al. 2016; Zhao et al. 2018a; 2018b;
Dev and Phillips 2019). While they address the same types
of bias – primarily the gender bias – they start from different bias “speciﬁcations” and either lack proper empirical evaluation (Bolukbasi et al. 2016) or employ different evaluation procedures, both hindering a direct comparison of the methods’ “debiasing abilities” (Zhao et al. 2019;
Dev and Phillips 2019; Manzini et al. 2019). What is more,
the most prominent debiasing models (Bolukbasi et al. 2016;
Zhao et al. 2018b) have been criticized for merely masking
the bias instead of removing it (Gonen and Goldberg 2019).
To resolve inconsistencies in the current debiasing research
and evaluation, in this work we propose a general debiasing
framework DEBIE (DEBiasing embeddings Implicitly and
Explicitly), which operationalizes bias speciﬁcations, groups
models according to the bias speciﬁcation type they operate
on, and evaluates models’ abilities to remove biases both
explicitly and implicitly (Gonen and Goldberg 2019).
We ﬁrst deﬁne two types of bias speciﬁcations – implicit
and explicit – and propose a method of augmenting bias
speciﬁcations with the help of embeddings specialized for
semantic similarity (Mrkšić et al. 2017; Ponti et al. 2018). We
then introduce the main contributions of this work as follows.
First, we present three novel debiasing models. (1) We adjust
the linear projection method of Dev and Phillips (2019), an
extension of the debiasing model of Bolukbasi et al. (2016), to
operate on the augmented implicit bias speciﬁcations. (2) We
then propose an alternative model that projects the embedding
space to itself using the term sets from implicit bias speciﬁcation as the projection signal. (3) Finally, we propose a simple

Abstract
Distributional word vectors have recently been shown to encode many of the human biases, most notably gender and
racial biases, and models for attenuating such biases have
consequently been proposed. However, existing models and
studies (1) operate on under-speciﬁed and mutually differing bias deﬁnitions, (2) are tailored for a particular bias (e.g.,
gender bias) and (3) have been evaluated inconsistently and
non-rigorously. In this work, we introduce a general framework for debiasing word embeddings. We operationalize the
deﬁnition of a bias by discerning two types of bias speciﬁcation: explicit and implicit. We then propose three debiasing
models that operate on explicit or implicit bias speciﬁcations
and that can be composed towards more robust debiasing. Finally, we devise a full-ﬂedged evaluation framework in which
we couple existing bias metrics with newly proposed ones. Experimental ﬁndings across three embedding methods suggest
that the proposed debiasing models are robust and widely applicable: they often completely remove the bias both implicitly
and explicitly without degradation of semantic information
encoded in any of the input distributional spaces. Moreover,
we successfully transfer debiasing models, by means of crosslingual embedding spaces, and remove or attenuate biases in
distributional word vector spaces of languages that lack readily
available bias speciﬁcations.

Introduction
Distributional word vectors have been recently shown to encode prominent human biases related to, e.g., gender or race
(Bolukbasi et al. 2016; Caliskan, Bryson, and Narayanan
2017; Manzini et al. 2019). Such biases are observed across
languages and embedding methods (Lauscher and Glavaš
2019), both in static and contextualized word embeddings
(Zhao et al. 2019). While this issue requires remedy, the ﬁnding itself is hardly surprising: we project our biases, in terms
of biased word co-occurrences, into the texts we produce.
Consequently, this is propagated to embedding models, both
static (Mikolov et al. 2013; Pennington, Socher, and Manning
2014; Bojanowski et al. 2017) and contextualized (Peters et al.
2018) alike, by virtue of the distributional hypothesis (Harris

1

Borrowing the famous example (Bolukbasi et al. 2016), man
will be found more often in the same context with programmer, and
woman with homemaker in any sufﬁciently large corpus.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8131

