The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

MarioNETte: Few-Shot Face Reenactment Preserving Identity of Unseen Targets
Sungjoo Ha,∗ Martin Kersner,∗ Beomsu Kim,∗ Seokjun Seo,∗ Dongyoung Kim†
Hyperconnect
Seoul, Republic of Korea
{shurain, martin.kersner, beomsu.kim, seokjun.seo, dongyoung.kim}@hpcnt.com

 

Abstract
When there is a mismatch between the target identity and the
driver identity, face reenactment suffers severe degradation in
the quality of the result, especially in a few-shot setting. The
identity preservation problem, where the model loses the detailed information of the target leading to a defective output,
is the most common failure mode. The problem has several
potential sources such as the identity of the driver leaking due
to the identity mismatch, or dealing with unseen large poses.
To overcome such problems, we introduce components that
address the mentioned problem: image attention block, target feature alignment, and landmark transformer. Through attending and warping the relevant features, the proposed architecture, called MarioNETte, produces high-quality reenactments of unseen identities in a few-shot setting. In addition,
the landmark transformer dramatically alleviates the identity
preservation problem by isolating the expression geometry
through landmark disentanglement. Comprehensive experiments are performed to verify that the proposed framework
can generate highly realistic faces, outperforming all other
baselines, even under a signiﬁcant mismatch of facial characteristics between the target and the driver.

 

 

      







Figure 1: Examples of identity preservation failures and improved results generated by the proposed method. Each row
shows (a) driver shape interference, (b) losing details of target identity, and (c) failure of warping at large poses.

Introduction
Given a target face and a driver face, face reenactment aims
to synthesize a reenacted face which is animated by the
movement of a driver while preserving the identity of the
target.
Many approaches make use of generative adversarial networks (GAN) which have demonstrated a great success in
image generation tasks. Xu et al.; Wu et al. (2017; 2018)
achieved high-ﬁdelity face reenactment results by exploiting CycleGAN (Zhu et al. 2017). However, the CycleGANbased approaches require at least a few minutes of training
data for each target and can only reenact predeﬁned identities, which is less attractive in-the-wild where a reenactment
of unseen targets cannot be avoided.
The few-shot face reenactment approaches, therefore, try
to reenact any unseen targets by utilizing operations such

as adaptive instance normalization (AdaIN) (Zakharov et al.
2019) or warping module (Wiles, Koepke, and Zisserman
2018; Siarohin et al. 2019). However, current state-of-theart methods suffer from the problem we call identity preservation problem: the inability to preserve the identity of the
target leading to defective reenactments. As the identity of
the driver diverges from that of the target, the problem is
exacerbated even further.
Examples of ﬂawed and successful face reenactments,
generated by previous approaches and the proposed model,
respectively, are illustrated in Figure 1. The failures of previous approaches, for the most part, can be broken down into
three different modes 1 :
1. Neglecting the identity mismatch may lead to a identity
of the driver interfere with the face synthesis such that the
generated face resembles the driver (Figure 1a).

∗

Equal contributions, listed in alphabetical order.
Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

1
Additional example images and videos can be found at the following URL: http://hyperconnect.github.io/MarioNETte

10893

