The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Region-Based Global Reasoning Networks
Chuanming Wang,1 Huiyuan Fu,1 Charles X. Ling,2 Peilun Du,1 Huadong Ma1
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
2
Western University, Canada
{wcm, fhy, dupeilun1995, mhd}@bupt.edu.cn, charles.ling@uwo.ca

Abstract
Global reasoning plays a signiﬁcant role in many computer
vision tasks which need to capture long-distance relationships. However, most current studies on global reasoning focus on exploring the relationship between pixels and ignore
the critical role of the regions. In this paper, we propose an
novel approach that explores the relationship between regions
which have richer semantics than pixels. Speciﬁcally, we design a region aggregation method that can gather regional features automatically into a uniform shape, and adjust theirs
positions adaptively for better alignment. To achieve the best
performance of global reasoning, we propose various relationship exploration methods and apply them on the regional
features. Our region-based global reasoning module, named
ReGr, is end-to-end and can be inserted into existing visual
understanding models without extra supervision. To evaluate
our approach, we apply ReGr to ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation
and action recognition benchmark tasks, and the experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach.

Figure 1: Two pictures both contain a football but have different meanings. When we see these pictures, we ﬁnd the
primary objects (red boxes in the second column), determine
the relationships between them (arrows in the third column)
and realize the role of each object played in the image, to
achieve the purpose of understanding. The football in the
yellow box is the protagonist and it is a decoration in the
green box due to the relationship between person and football in the below is obviously stronger than that in the above.

Introduction
Recently, more and more studies focus on exploring relationships to perform global reasoning in visual understanding models (Yue et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2018) and it has
achieved outstanding performance in many computer vision
tasks like image classiﬁcation, image generation, and action
recognition. The relationship is calculated and distributed
based on pixel-level features to make each of pixels contains
the information of the whole input. However, these methods
ignore the signiﬁcance of regions in building relationships.
As described in (Wang and Gupta 2018), ﬁnding regions
and establishing relationships are two key ingredients to
understand the visual input. Humans can ﬁnd the objects
quickly and make global reasoning due to the prior knowledge and the ability of global perception. As shown in Fig. 1,
when we apperceive images, we always ﬁnd the objects ﬁrst,
and then we explore the relationships between them (like the
person is playing football or watching television). Through
the relationships, global reasoning is performed, and we can
realize the role of each object played and understand the

complete content expressed by the whole visual data ultimately. Therefore, modeling relationships between regions
is signiﬁcant for the understanding procedure.
Motivated by the observation, we hope to introduce regions into the relationship exploration to promote global reasoning. Compared to pixels, regions contain richer semantic
information and more complete spatial-temporal information which can contribute to the understanding of the visual
scene. However, global reasoning through the relationship
between regions is difﬁcult. On the one hand, regions with
rich semantics always have different scales, so it is challenging to locate these regions and extract their features. On the
other hand, the regions contain richer information than the
pixels which makes it more complicated to explore the relationship between regions.
To overcome the above difﬁculties, in this work, we propose an elaborate approach which can enable the CNN architectures to perform region-based global reasoning. For
generating meaningful regions, we ﬁrst split the input into

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12136

