The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Knowledge Graph Alignment Network
with Gated Multi-Hop Neighborhood Aggregation
Zequn Sun,1∗ Chengming Wang,1∗ Wei Hu,1† Muhao Chen,2 Jian Dai,3 Wei Zhang,3 Yuzhong Qu1
1

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles, USA
3
Alibaba Group, China
{zqsun.nju, cmwang.nju}@gmail.com, {whu, yzqu}@nju.edu.cn, muhaochen@ucla.edu, {yiding.dj, lantu.zw}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

Shooting guard

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have emerged as a powerful
paradigm for embedding-based entity alignment due to their
capability of identifying isomorphic subgraphs. However, in
real knowledge graphs (KGs), the counterpart entities usually
have non-isomorphic neighborhood structures, which easily
causes GNNs to yield different representations for them. To
tackle this problem, we propose a new KG alignment network,
namely AliNet, aiming at mitigating the non-isomorphism of
neighborhood structures in an end-to-end manner. As the direct
neighbors of counterpart entities are usually dissimilar due to
the schema heterogeneity, AliNet introduces distant neighbors
to expand the overlap between their neighborhood structures.
It employs an attention mechanism to highlight helpful distant
neighbors and reduce noises. Then, it controls the aggregation
of both direct and distant neighborhood information using a
gating mechanism. We further propose a relation loss to reﬁne
entity representations. We perform thorough experiments with
detailed ablation studies and analyses on ﬁve entity alignment
datasets, demonstrating the effectiveness of AliNet.

1

United States
of America

United States of America
Charlotte Hornets

career position draft team
country

Kobe Bryant

birthplace
Philadelphia

high school

Lower Merion High School

Lower Merion
High School

Los Angeles
Lakers

country of citizenship
educated at
member of sports team
Kobe Bryant
place of birth drafted by father
Philadelphia Charlotte Hornets Joe Bryant

Figure 1: Non-isomorphic relational neighborhood of Kobe
Bryant in DBpedia (left) and Wikidata (right), respectively.

2019) have emerged as a powerful model to learn vector
representations for graph-structured data. In GNNs, the representation of a node is learned by recursively aggregating
the representations of its neighboring nodes. A recent work
(Morris et al. 2019) has proved that GNNs have the same
expressiveness as the Weisfeiler-Leman (WL) test (Weisfeiler
and Lehman 1968) in terms of identifying isomorphic subgraphs. It provides the theory basis of using GNNs for entity
alignment between different KGs as similar entities usually
have similar neighborhood. Recently, several studies (Wang
et al. 2018; Xu et al. 2019b; Cao et al. 2019; Wu et al. 2019;
Ye et al. 2019) have exploited GNNs for embedding-based
entity alignment, and have achieved promising results.
However, existing GNN-based entity alignment models
still face a critical problem. As different KGs usually have
heterogeneous schemas and data incompleteness (Pujara et
al. 2013), the counterpart entities usually have dissimilar
neighborhood structures. Figure 1 gives an example. The
neighborhood of the two entities referring to Kobe Bryant
is inconsistent to each other, especially containing different
sets of neighboring entities. The statistics on DBpedia-based
benchmark datasets for entity alignment (Sun, Hu, and Li
2017) also show that the majority of aligned entity pairs
have different neighboring entities. Particularly, the percentages of such entity pairs reach 89.97% between ChineseEnglish, 86.19% between Japanese-English and 90.71% between French-English, respectively. Different neighborhood
structures would easily cause a GNN to yield different representations for counterpart entities.
The challenge of resolving this issue lies in the difﬁculty

Introduction

Entity alignment is the task of ﬁnding entities from different
knowledge graphs (KGs) that refer to the same real-world
identity. Recently, increasing attention has been paid to the
utilization of KG representation learning rather than symbolic
formalism for tackling this task. Representation learning models encode KGs into vector spaces, where relation semantics
of entities can be assessed by the learned embedding operations, such as the relation-speciﬁc translation (Bordes et al.
2013) or rotation (Sun et al. 2019). For embedding-based
entity alignment, the similarity of entities is measured by
the distance of entity embeddings. It has shown great potentials in dealing with the symbolic heterogeneity problem and
beneﬁts the entity alignment task in both monolingual and
cross-lingual scenarios (Zhu et al. 2017; Chen et al. 2017).
Most recently, graph neural networks (GNNs) (Kipf and
Welling 2017; Velickovic et al. 2018; Abu-El-Haija et al.
∗
This work was done while Zequn Sun was a research intern at
Alibaba Group. The ﬁrst two authors contributed equally.
†
Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

222

