The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

3D Human Pose Estimation Using
Spatio-Temporal Networks with Explicit Occlusion Training
Yu Cheng,1∗ Bo Yang,2* Bo Wang,2* Robby T. Tan1,3
1

National University of Singapore, 2 Tencent Game AI Research Center, 3 Yale-NUS College
e0321276@u.nus.edu, {brandonyang, bohawkwang}@tencent.com, robby.tan@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Estimating 3D poses from a monocular video is still a challenging task, despite the signiﬁcant progress that has been
made in the recent years. Generally, the performance of existing methods drops when the target person is too small/large,
or the motion is too fast/slow relative to the scale and speed
of the training data. Moreover, to our knowledge, many of
these methods are not designed or trained under severe occlusion explicitly, making their performance on handling occlusion compromised. Addressing these problems, we introduce a spatio-temporal network for robust 3D human pose estimation. As humans in videos may appear in different scales
and have various motion speeds, we apply multi-scale spatial features for 2D joints or keypoints prediction in each individual frame, and multi-stride temporal convolutional networks (TCNs) to estimate 3D joints or keypoints. Furthermore, we design a spatio-temporal discriminator based on
body structures as well as limb motions to assess whether the
predicted pose forms a valid pose and a valid movement. During training, we explicitly mask out some keypoints to simulate various occlusion cases, from minor to severe occlusion,
so that our network can learn better and becomes robust to
various degrees of occlusion. As there are limited 3D ground
truth data, we further utilize 2D video data to inject a semisupervised learning capability to our network. Experiments
on public data sets validate the effectiveness of our method,
and our ablation studies show the strengths of our network’s
individual submodules.

Frame 0

Frame 10

Frame 20

Frame 30

Frame 90

Frame 100

Frame 110

Frame 120

Slow Motion
Results

Fast Motion
Results

Figure 1: Examples of our 3D human pose estimation under
different movement speeds.

However, we ﬁnd that existing methods do not fully
exploit the spatial and temporal information available in
videos. As a result, they suffer from the problem of large
variations in sizes and speeds of the target person in wild
videos. In this paper, we address this problem. First, we consider multi-scale features both spatially and temporally to
deal with persons at various distances with different speeds
of motions. We use the High Resolution Network (HRNet) (Sun et al. 2019) which exploits multi-scale spatial
features to produce one heat map for each keypoint. Unlike most previous works (Newell, Yang, and Deng 2016;
Pavllo et al. 2019) that only use the peaks in the heat maps,
we encode these maps into a latent space to incorporate more
spatial information. Then, we apply temporal convolutional
networks (TCNs) (Pavllo et al. 2019) to these latent features
with different strides, e.g., 1, 2, 4, and 8, and concatenate
them together for prediction of the 3D poses. Figure 1 shows
some expamples of our results.
Moreover, to reduce the risk of invalid 3D poses, we also
utilize a discriminator in our framework like many previ-

Introduction
This paper focuses on 3D human pose estimation from a
monocular RGB video. A 3D pose is deﬁned as the 3D
coordinates of pre-deﬁned keypoints on humans, such as
shoulder, pelvis, wrist, and etc. Recent top-down approaches
(Hossain and Little 2018; Wandt and Rosenhahn 2019;
Pavllo et al. 2019; Cheng et al. 2019) have shown promising
results, where spatial features from individual frames are extracted to detect a target person and estimate the 2D poses,
and temporal context is used to produce consistent 3D predictions.
∗

Equal contribution
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10631

