The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Object Instance Mining for Weakly Supervised Object Detection
Chenhao Lin,1 Siwen Wang,2∗ Dongqi Xu,1∗ Yu Lu,1† Wayne Zhang1
1

SenseTime Research
Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China, 116024
{linchenhao, luyu, wayne.zhang}@sensetime.com, {wangsiwendut, isdongqixu}@gmail.com
2

Abstract
Weakly supervised object detection (WSOD) using only
image-level annotations has attracted growing attention over
the past few years. Existing approaches using multiple instance learning easily fall into local optima, because such
mechanism tends to learn from the most discriminative object in an image for each category. Therefore, these methods
suffer from missing object instances which degrade the performance of WSOD. To address this problem, this paper introduces an end-to-end object instance mining (OIM) framework for weakly supervised object detection. OIM attempts
to detect all possible object instances existing in each image
by introducing information propagation on the spatial and appearance graphs, without any additional annotations. During
the iterative learning process, the less discriminative object
instances from the same class can be gradually detected and
utilized for training. In addition, we design an object instance
reweighted loss to learn larger portion of each object instance
to further improve the performance. The experimental results
on two publicly available databases, VOC 2007 and 2012,
demonstrate the efﬁcacy of proposed approach.

Figure 1: The original images and corresponding objectness
maps to show the evolution of object instance mining during learning process (from left to right). The ﬁrst to fourth
columns represent random initialization, epoch1, epoch3,
and ﬁnal epoch, respectively. Blue or red bounding boxes
indicate the detected instances (top-scoring proposals after
NMS) with detection scores < 0.5 or ≥ 0.5.

Introduction
Object detection has always been one of the most essential
technologies in computer vision ﬁeld. Deep learning techniques introduced in recent years have signiﬁcantly boosted
state-of-the-art approaches for object detection (Girshick
2015; Liu et al. 2016; Redmon et al. 2016; Ren et al. 2015).
However, these approaches usually require large-scale manually annotated datasets (Russakovsky et al. 2015). The
high-cost of time-consuming accurate bounding box annotations, has impeded the wide deployment of CNN-based
object detection technologies in real applications.
To address this limitation, weakly supervised object detection (WSOD) technology, which requires only imagelevel labels for training, has been introduced and explored
(Bilen and Vedaldi 2016; Diba et al. 2017; Jie et al. 2017;
Oquab et al. 2015; Zhang et al. 2018b; Tang et al. 2017;

Zhang et al. 2018a; Shen et al. 2018; Arun, Jawahar, and
Kumar 2019; Pan et al. 2019). Although many approaches
have been developed for WSOD and achieved promising results, the lack of object instance level annotations in images
leads to huge performance gap between WSOD and fully
supervised object detection (FSOD) methods.
Most previous approaches follow the framework of combining multiple instance learning (MIL) with CNN. This
framework usually mines the most conﬁdent class-speciﬁc
object proposals for learning CNN-based classiﬁer, regardless of the number of object instances appearing in an image. For the images with multiple object instances from the
same class, the object instances (fully annotated with bounding boxes in FSOD) with lower class-speciﬁc scores will be
probably regarded as background regions. Many images in
the challenging VOC datasets contain more than one object

∗

Work performed as an intern in SenseTime Research
https://github.com/bigvideoresearch/OIM
†
Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11482

