The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Hindi-English Hate Speech Detection:
Author Proﬁling, Debiasing, and Practical Perspectives
Shivang Chopra,1 Ramit Sawhney,2 Puneet Mathur,3 Rajiv Ratn Shah4
1

Delhi Technological University, Delhi, 2 Netaji Subhas Institute of Technology, Delhi,
3
University of Maryland College Park, 4 IIIT Delhi, Delhi
shivangchopra11@gmail.com, ramits.co@nsit.net.in, puneetm@cs.umd.edu, rajivratn@iiitd.ac.in

in Roman script. Over the years, the interest in detecting and
removing hate speech from content preset on online forums
like Twitter and Facebook in an automated way has risen signiﬁcantly. The lack of generalizability of off-the-shelf hate
speech moderation systems for code-switched languages necessitates efﬁcient techniques that can detect offensive content automatically on the Internet.

Abstract
Code-switching in linguistically diverse, low resource languages is often semantically complex and lacks sophisticated
methodologies that can be applied to real-world data for precisely detecting hate speech. In an attempt to bridge this
gap, we introduce a three-tier pipeline that employs profanity modeling, deep graph embeddings, and author proﬁling
to retrieve instances of hate speech in Hindi-English codeswitched language (Hinglish) on social media platforms like
Twitter. Through extensive comparison against several baselines on two real-world datasets, we demonstrate how targeted hate embeddings combined with social network-based
features outperform state of the art, both quantitatively and
qualitatively. Additionally, we present an expert-in-the-loop
algorithm for bias elimination in the proposed model pipeline
and study the prevalence and performance impact of the debiasing. Finally, we discuss the computational, practical, ethical, and reproducibility aspects of the deployment of our
pipeline across the Web.

Motivation
The inability of mono-lingual hate-speech classiﬁers to detect the semantic cues in code-switched languages necessitates an efﬁcient classiﬁer that can detect offensive content
automatically from code-switched languages. There exists
an active ﬁeld of research in the automatic detection of codeswitched hate-speech on social media. It has been observed
that a signiﬁcant part of the hate-inducing content on social
media comes from youth who participate in communities
and are susceptible to the inﬂuence and fringe opinions of
individuals of those communities. The active involvement in
communities leads to the presence of a strong label as well
as linguistic homophily among users in the same community (Mishra et al. 2019a). This approach has been successfully applied to hate-speech detection in English (Mishra et
al. 2019a), and the general nature can be extended to codeswitched languages where the societies should in-theory be
even tightly coupled. Fig. 1 gives a semantic of the motivation of our approach. A very clear co-relation can be
observed in the tweets posted by users in tightly coupled
communities. The two concepts of label and linguistic homophily, when used leveraged in concurrency with our bias
elimination pipeline, lead to a balance between the generalizability, speciﬁcity, and fairness of our model.

Introduction
Context and Original Scope
“Social media has given people a platform to spew hate
speech and propagate radical beliefs in an attempt to amplify
fringe opinions” (Singh 2019). One of Twitter’s most pressing challenge remains to deal with abusive behavior and hate
speech (Tiku and Newton 2015). Hate speech is an act of offending, insulting, or threatening a person or a group of people on the basis of caste, religion, sexual orientation, or gender (Schmidt and Wiegand 2017). This hate speech thereby
forms a big portion of content that is harmful and degrading
to the mental health of users on social media in the long run.
The widespread access of social media websites to individuals from linguistically distinct regions and cultures has led
to a blend of natively spoken languages with English, popularly known as code-switched languages (Silva et al. 2016).
Hinglish, a portmanteau of Hindi and English, is the macaronic hybrid use of English and South Asian languages from
across the Indian subcontinent, involving code-switching between these languages whereby native languages are written

Challenges
Analysis of the baseline implementations shown in Table 3
reveal the prevalence of more signiﬁcant bias against speciﬁc communities in Hinglish content as compared to monolingual content on social media. Additionally, being a low
resource language with loosely deﬁned semantic and grammatical rules, context identiﬁcation becomes a problematic
task for Hinglish (Mathur et al. 2018b). Furthermore, the
pre-existing bias-elimination techniques for mono-lingual

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
386

