The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

CAiRE: An End-to-End Empathetic Chatbot
Zhaojiang Lin, Peng Xu, Genta Indra Winata,
Farhad Bin Siddique, Zihan Liu, Jamin Shin, Pascale Fung
Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research (CAiRE)
Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong
{zlinao, pxuab, giwinata, fsiddique, zliucr, jay.shin}@connect.ust.hk,
pascale@ece.ust.hk

based user interface which allows multiple users to asynchronously chat with CAiRE online1 . CAiRE can also collect user feedback and continuously improve its response
quality and discard undesirable generation behaviors (e.g.
unethical responses) via active learning and negative training.

Abstract
We present CAiRE, an end-to-end generative empathetic
chatbot designed to recognize user emotions and respond in
an empathetic manner. Our system adapts the Generative Pretrained Transformer (GPT) to empathetic response generation
task via transfer learning. CAiRE is built primarily to focus
on empathy integration in fully data-driven generative dialogue systems. We create a web-based user interface which
allows multiple users to asynchronously chat with CAiRE.
CAiRE also collects user feedback and continues to improve
its response quality by discarding undesirable generations via
active learning and negative training.

System Description
User Interface
As shown in Figure 1, our user interface is based solely on
text inputs. Users can type anything in the input box and
get a response immediately from the server. A report button is added at the bottom to allow users to report unethical
dialogues, which will then be marked and saved in our backend server separately. To facilitate the need for teaching our
chatbot how to respond properly, we add an edit button next
to the response. When the user clicks it, a new input box
will appear, and the user can type in the appropriate response
they think the chatbot should have replied with.

Introduction
Empathetic chatbots are conversational agents that can understand user emotions and respond appropriately. Incorporating empathy into the dialogue system is essential to
achieve better human-robot interaction because naturally,
humans express and perceive emotion in natural language
to increase their sense of social bonding. In the early development stage of such conversational systems, most of
the efforts were put into developing hand-crafted rules of
engagement. Recently, a modularized empathetic dialogue
system, XiaoIce (Zhou et al. 2018) achieved an impressive
number of conversational turns per session, which was even
higher than average conversations between humans. Despite
the promising results of XiaoIce, this system is designed using a complex architecture with hundreds of independent
components, such as Natural Language Understanding and
Response Generation modules, using a tremendous amount
of labeled data for training each of them.
In contrast to such modularized dialogue system, endto-end systems learn all components as a single model in
a fully data-driven manner, and mitigate the lack of labeled data by sharing representations among different modules. In this paper, we build an end-to-end empathetic chatbot by ﬁne-tuning (Wolf et al. 2019) the Generative Pretrained Transformer (GPT) (Radford et al. 2018) on the PersonaChat dataset (Zhang et al. 2018) and the EmpatheticDialogue dataset (Rashkin et al. 2019). We establish a web-

Scalable to Multiple Users
Due to the high demand for GPU computations during response generation, the computation cost needs to be well
distributed across different GPUs to support multiple users.
We adopt several approaches to maximize the utility of
GPUs without crashing the system. Firstly, we set up two
independent processes in each GTX 1080Ti, where we
found the highest GPU utilities to be around 90%, with
both processes working stably. Secondly, we employ a loadbalancing module to distribute the requests to idle processes
based on their working loads. During a stress testing, we
simulated users sending requests every 2 seconds, and using
8 GPUs, we were able to support more than 50 concurrent
requests.

Generative Conversational Model
We apply the Generative Pre-trained Transformer
(GPT) (Radford et al. 2018) as our pre-trained language
model. GPT is a multi-layer Transformer decoder with a
causal self-attention which is pre-trained, unsupervised, on

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

13622

https://caire.ust.hk/chatbot

