The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

New Interpretations of Normalization Methods in Deep Learning
Jiacheng Sun,1 Xiangyong Cao,2 Hanwen Liang,1 Weiran Huang,1 Zewei Chen,1 Zhenguo Li1
1
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, 2 Xi’an Jiaotong University
{sunjiacheng1, lianghanwen1, weiran.huang, chen.zewei, Li.Zhenguo}@huawei.com, caoxiangyong@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

1.1

Abstract
In recent years, a variety of normalization methods have been
proposed to help training neural networks, such as batch normalization (BN), layer normalization (LN), weight normalization (WN), group normalization (GN), etc. However, some
necessary tools to analyze all these normalization methods
are lacking. In this paper, we ﬁrst propose a lemma to deﬁne
some necessary tools. Then, we use these tools to make a deep
analysis on popular normalization methods and obtain the following conclusions: 1) Most of the normalization methods
can be interpreted in a uniﬁed framework, namely normalizing pre-activations or weights onto a sphere; 2) Since most of
the existing normalization methods are scaling invariant, we
can conduct optimization on a sphere with scaling symmetry
removed, which can help to stabilize the training of network;
3) We prove that training with these normalization methods
can make the norm of weights increase, which could cause
adversarial vulnerability as it ampliﬁes the attack. Finally, a
series of experiments are conducted to verify these claims.

1

Related work: data-based normalization
method vs weight-based normalization method

Data-based normalization method is implemented by normalizing the pre-activations/activations (Mishkin and Matas
2015), which is computed by passing the data into each layer
of the network. The typical methods include BN, LN, IN and
GN. More speciﬁcally, BN standardizes the pre-activation
vector by transforming it into a vector with zero mean and
unit variance. LN implements this standardization within
one layer, and this method is equivalent to ﬁrst centering
every column of weights and then conducting the multiplicity and scaling. Therefore, it is scaling invariant with both
weights and data as well as moving invariant in a certain direction. IN implements the standardization in one channel
of the pre-activation, while GN balances between LN and
IN and is implemented by dividing the channels into groups.
Comparatively, the other strategy weight-based normalization method normalizes the weights directly. The typical
methods are WN, CWN and SN. Speciﬁcally, WN (Salimans
and Kingma 2016) decouples the length and direction of the
weight vector as BN does. CWN (Huang et al. 2017) standardizes the weight vector by centering at mean and scaling
by its L2 norm and is equivalent to weight standardization
(WS) (Qiao et al. 2019). SN is another normalization method
that helps to stabilize the training of discriminator in the
generative adversarial network (GAN), and it is similar to
WN in dividing the spectral norm of the weight matrix. This
method is implemented by controlling the Lipschitz constant
not too big, so it can be much more robust to noise (Miyato
et al. 2018).

Introduction

Normalization has been a very effective strategy in deep
learning, which speeds up training deep neural networks and
also acts as a regularizer to improve generalization. This
technique has been a fundamental component in many stateof-the-art algorithms, and is usually implemented by adding
non-linear mappings to pre-activations or weights before activation functions. In recent years, a variety of normalization methods have been proposed, including batch normalization (BN) (Ioffe and Szegedy 2015), layer normalization
(LN) (Ba, Kiros, and Hinton 2016), instance normalization
(IN) (Ulyanov, Vedaldi, and Lempitsky 2016), group normalization (GN) (Wu and He 2018), weight normalization
(WN) (Salimans and Kingma 2016), centered weight normalization (CWN) (Huang et al. 2017), spectral normalization (SN) (Miyato et al. 2018), etc. These methods can be
roughly divided into two categories: data-based normalization method and weight-based normalization method. In the
following, we will ﬁrst review the two categories, and then
introduce the motivation and contribution of our work.

1.2

Motivations

Although various normalization methods have been proposed and veriﬁed to be effective in many computer vision tasks, there still exist many issues. Firstly, all the existing normalization methods are heuristic and lack of a uniﬁed theoretical understanding. Therefore, it is very important to interpret all the normalization methods from a theoretical perspective. Secondly, many normalization methods are widely used and their performance is closely related
to the batch size. Take BN for instance. The small batch
size makes the network training rather unstable (Wu and He

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5875

