The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Iterative Delegations in Liquid
Democracy with Restricted Preferences
Bruno Escofﬁer

Hugo Gilbert

Adèle Pass-Lanneau

Sorbonne Université, CNRS, LIP6
75005 Paris, France
and Institut Universitaire de France
bruno.escofﬁer@lip6.fr

Gran Sasso Science Institute
L’Aquila, 67100, Italy
hugo.gilbert@gssi.it

Sorbonne Université, CNRS, LIP6
75005 Paris, France
and EDF R&D
91120 Palaiseau, France
adele.pass-lanneau@lip6.fr

On the other hand, a concern about LD is the stability of
the induced delegation process (Bloembergen, Grossi, and
Lackner 2019; Escofﬁer, Gilbert, and Pass-Lanneau 2019a).
Indeed, as the preferences of voters over their possible gurus can be conﬂicting, this process may end up in an unstable situation, i.e., a situation in which some voters would
change their delegations. Unfortunately, it was shown in (Escofﬁer, Gilbert, and Pass-Lanneau 2019a) that an equilibrium of LD’s delegation process may not exist, and that the
existence of such an equilibrium is even NP-hard to decide.
In the present work, we obtain more positive results by considering structures of preference. We show that various natural structures of preference guarantee the existence of an
equilibrium and we obtain both tractability and hardness results for the problem of computing several equilibria with
some desirable properties.

Abstract
Liquid democracy is a collective decision making paradigm
which lies between direct and representative democracy. One
main feature of liquid democracy is that voters can delegate
their votes in a transitive manner so that: A delegates to B and
B delegates to C leads to A delegates to C. Unfortunately, because voters’ preferences over delegates may be conﬂicting,
this process may not converge. There may not even exist a
stable state (also called equilibrium). In this paper, we investigate the stability of the delegation process in liquid democracy when voters have restricted types of preference on the
agent representing them (e.g., single-peaked preferences). We
show that various natural structures of preference guarantee
the existence of an equilibrium and we obtain both tractability and hardness results for the problem of computing several
equilibria with some desirable properties.

1

2

Introduction

Related Work

We review here several algorithmic issues of liquid democracy recently studied in the AI literature.
One promise of LD is that its ﬂexibility should make the
resulting collective decision more accurate. Indeed, it should
be possible for each voter to make an informed vote either
by voting or through delegation. This claim has been investigated by several works. On the positive side, GreenArmytage (2015) showed that, in a speciﬁc spatial voting setting, transitive delegations decrease an expected loss
measuring how well the votes represent the voters. On the
other hand, Kahng, Mackenzie, and Procaccia (2018), studied a binary election with a ground truth. In their model, no
“local” procedure (i.e., a procedure working locally on the
SN to organize delegations) can guarantee that LD is, at the
same time, never less accurate and sometimes strictly more
accurate than direct voting. Caragiannis and Micha (2019)
further discussed the possible ﬂaws of local delegation rules
and showed that organizing the delegations to maximize the
probability of electing the ground truth is NP-hard.
Other issues on LD are related to the number of delegations a guru should get. On the one hand, gurus should have
incentives to obtain delegations. In the work of Kotsialou
and Riley (2018), voters have both preferences over candidates and over possible gurus. Given the preferences over

Interactive democracy aims at using modern information
technology, as Social Networks (SN), in order to make
democracy more ﬂexible, interactive and accurate (Brill
2018). One of its most well-known implementation is Liquid Democracy (LD) (Green-Armytage 2015). In a nutshell,
LD allows voters to delegate transitively along an SN. More
precisely, each voter may decide to vote directly or to delegate her vote to one of her neighbors, i.e., to use a representative. In LD this representative can in turn delegate
her vote and the votes that have been delegated to her to
someone else. As a result, the delegations of the voters will
ﬂow along the SN until they reach a voter who decides to
vote. This voter is called the guru of the people she represents and has a voting weight equal to the number of people
who directly or indirectly delegated to her. This approach
is implemented in several online tools (Behrens et al. 2014;
Hardt and Lopes 2015) and has been used by several political parties (e.g., the German Pirate party). One main advantage of this framework is its ﬂexibility, as it enables voters
to vote directly for issues on which they feel both concerned
and expert and to delegate for others.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1926

