The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Generate, Segment, and Reﬁne: Towards Generic Manipulation Segmentation
Peng Zhou,1 Bor-Chun Chen,1 Xintong Han,2 Mahyar Najibi,1
Abhinav Shrivastava,1 Ser Nam Lim,3 Larry S. Davis1
1

University of Maryland, College Park, 2 Huya Inc, 3 Facebook
{pengzhou, sirius}@umd.edu, hanxintong@huya.com, {najibi, abhinav, lsd}@cs.umd.edu, sernamlim@fb.com



Abstract

 

  

  

Detecting manipulated images has become a signiﬁcant
emerging challenge. The advent of image sharing platforms
and the easy availability of advanced photo editing software
have resulted in a large quantities of manipulated images being shared on the internet. While the intent behind such manipulations varies widely, concerns on the spread of false
news and misinformation is growing. Current state of the art
methods for detecting these manipulated images suffers from
the lack of training data due to the laborious labeling process. We address this problem in this paper, for which we
introduce a manipulated image generation process that creates true positives using currently available datasets. Drawing from traditional work on image blending, we propose a
novel generator for creating such examples. In addition, we
also propose to further create examples that force the algorithm to focus on boundary artifacts during training. Strong
experimental results validate our proposal.

Introduction
Manipulated photos are becoming ubiquitous on social media due to the availability of advanced editing software, including powerful generative adversarial models (Isola et al.
2017; Yeh et al. 2017). While such images have been created for a variety of purposes, including memes, satires, etc.,
there are growing concerns on the abuse of manipulated images to spread fake news and misinformation. To this end, a
variety of solutions have been developed towards detecting
such manipulated images.
While a number of proposed solutions posed the problem
as a classiﬁcation task (Cozzolino et al. 2018; Zhou et al.
2017), where the goal is to classify whether a given image
has been tampered with, there is great utility for solutions
that are capable of detecting manipulated regions in a given
image (Huh et al. 2018; Zhou et al. 2017; Park et al. 2018;
Salloum, Ren, and Kuo 2018). In this paper, we similarly
treat this problem as a semantic segmentation task and adapt
GANs (Goodfellow et al. 2014) to generate samples to alleviate the lack of training data. The lack of training data
has been an ongoing problem for training models to detect

Figure 1: Examples of manipulated images across different datasets. Columns from left to right are images in CASIA (Dong, Wang, and Tan 2013), COVER (Wen et al.
2016), Carvalho (De Carvalho et al. 2013), and In-TheWild (Huh et al. 2018). The odd rows are manipulated images and the even rows are the ground truth masks. Different
datasets contain different distributions (from animals to person), manipulation techniques (from copy-move (the second
column) to splicing (the rest columns)) and post-processing
methods (from no post-processing to various processes including ﬁltering, illumination, and blurring).
manipulated images. Scouring the internet for “real” tampered images (Moreira et al. 2018) is a laborious process
that often leads to over-ﬁtting in the training process. Alternatively, one could employ a self-supervised process, where
detected objects in one image are spliced onto another, with
the caveat that such a process often results in training images

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13058

