The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

A Human-AI Loop Approach for Joint Keyword
Discovery and Expectation Estimation in Micropost Event Detection
Akansha Bhardwaj,1 Jie Yang,2∗ Philippe Cudré-Mauroux1
1

University of Fribourg, Switzerland, 2 Amazon, USA
{akansha.bhardwaj, pcm}@unifr.ch, jiy@amazon.com

bels useful for model training. To tackle this lack of negative
labels and the signiﬁcant manual efforts in data labeling, Ritter et al. (2015; 2017) introduced a weak supervision based
learning approach, which uses only positively labeled data,
accompanied by unlabeled examples by ﬁltering microposts
that contain a certain keyword indicative of the event type
under consideration (e.g., ‘hack’ for cyber security).
Another key technique in this context is expectation regularization (Mann and McCallum 2007; Druck, Mann, and
McCallum 2008; Ritter et al. 2015). Here, the estimated proportion of relevant microposts in an unlabeled dataset containing a keyword is given as a keyword-speciﬁc expectation. This expectation is used in the regularization term of
the model’s objective function to constrain the posterior distribution of the model predictions. By doing so, the model is
trained with an expectation on its prediction for microposts
that contain the keyword. Such a method, however, suffers
from two key problems:

Abstract
Microblogging platforms such as Twitter are increasingly being used in event detection. Existing approaches mainly use
machine learning models and rely on event-related keywords
to collect the data for model training. These approaches make
strong assumptions on the distribution of the relevant microposts containing the keyword – referred to as the expectation of the distribution – and use it as a posterior regularization parameter during model training. Such approaches are,
however, limited as they fail to reliably estimate the informativeness of a keyword and its expectation for model training.
This paper introduces a Human-AI loop approach to jointly
discover informative keywords for model training while estimating their expectation. Our approach iteratively leverages
the crowd to estimate both keyword-speciﬁc expectation and
the disagreement between the crowd and the model in order
to discover new keywords that are most beneﬁcial for model
training. These keywords and their expectation not only improve the resulting performance but also make the model
training process more transparent. We empirically demonstrate the merits of our approach, both in terms of accuracy
and interpretability, on multiple real-world datasets and show
that our approach improves the state of the art by 24.3%.

1

1. Due to the unpredictability of event occurrences and
the constantly changing dynamics of users’ posting frequency (Myers and Leskovec 2014), estimating the expectation associated with a keyword is a challenging task,
even for domain experts;

Introduction

2. The performance of the event detection model is constrained by the informativeness of the keyword used for
model training. As of now, we lack a principled method
for discovering new keywords and improve the model
performance.

Event detection on microblogging platforms such as Twitter aims to detect events preemptively. A main task in event
detection is detecting events of predetermined types (Atefeh
and Khreich 2015), such as concerts or controversial events
based on microposts matching speciﬁc event descriptions.
This task has extensive applications ranging from cyber security (Ritter et al. 2015; Chambers, Fry, and McMasters
2018) to political elections (Konovalov et al. 2017) or public
health (Akbari et al. 2016; Lee et al. 2017). Due to the high
ambiguity and inconsistency of the terms used in microposts, event detection is generally performed though statistical machine learning models, which require a labeled dataset
for model training. Data labeling is, however, a long, laborious, and usually costly process. For the case of micropost
classiﬁcation, though positive labels can be collected (e.g.,
using speciﬁc hashtags, or event-related date-time information), there is no straightforward way to generate negative la-

To address the above issues, we advocate a human-AI
loop approach for discovering informative keywords and
estimating their expectations reliably. Our approach iteratively leverages 1) crowd workers for estimating keywordspeciﬁc expectations, and 2) the disagreement between the
model and the crowd for discovering new informative keywords. More speciﬁcally, at each iteration after we obtain
a keyword-speciﬁc expectation from the crowd, we train
the model using expectation regularization and select those
keyword-related microposts for which the model’s prediction disagrees the most with the crowd’s expectation; such
microposts are then presented to the crowd to identify new
keywords that best explain the disagreement. By doing so,
our approach identiﬁes new keywords which convey more
relevant information with respect to existing ones, thus ef-

∗

Work performed before joining Amazon.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2451

