The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Detecting Human-Object Interactions via Functional Generalization
Ankan Bansal, Sai Saketh Rambhatla, Abhinav Shrivastava, Rama Chellappa
University of Maryland, College Park
{ankan, rssaketh, abhinav, rama}@umiacs.umd.edu

Abstract
We present an approach for detecting human-object interactions (HOIs) in images, based on the idea that humans interact
with functionally similar objects in a similar manner. The proposed model is simple and efﬁciently uses the data, visual features of the human, relative spatial orientation of the human
and the object, and the knowledge that functionally similar
objects take part in similar interactions with humans. We provide extensive experimental validation for our approach and
demonstrate state-of-the-art results for HOI detection. On the
HICO-Det dataset our method achieves a gain of over 2.5%
absolute points in mean average precision (mAP) over stateof-the-art. We also show that our approach leads to signiﬁcant
performance gains for zero-shot HOI detection in the seen
object setting. We further demonstrate that using a generic
object detector, our model can generalize to interactions involving previously unseen objects.

Introduction
Human-object interaction (HOI) detection is the task of
localizing and inferring relationships between a human
and an object, e.g., “eating an apple” or “riding a bike.”
Given an input image, the standard representation for HOIs
(Sadeghi and Farhadi 2011; Gupta and Malik 2015) is a
triplet human, predicate, object, where human
and object are represented by bounding boxes, and
predicate is the interaction between this (human,
object) pair. At ﬁrst glance, it seems that this problem
is a composition of the atomic problems of human and
object detection and HOI classiﬁcation (Shen et al. 2018;
Gkioxari et al. 2017). These atomic recognition tasks are
certainly the building blocks of a variety of approaches for
HOI understanding (Shen et al. 2018; Delaitre, Sivic, and
Laptev 2011); and the progress in these atomic tasks directly
translates to improvements in HOI understanding. However,
the task of HOI understanding comes with its own unique
set of challenges (Lu et al. 2016; Chao et al. 2017).
These challenges are due to the combinatorial explosion
of the possible interactions with increasing number of objects and predicates. For example, in the commonly used

Figure 1: Common properties of HOI Detection. Top Datasets are not exhaustively labeled. Bottom - Humans interact similarly with functionally similar objects - both persons could be eating either a burger, a hot dog, or a pizza.
HICO-Det dataset (Chao et al. 2017) with 80 unique object classes and 117 predicates, there are 9,360 possible
relationships. This number increases to more than 106 for
larger datasets like Visual Genome (Krishna et al. 2017) and
HCVRD (Zhuang et al. 2017b), which have hundreds of object categories and thousands of predicates. This, combined
with the long-tail distribution of HOI categories, makes it
difﬁcult to collect labeled training data for all HOI triplets.
A common solution to this problem is to arbitrarily limit the
set of HOI relationships and only collect labeled images for
this limited subset. For example, the HICO-Det benchmark
has only 600 unique relationships.
Though these datasets can be used for training models for
recognizing a limited set of HOI triplets, they do not address the problem completely. For example, consider the
images shown in Figure 1 (top row) from the challenging HICO-Det dataset. The three pseudo-synonymous rela-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10460

