The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

R2 MRF: Defocus Blur Detection via
Recurrently Reﬁning Multi-Scale Residual Features
1

Chang Tang,1 Xinwang Liu,2 Xinzhong Zhu,3 En Zhu,2
Kun Sun,1 Pichao Wang,4 Lizhe Wang,1 Albert Zomaya5

School of Computer Science, China University of Geosciences, Wuhan 430074, China
School of Computer Science, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha 410073, China
3
College of Mathematics, Physics and Information Engineering, Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua 321004, China
4
Alibaba Group (U.S.) Inc, Bellevue, WA 98004, USA
5
School of Information Technologies, University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia
https://github.com/ChangTang/R2MRF
2

Abstract
Defocus blur detection aims to separate the in-focus and outof-focus regions in an image. Although attracting more and
more attention due to its remarkable potential applications,
there are still several challenges for accurate defocus blur detection, such as the interference of background clutter, sensitivity to scales and missing boundary details of defocus
blur regions. In order to address these issues, we propose a
deep neural network which Recurrently Reﬁnes Multi-scale
Residual Features (R2 MRF) for defocus blur detection. We
ﬁrstly extract multi-scale deep features by utilizing a fully
convolutional network. For each layer, we design a novel recurrent residual reﬁnement branch embedded with multiple
residual reﬁnement modules (RRMs) to more accurately detect blur regions from the input image. Considering that the
features from bottom layers are able to capture rich low-level
features for details preservation while the features from top
layers are capable of characterizing the semantic information
for locating blur regions, we aggregate the deep features from
different layers to learn the residual between the intermediate
prediction and the ground truth for each recurrent step in each
residual reﬁnement branch. Since the defocus degree is sensitive to image scales, we ﬁnally fuse the side output of each
branch to obtain the ﬁnal blur detection map. We evaluate the
proposed network on two commonly used defocus blur detection benchmark datasets by comparing it with other 11 stateof-the-art methods. Extensive experimental results with ablation studies demonstrate that R2 MRF consistently and signiﬁcantly outperforms the competitors in terms of both efﬁciency
and accuracy.

(a) Input

(b) LBP

(c) DBDF

(d) BTBNet

(e) R2 MRF

(f) GT

Figure 1: Some challenging cases for defocus blur detection.
(a) Input image, defocus blur detection maps obtained by (b)
LBP, (c) DBDF, (d) BTBNet, (e) our R2 MRF, and (f) ground
truth (GT).

During the past decades, a large number of defocus blur
detection methods have been proposed. Based on the used
image features, these methods can be generally classiﬁed
into two categories, i.e., methods based on traditional handcrafted features and deep learning features. As to the former kind of methods, they often extract low-level features
such as gradient and frequency which can model the edge
changes since defocus blur usually blunts object edges in
an image(Liu, Li, and Jia 2008; Su, Lu, and Tan 2011;
Zhuo and Sim 2011; Vu, Phan, and Chandler 2012; Zhang
and Hirakawa 2013; Zhu et al. 2013; Shi, Xu, and Jia 2014;
Pang et al. 2015; Tang et al. 2016; Saad and Hirakawa 2016;
Park et al. 2017). Despite great improvement has been
achieved by traditional methods based on hand-crafted features, there are still several challenges which hamper the ﬁnal results. Firstly, traditional low-level features cannot distinguish the blurry smooth regions which do not contain

Defocus blur is a common phenomenon which occurs when
the objects of a scene are not exactly at the camera’s focus distance. As an important task, defocus blur detection aims to separate the out-of-focus regions from an image, which has obtained more and more attention due to
its wide potential applications such as image deblurring
(Shi, Xu, and Jia 2014), defocus magniﬁcation (Bae and
Durand 2007), image refocusing (Zhang and Cham 2009;
2012), image quality assessment (Wang et al. 2008), and
salient object detection (Jiang et al. 2013), just list a few.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12063

