The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Fractional Skipping: Towards Finer-Grained Dynamic CNN Inference
Jianghao Shen,1,2 Yue Wang,1 Pengfei Xu,1 Yonggan Fu,1 Zhangyang Wang,2 Yingyan Lin1
1

Rice University, 2 Texas A & M University
{nie, atlaswang}@tamu.edu, {yw68, px5, yf22, yingyan.lin}@rice.edu

assumed that CNNs are ﬁrst compressed before being deployed, thus being “static” and unable to adjust their own
complexity at inference. Later on, a series of works (Figurnov et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2018a) pointed out that the
continuous improvements in accuracy, while signiﬁcant, are
marginal compared to the growth in model complexity. This
implies that computationally intensive models may only be
necessary to classify a handful of difﬁcult inputs correctly,
and they might become “wasteful” for many simple inputs.
Motivated by this observation, several works have tackled
the problem of input-dependent adaptive inference, by dynamically bypassing unnecessary computations on the layer
level, i.e., selectively executing a subset of layers (Figurnov
et al. 2017; Wu et al. 2018b). However, the binary decision
scheme of either executing a layer fully, or skipping it completely, leaves no room for intermediate options. We conjecture that ﬁner-grained dynamic execution options can contribute to better calibrating the inference accuracy of CNNs
w.r.t. the complexity consumed.
On a separate note, CNN quantization appears to exploit model redundancy at the ﬁnest level - by reducing the
bitwidth of the element-level numerical representations of
weights and activations. Earlier works (Han, Mao, and Dally
2015; Zhu et al. 2016) presented to quantize all layer-wise
weights and activations to the same low bitwidth, yet ignored
the fact that different layers can have different importance.
The latest work (Wang et al. 2019) learned to assign different
bitwidths for each layer. However, no work has yet discussed
an input-adaptive, layer-wise bitwidth allocation at the inference time, not to mention linking between quantization with
dynamic inference.
In an effort to enable ﬁner-grained dynamic inference beyond “binary” layer skipping, we propose a Dynamic Fractional Skipping (DFS) framework, that treats layer quantization (to different bitwidths) as softer, intermediate versions
of layer-wise skipping. Below are our contributions:

Abstract
While increasingly deep networks are still in general desired for achieving state-of-the-art performance, for many
speciﬁc inputs a simpler network might already sufﬁce. Existing works exploited this observation by learning to skip
convolutional layers in an input-dependent manner. However,
we argue their binary decision scheme, i.e., either fully executing or completely bypassing one layer for a speciﬁc input, can be enhanced by introducing ﬁner-grained, “softer”
decisions. We therefore propose a Dynamic Fractional Skipping (DFS) framework. The core idea of DFS is to hypothesize layer-wise quantization (to different bitwidths) as intermediate “soft” choices to be made between fully utilizing and skipping a layer. For each input, DFS dynamically
assigns a bitwidth to both weights and activations of each
layer, where fully executing and skipping could be viewed
as two “extremes” (i.e., full bitwidth and zero bitwidth). In
this way, DFS can “fractionally” exploit a layer’s expressive
power during input-adaptive inference, enabling ﬁner-grained
accuracy-computational cost trade-offs. It presents a uniﬁed
view to link input-adaptive layer skipping and input-adaptive
hybrid quantization. Extensive experimental results demonstrate the superior tradeoff between computational cost and
model expressive power (accuracy) achieved by DFS. More
visualizations also indicate a smooth and consistent transition in the DFS behaviors, especially the learned choices between layer skipping and different quantizations when the total computational budgets vary, validating our hypothesis that
layer quantization could be viewed as intermediate variants of
layer skipping. Our source code and supplementary material
are available at https://github.com/Torment123/DFS.

1

Introduction

Although convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have show
state of the art performance in many visual perception tasks
(Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Taigman et al.
2014), the high computational cost has limited their application in resource constrained platforms such as drones,
self-driving cars, wearables and many more. The growing
demand of unleashing the intelligent power of CNN into
these devices has posed unique challenges in developing algorithms that enables more computationally efﬁcient inference of CNNs. Earlier resource-efﬁcient implementations

• We propose to link two efﬁcient CNN inference mindsets:
dynamic layer skipping and static quantization, and show
that they can be uniﬁed into one framework. Speciﬁcally,
DFS considers a quantized layer to be a “fractionally executed” layer, in contrast to either a fully executed (selected) or non-executed (bypassed) layer in the existing
layer skipping regime. In this way, DFS can more ﬂexibly
calibrate the trade-off between the inference accuracy and

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5700

