The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

RoboCoDraw: Robotic Avatar Drawing with
GAN-Based Style Transfer and Time-Efﬁcient Path Optimization
Tianying Wang,1,† Wei Qi Toh,1,† Hao Zhang1,†
Xiuchao Sui,1 Shaohua Li,1,2 Yong Liu,1,2 Wei Jing1,3,‡
1 Artiﬁcial Intelligence Initiative, A*STAR
2 Institute of High Performance Computing, A*STAR
3 Institute of Information Research, A*STAR
1 Fusionopolis Way, Connexis North Tower, 138632, Singapore
21wjing@gmail.com

Abstract
Robotic drawing has become increasingly popular as an entertainment and interactive tool. In this paper we present
RoboCoDraw, a real-time collaborative robot-based drawing
system that draws stylized human face sketches interactively
in front of human users, by using the Generative Adversarial
Network (GAN)-based style transfer and a Random-Key Genetic Algorithm (RKGA)-based path optimization. The proposed RoboCoDraw system takes a real human face image
as input, converts it to a stylized avatar, then draws it with a
robotic arm. A core component in this system is the AvatarGAN proposed by us, which generates a cartoon avatar face
image from a real human face. AvatarGAN is trained with
unpaired face and avatar images only and can generate avatar
images of much better likeness with human face images in
comparison with the vanilla CycleGAN. After the avatar image is generated, it is fed to a line extraction algorithm and
converted to sketches. An RKGA-based path optimization
algorithm is applied to ﬁnd a time-efﬁcient robotic drawing
path to be executed by the robotic arm. We demonstrate the
capability of RoboCoDraw on various face images using a
lightweight, safe collaborative robot UR5.



   

   

   
  

 
  

Figure 1: Top: the robot performing the drawing; Bottom:
the generated personalized avatar and the drawing result.

(Calinon, Epiney, and Billard 2005), with a focus on generating realistic portraits.
Although somewhat impressive, realistic drawings have
a limited level of amusement for human users. In order to
increase entertainment and engagement, in this paper, we
propose a real-time robotic drawing system that converts input face images to cartoon avatars as a form of robotic art
creation. Our system can capture and preserve facial features of the input face images and reproduce them in generated avatars so that the avatars have good likeness with
the input faces. Such personalized art creation enriches the
interactive experience between the user and the robot, while
the optimized execution of the robotic drawing complements
and improves the overall experience. Additionally, the whole
system is trained without manual annotations.
In this paper, we propose RoboCoDraw, a collaborative
robot-based, real-time drawing system. The core component of RoboCoDraw is AvatarGAN, a Generative Adversarial Network (GAN)-based image style transfer method for
transferring real human faces to personalized cartoon avatars

Introduction
Robotic drawing is an increasingly popular human-robot interaction task that is fascinating and entertaining to the public. In a typical robotic drawing system, a robotic arm (Song,
Lee, and Kim 2018) or a humanoid robot (Calinon, Epiney,
and Billard 2005) is usually used in an interactive environment to draw pictures in front of human users. Because of
its interactivity and entertainment, robotic drawing systems
have found applications in a wide range of scenarios, such
as early childhood education (Hood, Lemaignan, and Dillenbourg 2015), psychological therapy (Cooney and Menezes
2018), and social entertainment (Jean-Pierre and Saı̈d 2012).
Among these different systems, drawing human faces is one
of the most engaging and entertaining tasks. During the past
years, robotic face drawing has been extensively studied
†

The ﬁrst three authors contributed equally.
Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

10402

