The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Robust Gradient-Based Markov Subsampling
Tieliang Gong, Quanhan Xi, Chen Xu
Deparment of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, K1N6N5, Canada

Intuitively, uniform sampling is perhaps the most straightforward way to conduct subsampling. However, uniform
sampling can be inefﬁcient and unstable for data with high
noise level. Therefore, we usually resort to informative subsampling, where important observations are given a higher
chance to be selected. One representative informative subsampling procedure is leverage score sampling (Drineas
et al. 2011; 2012; Drineas, Mahoney, and Muthukrishnan
2008; Rudi et al. 2018), which assigns sampling probability proportional to a distance measure within the covariates.
Another informative subsampling procedure is given in (Zhu
2016), where the sampling probabilities are computed proportional to the quadratic loss gradient using a pilot estimator. Gradient-based subsampling (GS) notably uses information derived from the input data as well as the response. Following in this spirit, the work in (Ting and Brochu 2018)
proposes an inﬂuence function as a information measure to
calculate sampling probabilities, which is shown to lead to
an asymptotically optimal sampling distribution in the sense
of minimum variance for the resulting linear estimator.

Abstract
Subsampling is a widely used and effective method to deal
with the challenges brought by big data. Most subsampling
procedures are designed based on the importance sampling
framework, where samples with high importance measures
are given corresponding sampling probabilities. However, in
the highly noisy case, these samples may cause an unstable
estimator which could lead to a misleading result. To tackle
this issue, we propose a gradient-based Markov subsampling
(GMS) algorithm to achieve robust estimation. The core idea
is to construct a subset which allows us to conservatively correct a crude initial estimate towards the true signal. Speciﬁcally, GMS selects samples with small gradients via a probabilistic procedure, constructing a subset that is likely to exclude noisy samples and provide a safe improvement over the
initial estimate. We show that the GMS estimator is statistically consistent at a rate which matches the optimal in the
minimax sense. The promising performance of GMS is supported by simulation studies and real data examples.

Introduction

These informative subsampling methods usually boil
down to solving a weighted least squares problem which
is sensitive to unbalanced sampling probabilities. Consequently, the resulting estimators can be less precise in applications (Ma, Mahoney, and Yu 2015). Moreover, these methods assign higher probabilities to samples that are highly
inﬂuential to the estimator. However, many of these samples can be noisy or outliers when the noise level is high,
and these estimators would result in a misleading conclusion. In addition, the accuracy of GS and inﬂuence sampling
depends on a reliable initial estimator which would be difﬁcult to obtain in the noisy setting. In this paper, we develop a robust gradient-based Markov subsampling (GMS)
method for linear regression. The procedure is as follows:
We ﬁrst obtain a crude estimator β0 based on a simple pilot selection. We later show that by selecting samples with
small loss gradients, it is possible to construct a subset DS
on which the empirical loss at β0 serves as a good approximation of the empirical loss at the oracle β ∗ . Since β0 is
a rough estimator to β ∗ and quadratic loss is convex, the
least square estimator β̂ on DS is a safe improvement from
β0 towards β ∗ (See Fig. 1 for an illustration). The pro-

The rapid development of science and technology in the past
decade have introduced data of extraordinary size and complexity, which brings great challenges to conventional machine learning and statistical methods. A popular way to
deal with big data is the divide and conquer strategy, which
involves partitioning the data, running a particular learning
algorithm on data segments in parallel, and then aggregating a global output by combining these individual parallel
outputs. To this end, distributed computing platforms like
Spark (Zaharia et al. 2010) and Ray (Moritz and et al 2018)
have been developed. As a computationally cheaper alternative, subsampling techniques have also drawn a great deal of
attention for processing big data (Fithian and Hastie 2014;
Halko, Martinsson, and Tropp 2011; Dereziński, Warmuth,
and Hsu 2018a; Derezinski, Warmuth, and Hsu 2018b).
These methods aim to select a representative subset from
the full data for downstreaming learning tasks. The computational burden is then greatly alleviated as the selected
subset is quite small.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4004

