The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Parameterized Algorithms for Finding a Collective Set of Items
Robert Bredereck,1 Piotr Faliszewski,2 Andrzej Kaczmarczyk,1 Dušan Knop,1,3 Rolf Niedermeier1
1

Technische Universität Berlin, Chair of Algorithmics and Computational Complexity
2
AGH University, Kraków, Poland
3
Department of Theoretical Computer Science, Faculty of Information Technology,
Czech Technical University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic
{robert.bredereck, a.kaczmarczyk, rolf.niedermeier}@tu-berlin.de, faliszew@agh.edu.pl, dusan.knop@ﬁt.cvut.cz
Student Recruiting Setting. Consider the task of choosing PhD students for a university department. Each of the
professors assigns a utility to each of the prospective candidates (e.g., depending on the results of their entry exams,
his or her impressions after interviews, or the students’ interests). Then the professors evaluate potential batches of k
students. If each professor thought that he or she would get
the best PhD student from the batch (with respect to his or
her preferences), and he or she is only interested in advising one new student, then the professors should use OWAvectors (1, 0, . . . , 0). Similarly, if each of the professors
thought that he or she would get one of the top two students
(with respect to his or her preferences), then they would
have a choice between several OWAs. If they viewed the
student-professor matching process as effectively random
(but restricted to the top two students for each professor),
then they should use OWA (1/2, 1/2, 0, . . . , 0).1 Yet, if they
were risk-averse and thought they would get the second-best
student, they should use OWA (0, 1, 0, . . . , 0). Other OWAvectors capture numerous other approaches how the professors might view the matching process.
Interestingly, sometimes it even makes sense to use OWAvectors with negative values. Let us say that each professor assigns utility 1 to each student whose interests
are aligned with his or hers, and utility 0 to each other
one. If the student’s and the professor’s interests are
aligned, then the student is likely to require some attention from the professor. As the professors are somehow
busy, they might want to limit the number of students who
share their interests (although they certainly would like
some such students to be admitted). For example, OWAvector (1, 1, 0, −1, −1, −1, . . .) indicates that the professor
is happy with one student, is even happier with two, and is
as happy with three, but beyond that, his or her satisfaction
drops (so, for example, with six students he or she is less
satisﬁed than without any students at all).

Abstract
We extend the work of Skowron et al. (AIJ, 2016) by considering the parameterized complexity of the following problem.
We are given a set of items and a set of agents, where each
agent assigns an integer utility value to each item. The goal
is to ﬁnd a set of k items that these agents would collectively
use. For each such collective set of items, each agent provides a score that can be described using an OWA (ordered
weighted average) operator and we seek a set with the highest
total score. We focus on the parameterization by the number
of agents and we ﬁnd numerous ﬁxed-parameter tractability
results (however, we also ﬁnd some W[1]-hardness results). It
turns out that most of our algorithms even apply to the setting
where each agent has an integer weight.

1

Introduction

We study the parametrized complexity of the problem of
choosing a collective set of items, introduced by Skowron et
al. (2016). In this problem we are given a set of agents and
a set of items, and the goal is to choose a set of k items that
the agents would jointly use. Depending on the setting, each
agent may be able to access each of the chosen items, or only
one of them (e.g., the one he or she likes most), or some subset of them (e.g., the bottom half of the items, from the perspective of the agent), or even the agents may be uncertain
as to which items will eventually be available. Thus, each
agent has an intrinsic utility for gaining access to each of the
items, but the satisfaction (or, the utility) that the agent derives from a set of items is computed as an ordered weighted
average (OWA) of these utilities. We seek a set of k items
whose sum of thus-computed satisfactions is highest.
An OWA operator Λ = (λ1 , . . . , λk ) is a vector of rational
numbers; to apply Λ to a vector u = (u1 , . . . , uk ) of utilities,
we (1) sort u in nonincreasing order—so we obtain a vector
u = (u1 , . . . , uk )—and (2) output the value λ1 u1 + λ2 u2 +
· · · + λk uk .
Due to the expressive power of OWA operators, the problem of choosing a collective set of items is very general and
captures many interesting settings. Below we ﬁrst discuss
a direct application, and then argue that it also extends the
framework of multiwinner voting (Faliszewski et al. 2017b).

Multiwinner Voting Setting. In the multiwinner setting
we have a set of voters (agents) who express preferences
regarding a set of candidates (items), and the goal is to
ﬁnd a committee (a size-k set of items) that, in the aggregate, the voters ﬁnd most appealing. By choosing the
right OWA vectors and setting appropriate agent utilities, we

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

1838

Mathematically, this is equivalent to OWA (1, 1, 0, . . . , 0).

