The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Shared Generative Latent Representation Learning for Multi-View Clustering
Ming Yin,∗1 Weitian Huang,1 Junbin Gao2
1

2

School of Automation, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China.
The University of Sydney Business School, The University of Sydney, Camperdown, NSW 2006, Australia.
yiming@gdut.edu.cn, whytin@yeah.net, junbin.gao@sydney.edu.au.

assuming that the same cluster structure is shared across all
the views (Gao et al. 2015; Wang, Nie, and Huang 2013;
Yin et al. 2019). It is crucial for learning algorithm to incorporate the heterogeneous view information to enhance its
accuracy and robustness. As well, the effectiveness has been
empirically validated under different multi-view scenarios.
In general, multi-view clustering can be roughly separated
into two classes, i.e., similarity-based and feature-based.
The former aims to construct an afﬁnity matrix whose elements deﬁne the similarity between each pair of samples.
In light of this, multi-view subspace clustering is one of
the most famous similarity-based methods, which purses
a latent subspace shared by multiple views, assuming that
each view is built from a common subspace (Chaudhuri et
al. 2009; Gao et al. 2015; Yin et al. 2019; Zhang et al.
2015). However, these methods often suffer scalability issue due to super-quadratic running time for computing spectra (Jiang et al. 2017). While for the feature-based methods,
they seek to partition the samples into K clusters so as to
minimize the within-cluster sum of squared errors, such as
multi-view K-means clustering (Cai, Nie, and Huang 2013;
Xu et al. 2017). It is clear that the selection of feature space
is vital as the clustering with Euclidean distance on raw pixels is somehow ineffective.
Inspired by the recent amazing success of deep learning in feature learning (Hinton and Salakhutdinov 2006), a
surge of multi-view learning based on deep neural networks
(DNN) are proposed (Ngiam et al. 2011; Wang et al. 2015;
Xu et al. 2018). First, Ngiam et al. (Ngiam et al. 2011)
explored extracting shared representations by training a bimodal deep autoencoders. Next, by extending canonical correlation analysis (CCA), Wang et al. (Wang et al. 2015)
proposed a novel deep canonically correlation autoencoders
(DCCAE), which introduces an autoencoders regularization
term into deep CCA. However, unfortunately the aforementioned can only be feasible to the two-view case, failing to
handle the multi-view one. To explicitly summarize the consensus and complementary information in multi-view data, a
Deep Multi-view Concept learning (DMCL) (Xu et al. 2018)
is presented by performing non-negative factorization on every view hierarchically.
Though these methods perform well in multi-view clus-

Abstract
Clustering multi-view data has been a fundamental research
topic in the computer vision community. It has been shown
that a better accuracy can be achieved by integrating information of all the views than just using one view individually. However, the existing methods often struggle with the
issues of dealing with the large-scale datasets and the poor
performance in reconstructing samples. This paper proposes
a novel multi-view clustering method by learning a shared
generative latent representation that obeys a mixture of Gaussian distributions. The motivation is based on the fact that the
multi-view data share a common latent embedding despite
the diversity among the various views. Speciﬁcally, beneﬁtting from the success of the deep generative learning, the proposed model can not only extract the nonlinear features from
the views, but render a powerful ability in capturing the correlations among all the views. The extensive experimental results on several datasets with different scales demonstrate that
the proposed method outperforms the state-of-the-art methods under a range of performance criteria.

Introduction
Image clustering is one of the fundamental research topics,
which has been widely studied in computer vision and machine learning (Caron et al. 2018; Chang et al. 2017). As
well, as a class of unsupervised learning methods, clustering has attracted signiﬁcant attention from various applications. With the advance of information technology, in many
real-world scenarios, many heterogeneous visual features,
such as HOG (Dalal and Triggs 2005), SIFT (Deng et al.
2009) and LBP (Ojala, Pietikainen, and Maenpaa 2002), can
be readily acquired and form a new type data, i.e., multiview data. These features are collected from different domains or generated from various sensors. Therefore, to efﬁciently capture the consistency and complementary information among different views, multi-view clustering has gained
considerable attention in the recent years (Sun 2013; Xu,
Tao, and Xu 2013). In essence, multi-view clustering seeks
to partition data points based on multiple representations by
∗
The Project was supported in part by NSF China (No.
61876042).
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6688

