The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Fast Adaptively Weighted Matrix
Factorization for Recommendation with Implicit Feedback
Jiawei Chen,1,2 Can Wang,1,2,∗ Sheng Zhou,1 Qihao Shi,1
Jingbang Chen,1 Yan Feng,1,2 Chun Chen1
1

College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University, China
2
Zhejiang University-LianlianPay Joint Research Center
{sleepyhunt, wcan, zhousheng zju, shiqihao321, chenjb, fengyan, chenc}@zju.edu.cn

the un-observed data as negative (dislike) but downweighting their conﬁdence. Although it is reasonable, it poses two
important questions: (1) How to assign conﬁdence weights
for each data? (2) How to handle the massive volume of the
unobserved data efﬁciently?

Abstract
Recommendation from implicit feedback is a highly challenging task due to the lack of the reliable observed negative
data. A popular and effective approach for implicit recommendation is to treat unobserved data as negative but downweight their conﬁdence. Naturally, how to assign conﬁdence
weights and how to handle the large number of the unobserved data are two key problems for implicit recommendation models. However, existing methods either pursuit fast
learning by manually assigning simple conﬁdence weights,
which lacks ﬂexibility and may create empirical bias in evaluating user’s preference; or adaptively infer personalized conﬁdence weights but suffer from low efﬁciency.
To achieve both adaptive weights assignment and efﬁcient
model learning, we propose a fast adaptively weighted matrix
factorization (FAWMF) based on variational auto-encoder.
The personalized data conﬁdence weights are adaptively assigned with a parameterized neural network (function) and
the network can be inferred from the data. Further, to support
fast and stable learning of FAWMF, a new speciﬁc batchbased learning algorithm fBGD has been developed, which
trains on all feedback data but its complexity is linear to
the number of observed data. Extensive experiments on realworld datasets demonstrate the superiority of the proposed
FAWMF and its learning algorithm fBGD.

While there is a rich literature on recommendation from
implicit feedback, to our knowledge, all existing methods
lack one or more desiderata. Most of these methods rely
on the meticulous assignment of conﬁdence weights to the
data. For example, WMF (Hu, Koren, and Volinsky 2008)
and eALS (He et al. 2016) give uniform or popularity-based
conﬁdence weights; BPR (Rendle et al. 2009), CDAE (Wu
et al. 2016), or other sophisticated models downweight the
contributions of the negative data in their heuristical (e.g.
uniformly) negative sampling strategy. However, choosing
these weights usually involves heuristic alterations to the
data and needs expensive exhaustive grid search via crossvalidation. Furthermore, it is unrealistic for researchers to
manually set ﬂexible and diverse weights for millions of
data. In practical scenarios, the data conﬁdence weights
may change for various user-item combinations. Some unobserved data can be attributed to user’s preference while
others are the results of users’ limited scopes. To this end,
exposure-based matrix factorization (EXMF) (Liang et al.
2016) has been proposed to downweight negative data automatically by predicting how a user knows a item. However, EXMF involves iterative inference of the exposure for
each data, which is computationally expensive and also potentially suffers from overﬁtting. More recently, SamWalker
(Chen et al. 2019b) adaptively assign conﬁdence weights
from users’ social contexts. However, the social network information is hard obtained in many recommender systems.

Introduction
Recommender systems play an important role in many internet services. Since in practise most of recommender systems
only have the implicit feedback (e.g. items consumed), recently research attention is increasingly shifted from explicit
feedback (e.g. rating prediction) to implicit feedback. However, learning a recommender system from implicit feedback
is more challenging. In implicit feedback scenarios, only
positive feedback are observed, and the unobserved useritem feedback data (e.g. a user has not bought an item yet)
are a mixture of real negative feedback (i.e. a user does not
like it) and missing values (i.e. a user just does not know
it). Existing methods address this problem by treating all

To address these problems, we propose a fast adaptively
weighted matrix factorization (FAWMF) based on variational auto-encoder (Kingma and Welling 2013) for both
adaptive weights assignment and efﬁcient learning. We ﬁrst
analyze EXMF from variational perspective and ﬁnd that
the variational posterior of user’s exposure acts as data conﬁdence weights in learning users’ preference with MF. It
is consistent with our intuitions. Only if the user is exposed to the item, he can decide whether to consume the
item based on his preference. The data with larger expo-

∗

Corresponding author: wcan@zju.edu.cn
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3470

