The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

ECGadv: Generating Adversarial
Electrocardiogram to Misguide Arrhythmia Classiﬁcation System
Huangxun Chen,1† Chenyu Huang,1† Qianyi Huang,2,1 Qian Zhang,1 Wei Wang3
1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Southern University of Science and Technology, Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{hchenay, chuangak}@connect.ust.hk, huangqy@sustech.edu.cn, qianzh@cse.ust.hk, weiwangw@hust.edu.cn
†
Co-primary Authors
2

great public concern. The state-of-the-art literature has
shown that to attack a DNN-based image classiﬁer, an adversary can construct adversarial images by adding almost imperceptible perturbations to the input image. This misleads
DNNs to misclassify them into an incorrect class (Szegedy
et al. 2013; Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014; Carlini
and Wagner 2017). Such adversarial attacks would pose devastating threats to the DNN-powered ECG diagnosis system.
On one hand, adversarial examples fool the system to give
incorrect results so that the system fails to serve the purpose
of diagnosis assistance. On the other hand, adversarial examples would breed medical frauds. The DNNs’ outputs are
expected to be utilized in other decision-making in medical
system (Finlayson et al. 2018), including billing and reimbursement between hospitals/physicians and insurance companies. Large institutions or individual actors may exploit
the system’s blind spots on adversarial examples to inﬂate
medical costs (e.g., exaggerate symptoms) for proﬁt3 .
To our knowledge, previous literature on DNN model attacks mainly focus on the image domain, and has yet to thoroughly discuss the adversarial attacks on ECG recordings. In
this paper, we identify the distinct properties of ECGs, and
investigate two types of adversarial attacks for DNN-based
ECG classiﬁcation system.
In Type I Attack, the adversary can access the ECG
recordings and corrupt them by adding perturbations. One
possible case is a cardiologist who can access patients’
ECGs and have monetary incentive to manipulate them to
fool the checking system of insurance companies. Another
possible case is a hacker who intercept and corrupt data to
attack a cloud-deployed ECG diagnosis system for fun or
proﬁt. That data may be uploaded from portable patches like
Life Signal LP1100 or household medical instruments like
Heal Force ECG monitor to the cloud-deployed algorithms
for analysis. For both cases, the adversary aims to engineer
ECGs so that the ECG classiﬁcation system is mislead to
give the diagnosis that he/she desires, and in the meanwhile,
the data perturbations should be sufﬁciently subtle that they
are either imperceptible to humans, or if perceptible, seems

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs)-powered Electrocardiogram (ECG) diagnosis systems recently achieve promising
progress to take over tedious examinations by cardiologists.
However, their vulnerability to adversarial attacks still lack
comprehensive investigation. The existing attacks in image
domain could not be directly applicable due to the distinct
properties of ECGs in visualization and dynamic properties.
Thus, this paper takes a step to thoroughly explore adversarial attacks on the DNN-powered ECG diagnosis system. We
analyze the properties of ECGs to design effective attacks
schemes under two attacks models respectively. Our results
demonstrate the blind spots of DNN-powered diagnosis systems under adversarial attacks, which calls attention to adequate countermeasures.

Introduction
In common clinical practice, the ECG is an important tool
to diagnose a wide spectrum of cardiac disorders, which
are the leading health problem and cause of death worldwide by statistics (World Health Organization 2018). There
are recent high-proﬁle examples of Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs)-powered approaches achieving parity with human
cardiologists on ECG classiﬁcation and diagnosis (Awni Y
et al. 2019; IEEE-Spectrum 2018; Kiranyaz, Ince, and Gabbouj 2016; Al Rahhal et al. 2016), which are superior to
traditional classiﬁcation methods. Given enormous costs of
healthcare, it is tempting to replace expensive manual ECG
examining of cardiologists with a cheap and highly accurate
deep learning system. In recent, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration has granted clearance to several deep learningbased ECG diagnostic systems such as AliveCor1 and Biofourmis2 .
With DNN’s increasing adoption in ECG diagnosis, its
potential vulnerability to ‘adversarial examples’ also arouses
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/fda-grants-ﬁrstever-clearances-to-detect-bradycardia-and-tachycardia-on-apersonal-ecg-device-300835949.html
2
https://www.mobihealthnews.com/content/fda-clearsbiofourmis-software-ecg-based-arrhythmia-detection

3

https://www.beckershospitalreview.com/legal-regulatoryissues/cardiologist-convicted-in-fountain-of-youth-billing-fraudscam.html
3446

