The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Who Did They Respond to? Conversation
Structure Modeling Using Masked Hierarchical Transformer
Henghui Zhu,1∗ Feng Nan,2 Zhiguo Wang,2 Ramesh Nallapati,2 Bing Xiang2
1

Boston University, 2 AWS AI Labs
henghuiz@bu.edu, {nanfen, zhiguow, rnallapa, bxiang}@amazon.com

(Elsner and Charniak 2008; Kummerfeld et al. 2019). Disentangling the conversation structure opens the door for many
downstream applications. For example, the topics discussed
in a conversation are often non-contiguous and intertwined
with each other. Discovering the conversation structure allows us to segment the conversation by topics. It also permits
easier analysis and summarization of the various threads and
topics discussed in the conversation. In addition, conversation structure can also be used to improve discourse act classiﬁcation, which is useful in dialogue modeling (Zhang, Culbertson, and Paritosh 2017).

Abstract
Conversation structure is useful for both understanding the
nature of conversation dynamics and for providing features
for many downstream applications such as summarization of
conversations. In this work, we deﬁne the problem of conversation structure modeling as identifying the parent utterance(s) to which each utterance in the conversation responds
to. Previous work usually took a pair of utterances to decide
whether one utterance is the parent of the other. We believe
the entire ancestral history is a very important information
source to make accurate prediction. Therefore, we design a
novel masking mechanism to guide the ancestor ﬂow, and
leverage the transformer model to aggregate all ancestors to
predict parent utterances. Our experiments are performed on
the Reddit dataset (Zhang, Culbertson, and Paritosh 2017)
and the Ubuntu IRC dataset (Kummerfeld et al. 2019). In
addition, we also report experiments on a new larger corpus
from the Reddit platform and release this dataset. We show
that the proposed model, that takes into account the ancestral
history of the conversation, signiﬁcantly outperforms several
strong baselines including the BERT model on all datasets.

Figure 1: An example sequence of utterances. Curved lines
with arrows are the ground truth ‘reply to’ relationship in
the conversation. Without the context of the ﬁrst utterance,
it is hard to tell whether the fourth utterance is responding to
the second utterance or the third utterance.

Introduction
When a group of people communicate with one another,
there exist inherent structures in the conversation. One of
the structures can be deﬁned as the ‘reply to’ relationship
between a pair of utterances. The ‘reply to’ relationship may
be explicitly deﬁned in some platforms including Reddit,
Twitter, and Facebook. In other platforms such as Internet
Relay Chat (IRC), Slack, and most other forums, there is
no explicit ‘reply to’ relationship in the conversation. The
problem also exists in Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR)
transcripts of recorded conversations where the output typically consists of a ﬂat list of utterances with no structure
assigned to them. Identiﬁcation of the structure of such conversations typically entails signiﬁcant human labeling effort
(Kummerfeld et al. 2019).
The problem of discovering conversation structure is also
referred to as conversation disentanglement in the literature

Previous work (Kummerfeld et al. 2019) only takes a pair
of utterances to decide whether one utterance is the parent
of the other without considering the context. Consider an
example conversation shown in Figure 1. User A poses a
question in the ﬁrst line; user B asks a clariﬁcation question in the second line responding to the ﬁrst line; user C
then interjects with an unrelated question in the third line;
ﬁnally, user A makes a statement in the fourth line. Judging
in a pairwise fashion, without considering context, the last
line is equally likely to be replying to the questions in the
second and third lines. However, by considering the context
of the ﬁrst utterance, it is clear that user A is continuing a
conversation with user B to address the internet connection
question.
The goal of this work is to automatically discover the
structure of a conversation given all the utterances. The task

∗

Work done during an internship at the AWS AI Labs.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9741

