The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference (IAAI-20)

Feedback-Based Self-Learning in Large-Scale Conversational AI Agents
Pragaash Ponnusamy, Alireza Roshan Ghias, Chenlei Guo, Ruhi Sarikaya
Amazon Alexa
{ponnup, ghiasali, guochenl, rsarikay}@amazon.com

new tasks to help users across the globe. One key consideration in designing such systems is how they can be improved over time at that scale. Users interacting with these
agents experience frictions due to various reasons: 1) Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) errors, such as ”play maj
and dragons” (should be ”play imagine dragons”), 2) Natural Language Understanding (NLU) errors, such as ”don’t
play this song again skip” (Alexa would understand if it is
formulated as ”thumbs down this song”), and even user errors, such as ”play bazzi angel” (it should’ve been ”play
beautiful by bazzi”). It goes without saying that ﬁxing these
frictions help users to have a more seamless experience, and
engage more with the AI agents.

Abstract
Today, most of the large-scale conversational AI agents such
as Alexa, Siri, or Google Assistant are built using manually
annotated data to train the different components of the system including Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR), Natural Language Understanding (NLU) and Entity Resolution
(ER). Typically, the accuracy of the machine learning models in these components are improved by manually transcribing and annotating data. As the scope of these systems increase to cover more scenarios and domains, manual annotation to improve the accuracy of these components becomes
prohibitively costly and time consuming. In this paper, we
propose a system that leverages customer/system interaction
feedback signals to automate learning without any manual
annotation. Users of these systems tend to modify a previous query in hopes of ﬁxing an error in the previous turn to
get the right results. These reformulations, which are often
preceded by defective experiences caused by either errors in
ASR, NLU, ER or the application. In some cases, users may
not properly formulate their requests (e.g. providing partial
title of a song), but gleaning across a wider pool of users and
sessions reveals the underlying recurrent patterns. Our proposed self-learning system automatically detects the errors,
generate reformulations and deploys ﬁxes to the runtime system to correct different types of errors occurring in different
components of the system. In particular, we propose leveraging an absorbing Markov Chain model as a collaborative
ﬁltering mechanism in a novel attempt to mine these patterns.
We show that our approach is highly scalable, and able to
learn reformulations that reduce Alexa-user errors by pooling
anonymized data across millions of customers. The proposed
self-learning system achieves a win-loss ratio of 11.8 and effectively reduces the defect rate by more than 30% on utterance level reformulations in our production A/B tests. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst self-learning large-scale
conversational AI system in production.

One common method to address frictions is to gather
these use cases and ﬁx them manually using rules and Finite
State Transducers (FST) as they’re often the case in speech
recognition systems (Mohri, Pereira, and Riley 2002). This
of course is a laborious technique which is: 1) not scalable
at Alexa scale, and 2) prone to error, and 3) getting stale and
even defective over time. Another approach could be to identify these frictions, ask annotators to come up with the correct form of query, and then update ASR and NLU models
to solve these problems. This is also: 1) not an scalable solution, since it needs a lot of annotations, and 2) it is expensive and time consuming to update those models. Instead,
we have taken a ”query rewriting” approach to solve customer frictions, meaning that when necessary, we reformulate a customer’s query such that it conveys the same meaning/intent, and is actionable (i.e. interpretable) by Alexa’s
existing NLU systems.
In motivating our approach, consider the example utterance, ”play maj and dragons”. Now, without reformulation,
Alexa would inevitably come up with the response, ”Sorry, I
couldn’t ﬁnd maj and dragons”. Some customers give up at
this point, while others may try enunciating better for Alexa
to understand them: ”play imagine dragons”. Also note that
there might be other customers who give up, and change the
next query to another intent, for example: ”play pop music”.
Here, frictions evidently cause dissatisfaction with different customers reacting differently to them. However, quite
clearly there are good rephrases by some customers among
all these interactions, which beckons the question – how can

Introduction
Large-scale conversational AI agents (Sarikaya 2017) such
as Alexa, Siri, and Google Assistant are getting more and
more prevalent, opening up in new domains and taking up
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13180

