The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Be Relevant, Non-Redundant, and Timely: Deep
Reinforcement Learning for Real-Time Event Summarization
Min Yang,1 Chengming Li,1∗ Fei Sun,2 Zhou Zhao,3 Ying Shen,4 Chenglin Wu5
1

Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Alibaba Group, 3 Zhejiang University
4
Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, 5 Deep Wisdom
{min.yang, cm.li}@siat.ac.cn, ofey.sunfei@gmail.com, zhaozhou@zju.edu.cn
shenying@pkusz.edu.cn, alexanderwu@fuzhi.ai
Recently, great efforts have been devoted to building effective and efﬁcient real-time event summarization systems
(Aslam et al. 2015). One representative method is to select or
skip the documents in the text streams using the locally optimal learning method with greedy search (Kedzie, Diaz, and
McKeown 2016). As deep learning models have achieved
promising performance in text matching, there have been increasing attempts to apply deep learning models to real-time
event summarization (Tan, Lu, and Li 2017). Despite the effectiveness of previous studies, there are several technical
challenges (i.e., text relevance, non-redundancy, and timeliness) that are critical to generate high-quality real-time event
summaries.

Abstract
Real-time event summarization is an essential task in natural language processing and information retrieval areas. Despite the progress of previous work, generating relevant, nonredundant, and timely event summaries remains challenging in practice. In this paper, we propose a Deep Reinforcement learning framework for real-time Event Summarization
(DRES), which shows promising performance for resolving
all three challenges (i.e., relevance, non-redundancy, timeliness) in a uniﬁed framework. Speciﬁcally, we (i) devise
a hierarchical cross-attention network with intra- and interdocument attentions to integrate important semantic features
within and between the query and input document for better text matching. In addition, relevance prediction is leveraged as an auxiliary task to strengthen the document modeling and help to extract relevant documents; (ii) propose a
multi-topic dynamic memory network to capture the sequential patterns of different topics belonging to the event of interest and temporally memorize the input facts from the evolving
document stream, avoiding extracting redundant information
at each time step; (iii) consider both historical dependencies
and future uncertainty of the document stream for generating
relevant and timely summaries by exploiting the reinforcement learning technique. Experimental results on two realworld datasets have demonstrated the advantages of DRES
model with signiﬁcant improvement in generating relevant,
non-redundant, and timely event summaries against the stateof-the-arts.

1

Text Relevance Most real-time event summarization approaches focus on learning inter-document relations between the query and input document. However, the intradocument features within the query and input document
are complementary to the inter-document relations between
the query and input document (Vaswani et al. 2017; Liang
et al. 2019). It is necessary to explore both intra- and
inter-document features to capture the relevance between
the query and input document for real-time event summarization. In addition, most methods consider relevance prediction and real-time event summarization as a sequential
pipeline or treat the relevance score as a feature of the
real-time event summarization model. However, these two
subtasks are often mutually dependent on each other and
shall be considered simultaneously. Concretely, for each
speciﬁc query, knowing the relevance degree of each querydocument pair in advance enables to ﬁlter out quite nonrelevant documents. Meanwhile, the existence of the sentence in the summary context might further improve the performances of the relevance prediction as the part of the summary sentences is generally intensely relevant to the query.

Introduction

Real-time event summarization aims to select an only relevant, non-redundant and timely subset from an overwhelming time-ordered stream of documents to summarize an
event of interest. Different from the static event summarization (Saggion and Poibeau 2013) that only generates event
summaries once without updating the summaries when new
information emerges, real-time event summarization generates updating summaries when documents are coming in real
time. It becomes an extremely important research topic with
the increase of streaming applications.

Non-redundancy There exist long-term dependencies
among the document stream for real-time event summarization, i.e., the later decision making will be affected by the
previous actions so as to avoid repeating the redundant information. Considering the rapidly growing document stream,
it is challenging for the model to scan through the complete

∗

Chengming Li is corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9410

