The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Dynamic Reward-Based Dueling Deep
Dyna-Q: Robust Policy Learning in Noisy Environments
Yangyang Zhao, Zhenyu Wang,∗ Kai Yin, Rui Zhang, Zhenhua Huang, Pei Wang
School of Software, South China University of Technology
{msyyz, sekaiyin, sewangpei}@mail.scut.edu.cn, wangzy@scut.edu.cn,
zhang1rui4@outlook.com, zhhuangscut@gmail.com

2000). Therefore, designing a robust dialogue policy is crucial for the application of task-oriented in real-world environments.
The idea of dialogue policy learning for noise is not new
(Schatzmann et al. 2006). It has been suggested that both
the rule-based strategies and statistical modeling techniques
offer a natural framework for modeling noise and support
policies which are robust to their effects (Young et al. 2013;
Bohus and Rudnicky 2009). Some statistical-modeling techniques generally model dialogue policies as a reinforcement learning (RL) problem which requires a huge amount
of interactions between the dialogue system and real users
(Fazel-Zarandi et al. 2017; Guo et al. 2019). Although user
simulators provide an inexpensive alternative (Li et al. 2016;
Williams, Asadi, and Zweig 2017; ?), there always exists
discrepancies between real users and user simulators (Young
et al. 2016).
To alleviate the biases in the design of user simulators, the
Deep Dyna-Q (DDQ) has been proposed recently which integrates planning into RL for dialogue policy learning (Peng
et al. 2018). As illustrated in Figure 1a, the policy of the
DDQ agent can be improved through both real user experiences via direct RL and simulated experiences via planning.
However, the effectiveness of DDQ depends upon the quality of simulated experiences. Although some DDQ variants
further incorporate discriminators (Su et al. 2018), active
learning (Wu et al. 2019) and Budget-Conscious Scheduling
(BCS) (Zhang et al. 2019) to obtain high-quality simulated
experiences, they are only suitable in simulated environment
without noise (Li et al. 2017). Noise in the real-world environments hurts their performance badly. Moreover, in practice the noise problems are exacerbated in domains where
multi-step planning is used (Su et al. 2017).
Existing research on Dueling Deep Q-Network (Dueling
DQN) has shown that, in Atari 2600 tasks, an RL agent
can lead to better policy evaluation in noise conditions from
many similar-valued actions by automatically producing
separate estimates of the state value function V (s) and the
state-dependent action advantage function A(s, a) (Wang et
al. 2016). In this paper, we attempt to utilize Dueling DQN
method to mitigate the negative impact of noise in real dialogue environments.

Abstract
Task-oriented dialogue systems provide a convenient interface to help users complete tasks. An important consideration
for task-oriented dialogue systems is the ability to against the
noise commonly existed in the real-world conversation. Both
rule-based strategies and statistical modeling techniques can
solve noise problems, but they are costly. In this paper, we
propose a new approach, called Dynamic Reward-based Dueling Deep Dyna-Q (DR-D3Q). The DR-D3Q can learn policies in noise robustly, and it is easy to implement by combining dynamic reward and the Dueling Deep Q-Network (Dueling DQN) into Deep Dyna-Q (DDQ) framework. The Dueling DQN can mitigate the negative impact of noise on learning policies, but it is inapplicable to dialogue domain due to
different reward mechanisms. Unlike typical dialogue reward
function, we integrate dynamic reward that provides reward
in real-time for agent to make Dueling DQN adapt to dialogue
domain. For the purpose of supplementing the limited amount
of real user experiences, we take the DDQ framework as the
basic framework. Experiments using simulation and human
evaluation show that the DR-D3Q signiﬁcantly improve the
performance of policy learning tasks in noisy environments.1

1

Introduction

Task-oriented dialogue systems aim at assisting users to
solve a task with fewer turns and have been used in a variety of applications (Dhingra et al. 2017; Li et al. 2017;
Gao, Galley, and Li 2019). Dialogue policy, which can select appropriate dialogue actions to respond and steer the
conversation, is the key component of task-oriented dialogue
systems. The noise in real-world conversation include automatic speech recognition (ASR) or natural language understanding (NLU) errors and ambiguous user utterances. This
noise adds the complexity of real dialogue tasks, increasing the challenge of designing dialogue policies that can robustly handle noise. A dialogue system should be able to
carry on a conversation without the luxury of the accurate
ASR, NLU, or precise user utterances (Paek and Horvitz
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Source code is at https://github.com/zhaoyangyangHH/DRD3Q.
9676

