The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Optimal Feature Transport for Cross-View Image Geo-Localization
Yujiao Shi,1,2 Xin Yu,1,2 Liu Liu,1,2 Tong Zhang,1,3 Hongdong Li1,2
1

Australian National University, Canberra, Australia.
2
Australian Centre for Robotic Vision, Australia.
3
Motovis Australia Pty Ltd
ﬁrstname.lastname@anu.edu.au

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of cross-view image geolocalization, where the geographic location of a ground-level
street-view query image is estimated by matching it against
a large scale aerial map (e.g., a high-resolution satellite image). State-of-the-art deep-learning based methods tackle this
problem as deep metric learning which aims to learn global
feature representations of the scene seen by the two different
views. Despite promising results are obtained by such deep
metric learning methods, they, however, fail to exploit a crucial cue relevant for localization, namely, the spatial layout
of local features. Moreover, little attention is paid to the obvious domain gap (between aerial view and ground view) in
the context of cross-view localization. This paper proposes
a novel Cross-View Feature Transport (CVFT) technique to
explicitly establish cross-view domain transfer that facilitates
feature alignment between ground and aerial images. Specifically, we implement the CVFT as network layers, which
transports features from one domain to the other, leading to
more meaningful feature similarity comparison. Our model is
differentiable and can be learned end-to-end. Experiments on
large-scale datasets have demonstrated that our method has
remarkably boosted the state-of-the-art cross-view localization performance, e.g., on the CVUSA dataset, with signiﬁcant improvements for top-1 recall from 40.79% to 61.43%,
and for top-10 from 76.36% to 90.49%. We expect the key insight of the paper (i.e., explicitly handling domain difference
via domain transport) will prove to be useful for other similar
problems in computer vision as well.

1

Figure 1: Illustration of the proposed Cross-View Feature Transport (CVFT). First row: a panoramic groundlevel query image (left), and its corresponding aerial image
(right); Second row: left: an example feature map learned
from the ground image shown above; middle: the learned
feature map from the aerial image shown above; Right: the
transported ground-level feature map using our CVFT. It is
clear that CVFT effectively aligns the two feature domains,
bringing the two corresponding feature maps closer in the
feature space; Bottom row: visualizing the two feature maps
(Zeiler and Fergus 2014).

Introduction

This paper studies the problem of ground-to-aerial crossview image-based localization. The task is: given a groundlevel image of street scene (e.g., a Google street view image), we want to estimate where this image was taken,
in terms of estimating its geo-location relative to a large
(and geo-tagged) satellite map covering the region of interest (e.g., an entire city). Such a cross-view localization problem is not only practically relevant, thanks to the
wide-accessibility of high-resolution satellite imagery, but
also scientiﬁcally important and challenging. The challenges
mainly come from the signiﬁcant differences in their dif-

ferent viewpoints (one is from overhead, and the other at
ground level) and vast variations in visual appearance.
In this paper, we propose an effective mechanism to explicitly take into account the two issues: (1) preserving local
feature spatial layout information, and (2) implementing a
mechanism to account for feature domain differences. We
ﬁrst employ a two-branch Siamese-like CNN architecture to
extract features from ground and aerial images separately.
As seen in Figure 1, there is a spatial domain correspondence between ground panorama and aerial imagery. In or-

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11990

