The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Do Not Have Enough Data? Deep Learning to the Rescue!
∗

∗

Ateret Anaby-Tavor,1 Boaz Carmeli,1, Esther Goldbraich,1 Amir Kantor,1 George Kour,1,2,
∗
Segev Shlomov,1,3, Naama Tepper,1 Naama Zwerdling1
1

IBM Research AI, 2 University of Haifa, Israel, 3 Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
{atereta, boazc, esthergold, amirka, naama.tepper, naamaz}@il.ibm.com, gkour@ibm.com, segevs@technion.ac.il

Data augmentation (Wong et al. 2016) is a common strategy for handling scarce data situations. It works by synthesizing new data from existing training data, with the objective of improving the performance of the downstream model.
This strategy has been a key factor in the performance improvement of various neural network models, mainly in the
domains of computer vision and speech recognition. Specifically, for these domains there exist well-established methods for synthesizing labeled-data to improve classiﬁcation
tasks. The simpler methods also apply transformations on
existing training examples, such as cropping, padding, ﬂipping, and shifting along time and space dimensions, as these
transformations are usually class preserving (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Cui, Goel, and Kingsbury 2015;
Ko et al. 2015; Szegedy et al. 2015).
However, in the case of textual data, such transformations
usually invalidate and distort the text, making it grammatically and semantically incorrect. This makes data augmentation more challenging. In fact, textual augmentation could
even do more harm than good, since it is not an easy task to
synthesize good artiﬁcial textual data. Thus, data augmentation methods for text usually involve replacing a single word
with a synonym, deleting a word, or changing the word order, as suggested by (Wei and Zou 2019).
Recent advances in text generation models (Radford et
al. 2018; Kingma and Welling 2014) facilitate an innovative approach for handling scarce data situations. Although improving text classiﬁcation in these situations by
using deep learning methods seems like an oxymoron, pretrained models (Radford et al. 2018; Peters et al. 2018;
Devlin et al. 2019) are opening new ways to address this
task.
In this paper, we present a novel method, referred to
as language-model-based data augmentation (LAMBADA),
for synthesizing labeled data to improve text classiﬁcation
tasks. LAMBADA is especially useful when only a small
amount of labeled data is available, where its results go
beyond state-of-the-art performance. Models trained with
LAMBADA exhibit increased performance compared to:
1) The baseline model, trained only on the existing data
2) Models trained on augmented corpora generated by the
state-of-the-art techniques in textual data augmentation.

Abstract
Based on recent advances in natural language modeling and
those in text generation capabilities, we propose a novel data
augmentation method for text classiﬁcation tasks. We use a
powerful pre-trained neural network model to artiﬁcially synthesize new labeled data for supervised learning. We mainly
focus on cases with scarce labeled data. Our method, referred to as language-model-based data augmentation (LAMBADA), involves ﬁne-tuning a state-of-the-art language generator to a speciﬁc task through an initial training phase on
the existing (usually small) labeled data. Using the ﬁne-tuned
model and given a class label, new sentences for the class
are generated. Our process then ﬁlters these new sentences
by using a classiﬁer trained on the original data. In a series
of experiments, we show that LAMBADA improves classiﬁers’ performance on a variety of datasets. Moreover, LAMBADA signiﬁcantly improves upon the state-of-the-art techniques for data augmentation, speciﬁcally those applicable to
text classiﬁcation tasks with little data.

1

Introduction

Text classiﬁcation (Sebastiani 2002), such as classiﬁcation
of emails into spam and not-spam (Shams 2014), is a
fundamental research area in machine learning and natural language processing. It encompasses a variety of other
tasks such as intent classiﬁcation (Kumar et al. 2019), sentiment analysis (Tang, Qin, and Liu 2015), topic classiﬁcation
(Tong and Koller 2001), and relation classiﬁcation (Giridhara, Mishra, and Modam 2019).
Depending upon the problem at hand, getting a good
ﬁt for a classiﬁer model may require abundant labeled
data (Shams 2014). However, in many cases, and especially
when developing AI systems for speciﬁc applications, labeled data is scarce and costly to obtain.
One example of text classiﬁcation is intent classiﬁcation
in the growing market of automated chatbot platforms (Collinaszy, Bundzel, and Zolotova 2017). A developer of an intent classiﬁer for a new chatbot may start with a dataset containing two, three, or ﬁve samples per class, and in some
cases no data at all.
∗

Equally main contributors
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7383

