The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Bounds and Complexity Results for Learning
Coalition-Based Interaction Functions in Networked Social Systems
Abhijin Adiga,1 Chris J. Kuhlman,1 Madhav V. Marathe,1,2 S. S. Ravi,1,3
Daniel J. Rosenkrantz,1,3 Richard E. Stearns,1,3 Anil Vullikanti1,2
1

Biocomplexity Institute and Initiative, University Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22904
2
Computer Science Dept., University Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22904
3
Computer Science Dept., University at Albany – SUNY, Albany, NY 12222
{abhijin, cjk8gx, marathe, vskumar}@virginia.edu, {ssravi0, drosenkrantz, thestearns2}@gmail.com
time instant (Adiga et al. 2018; He et al. 2016). We also consider inference under the Probably Approximately Correct
(PAC) learning framework where conﬁguration–successor
pairs are independently drawn from an unknown distribution
(see similar work in (Narasimhan, Parkes, and Singer 2015;
He et al. 2016)). Under both models, we assume that the network is known.

Abstract
Using a discrete dynamical system model for a networked
social system, we consider the problem of learning a class
of local interaction functions in such networks. Our focus is
on learning local functions which are based on pairwise disjoint coalitions formed from the neighborhood of each node.
Our work considers both active query and PAC learning models. We establish bounds on the number of queries needed to
learn the local functions under both models. We also establish
a complexity result regarding efﬁcient consistent learners for
such functions. Our experimental results on synthetic and real
social networks demonstrate how the number of queries depends on the structure of the underlying network and number
of coalitions.

1

The great majority of prior work focuses on each agent’s
individual behavior, where an agent treats each neighbor as
an autonomous inﬂuencer. However, in several situations, an
agent is inﬂuenced by groups formed by its neighbors. Here,
our focus is on learning a form of interaction based on pairwise disjoint coalitions formed by the neighbors of an agent.
The motivation for this model comes from the work reported
in (Ugander et al. 2012; Laubenbacher and Stigler 2004;
Colón-Reyes et al. 2006). The model studied in (Ugander
et al. 2012) uses a social network and considers the connected components formed by the one-hop neighbors of a
node v. Since the connected components are node disjoint,
so are the coalitions. The experimental evidence presented
in (Ugander et al. 2012) shows that coalitions are indeed operative in social networked systems. In particular, the results
in this reference point out that people consider coalitions
of their neighbors in deciding whether to join Facebook.
Thus, our model of non-overlapping coalitions has direct
relevance to social systems. The model studied in (Laubenbacher and Stigler 2004; Colón-Reyes et al. 2006) considers
polynomial interaction functions, where each polynomial is
a sum of monomials (products of variables where the degree of each variable is at most 1). The monomials can be
thought of as coalitions. For Boolean functions, sums of
monomials correspond to monotone functions in disjunctive
normal form (DNF); such functions are in the sum of products form where no variable appears negated. Each product term in a DNF represents a coalition. Since coalitions
considered in models of social systems generally do not
overlap (Branzei, Dimitrov, and Tijs 2005; Ugander et al.
2012), we have the additional requirement that the coalitions must partition the set of inputs. We call such functions partitioned monotone DNF (PM-DNF) functions. As
an example, the Boolean function of ﬁve variables deﬁned
by f (x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 , x5 ) = x1 x5 + x2 x3 + x4 consists of

Introduction

Motivation. Learning the nature of interactions in networked physical and social systems is a challenging problem
(see e.g., (Laubenbacher and Stigler 2004; Romero, Meeder,
and Kleinberg 2011; González-Bailón et al. 2011)). We use
a graphical dynamical systems model, called a synchronous
dynamical system (SyDS) (see e.g., (Barrett et al. 2006))
to represent these networked systems. Such a system consists of an undirected graph G(V, E), where the nodes represent entities (agents) and the edges represent pairwise interactions. (Formal deﬁnitions are provided in Section 2.)
Each node v has a time varying state value (assumed to be
Boolean) and a local function fv which determines the next
state of the node using the current states of v and its neighbors. The SyDS model assumes that nodes compute and update their state values synchronously. The graph and the local functions determine the dynamics of the system.
The problem of understanding the nature of interactions in
a networked system can be formulated as that of inferring the
local functions in a SyDS model of the system. We consider
inference through interactions with the system where a user
may specify each query in the form of a conﬁguration (i.e.,
the current state values of nodes) and the system provides the
successor conﬁguration, i.e., states of the nodes at the next
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3138

