The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Monolingual Transfer Learning via Bilingual
Translators for Style-Sensitive Paraphrase Generation
Tomoyuki Kajiwara,1 Biwa Miura,2 Yuki Arase3
1
Institute for Datability Science, Osaka University, 2 AI Samurai Inc.,
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, Osaka University
kajiwara@ids.osaka-u.ac.jp, miura@aisamurai.co.jp, arase@ist.osaka-u.ac.jp
3

transfer. From such small datasets, only a limited amount
of rewrite rules can be acquired. This results in a conservative style transfer model that rewrites only a few phrases in
an input sentence (Niu, Rao, and Carpuat 2018).
To train a high-quality style transfer model that conducts active rewrites, rule-based data augmentation (Rao and
Tetreault 2018) and multitask learning with style-sensitive
machine translation (Niu, Rao, and Carpuat 2018) are proposed. However, these are high-cost methods that rely on
manual rules or special datasets; they cannot be extended
easily to other styles.
We address the low-resource problem in style transfer
by transfer learning. Our method is independent of any
manual process for data augmentation and hence widely
applicable to various types of styles. As a key contribution, our method allows to train a style transfer model with
just a thousand parallel sentence pairs. In style transfer, a
successful paraphrase should reserve meaning equivalence,
grammaticality, and style ﬁdelity (Rao and Tetreault 2018;
Niu, Rao, and Carpuat 2018). Our key concept is that styles
should be learned from the monolingual parallel corpus, but
meaning equivalence and grammaticality can be ensured by
utilizing other corpora of larger sizes. Speciﬁcally, we pretrain the paraphrase generation model to ensure that grammatical sentences of equivalent meaning are generated using
a style-independent raw corpus. Subsequently, we ﬁne-tune
the model to learn styles using the monolingual parallel corpus specialized for a target style.
We propose two methods for pre-training using AutoEncoder and machine translators. AutoEncoder is a simpler
approach, where the paraphrase generator learns to generate
exactly the same sentence as the input using any raw corpus.
The pre-trained model that learns various expressions using
a large-scale raw corpus becomes a high-quality paraphrase
generator via ﬁne-tuning. If reliable machine translators
are available, we can pre-train the model with more diverse paraphrasal expressions on pseudo-parallel corpus
generated by roundtrip translation. Fine-tuning on the
truly-parallel corpus ﬁts the model to generate paraphrases
with the target style distilling a number of rewriting patterns
acquired in pre-training.

Abstract
We tackle the low-resource problem in style transfer by employing transfer learning that utilizes abundantly available
raw corpora. Our method consists of two steps: pre-training
learns to generate a semantically equivalent sentence with an
input assured grammaticality, and ﬁne-tuning learns to add
a desired style. Pre-training has two options, auto-encoding
and machine translation based methods. Pre-training based
on AutoEncoder is a simple way to learn these from a raw
corpus. If machine translators are available, the model can
learn more diverse paraphrasing via roundtrip translation. After these, ﬁne-tuning achieves high-quality paraphrase generation even in situations where only 1k sentence pairs of the
parallel corpus for style transfer is available. Experimental results of formality style transfer indicated the effectiveness of
both pre-training methods and the method based on roundtrip
translation achieves state-of-the-art performance.

1

Introduction

Style transfer is a class of tasks that generate paraphrases
by controlling information other than the meaning in a sentence. Style transfer is beneﬁcial for various applications.
For example, it allows us to simplify text by changing
difﬁcult expressions to easier ones for language learning
support (Petersen and Ostendorf 2007; Belder and Moens
2010). Furthermore, it is useful as preprocessing for information extraction and machine translation (Evans 2011;
Štajner and Popovic 2016). In this study, we focus on formality and simplicity, denoted as style herein.
Paraphrase generation, including style transfer, can be formalized as a monolingual machine translation problem (Specia 2010; Xu et al. 2012). Generally, machine translation requires the availability of million-scale parallel corpora to
train statistical or neural models. Bilingual texts are produced and accumulated in daily life. Meanwhile, monolingual parallel sentences of a speciﬁc style are difﬁcult to
collect because they are unlikely to be produced naturally.
Hence, only small-scale monolingual parallel corpora with
hundreds of thousands of sentence pairs (Zhang and Lapata 2017; Rao and Tetreault 2018) are available for style
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8042

