The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Spatio-Temporal Attention-Based
Neural Network for Credit Card Fraud Detection
Dawei Cheng, Sheng Xiang, Chencheng Shang,
Yiyi Zhang, Fangzhou Yang, Liqing Zhang∗
MoE Key Lab of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
{dawei.cheng, yi95yi, lake titicaca}@sjtu.edu.cn, zhang-lq@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

濥濸濽濸濶瀇濸濷

濖濴瀅濷澳濖濻濸濶濾

Credit card fraud is an important issue and incurs a considerable cost for both cardholders and issuing institutions.
Contemporary methods apply machine learning-based approaches to detect fraudulent behavior from transaction
records. But manually generating features needs domain
knowledge and may lay behind the modus operandi of fraud,
which means we need to automatically focus on the most relevant patterns in fraudulent behavior. Therefore, in this work,
we propose a spatial-temporal attention-based neural network
(STAN) for fraud detection. In particular, transaction records
are modeled by attention and 3D convolution mechanisms
by integrating the corresponding information, including spatial and temporal behaviors. Attentional weights are jointly
learned in an end-to-end manner with 3D convolution and
detection networks. Afterward, we conduct extensive experiments on real-word fraud transaction dataset, the result shows
that STAN performs better than other state-of-the-art baselines in both AUC and precision-recall curves. Moreover, we
conduct empirical studies with domain experts on the proposed method for fraud post-analysis; the result demonstrates
the effectiveness of our proposed method in both detecting
suspicious transactions and mining fraud patterns.

濕濿瀂濶濾濸濷澳濖濴瀅濷濒
濦瀈濹濹濼濶濼濸瀁瀇澳濕濴濿濴瀁濶濸濒

濙濸濸濷濵濴濶濾

濣瀅濸濷濼濶瀇濼瀉濸澳
濠瀂濷濸濿
濦濶瀂瀅濸

澽濢濪濙濧濨濝濛濕濨濝濣濢

Figure 1: The framework of credit card fraud detection.

and feedback the analysis results to the predictive model for
model updating.
As attacking strategies from potential fraudsters change,
it is essential that a well-behaved system can adapt to the
evolving strategies (Randhawa et al. 2018; Jiang et al. 2018).
We summarize the following two major observations from
real-world fraud transactions: 1). Temporal aggregation.
Fraudsters are subject to the limited time of the activities. As
the cardholder will freeze the card as soon as possible once
suspicious transactions have been detected, fraudsters are required to reach the credit limit in a short time. That means
the behaviors of the fraud transaction would be exposed in
a limited time. 2). Spatial aggregation. Fraudsters are subjected to cost on the devices and merchants of transactions.
That is, due to the economic constraints, fraudsters will use
the card frequently with only a small number of merchants,
which are spatially different from normal transactions.
Many existing models to deal with fraud transactions have
been extensively studied (Patidar, Sharma, and others 2011;
Bahnsen et al. 2016; Carneiro, Figueira, and Costa 2017).
They mainly split into one of two directions: 1). Rule-based
methods directly generate sophisticated rules by domain experts for identiﬁcation; for example, (Seeja and Zareapoor
2014) proposed an association rules method for mining frequent fraud rules. 2). Machine learning-based methods learn
static models by exploring large amounts of historical data.
For example, (Fiore et al. 2017) extracted features based on
neural networks and built supervised classiﬁers for detecting

Introduction
Credit card fraud is a general term for the unauthorized use
of funds in a transaction typically through a credit or a debit
card (Bhattacharyya et al. 2011). Global card fraud losses
amounted to over 25 billion US dollars in 2018 and is forecast to continue to increase (Wang, Chen, and Chen 2019).
This huge amount of losses has increased the importance
of fraud-ﬁghting. Figure 1 shows a typical fraud detection
framework deployed in a commercial system. The card alliance or banks, such as VISA, MasterCard or Citibank, assess each transaction with an online predictive model once
it has passed card checking. Unlike a simple card checking
system, which focuses on card blacklists, budget checking,
etc., the predictive model is designed to detect fraud patterns
automatically and produces a fraud risk score. Investigators
can thereby focus on the high-risk transactions effectively
∗

Corresponding Author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
362

