The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

P-SIF: Document Embeddings Using Partition Averaging
Vivek Gupta,1,3 Ankit Saw,2 Pegah Nokhiz,1 Praneeth Netrapalli,3
Piyush Rai,4 Partha Talukdar5
1

School of Computing, University of Utah, 2 InfoEdge (India) Limited, 3 Microsoft Research Lab, Bangalore,
4
Computer Science Department, IIT Kanpur, 5 Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore
{vgupta, pnokhiz}@cs.utah.edu, ankit.kgpian@gmail.com,
praneeth@microsoft.com, piyush@cse.iitk.ac.in, ppt@iisc.ac.in

simple averaging of word-vectors will disregard all the topical structure. 1 Hence, these techniques are largely unable to
capture the semantic meanings of larger pieces of text, e.g.,
multi-sentence documents.
To address these limitations, we present a novel document
embedding method called partition SIF weighted averaging
(P-SIF) to embed documents which usually contain multiple sentences efﬁciently. P-SIF learns topic-speciﬁc vectors
from a document and ﬁnally concatenates them all to represent the overall document. Thus, P-SIF retains the simplicity of simple weighted word averaging while taking a document’s topical structure into account. We also provide theoretical justiﬁcations for the proposed approach and demonstrate its efﬁcacy via a comprehensive set of experiments.
P-SIF achieves signiﬁcant improvements over several embedding techniques on several tasks despite being simple.
We have released the source code for P-SIF embeddings. 2
The novel characteristics of P-SIF are described below:

Abstract
Simple weighted averaging of word vectors often yields effective representations for sentences which outperform sophisticated seq2seq neural models in many tasks. While it
is desirable to use the same method to represent documents
as well, unfortunately, the effectiveness is lost when representing long documents involving multiple sentences. One of
the key reasons is that a longer document is likely to contain
words from many different topics; hence, creating a single
vector while ignoring all the topical structure is unlikely to
yield an effective document representation. This problem is
less acute in single sentences and other short text fragments
where the presence of a single topic is most likely. To alleviate this problem, we present P-SIF, a partitioned word averaging model to represent long documents. P-SIF retains the
simplicity of simple weighted word averaging while taking
a document’s topical structure into account. In particular, PSIF learns topic-speciﬁc vectors from a document and ﬁnally
concatenates them all to represent the overall document. We
provide theoretical justiﬁcations on the correctness of P-SIF.
Through a comprehensive set of experiments, we demonstrate
P-SIF’s effectiveness compared to simple weighted averaging and many other baselines.

• P-SIF can embed larger multi-sentence documents, as it
pays attention to the topical structure of the document.
• P-SIF is based on simple weighted word vectors averaging rather than considerably more sophisticated tensor
factorization or neural network-based methods.
• P-SIF is unsupervised since it only uses pre-trained word
embeddings without using any label information.
• P-SIF outperforms many existing methods on text similarity, text classiﬁcation, and other supervised tasks.

Introduction
Many approaches such as (Socher et al. 2013; Liu, Qiu, and
Huang 2015; Le and Mikolov 2014; Ling et al. 2015) are
proposed which go beyond words to capture the semantic
meaning of sentences. These techniques either use the simple composition of the word-vectors or sophisticated neural
network architectures for sentence representation. Recently,
(Arora, Liang, and Ma 2017) proposed a smooth inverse frequency (SIF) based word vector averaging model to embed
a sentence. They further improved their embedding by removing the ﬁrst principal component of the weighted average vectors. However, all these approaches are limited to
capturing the meaning of a single sentence and representing the sentence in the same space as words, thus reducing their expressive power. Generally, longer texts contain
words from multiple topics, so creating a single vector from

Related Work
Most of the prior work has computed sentence embeddings
by coordinate wise vector and matrix-based compositional
operations over word vectors, e.g., (Levy and Goldberg
2014) use unweighted averaging of word vectors (Le and
Mikolov 2014) for representing short phrases, (Singh and
Mukerjee 2015) propose tﬁdf-weighted averaging of word
vectors to form document vectors, (Socher et al. 2013) propose a recursive neural network deﬁned over a parse tree,
and train with supervision.
1

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2

7863

Topical structure denotes word distribution across topics.
https://github.com/vgupta123/P-SIF

