The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

An Information-Theoretic Quantiﬁcation of Discrimination with Exempt Features
Sanghamitra Dutta, Praveen Venkatesh, Piotr Mardziel, Anupam Datta, Pulkit Grover
Carnegie Mellon University
sanghamd@andrew.cmu.edu, {vpraveen, piotrm, danupam, pulkit}@cmu.edu

In particular applications, there are some features that
are critical in a way that they are required to be weighed
strongly in the decision even if they perpetuate bias, e.g.,
educational qualiﬁcation for a job, merit and seniority in deciding salary etc. (Kamiran, Žliobaitė, and Calders 2013).
Hence, the discrimination arising due to these features can
be exempted. In this work, our goal is to formalize and quantify the non-exempt discrimination, i.e., the part of the discrimination that cannot be accounted for by critical features,
and selectively remove it if desired.
While such categorization of features is applicationdependent and might require domain knowledge and ethical
evaluation, such exemptions do exist. E.g., the US Equal Pay
Act (US Equal Employment Opportunity Commission) exempts for any difference in salary based on gender that can
be explained by merit and seniority. Similarly, the US employment discrimination law (Manley 2009) contains a Bona
Fide Occupational Qualiﬁcation (BFOQ) defense where discrimination based on protected attributes may be exempted
if the discrimination is due to a BFOQ reasonably necessary to the normal operation of that particular business, or
other reasonable differentials. E.g., ﬁre departments may require ﬁremen to be able to lift a given weight to demonstrate
that they will be able to carry ﬁre victims out of a burning building. This feature is therefore allowed to be weighed
strongly in hiring even if it is correlated with protected attributes. Similarly, UK employment discrimination law also
allows exemptions based on the privacy and decency of the
people the employer would be dealing with, e.g., staff in a
care home (Dept. of Trade and Industry 2008).
In this work, we assume that the critical features are
known (similar to Kamiran, Žliobaitė, and Calders (2013),
Kilbertus et al. (2017), Salimi et al. (2019)). Let Xc and Xg
denote the critical and the non-critical or general features,
respectively. We denote the protected attribute(s) as Z and
the model output as Ŷ . Note that Ŷ is a function of the entire feature vector X = (Xc , Xg ).
Why should a model use the “general” features at all for
prediction if they are not critical? The general features can
improve accuracy, or reduce the candidate pool, e.g., if 60%
of applicants clear a test but resources are available to interview only 10%. Not using the general features at all may

Abstract
The needs of a business (e.g., hiring) may require the use
of certain features that are critical in a way that any discrimination arising due to them should be exempted. In this
work, we propose a novel information-theoretic decomposition of the total discrimination (in a counterfactual sense)
into a non-exempt component, which quantiﬁes the part of
the discrimination that cannot be accounted for by the critical features, and an exempt component, which quantiﬁes the
remaining discrimination. Our decomposition enables selective removal of the non-exempt component if desired. We arrive at this decomposition through examples and counterexamples that enable us to ﬁrst obtain a set of desirable properties that any measure of non-exempt discrimination should
satisfy. We then demonstrate that our proposed quantiﬁcation of non-exempt discrimination satisﬁes all of them. This
decomposition leverages a body of work from information
theory called Partial Information Decomposition (PID). We
also obtain an impossibility result showing that no observational measure of non-exempt discrimination can satisfy all
of the desired properties, which leads us to relax our goals
and examine alternative observational measures that satisfy
only some of these properties. We then perform a case study
using one observational measure to show how one might train
a model allowing for exemption of discrimination due to critical features.

1

Introduction

As artiﬁcial intelligence becomes ubiquitous, it is important to understand whether a machine-learnt model is perpetuating existing biases, and if so, how we can engineer
fairness into such a model. The ﬁeld of fair machine learning (Dwork et al. 2012; Agarwal et al. 2018; Hardt et al.
2016; Calmon et al. 2017; Kamishima et al. 2012; Wang,
Ustun, and Calmon 2019; Menon and Williamson 2018;
Komiyama and Shimao 2017; Donini et al. 2018; Ghassami, Khodadadian, and Kiyavash 2018; Heidari et al. 2018;
Liao et al. 2019; Varshney 2019) provides several measures
of fairness, and uses them to reduce discrimination based
on protected attributes, e.g., as a regularizer during training
(Agarwal et al. 2018; Kamishima et al. 2012).
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3825

