The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Distributionally Robust Counterfactual Risk Minimization
Louis Faury,1,2,∗ Ugo Tanielian,1,3,∗ Elvis Dohmatob,1 Elena Smirnova,1 Flavian Vasile1
1

Criteo AI Lab
LTCI, Telecom-ParisTech, Université Paris-Saclay
3
LPSM, Université Paris 6
{l.faury, u.tanielian, e.dohmatob, e.smirnova, f.vasile}@criteo.com
2

factual rewards. However, this initiative can be rather burdensome as it suffers a crucial caveat intimately linked with a phenomenon known as the optimizer’s curse (Capen et al. 1971;
Smith and Winkler 2006; Thaler 2012). It indicates that sorting actions by their empirical reward average can be suboptimal since the resulting expected post-decision surprise
is non-zero. In real life applications where the space of possible actions is often extremely large and where decisions
are taken based on very low sample sizes, the consequence
of this phenomenon can be dire and motivates the design
of principled robust solutions. As a solution for this Counterfactual Risk Minimization (CRM) problem, the authors
of (Swaminathan and Joachims 2015a) proposed a modiﬁed
action selection process, penalizing behaviors resulting in
high-variance estimates.
In this paper, we argue that another line of reasoning resides in using Distributional Robust Optimization (DRO)
for the CRM. It has indeed proven to be a powerful tool
both in decision theory (Duchi, Glynn, and Namkoong 2016;
Esfahani and Kuhn 2018; Blanchet and Murthy 2019)
and the training of robust classiﬁers (Madry et al. 2017;
Xiao et al. 2018; Hu et al. 2018). Under the DRO formulation, one treats the empirical distribution with skepticism
and hence seeks a solution that minimizes the worst-case
expected cost over a family of distributions, described in
terms of an uncertainty ball. Using distributionally robust
optimization, one can therefore control the magnitude of the
post-decision surprise, critical to the counterfactual analysis.
We motivate the use of DRO for the CRM problem with
asymptotic guarantees and bring to light a formal link between the variance penalization solution of (Swaminathan
and Joachims 2015a) and a larger DRO problem for which
the uncertainty set is deﬁned with the chi-square divergence.
Building from this, we propose the use of other uncertainty
sets and introduce a KL-based formulation of the CRM problem. We develop a new algorithm for this objective and benchmark its performance on a variety of real-world datasets. We
analyze its behavior and show that it outperforms existing
state-of-the-art methods.
The structure of the paper is the following: in Section 2
we formally introduce the BLBF framework and the CRM
problem. In Section 3 we present the DRO framework, moti-

Abstract
This manuscript introduces the idea of using Distributionally
Robust Optimization (DRO) for the Counterfactual Risk Minimization (CRM) problem. Tapping into a rich existing literature, we show that DRO is a principled tool for counterfactual
decision making. We also show that well-established solutions to the CRM problem like sample variance penalization
schemes are special instances of a more general DRO problem. In this unifying framework, a variety of distributionally
robust counterfactual risk estimators can be constructed using
various probability distances and divergences as uncertainty
measures. We propose the use of Kullback-Leibler divergence
as an alternative way to model uncertainty in CRM and derive
a new robust counterfactual objective. In our experiments, we
show that this approach outperforms the state-of-the-art on
four benchmark datasets, validating the relevance of using
other uncertainty measures in practical applications.

1

Introduction

Learning how to act from historical data is a largely studied ﬁeld in machine learning (Strehl et al. 2010; Dudı́k,
Langford, and Li 2011; Li et al. 2011; 2015), spanning a
wide range of applications where a system interacts with
its environment (e.g search engines, ad-placement and recommender systems). Interactions are materialized by the
actions taken by the system, themselves rewarded by a
feedback measuring their relevance. Both quantities can be
logged at little cost, and subsequently used to improve the
performance of the learning system. The Batch Learning
from Bandit Feedback (Swaminathan and Joachims 2015a;
2015b) (BLBF) framework describes such a situation, where
a contextual decision making process must be improved
based on the logged history of implicit feedback observed
only on a subset of actions. Counterfactual estimators (Bottou et al. 2013) allow to forecast the performance of any
system from the logs, as if it was taking the actions by itself.
This enables the search for an optimal system, even with
observations biased towards actions favored by the logger.
A natural approach to carry out this search consists in favoring systems that select actions with high empirical counter∗

Equal contribution.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3850

