The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning Cross-Modal Context Graph for Visual Grounding
Yongfei Liu,1∗ Bo Wan,1∗ Xiaodan Zhu,2 Xuming He1
1
ShanghaiTech University 2 Queen’s University

{liuyf3, wanbo, hexm}@shanghaitech.edu.cn xiaodan.zhu@queensu.ca

et al. 2019), visual question answering (Mun et al. 2018;
Cadene et al. 2019) and visual dialogue (Das et al. 2017;
Kottur et al. 2018).
General visual grounding typically attempts to localize
object regions that correspond to multiple noun phrases in
image descriptions. Despite signiﬁcant progress in solving
vision (Ren et al. 2015; Zhang et al. 2017) or language (Peters et al. 2018; Devlin et al. 2018) tasks, it remains challenging to establish such cross-modal correspondence between
objects and phrases, mainly because of large variations in
object appearances and phrase descriptions, strong context
dependency among these grounding entities, and the resulting semantic ambiguities in their representations (Plummer
et al. 2015; 2018).
Many existing works on visual grounding tackle the
problem by localizing each noun phrase independently via
phrase-object matching (Plummer et al. 2015; 2018; Yu et
al. 2018b; Rohrbach et al. 2016). However, such grounding
strategy tends to ignore visual and linguistic context, thus
leading to matching ambiguity or errors for complex scenes.
Only a few grounding approaches take into account context information (Pelin, Leonid, and Markus 2019; Chen,
Kovvuri, and Nevatia 2017) or phrase relationship (Wang
et al. 2016; Plummer et al. 2017) when representing visual
or phrase entities. While they partially alleviate the problem of grounding ambiguity, their context or relation representations have several limitations for capturing global
structures in language descriptions and visual scenes. First,
for language context, they typically rely on chain-structured
LSTMs deﬁned on description sentences, which have difﬁculty in encoding long-range dependencies among phrases.
In addition, most methods simply employ off-the-shelf object detectors to generate object candidates for cross-modal
matching. However, it is inefﬁcient to encode visual context for those objects due to a high ratio of false positives in
such object proposal pools. Furthermore, when incorporating phrase relations, these methods often adopt a stage-wise
strategy that learns representations of noun phrases and their
relationship separately, which is sub-optimal for the overall
grounding task.
In this work, we propose a novel cross-modal graph network to address the aforementioned limitations for multiple-

Abstract
Visual grounding is a ubiquitous building block in many
vision-language tasks and yet remains challenging due to
large variations in visual and linguistic features of grounding
entities, strong context effect and the resulting semantic ambiguities. Prior works typically focus on learning representations of individual phrases with limited context information.
To address their limitations, this paper proposes a languageguided graph representation to capture the global context of
grounding entities and their relations, and develop a crossmodal graph matching strategy for the multiple-phrase visual
grounding task. In particular, we introduce a modular graph
neural network to compute context-aware representations of
phrases and object proposals respectively via message propagation, followed by a graph-based matching module to generate globally consistent localization of grounding phrases. We
train the entire graph neural network jointly in a two-stage
strategy and evaluate it on the Flickr30K Entities benchmark.
Extensive experiments show that our method outperforms the
prior state of the arts by a sizable margin, evidencing the
efﬁcacy of our grounding framework. Code is available at
https://github.com/youngﬂy11/LCMCG-PyTorch.

1

Introduction

Integrating visual scene and natural language understanding is a fundamental problem toward achieving human-level
artiﬁcial intelligence, and has attracted much attention due
to rapid advances in computer vision and natural language
processing (Mogadala, Kalimuthu, and Klakow 2019). A
key step in bridging vision and language is to build a detailed correspondence between a visual scene and its related
language descriptions. In particular, the task of grounding
phrase descriptions into their corresponding image has become an ubiquitous building block in many vision-language
applications, such as image retrieval (Justin et al. 2015;
Nam et al. 2019), image captioning (Li et al. 2017; Feng
∗

Both authors contributed equally to the work. This work was
supported by Shanghai NSF Grant (No. 18ZR1425100) and NSFC
Grant (No. 61703195). The research of 3rd author is supported by
the Discovery Grant of Natural Sciences and Engineering Research
Council of Canada.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11645

