The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning Weighted Model Integration Distributions
Paolo Morettin,1∗ Samuel Kolb,2* Stefano Teso,1† Andrea Passerini1
1

University of Trento, Italy
{paolo.morettin, stefano.teso, andrea.passerini}@unitn.it
2
KU Leuven, Belgium
samuel.kolb@cs.kuleuven.be

oblique supports, which are necessary to capture linear interactions between continuous quantities. Failing to account
for the support can lead to substantial inaccuracies in density
estimation, especially for high-density regions lying at the
border of the support. Most importantly, acquiring a faithful support estimate is necessary to guarantee that invalid or
harmful conﬁgurations cannot be generated, a crucial feature
in safety-critical applications, e.g., reliable machine learning
and safe AI (Amodei et al. 2016).
Inspired by work on learning discrete structured distributions (Liang, Bekker, and Van den Broeck 2017), we contribute LARIAT (LeARning to IntegrATe), a novel approach
for learning WMI distributions from data. Our approach
breaks the learning problem into two steps. In a ﬁrst step,
a (non-trivial) support is learned from the data. This is accomplished by a novel extension of the approach of (Kolb
et al. 2018b) for learning satisﬁability modulo linear real
arithmetic formulas (Barrett et al. 2009). Our generalization
extends the original approach to learning from positive-only
data, and inherits the ability to natively acquire oblique and
non-convex constraints. In a second step, a candidate density
is obtained by employing a state-of-the-art non-parametric
estimator, e.g., a DET or an MSPN. Finally, INCAL automatically adjusts (normalizes) the learned density to be consistent with the learned support, thus allocating zero mass to
infeasible conﬁgurations while guaranteeing that the resulting model is a valid WMI distribution.
Summarizing, our main contributions are: (1) INCAL +, an
extension of the SMT(LRA) learning algorithm of (Kolb
et al. 2018b) to support learning; (2) LARIAT, a method to
estimate WMI distributions that combines structured supports (either learned by INCAL + or provided by a domain expert) and state-of-the-art density estimators, e.g., DETs and
MSPNs; (3) Extensive experiments showing the advantages
of LARIAT over standard density estimators in cases where
the underlying distribution has a non-trivial support.

Abstract
Weighted model integration (WMI) is a framework for probabilistic inference over distributions with discrete and continuous variables and structured supports. Despite the growing popularity of WMI, existing density estimators ignore the
problem of learning a structured support, and thus fail to handle unfeasible conﬁgurations and piecewise-linear relations
between continuous variables. We propose LARIAT, a novel
method to tackle this challenging problem. In a ﬁrst step, our
approach induces an SMT(LRA) formula representing the
support of the structured distribution. Next, it combines the
latter with a density learned using a state-of-the-art estimation method. The overall model automatically accounts for
the discontinuous nature of the underlying structured distribution. Our experimental results with synthetic and real-world
data highlight the promise of the approach.

1

Introduction

Weighted model integration (WMI) is a recent framework
for probabilistic inference in hybrid domains, that is, domains with both discrete and continuous variables. A key
feature of WMI is that it enables reasoning with highly
structured distributions that include arbitrary combinations
of logical and linear constraints. As previously recognized
in work on discrete structured distributions (e.g. (Liang,
Bekker, and Van den Broeck 2017)), these arise in important real-world applications because of, e.g., physical and
mechanical limitations (Afshar, Sanner, and Webers 2016)
or safety requirements (Amodei et al. 2016).
Despite their relevance, learning these WMI distributions (formally deﬁned in the Background) from data has
not been considered so far. Indeed, density estimators for
hybrid domains entirely ignore the problem of identifying and learning the support of the distribution. Stateof-the-art approaches like Mixed Sum-Product Networks
(MSPNs) (Molina et al. 2018) and Density Estimation Trees
(DETs) (Ram and Gray 2011) can only model boundingbox constraints over individual variables, and do not admit

2

∗

Equal contributions.
†
This research was performed while ST was working at KU
Leuven.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Related Work

Non-parametric multivariate density estimation is a venerable ﬁeld of study. Textbook approaches include histograms (Fix and Hodges Jr 1951) and kernel density estimation (Gray and Moore 2003). Histograms partition the
5224

