The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning to Learn Morphological Inﬂection for Resource-Poor Languages
Katharina Kann, Samuel R. Bowman, Kyunghyun Cho
New York University, USA
{kann, kyunghyun.cho, bowman}@nyu.edu

Abstract
We propose to cast the task of morphological inﬂection—
mapping a lemma to an indicated inﬂected form—for
resource-poor languages as a meta-learning problem. Treating each language as a separate task, we use data from highresource source languages to learn a set of model parameters
that can serve as a strong initialization point for ﬁne-tuning on
a resource-poor target language. Experiments with two model
architectures on 29 target languages from 3 families show that
our suggested approach outperforms all baselines. In particular, it obtains a 31.7% higher absolute accuracy than a previously proposed cross-lingual transfer model and outperforms
the previous state of the art by 1.7% absolute accuracy on
average over languages.

Figure 1: Multi-task training (upper left), multi-task training
and ﬁne-tuning (upper right), and MAML and ﬁne-tuning
(down). Solid lines represent training of initial parameters,
dashed lines ﬁne-tuning. Source languages in blue; target
language in purple.

Introduction
Morphological inﬂection, an omnipresent phenomenon in
many languages, denotes the variation in a word’s surface
form that expresses semantic or syntactic properties like
tense or grammatical gender. It yields an abundance of individual word types, while reducing each type’s frequency
in text. The resulting information sparsity is challenging for
natural language processing (NLP) systems and has lead to
the development of approaches for explicit handling of morphology.
The task of morphological inﬂection consists of automatically generating an indicated inﬂected form of a given
lemma. Over the last years, it has gained popularity in the
NLP community and has been featured in a series of shared
tasks (Cotterell et al. 2016; 2017; 2018). Neural sequenceto-sequence (seq2seq) models obtain high accuracy, at least
when training sets with many thousands of examples are
available (Cotterell et al. 2018). However, neural models
perform poorly if training data is sparse, as is the case for
many morphologically rich languages. One way to mitigate
this problem is via cross-lingual transfer, i.e., by leveraging
knowledge from a related resource-rich language. For morphological inﬂection, knowledge transfer has been shown to
be possible via multi-task training on data from several lan-

guages, with each language being considered a separate task
(Kann, Cotterell, and Schütze 2017).
In this work, we consider a setting in which we have
large training sets from multiple data-rich source languages
available, but only a small number of training examples in
each of our low-resource target languages. We introduce a
novel approach for cross-lingual transfer for morphological
inﬂection, which differs from previous work in two crucial
ways: (i) we add a ﬁne-tuning phase to the training process, which enables the model to focus speciﬁcally on the
low-resource language’s examples at the end of training,
and (ii) instead of multi-task training, we employ modelagnostic meta-learning (MAML; Finn, Abbeel, and Levine
2017). Using MAML, we learn an initial set of model parameters that, instead of just showing good performance on
all high-resource tasks, is easy to ﬁne-tune on data from
new tasks with only a few instances. Treating individual languages as separate tasks, our inﬂection model meta-learns
on a set of training languages how to adjust quickly to any
new language. Figure 1 compares the different approaches.

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8058

