The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Graph Few-Shot Learning via Knowledge Transfer
Huaxiu Yao,1∗ Chuxu Zhang,2 Ying Wei,3 Meng Jiang,2 Suhang Wang,1
Junzhou Huang,3 Nitesh V. Chawla,2 Zhenhui Li1
1

Pennsylvania State University, 2 University of Notre Dame, 3 Tencent AI Lab
{huaxiuyao, szw494, JessieLi}@psu.edu, {czhang11, mjiang2, nchawla}@nd.edu, {judyweiying, joehhuang}@tencent.com

2017), most of existing GNNs have shallow layers with a
restricted receptive ﬁeld. Therefore, GNNs are inadequate
to characterize the global information, and work not that
satisfactorily when the number of labeled nodes is especially
small.
Inspired by recent success of few-shot learning, from a
innovative perspective, we are motivated to leverage the
knowledge learned from auxiliary graphs to improve semisupervised node classiﬁcation in the target graph of our interest. The intuition behind lies in that auxiliary graphs and the
target graph likely share local topological structures as well
as class-dependent node features (Shervashidze et al. 2011;
Koutra, Joshua T., and Faloutsos 2013). For example, an existing social network group of co-workers at Google offer
valuable clues to predict interests of users in a newly emerged
social network group of co-workers at Amazon.
Yet it is even more challenging to achieve few-shot learning on graphs than on independent and identically distributed data (e.g., images) which exisiting few shot learning algorithms focus on. The two lines of recent few-shot
learning works, including gradient-based methods (Finn,
Abbeel, and Levine 2017; Ravi and Larochelle 2016) and
metric-based methods (Snell, Swersky, and Zemel 2017;
Vinyals et al. 2016), formulate the transferred knowledge
as parameter initializations (or a meta-optimizer) and a metric space, respectively. None of them, however, meets the
crucial prerequisite of graph few-shot learning to succeed,
i.e., transferring underlying structures across graphs.
To this end, we propose a novel Graph Few-shot Learning
(GFL) model. Built upon metric-based few-shot learning, the
basic idea of GFL is to learn a transferable metric space in
which the label of a node is predicted as the class of the
nearest prototype to the node. The metric space is practically
characterized with two embedding functions, which embed
a node and the prototype of each class, respectively. Speciﬁcally, ﬁrst, GFL learns the representation of each node using
a graph autoencoder whose backbone is GNNs. Second, to
better capture global information, we establish a relational
structure of all examples belonging to the same class, and
learn the prototype of this class by applying a prototype GNN
to the relational structure. Most importantly, both embedding
functions encrypting structured knowledge are transferred

Abstract
Towards the challenging problem of semi-supervised node
classiﬁcation, there have been extensive studies. As a frontier,
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have aroused great interest
recently, which update the representation of each node by aggregating information of its neighbors. However, most GNNs
have shallow layers with a limited receptive ﬁeld and may not
achieve satisfactory performance especially when the number
of labeled nodes is quite small. To address this challenge, we
innovatively propose a graph few-shot learning (GFL) algorithm that incorporates prior knowledge learned from auxiliary
graphs to improve classiﬁcation accuracy on the target graph.
Speciﬁcally, a transferable metric space characterized by a
node embedding and a graph-speciﬁc prototype embedding
function is shared between auxiliary graphs and the target,
facilitating the transfer of structural knowledge. Extensive
experiments and ablation studies on four real-world graph
datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed model
and the contribution of each component.

1

Introduction

Classifying a node (e.g., predicting interests of a user) in
a graph (e.g., a social network on Facebook) in a semisupervised manner has been challenging but imperative, inasmuch as only a small fraction of nodes have access to annotations which are usually costly. Drawing inspiration from traditional regularization-based (Zhu, Ghahramani, and Lafferty
2003) and embedding-based (Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena
2014) approaches for graph-based semi-supervised learning, graph neural networks (GNN) (Kipf and Welling 2017;
Veličković et al. 2018) have attracted considerable interest
and demonstrated promising performance recently.
To their essential characteristics, GNNs recursively update
the feature of each node through aggregation (or message
passing) of its neighbors, by which the patterns of graph
topology and node features are both captured. Nevertheless,
considering that adding more layers increases the difﬁculty of
training and over-smoothens node features (Kipf and Welling
∗

Correspondence to Huaxiu Yao <huaxiuyao@psu.edu>,
Ying Wei <judyweiying@tencent.com>, Zhenhui Li
<JessieLi@psu.edu>
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6656

