The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Favorite-Candidate Voting for Eliminating
the Least Popular Candidate in a Metric Space
Xujin Chen,1,2 Minming Li,3 Chenhao Wang1,2,3∗
1

Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Mathematical Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
xchen@amss.ac.cn, minming.li@cityu.edu.hk, chenhwang4-c@my.cityu.edu.hk
2

other hand, one may note that eliciting so much information on the preferences casts a high burden on the selection
rules, and often impairs the privacy of voters. The simplicity, which means that each voter is only required to provide a
small amount of information, is often a desideratum for good
mechanisms. In this paper, we study the single-candidate
vote mechanisms (named by (Feldman, Fiat, and Golomb
2016)), scv mechanisms for short, that ask each voter to cast
a vote of a single candidate.
In addition to the top choices of voters, we further assume that the locations of candidates in the metric space are
known to the mechanism, while the voters’ private locations
and numerical preferences are inaccessible, since every political candidate in a typical election should fully announce
her opinions on all issues, and thus her location in the space
is public information. For example, in the facility location
scenario, the city authority, who plans to locate some facilities on a street or a plane, predetermines the potential locations of facilities, based on the landscape, resources and
distributions of social communities.
As voters’ preferences are speciﬁed by their distances to
candidates, it is natural to quantify the quality of a committee by the associated distances. We evaluate the performance
of a mechanism in the standard worst-case analysis benchmark (introduced by Procaccia and Rosenschein (2006)),
which deﬁnes the distortion of a mechanism to be the worstcase ratio between the quality of a committee selected by
this mechanism and that of the optimal committee selected
by an omniscient mechanism.
Previous work was mainly concerned about the singlewinner elections. In this paper, we focus on the antithesis,
the multi-winner elections that eliminate the least popular
candidate, that is, select a committee containing all candidates but one. These can be regarded as single-loser elections, which are well motivated. For example, some enterprises adopt a last-out mechanism in the personnel performance appraisal system, which dismisses the employee with
the lowest performance in a department each year. Some voting rules in TV talent shows iteratively eliminate one candidate at each time to obtain the ﬁnal winners.
Our Contributions.
Let m be the number of candidates in the election, and

Abstract
We study single-candidate voting embedded in a metric
space, where both voters and candidates are points in the
space, and the distances between voters and candidates specify the voters’ preferences over candidates. In the voting, each
voter is asked to submit her favorite candidate. Given the collection of favorite candidates, a mechanism for eliminating
the least popular candidate ﬁnds a committee containing all
candidates but the one to be eliminated.
Each committee is associated with a social value that is the
sum of the costs (utilities) it imposes (provides) to the voters.
We design mechanisms for ﬁnding a committee to optimize
the social value. We measure the quality of a mechanism by
its distortion, deﬁned as the worst-case ratio between the social value of the committee found by the mechanism and the
optimal one. We establish new upper and lower bounds on the
distortion of mechanisms in this single-candidate voting, for
both general metrics and well-motivated special cases.
Keywords: Voting; Social Choice; Distortion

1

Introduction

In social choice theory, a mechanism (also referred to as a
voting rule) aggregates the preferences of multiple voters
over a set of candidates, and returns a k-element subset of
candidates as a winning committee. An appealing approach
to dealing with social choice problems is embedding the input “election” into a metric space, i.e., each participant is
represented by a point in a metric space, and voters prefer candidates that are closer to them to the ones that are
further away. This spatial model has very natural interpretations. For example, in a 2-dimensional Euclidean space,
each dimension speciﬁes a political issue (such as military
or education), and the position of a voter or candidate identiﬁes the extent to which the individual supports the issues.
Recently, this model has attracted attentions from AI researchers, see, e.g., (Anshelevich, Bhardwaj, and Postl 2015;
Elkind et al. 2017; Abramowitz, Anshelevich, and Zhu
2019).
The mechanisms in many of the works aforementioned
ask each voter for a linear order over candidates. On the
∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1894

