The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Reinforcement Learning with Perturbed Rewards
Jingkang Wang

Yang Liu

Bo Li

University of Toronto & Vector Institute University of California, Santa Cruz University of Illinois, Urbana–Champaign
Illinois, USA
Toronto, Canada
California, USA
lbo@illinois.edu
wangjk@cs.toronto.edu
yangliu@ucsc.edu

• Application-Speciﬁc Noise. In machine teaching
tasks (Loftin et al. 2014), when an RL agent receives
feedback/instructions, different human instructors might
provide drastically different feedback that leads to biased
rewards for machine.

Abstract
Recent studies have shown that reinforcement learning (RL)
models are vulnerable in various noisy scenarios. For instance,
the observed reward channel is often subject to noise in practice (e.g., when rewards are collected through sensors), and
is therefore not credible. In addition, for applications such as
robotics, a deep reinforcement learning (DRL) algorithm can
be manipulated to produce arbitrary errors by receiving corrupted rewards. In this paper, we consider noisy RL problems
with perturbed rewards, which can be approximated with a
confusion matrix. We develop a robust RL framework that
enables agents to learn in noisy environments where only perturbed rewards are observed. Our solution framework builds
on existing RL/DRL algorithms and ﬁrstly addresses the biased noisy reward setting without any assumptions on the true
distribution (e.g., zero-mean Gaussian noise as made in previous works). The core ideas of our solution include estimating
a reward confusion matrix and deﬁning a set of unbiased
surrogate rewards. We prove the convergence and sample complexity of our approach. Extensive experiments on different
DRL platforms show that trained policies based on our estimated surrogate reward can achieve higher expected rewards,
and converge faster than existing baselines. For instance, the
state-of-the-art PPO algorithm is able to obtain 84.6% and
80.8% improvements on average score for ﬁve Atari games,
with error rates as 10% and 30% respectively.

• Adversarial Noise. Huang et al. have shown that by adding
adversarial perturbation to each frame of the game, they
can mislead pre-trained RL policies arbitrarily.
Assuming an arbitrary noise model makes solving this
noisy RL problem extremely challenging. Instead, we focus
on a speciﬁc noisy reward model which we call perturbed
rewards, where the observed rewards by RL agents are learnable. The perturbed rewards are generated via a confusion
matrix that ﬂips the true reward to another one according
to a certain distribution. This is not a very restrictive setting (Everitt et al. 2017) to start with, even considering that
the noise could be adversarial: For instance, adversaries can
manipulate sensors via reversing the reward value.
In this paper, we develop an unbiased reward estimator
aided robust framework that enables an RL agent to learn in
a noisy environment with observing only perturbed rewards.
The main challenge is that the observed rewards are likely to
be biased, and in RL or DRL the accumulated errors could
amplify the reward estimation error over time. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work addressing robust RL
in the biased rewards setting (existing work need to assume
the unbiased noise distribution). We do not require any assumption on the knowledge of true reward distribution or
adversarial strategies, other than the fact that the generation
of noises follows a reward confusion matrix. We address the
issue of estimating the reward confusion matrices by proposing an efﬁcient and ﬂexible estimation module for settings
with deterministic rewards.
Everitt et al. provided preliminary studies for this noisy
reward problem and gave some general negative results. The
authors proved a No Free Lunch theorem, which is, without any assumption about what the reward corruption is, all
agents can be misled. Our results do not contradict with the
results therein, as we consider a stochastic noise generation
model (that leads to a set of perturbed rewards).
We analyze the convergence and sample complexity for
the policy trained using our proposed method based on sur-

Introduction
Designing a suitable reward function plays a critical role in
building reinforcement learning models for real-world applications. Ideally, one would want to customize reward functions to achieve application-speciﬁc goals (Hadﬁeld-Menell
et al. 2017). In practice, however, it is difﬁcult to design a reward function that produces credible rewards in the presence
of noise. This is because the output from any reward function
is subject to multiple kinds of randomness:
• Inherent Noise. For instance, sensors on a robot will be
affected by physical conditions such as temperature and
lighting, and therefore will report back noisy observed
rewards.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6202

