The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning to Crawl
Utkarsh Upadhyay

Róbert Busa-Fekete

Wojciech Kotłowski

Resonal, Berlin, Germany
utkarsh@reason.al

Google Research, NY, USA
busarobi@google.com

Poznan University of Technology, Poland
wkotlowski@cs.put.poznan.pl

Dávid Pál

Balázs Szörényi

Yahoo! Research, NY, USA
davidko.pal@gmail.com

Yahoo! Research, NY, USA
szorenyi.balazs@gmail.com
a formulation of the problem which was recently studied
by Azar et al. (2018). Under the assumption that the changes
to the webpages and the requests are Poisson processes with
known rates, they describe an efﬁcient algorithm to ﬁnd the
optimal refresh rates for the webpages.

Abstract
Web crawling is the problem of keeping a cache of webpages
fresh, i.e., having the most recent copy available when a page
is requested. This problem is usually coupled with the natural
restriction that the bandwidth available to the web crawler is
limited. The corresponding optimization problem was solved
optimally by Azar et al. (2018) under the assumption that, for
each webpage, both the elapsed time between two changes
and the elapsed time between two requests follows a Poisson distribution with known parameters. In this paper, we
study the same control problem but under the assumption that
the change rates are unknown a priori, and thus we need to
estimate them in an online fashion using only partial observations (i.e., single-bit signals indicating whether the page
has changed since the last refresh). As a point of departure,
we characterise the conditions under which one can solve the
problem with such partial observability. Next, we propose a
practical estimator and compute conﬁdence intervals for it in
terms of the elapsed time between the observations. Finally,
we √
show that the explore-and-commit algorithm achieves an
O( T ) regret with a carefully chosen exploration horizon.
Our simulation study shows that our online policy scales well
and achieves close to optimal performance for a wide range of
parameters.

1

However, the change rates of the webpages are often not
known in advance and need to be estimated. Since the web
crawler cannot continuously monitor every page, there is
only partial information available on the change process. Cho
and Garcia-Molina (2003b), and more recently Li, Cline,
and Loguinov (2017), have proposed estimators of the rate
of change given partial observations. However, the problem
of learning the refresh rates of items while also trying to
optimise the objective of keeping the cache as up-to-date
for incoming requests as possible seems very challenging.
On the one hand, the optimal policy found by the algorithm
by Azar et al. (2018) does not allocate bandwidth for pages
that are changing very frequently, and, on the other hand,
rate estimates with low precision, especially for those that
are changing frequently, may result in a policy that has nonvanishing regret. We formulate this web-crawling problem
with unknown change rates as an online optimization problem
for which we deﬁne a natural notion of regret, describe the
conditions under which the refresh rates of the webpages can
be learned, and show that using a simple explore-and-commit
√
algorithm, one can obtain regret of order T .

Introduction

As information dissemination in the world becomes near realtime, it becomes more and more important for search engines,
like Bing and Google, and other knowledge repositories to
keep their caches of information and knowledge fresh. In this
paper, we consider the web-crawling problem of designing
policies for refreshing webpages in a local cache with the objective of maximizing the number of incoming requests which
are served with the latest version of the page. Webpages are
the simplest and most ubiquitous source of information on
the internet. As items to be kept in a cache, they have two key
properties: (i) they need to be polled, which uses bandwidth,
and (ii) polling them only provides partial information about
their change process, i.e., a single bit indicating whether the
webpage has changed since it was last refreshed or not. Cho
and Garcia-Molina (2003a) in their seminal work presented

Though in this paper we primarily investigate the problem of web-crawling, our notion of regret and the observations we make about the learning algorithms can also
be applied to other control problems which model the actions of agents as Poisson processes and the policies as
intensities, including alternate objectives and observation
regimes for the web-crawling problem itself. Such an approach is seen in recent works which model or predict social activities (Farajtabar 2018; Du et al. 2016), control online social actions (Zarezade et al. 2017; Karimi et al. 2016;
Wang et al. 2017; Upadhyay, De, and Gomez-Rodriguez
2018), or even controlling spacing of items for optimal learning (Tabibian et al. 2019). All such problems admit online
versions where the parameters for the models (e.g., difﬁculty
of items from recall events (Tabibian et al. 2019), or rates
of posting of messages by other broadcasters (Karimi et al.
2016)) need to be learned while also optimising the policy

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6046

