The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Embedding High-Level Knowledge into DQNs to Learn Faster and More Safely
Zihang Gao,1,2 Fangzhen Lin,3 Yi Zhou,4 Hao Zhang,5 Kaishun Wu,1,2 Haodi Zhang1,2,∗
1

College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
Guangdong Laboratory of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Digital Economy (SZ), Shenzhen University
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
4
Shanghai Research Center for Brain Science and Brain-Inspired Intelligence/Zhangjiang Laboratory
5
Dorabot Inc.
2

and Grid World. The results show that good heuristic rules
work as accelerators that make DQN learn faster and safety
rules work as guards that make DQN learn more safely.
To be speciﬁc, in RIL, the model randomly gets a sample from the replay memory for training, and calculates the
predicted Q-value for every valid action:


∗
 
Q
(s
,
a
)
|s,
a
(1)
Q∗ (s, a) = Es ∼E r + γ max


Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning has been successfully applied
in many decision making scenarios. However, the slow training process and difﬁculty in explaining limit its application.
In this paper, we attempt to address some of these problems by proposing a framework of Rule-interposing Learning (RIL) that embeds knowledge into deep reinforcement
learning. In this framework, the rules dynamically effect the
training progress, and accelerate the learning. The embedded knowledge in form of rule not only improves learning
efﬁciency, but also prevents unnecessary or disastrous explorations at early stage of training. Moreover, the modularity of
the framework makes it straightforward to transfer high-level
knowledge among similar tasks.

1

a

The agent selects a random action with probability ε, otherwise select the action with maximal Q-value. But unlike
original DQN, before the execution of selected action, RIL
passes the action into rule set. The rule set maintains a pool
of legal actions for each rule in knowledge base R. If the selected action violates the knowledge, RIL rejects the action
and suggest a new one under probability Pt = p0 · γ t , where
p0 is a given initial probability, γ is the decay rate, and t is
the timestamp. After the rejection, a random legal action is
selected to be executed. We demonstrate RIL’s performance
under two rule-interposing schemes:
Acceleration rules: the rules with probability Pt = p0 · γ t
where 0 < γ < 1. Given existing knowledge about the task,
some explorations are unnecessary and can be pruned. As a
consequence, under the instruction of these rules as a priori,
a DQN learns faster.
Safety rules: the rules with probability Pt = p0 · γ t where
p0 = 1 and γ = 1. In this case, the rule will be always
on, overseeing the training process. Once the decision made
by DQN is considered dangerous by the safety rules, it’ll be
rejected and replaced to a safe one given by knowledge base.
Formally, for a given domain, the knowledge base R consists of rules of form (η, δ) where η is a ﬁrst-order logic
proposition indicating some environmental condition, and δ
is a set of conditionally recommended actions, which is a
subset of action space. For convenience, the two parts of a
given rule r ∈ R are written as functions in the rest of the
paper, denoted respectively by η(r) and δ(r). Denote activation set of rule r at timestamp t as

δ(r) if η(r) is true at timestamp t
α(r, t) =
∅
otherwise.

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (Mnih et al. 2013) has been
successfully applied in many dynamic decision making scenarios. However, like deep learning, it suffers from problems
like being brittle and not easily explainable. The training
time is also often very long and suffers from “cold start” performing very badly at the beginning. Furthermore, for applications in robotics and critical decision support systems,
the lack of a guarantee that the system won’t do anything
disastrous is also of concern.
There have been many related approaches proposed. In
(Zahavy, Zrihem, and Mannor 2016), the behaviors of neural network is visualized to increase the transparency. Some
other combine symbolic methods or high-level knowledge
with deep reinforcement learning, such as Hierarchical Deep
Reinforcement Learning (Kulkarni et al. 2016) and DSRL.
Imitation Learning approaches learn directly from human.
Related works can be found in (Zhang et al. 2019). We omit
many other references due to the space limit.
Different from previous work, we propose a new framework named Rule-Interposing Learning (RIL) to embed human knowledge into the deep reinforcement learning. We
have implemented our framework and tried it on some wellknown games such as Flappy Bird, Space War, Breakout,
∗

Corresponding Author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

The activation set α(r, t) contains all actions suggested by
rule r at time t, and it is obviously also a subset of action
13608

