The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

New Efﬁcient Multi-Spike Learning for Fast Processing and Robust Learning
Shenglan Li,1 Qiang Yu1 *
1

Tianjin Key Laboratory of Cognitive Computing and Application,
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
{lishenglan, yuqiang}@tju.edu.cn

spikes while resembling biological counterparts to certain
extent still remains challenging.
There are many spiking neuron models that have been
proposed for emulating the ability of biological neurons,
such as Hodgkin-Huxley model (Hodgkin and Huxley
1952), spike response model (SRM) (Gerstner and Kistler
2002), and leaky integrate-and-ﬁre (LIF) model (Burkitt
2006). Among them, LIF and SRM models are most widely
used due to their simple forms and computational effectivity
(Ponulak 2005).
Based on these spiking neuron models, different learning
algorithms have been developed. The tempotron (Gütig and
Sompolinsky 2006) is an efﬁcient rule that trains neurons to
make decisions by binary response of ﬁring or not. However,
the binary response of the tempotron constrains its ability to
utilize the temporal structure of its output (Yu, Li, and Tan
2018). To overcome this limitation, a series of learning rules
were proposed to train neurons to ﬁre at desired times, such
as ReSuMe (Ponulak 2005), SPAN (Mohemmed et al. 2012)
and PSD (Yu et al. 2013). With association between different
output spike times and categories, neuron can perform the
challenging task of multi-category classiﬁcation, but how biological systems estabilsh such a precise instruction signal
is still unclear. Moreover, most of these rules are designed
for a temporal code where information is carried by the precise arrival time of input spikes (Panzeri et al. 2010), limiting their generalization to other schemes such as a rate code
where information is encoded by ﬁring frequencies (Brette
2015).
Recently, a new multi-spike tempotron (MST) rule (Gütig
2016) has been proposed to train neurons to ﬁre desired
number of spikes. This kind of multi-spike learning enables neurons to process both rate- and temporal-based
spike patterns, and thus provides a new way for processing information under a broad range of coding schemes. Inspired by it, two multi-spike learning rules (Yu, Li, and Tan
2018), namely TDP1 and TDP2, were developed to improve
simplicity and efﬁciency by using a linear assumption for
threshold crossing.These rules are successfully applied to
sound recognition and demonstrate advanced performance.
(Yu et al. 2019). In a later work, another method was developed (Miao, Tang, and Pan 2018). It simpliﬁes the expres-

Abstract
Spiking neural networks (SNNs) are considered to be more
biologically plausible and lower power consuming than traditional artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs). SNNs use discrete spikes as input and output, but how to process and
learn these discrete spikes efﬁciently and accurately still remains a challenging task. Moreover, most existing learning
methods are inefﬁcient with complicated neuron dynamics
and learning procedures being involved. In this paper, we
propose efﬁcient alternatives by ﬁrstly introducing a simpliﬁed and efﬁcient neuron model. Based on it, we develop
two new multi-spike learning rules together with an eventdriven scheme being presented to improve the processing efﬁciency. We show that, with the as-proposed rules, a single
neuron can be trained to successfully perform challenging
tasks such as multi-category classiﬁcation and feature extraction. Our learning methods demonstrate a signiﬁcant robustness against various strong noises. Moreover, experimental
results on some real-world classiﬁcation tasks show that our
approaches yield higher efﬁciency with less requirement on
computation resource, highlighting the advantages and potential of spike-based processing and driving more efforts towards neuromorphic computing.

Introduction
Due to the development of deep learning, artiﬁcial neural
networks (ANNs) have prospered in many ﬁelds, such as
computer vision and speech recognition (LeCun, Bengio,
and Hinton 2015). However, current deep learning methods are resource consuming, data depending and lack biological plausibility as compared to high efﬁciency of the
brain. Therefore, efﬁcient and biologically plausible spiking
neural networks (SNNs) can thus be more favorable (Maass
1997). Unlike artiﬁcial neurons that communicate with each
other by numerical values, biological ones use discrete allor-nothing response, i.e. spikes (Kandel et al. 2000). It is
believed that spikes play an essential role in efﬁcient processing in biological systems, but how to model the neurons in a way such that they can efﬁciently learn to process
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4650

