The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

FlowScope: Spotting Money Laundering Based on Graphs
Xiangfeng Li,1 Shenghua Liu,2*# Zifeng Li,3 Xiaotian Han,4
Chuan Shi,1 # Bryan Hooi,5 He Huang,6 Xueqi Cheng2*
1

Beijing University of Post and Telecommunication
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of Surrey, 4 Texas A&M University
5
School of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
6
China Citic Bank
{aplaceof, shichuan}@bupt.edu.cn, {liushenghua, cxq}@ict.ac.cn, zl00693@surrey.ac.uk, han@tamu.edu,
bryan.hooi.ky@gmail.com, huanghe@citicbank.com
2

Abstract
v1

Given a graph of the money transfers between accounts of
a bank, how can we detect money laundering? Money laundering refers to criminals using the bank’s services to move
massive amounts of illegal money to untraceable destination
accounts, in order to inject their illegal money into the legitimate ﬁnancial system. Existing graph fraud detection approaches focus on dense subgraph detection, without considering the fact that money laundering involves high-volume
ﬂows of funds through chains of bank accounts, thereby
decreasing their detection accuracy. Instead, we propose to
model the transactions using a multipartite graph, and detect the complete ﬂow of money from source to destination
using a scalable algorithm, FlowScope. Theoretical analysis
shows that FlowScope provides guarantees in terms of the
amount of money that fraudsters can transfer without being
detected. FlowScope outperforms state-of-the-art baselines in
accurately detecting the accounts involved in money laundering, in both injected and real-world data settings.

×10

v5
v 17

v2

8

4
3

v3

v 18

v4

2
1

A

v 16

M

C

Figure 1: An example of money laundering transfers in a
bank, creating a dense tripartite subgraph. The left accounts
A are sources laundering money through the middle accounts M to the right destination accounts C. Both A and
C are outer accounts of the bank. Edge color and node size
indicates the amount of money transferred.

detection accuracy and easy evasion by adversaries. Dense
subgraph or subtensor detection algorithms (Liu, Hooi, and
Faloutsos 2017; Shin et al. 2017; Prakash et al. 2010;
Hooi et al. 2016) have been used for graph fraud detection, but also only consider single-step transfers. Although
(Michalak and Korczak 2011) claims to handle chain transactions, it needs manually labeled data to train this model,
whereas such data is rare, and the use of speciﬁc labels can
make the model less robust for use in different datasets.
In contrast, our FlowScope in this paper considers multistep ﬂows of funds: from senders, through middle accounts,
to receivers. In the example based on synthetic data in Fig.
2, fraudulent ﬂows consist of two steps: from A to M and
M to C, where the fraudulent accounts are plotted in the upper left of each adjacency matrix. FlowScope correctly detects the accounts involved in this two-step ﬂow, while other
algorithms detect parts of the two disconnected hyperbolic
blocks, which resemble communities commonly observed
in real graphs (Araujo et al. 2014).
Speciﬁcally, the FlowScope, proposed in this paper, is a
ﬂow-based approach for detecting money laundering behavior that detects chains of transactions. Due to highly skewed
portion of ML accounts in real data, we propose an optimiza-

Introduction
Given a big tripartite or multipartite graph, how can we
spot the most suspicious dense ﬂow? Such a ﬂow can be an
illegal money laundering (ML) process from sources to untraceable destinations through many adverserial middle accounts and transfers, or transportation ﬂow shows interesting
needs of a group of customers. Fig. 1 shows an example of
ML within a subgraph, containing two-step ﬂow from source
to middle to destination accounts.
Most existing anti-money laundering algorithms (Wang
and Yang 2007; Tang and Yin 2005; Lv, Ji, and Zhang 2008;
Awasthi 2012; Paula et al. 2016) ignore the chain transfer scheme of money laundering behavior, and also ignore
complex dependencies between transactions, leading to low
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* CAS Key Laboratory of Network Data Science and Technology and University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing,
China
# Corresponding authors
4731

