The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

RL-Duet: Online Music Accompaniment
Generation Using Deep Reinforcement Learning
Nan Jiang,1 Sheng Jin,1 Zhiyao Duan,2 Changshui Zhang1
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
State Key Lab of Intelligent Technologies and Systems
Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Tsinghua University (THUAI)
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist)
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Rochester
{jiangn15, js17}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
zhiyao.duan@rochester.edu, zcs@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper presents a deep reinforcement learning algorithm
for online accompaniment generation, with potential for realtime interactive human-machine duet improvisation. Different from ofﬂine music generation and harmonization, online
music accompaniment requires the algorithm to respond to
human input and generate the machine counterpart in a sequential order. We cast this as a reinforcement learning problem, where the generation agent learns a policy to generate
a musical note (action) based on previously generated context (state). The key of this algorithm is the well-functioning
reward model. Instead of deﬁning it using music composition rules, we learn this model from monophonic and polyphonic training data. This model considers the compatibility of the machine-generated note with both the machinegenerated context and the human-generated context. Experiments show that this algorithm is able to respond to the
human part and generate a melodic, harmonic and diverse
machine part. Subjective evaluations on preferences show
that the proposed algorithm generates music pieces of higher
quality than the baseline method.

Figure 1: Online music accompaniment generation requires
the agent to adapt/respond to human input without delay.

In this work, we propose a novel algorithm (RL-Duet) for
online music accompaniment generation that could be further developed toward a real-time interactive duet improvisation system. In this setting, a human performer would improvise a melody, and the machine would generate a counterpoint accompaniment in real-time. We focus on the design of the algorithm instead of the system; the latter would
require signiﬁcant considerations on the interactivity and usability through systematic user studies, but is beyond the
scope of this paper. We cast the problem of online music accompaniment as a reinforcement learning problem.
The generation agent takes into consideration both the longterm temporal structure and the inter-part harmonization,
and generates musical notes based on the context.
Reinforcement learning-based music generation has been
explored in (Jaques et al. 2017), where hand-crafted composition rules or criteria are used as the reward function for music generation. The main disadvantages of rule-based reward
models, we argue, are two-fold: 1) It is difﬁcult to deﬁne a
comprehensive list of rules. There is a long list of composition rules or evaluation criteria in literature (Green 1989;
Jaques et al. 2017; Dong et al. 2018; Trieu and Keller 2018;
Yang and Lerch 2018). Some of them are hard rules (e.g. ,
note duration greater than 32nd note), while others are soft
rules (e.g., less empty bars, and more pitch variations). Most
of them only focus on one limited aspect, enforcing some
constraints on the process of music composition. 2) It is dif-

Introduction
Learning based automatic music generation has been an active research area (Tatar and Pasquier 2019; Briot, Hadjeres,
and Pachet 2017). Existing learning based music generation
methods, however, have paid less attention to real-time interactive music generation (e.g., interactive duet improvisation) between humans and machines: A machine agent and
a human player collaboratively create music by listening to
each other. In this work, we take one step towards this goal
and aim to solve the online music accompaniment generation as the ﬁrst step. Online music accompaniment generation is an interesting but challenging problem. It is interesting because it requires comprehensive musicianship skills
including perception and composition, and the ability of fast
decision making. It further requires machines to adapt and
respond to human input in a timely fashion, leading to successful human-computer collaboration.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
710

