The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Multi-View Clustering in Latent Embedding Space
Man-Sheng Chen,1,2 Ling Huang,1,2 Chang-Dong Wang,1,2∗ Dong Huang3
1

School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Computational Science, Guangzhou, China
3
College of Mathematics and Informatics, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou, China
chenmsh27@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {huanglinghl, changdongwang}@hotmail.com, huangdonghere@gmail.com
2

features into a new feature vector, which is then fed into
a single-view clustering method to obtain the ﬁnal clustering results. However, this naive strategy neglects the different characteristics as well as the correlation among multiple views. Recently, a large number of multi-view clustering
methods have been proposed to handle multi-view data by
effectively considering the rich information from multiple
views (Cai et al. 2011; Kumar and Daumé III 2011; Kumar,
Rai, and Daumé III 2011; Xia et al. 2014; Zhang et al. 2017;
Zong et al. 2018; Zhan et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2018;
Huang et al. 2019; Huang, Wang, and Chao 2019a). For
instance, to minimize the disagreement between each pair
of views, a co-regularization technique was introduced in
multi-view spectral clustering (Kumar, Rai, and Daumé III
2011). Similarly, inspired by the idea of co-training, Kumar
et al. proposed to generate clusters that are consistent across
the multiple views (Kumar and Daumé III 2011). However,
these methods may be easily affected by the poor quality of
the original views, thereby resulting in the degraded clustering performance. Besides, most of these methods directly
compute on the original features from the dataset, in which
there may be gross noise and corruption. To handle the possible noise, Zhang et al. performed data reconstruction based
on the learned subspace (Zhang et al. 2017). Xia et al. developed a Markov chain method which takes as input a shared
low-rank transition probability matrix associated with all
views (Xia et al. 2014). Nevertheless, on the one hand, these
methods generally rely on the original features in each view,
but still lack the ability to discover a uniﬁed feature representation for multi-view data. On the other hand, in the spectral clustering phase, they mostly tend to consider the two
components of spectral clustering (i.e., afﬁnity matrix construction and cluster indicator matrix calculation) separately,
but often lack the ability to formulate these two components
simultaneously in an optimization framework.

Abstract
Previous multi-view clustering algorithms mostly partition
the multi-view data in their original feature space, the efﬁcacy of which heavily and implicitly relies on the quality of
the original feature presentation. In light of this, this paper
proposes a novel approach termed Multi-view Clustering in
Latent Embedding Space (MCLES), which is able to cluster
the multi-view data in a learned latent embedding space while
simultaneously learning the global structure and the cluster
indicator matrix in a uniﬁed optimization framework. Specifically, in our framework, a latent embedding representation is
ﬁrstly discovered which can effectively exploit the complementary information from different views. The global structure learning is then performed based on the learned latent
embedding representation. Further, the cluster indicator matrix can be acquired directly with the learned global structure.
An alternating optimization scheme is introduced to solve the
optimization problem. Extensive experiments conducted on
several real-world multi-view datasets have demonstrated the
superiority of our approach.

Introduction
In the past decade, multi-view clustering has become a hot
research topic in data mining and machine learning, due to
the rapid emergence of a great deal of multi-view data from
different areas (Xu, Tao, and Xu 2013; Xu, Wang, and Lai
2016; Chao, Sun, and Bi 2017; Tao et al. 2018; Li et al. 2018;
Huang, Chao, and Wang 2019; Xing et al. 2019; Wang et al.
2019; Yao et al. 2019; Huang, Wang, and Chao 2019b). In
multi-view data, the same instance is represented by multiple views obtaining from multiple sources or different feature subsets (Ji et al. 2019; Huang, Wang, and Chao 2019c).
For instance, in a webpage, different types of data, such as
texts, videos and images, can be taken into consideration as
they are different aspects of the webpage. A text news can be
translated into multiple languages. Considering the diversity
of multiple views, it is essential to study how to integrate
such kind of data efﬁciently and cluster them effectively.
Prior to the most multi-view learning methods, a direct
way to deal with multi-view data is to concatenate all the

Aiming to address the above limitations, in this paper,
we propose a uniﬁed framework termed Multi-view Clustering in Latent Embedding Space (MCLES). The proposed
method jointly learns the latent embedding representation,
the similarity information and the cluster indicator matrix in
a uniﬁed model. The latent embedding space learned from
the multi-view features is able to explore the relationships

∗

Corresponding author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3513

