The Tenth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (EAAI-20)

Lessons Learned from Teaching Machine Learning
and Natural Language Processing to High School Students

Narges Norouzi, Snigdha Chaturvedi, Matthew Rutledge
University of California, Santa Cruz
{nanorouz, snigdha, mrutledg}@ucsc.edu

Wollowski et al. surveyed practitioners of AI about “up-andcoming AI topics”. The most common response was ‘machine learning’ at 47%, while ‘natural language processing’
was the fourth most common response at 17% (Wollowski
et al. 2016). Therefore, the authors of this work decided to
explore instructing machine learning and natural language
processing to high school students at the University of California, Santa Cruz.
The University of California, Santa Cruz hosts the COSMOS Summer School for high school students each summer quarter. In Summer 2019, following in the pattern of
increased focus on computer science in K-12 education, a
new cluster of “Machine Learning and Natural Language
Processing” has been added to the program. Even in its ﬁrst
year, the ML/NLP cluster received more than twice as many
applications as the other existing nine clusters. Since this
was a new cluster, the instructors developed a new curriculum from scratch. Both instructors have prior experience in
teaching a variety of machine learning, artiﬁcial intelligence,
and natural language processing courses at the undergraduate and graduate levels and developed the materials with
these experiences in mind.
Traditionally, courses have employed an objectivist curriculum. An objectivist curriculum is completely governed
by the instructor. The instructor selects well-deﬁned learning goals from the domain of the class. The explicit learning
goals are then taught in a planned sequence. The assessment
is given at the end of the course in the form of a ﬁnal exam.
On the other hand, in a purely constructivist curriculum, students control the learning sequence. In the ﬂexible learning
environment students inﬂuence, or construct, the direction
and goals of the learning. Instead of a single ﬁnal exam,
the evaluation or feedback is embedded throughout different learning tasks. Studies on ﬁrst-year undergraduate students revealed that these students are not quite prepared for
a completely constructivist curriculum (Pantic, Zwitserloot,
and Grootjans 2005). In order to adapt to the unique needs of
high school students, the instructors chose to use a combination of objectivist and constructivist pedagogies. The course

Abstract
This paper describes an experience in teaching Machine
Learning (ML) and Natural Language Processing (NLP) to
a group of high school students over an intense one-month
period. In this work, we provide an outline of an AI course
curriculum we designed for high school students and then
evaluate its effectiveness by analyzing student’s feedback and
student outcomes. After closely observing students, evaluating their responses to our surveys, and analyzing their contribution to the course project, we identiﬁed some possible impediments in teaching AI to high school students and propose
some measures to avoid them. These measures include employing a combination of objectivist and constructivist pedagogies, reviewing/introducing basic programming concepts
at the beginning of the course, and addressing gender discrepancies throughout the course.

Keywords: Machine Learning, Natural Language Processing, Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Summer Course, High School
Students

1

Introduction

Throughout the past decade, K-12 Education has evolved
to equip students with computer skills, especially programming and topics in data science. Patricia Levesque, CEO
of ExcelinEd noted, “States are recognizing that computer
skills have become as fundamental to student success as
reading, writing, and math. If we are not teaching our children computer science, we are not preparing them to participate in a world of rapidly changing technology and advancement.” In the United States, during the ﬁrst six months
of 2019, 33 states have passed legislation and funded 40.1
million dollars to support K-12 computer science instruction
(Code.org 2019). With the increase in general computer science instruction starting in elementary schools, in the coming decade, there will be opportunities for more advanced
computer science instruction in middle and high schools.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13454

