The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Voice for the Voiceless: Active Sampling to
Detect Comments Supporting the Rohingyas
Shriphani Palakodety,1∗ Ashiqur R. KhudaBukhsh,2∗ Jaime G. Carbonell2
2

1
Onai, 7280 Blue Hill Dr., Suite 10, San Jose, CA 95129
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Avenue, PA 15213
spalakod@onai.com, {akhudabu, jgc}@cs.cmu.edu

claims about the Myanmar government, the alleged oppressor’s involvement in this crisis. Rather, our goal is to present
the ﬁrst-of-its-kind case-study of what we call a 21st century problem: migrant crisis in the era of ubiquitous internet, where the global audience can weigh in on the matter, shape public opinion about the persecuted community
through social media comments, clamor for justice for the
oppressed, mobilize help to the community in distress, and
perhaps side with the alleged oppressor and paint a picture of
distrust, fear and threat about a persecuted minority. In online forums, persecuted communities may have little or no
voice in discussions centered around them because (i) much
of the discussion occurs in a global language (e.g., English)
in which they may have limited proﬁciency, or (ii) they may
have minimal access to internet, or most importantly, (iii)
survival is possibly the highest priority demanding a significant chunk of their resources. Online activities disparaging
refugee communities may result in serious real world consequences; prior research has even identiﬁed a close, causal
link between online hate speech and ofﬂine violence targeting refugees (Müller and Schwarz 2018).

Abstract
The Rohingya refugee crisis is one of the biggest humanitarian crises of modern times with more than 700,000 Rohingyas rendered homeless according to the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees. While it has received sustained press attention globally, no comprehensive research
has been performed on social media pertaining to this large
evolving crisis. In this work, we construct a substantial corpus of YouTube video comments (263,482 comments from
113,250 users in 5,153 relevant videos) with an aim to analyze the possible role of AI in helping a marginalized community. Using a novel combination of multiple Active Learning strategies and a novel active sampling strategy based on
nearest-neighbors in the comment-embedding space, we construct a classiﬁer that can detect comments defending the Rohingyas among larger numbers of disparaging and neutral
ones. We advocate that beyond the burgeoning ﬁeld of hate
speech detection, automatic detection of help speech can lend
voice to the voiceless people and make the internet safer for
marginalized communities.

Introduction

Contributions:

On 25th August, 2017 extreme violence was allegedly perpetrated against the Rohingya community in Rakhine state,
Myanmar (Thompson 2018). Since then, more than 740,000
Rohingyas (Human Rights Watch 2019) have ﬂed Rakhine
state to escape persecution. The Myanmar military’s alleged
large-scale campaign of ethnic cleansing (Beyrer and Kamarulzaman 2017) has led to one of the fastest-growing
refugee crises in the 21st century. However, Myanmar’s
military and civilian ofﬁcials have repeatedly denied any
claims of atrocities - which are contradicted by extensive
evidence (Thompson 2018) and witness accounts indicating
widespread genocide or ethnic cleansing.
Modern history has witnessed multiple instances of mass
migration of persecuted communities. Our main goal in this
paper is not to argue about highly debated issues like Rohingyas’ citizenship rights or make politically contentious

1. Domain: In this paper, via a substantial corpus constructed using comments on YouTube videos (5,153
videos, 263,482 comments posted by 113,250 users) relevant to the Rohingya refugee crisis, we characterize several key aspects of the discourse and show that a medium
as powerful as the internet can create an asymmetric discourse where an (allegedly) oppressed minority may have
little or no voice to defend themselves from (possibly
misinformed) global vitriol. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst AI-focused comprehensive analysis
of the Rohingya refugee crisis. In the last decade, besides
the Rohingya immigrant crisis, the world has witnessed
migrant crises in central America (BBC News 2019b),
Venezuela (Goldberg 2019), Italy (BBC News 2019a),
and the long-standing Syrian refugee crisis (Ofﬁce of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 2018)
resulting in the displacement of millions of people. We
believe our work in characterizing key aspects of the Rohingya migrant crisis will open the gates for similar AI
research in this humanitarian domain.

∗

Shriphani Palakodety and Ashiqur R. KhudaBukhsh are equal
contribution ﬁrst authors. Ashiqur R. KhudaBukhsh is the corresponding author.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
454

