The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Learning Saliency-Free Model with Generic
Features for Weakly-Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Wenfeng Luo,1 Meng Yang1,2∗
2

1
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing (SYSU), Ministry of Education
luowf5@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, yangm6@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Current weakly-supervised semantic segmentation methods
often estimate initial supervision from class activation maps
(CAM), which produce sparse discriminative object seeds
and rely on image saliency to provide background cues when
only class labels are used. To eliminate the demand of extra data for training saliency detector, we propose to discover
class pattern inherent in the lower layer convolution features,
which are scarcely explored as in previous CAM methods.
Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst project the convolution features into a
low-dimension space and then decide on a decision boundary
to generate class-agnostic maps for each semantic category
that exists in the image. Features from Lower layer are more
generic, thus capable of generating proxy ground-truth with
more accurate and integral objects. Experiments on the PASCAL VOC 2012 dataset show that the proposed saliency-free
method outperforms the previous approaches under the same
weakly-supervised setting and achieves superior segmentation results, which are 64.5% on the validation set and 64.6%
on the test set concerning mIoU metric.

(a) Image

(b) CAM

(c) Our method

(e) C41

(f) C42

(g) C43

Figure 1: Comparison of localization ability between CAM
(Zhou et al. 2016) and the proposed method. (a) Original images. (b) Object seeds from CAM method. The black regions
are pixels with relatively small saliency value. (c) Mask estimated by our method. (e)(f)(g) Convolutional features projected onto 2d planes. Each point denotes a spatial location
in the original convolutional features and its color indicates
the ground-truth class.

Introduction

only the semantic labels of the image, it is very challenging to locate integral object regions since it involves association between high-level semantic and low-level appearance.
Many of the previous methods (Huang et al. 2018) relied on
class activation maps (CAM) (Zhou et al. 2016) to generate initial supervisions. However, there are two main issues
concerning CAM methods: 1) it only localizes sparse discriminative object seeds, as shown in Fig.1(b); 2) it provides
no background cues, which are needed for the subsequent
segmentation task but are unavailable from the classiﬁcation
network. The latter could be solved by resort to an external
saliency detector, whose training also requires extra annotations.
To address the sparseness of initial seeds, many approaches, e.g., adversarial erasing (Wei et al. 2017b; Hou
et al. 2018), saliency-aided (Wei et al. 2016; Chaudhry et
al. 2017; Oh et al. 2017) and region mining (Huang et al.
2018; Wang et al. 2018), have been proposed for weaklysupervised semantic segmentation. But they all focused on
high-level features, which are discriminative enough for
classiﬁcation yet not suitable for dense labeling task. We

Computer vision community has witnessed tremendous
progress on the image semantic segmentation problem
(Shelhamer, Long, and Darrell 2014; Chen et al. 2016;
Zhen et al. 2019) thanks to the successful applications of
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (DCNN). However,
training these DCNNs requires large amount of pixel-level
annotations, whose collecting procedure is labor-intensive,
thus becoming a bottleneck for real-world applications.
A promising solution is to develop segmentation methods
that could utilize unlabeled or weakly-labeled visual data
(Kolesnikov and Lampert 2016; Huang et al. 2018) since
they could be acquired in a much faster and cheaper manner.
In this work, we focus on tackling the problem of semantic segmentation under only image-level supervision,
since the class information is a more natural supervision
and requires the least amount of time for annotation, roughly
twenty seconds per image (Russakovsky et al. 2016). Given
∗

Corresponding Author
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11717

