The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Towards Accurate Low Bit-Width Quantization with Multiple Phase Adaptations
Zhaoyi Yan,1 Yemin Shi,2 Yaowei Wang,3 Mingkui Tan,3
Zheyang Li,4 Wenming Tan,4 Yonghong Tian2∗
1

2

School of ECE, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School
School of EECS, Peking University, 3 Pengcheng Laboratory, 4 Hikvision Research Institute

can be used to represent more than 10 million weights. Even
small errors from quantization may thus lead to a signiﬁcant
drop in performance.
(Miyashita, Lee, and Murmann 2016) use base-2 logarithmic representation to compress AlexNet (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012) parameters to 3-bit, resulting in a 1.4% drop in top-5 accuracy. Moreover, in (Ullrich, Meeds, and Welling 2017), a version of “soft weightsharing” is used, with a resultant 2.02% accuracy drop of the
ResNet (light) model on CIFAR-100. The problem here is
how to compress the network model with acceptable performance loss. Researchers have developed some methods involving complex processes designed to reduce the loss; however, these processes bring with them additional parameters
(hyperparameters). In INQ (Zhou et al. 2017), a group of
global hyperparameters are handcrafted and pre-determined.
In CLIPQ (Tung and Mori 2018), each layer has two distinct
hyperparameters that differ from the other layers. SLQ (Xu
et al. 2018) is similar, which owns global parameters for different bit-width representation. Although these methods obtain good results with well-selected hyperparameters, their
practical application is limited by the variation of hyperparameters between various network models.
In general, there are two main challenges associated with
model compression; the ﬁrst is the trade-off between expected bit-width and model accuracy, while the second is
the non-uniform hyperparameter selection. Therefore, an effective and easy-conﬁgure quantization framework, Multiple Phase Adaptations (MPA), is proposed in this paper to
address the above problems. Unlike the rough quantization
process, we offer a smoother method of conducting weight
quantization. There are three main steps in our proposed
framework: division, MPA, and ﬁne-tuning. We can apply
MPA on different models such as AlexNet, VGG16 and
ResNet. For example, the quantized ResNet-18 model with
bit-width of 4 even achieves better performance than the
full-precision baseline. Other experiments also show better
or similar results with the state-of-the-art methods. We further report the linear and exponential quantization results for
potential inference acceleration.
In summary, our contributions to network quantization are
as follows:

Abstract
Low bit-width model quantization is highly desirable when
deploying a deep neural network on mobile and edge devices.
Quantization is an effective way to reduce the model size with
low bit-width weight representation. However, the unacceptable accuracy drop hinders the development of this approach.
One possible reason for this is that the weights in quantization intervals are directly assigned to the center. At the same
time, some quantization applications are limited by the various of different network models. Accordingly, in this paper,
we propose Multiple Phase Adaptations (MPA), a framework
designed to address these two problems. Firstly, weights in
the target interval are assigned to center by gradually spreading the quantization range. During the MPA process, the accuracy drop can be compensated for the unquantized parts.
Moreover, as MPA does not introduce hyperparameters that
depend on different models or bit-width, the framework can
be conveniently applied to various models. Extensive experiments demonstrate that MPA achieves higher accuracy than
most existing methods on classiﬁcation tasks for AlexNet,
VGG-16 and ResNet.

Introduction
Over the last decade, we have witnessed the dramatic development of deep neural networks (DNNs) in many areas,
the image classiﬁcation (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton
2012; He et al. 2016; Simonyan and Zisserman 2014), object
detection (Girshick et al. 2014), and semantic segmentation
(Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015). With the aim of improving the network performance, the network models have
become deeper and more complex. Unfortunately, the relationship between the number of parameters and the performance is not linear, meaning that there tends to be a lot of
redundancy in these models. More critically, a well-trained
DNN model is difﬁcult to deploy on most resource-limited
devices due to the network model’s huge size. Deep neural
network quantization is one of the common methods used
for network model compression. Obviously, the fewer the
bit-width we use, the worse accuracy we will get. For example, a bit-width of 4 means that there are only 16 values that
∗

Corresponding author: Yonghong Tian (yhtian@pku.edu.cn)
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6591

