The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Deep Spiking Delayed Feedback Reservoirs and Its Application
in Spectrum Sensing of MIMO-OFDM Dynamic Spectrum Sharing
Kian Hamedani,1 Lingjia Liu,1 Shiya Liu,1 Haibo He,2 Yang Yi1
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Virginia Tech, USA
{hkian, ljliu, shiyal, yangyi8}@vt.edu
2
Department of Electrical, Computer, and Biomedical Engineering, University of Rhode Island, USA
{haibohe}@uri.edu

even improved performances compared to the traditional
RNNs (Palumbo et al. 2016; Antonelo, Schrauwen, and
Stroobandt 2008). There are three different types of RC systems, echo state networks (ESN), delayed feedback reservoirs (DFR), and liquid state machines (LSM) (Lukoševičius
and Jaeger 2009). The RC paradigms avoid the gradient
vanishing problem through generating a recurrent reservoir
layer where the weights of the connections between neurons are randomly created and remain ﬁxed during the training (Schrauwen, Verstraeten, and Van Campenhout 2007).
DFRs are the most recent generation of RC models and are
constructed through a single neural model and a delay loop
which performs as the reservoir layer (Antonik et al. 2017).
It is shown to be powerful for attack detection in smart
grids (Hamedani et al. 2018) and video based face recognition in cyber physical systems (CPS) (Hamedani et al. 2019;
Bai et al. 2018).
Various mathematical models have been introduced to
represent artiﬁcial neurons. The spiking neural networks
(SNNs) are the most biologically plausible model with extremely high energy-efﬁciency since the spikes are the main
signal format that the neurons of our brains adopt to communicate with each other(Uzzell and Chichilnisky 2004).
Truenorth is a SNN chip which was developed by IBM in
2014 (Esser et al. 2016), and it forms a network composed
of 1 million artiﬁcial neurons with 256 million synapses.
Despite this large number of neurons and synapses, the
Truenorth consumes only 70 milli-Watts (mW) in power.
It is known that neurons use spikes to communicate in
our brains, however, the exact encoding approach the neurons adopt to encode the information is still unclear. Rate
encoding and temporal encoding are the two major neural
encoding schemes that have been introduced where temporal encoding schemes have drawn more attention recently
due to their superior performance over rate encoding (Panzeri et al. 2010). Therefore, in this paper, we adopt temporal
encoding for neural encoding.
To evaluate the introduced deep spiking DFR (DSDFR)
model we focus on the application of spectrum occupancy
prediction of a dynamic spectrum sharing (DSS) system
using multiple-input-multiple-output (MIMO) orthogonalfrequency-division multiplexing (OFDM) technologies. The

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a deep spiking delayed feedback
reservoir (DFR) model to combine DFR with spiking neuros:
DFRs are a new type of recurrent neural networks (RNNs)
that are able to capture the temporal correlations in time series while spiking neurons are energy-efﬁcient and biologically plausible neurons models. The introduced deep spiking DFR model is energy-efﬁcient and has the capability of
analyzing time series signals. The corresponding ﬁeld programmable gate arrays (FPGA)-based hardware implementation of such deep spiking DFR model is introduced and
the underlying energy-efﬁciency and recourse utilization are
evaluated. Various spike encoding schemes are explored and
the optimal spike encoding scheme to analyze the time series
has been identiﬁed. To be speciﬁc, we evaluate the performance of the introduced model using the spectrum occupancy
time series data in MIMO-OFDM based cognitive radio (CR)
in dynamic spectrum sharing (DSS) networks. In a MIMOOFDM DSS system, available spectrum is very scarce and
efﬁcient utilization of spectrum is very essential. To improve
the spectrum efﬁciency, the ﬁrst step is to identify the frequency bands that are not utilized by the existing users so that
a secondary user (SU) can use them for transmission. Due to
the channel correlation as well as users’ activities, there is
a signiﬁcant temporal correlation in the spectrum occupancy
behavior of the frequency bands in different time slots. The
introduced deep spiking DFR model is used to capture the
temporal correlation of the spectrum occupancy time series
and predict the idle/busy subcarriers in future time slots for
potential spectrum access. Evaluation results suggest that our
introduced model achieves higher area under curve (AUC) in
the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve compared
with the traditional energy detection-based strategies and the
learning-based support vector machines (SVMs).

1

Introduction

Recurrent neural network (RNNs) have shown to be very
powerful tools to analyze time series data. However, Due
to the vanishing gradients, the traditional RNNs are very
challenging or even impossible to train. Reservoir computing (RC) is a new generation of RNNs that is much easier to train, and in many cases have shown equivalent or
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1292

