The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Recovering Causal Structures from Low-Order Conditional Independencies
Marcel Wienöbst, Maciej Liśkiewicz
Institute of Theoretical Computer Science, University of Lübeck, Germany
{wienoebst, liskiewi}@tcs.uni-luebeck.de

c

Abstract
One of the common obstacles for learning causal models from
data is that high-order conditional independence (CI) relationships between random variables are difﬁcult to estimate.
Since CI tests with conditioning sets of low order can be performed accurately even for a small number of observations, a
reasonable approach to determine casual structures is to base
merely on the low-order CIs. Recent research has conﬁrmed
that, e.g. in the case of sparse true causal models, structures
learned even from zero- and ﬁrst-order conditional independencies yield good approximations of the models. However,
a challenging task here is to provide methods that faithfully
explain a given set of low-order CIs. In this paper, we propose an algorithm which, for a given set of conditional independencies of order less or equal to k, where k is a small
ﬁxed number, computes a faithful graphical representation of
the given set. Our results complete and generalize the previous work on learning from pairwise marginal independencies.
Moreover, they enable to improve upon the 0-1 graph model
which, e.g. is heavily used in the estimation of genome networks.

1

a

c
b a

d

c
b a

d

c
b a

d

c
b a

d

c
b a

d

b
d

Figure 1: All 1-faithful DAGs for the vertex set {a, b, c, d}
and the single CI statement (c ⊥
⊥ d | a).
model using merely low-order CIs. Recent research in inferring genetic networks has conﬁrmed the effectiveness of this
approach when basing only on zero- and ﬁrst-order independencies (Wille et al. 2004; Magwene and Kim 2004).
In this paper, we systematically study the problem to extract as much “causal knowledge” as possible from CI statements of order at most k, where k ≥ 0 is a (typically small)
integer. More precisely, we investigate the following task:
For a set of variables V and a given set I of CI statements
of the form (a ⊥
⊥ b | Z), with a, b ∈ V , Z ⊆ V , and |Z| ≤ k,
ﬁnd all DAGs D which encode up to order k exactly the CIs
in I, i.e., such that for all a, b, Z, with |Z| ≤ k, it is true that
a and b are d-separated by Z in D if and only if (a ⊥
⊥ b | Z) is
in I. We will call such DAGs k-faithful to I (for formal definitions, see Section 3). Figure 1 illustrates all DAGs which
are 1-faithful to a single CI statement (c ⊥
⊥ d | a) for the
vertex set V = {a, b, c, d}.
We observe that this is a generalization of several problems already studied in the literature. For the simplest case
k = 0, the CI statements are marginal independencies and
the 0-faithful DAGs are called faithful to pairwise marginal
independencies. The problem of deciding if a 0-faithful
DAG exists for a given set of CIs of order zero, represented
as an undirected graph, has been studied in (Pearl and Wermuth 1994; Textor, Idelberger, and Liśkiewicz 2015).
Next, with n denoting the cardinality of V , the problem
for k = n − 2 was ﬁrst investigated by Verma and Pearl
(1992). They called such k-faithful DAGs just faithful ones
and presented an algorithm which, for a given I, tests for
the existence of a DAG faithful to I and produces a representation of all such DAGs encoded in form of a completed
partially directed acyclic graph (CPDAG) (we recall all used
graphical notions in Section 2).

Introduction

Graphical models, as e.g. directed acyclic graphs (DAGs),
allow an intuitive and mathematically sound approach to analyze complex causal mechanisms (Lauritzen 1996; Pearl
2009). Generally, they encode the causal links between variables of interests based on conditional independence (CI)
statements between the variables (Spirtes, Glymour, and
Scheines 2000). Hence, the accuracy of estimate of the CIs
plays a key role in learning graphical models and consequently in causal inference from observational data.
CI testing is a challenging task, particularly in the presence of high-order independencies, when the number of
variables far exceeds the number of observations (Wille and
Bühlmann 2006). In such cases, estimations of CIs are usually inaccurate, potentially resulting in incorrect links between variables in the graphical model. On the other hand,
CI tests with conditioning sets of low dimension can be performed accurately even for relatively small observed data
sets. Thus, a natural task is to approximate the true causal
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10302

