The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

HAMNER: Headword Ampliﬁed Multi-Span Distantly
Supervised Method for Domain Speciﬁc Named Entity Recognition∗
Shifeng Liu,1 Yifang Sun,1 Bing Li,1 Wei Wang,1,2 Xiang Zhao3
1

University of New South Wales, 2 Dongguan University of Technology
3
National University of Defence Technology
{shifeng.liu, bing.li}@unsw.edu.au, {yifangs, weiw}@cse.unsw.edu.au, xiangzhao@nudt.edu.cn
methods ﬁrstly ﬁnd entity mentions by exact string matching (Giannakopoulos et al. 2017; Shang et al. 2018b) or regular expression matching (Fries et al. 2017) with the dictionary, and then assign corresponding types to the mentions.
A model is trained on the training corpus with the pseudo
annotations. As the result, distant supervision signiﬁcantly
reduces the annotation cost, while not surprisingly, the accuracy (e.g., precision and recall) reduces.
In this paper, we aim to reduce the gap between distantly supervised methods and supervised methods. We observed two limitations in distantly supervised methods. The
ﬁrst limitation is that the information in the dictionary has
not been fully mined and used. For example, consider a
newly discovered disease namely ROSAH syndrome, which
is unlikely to exist in the dictionaries, and hence cannot be
correctly extracted and annotated if we use simple surface
matching. However, human beings can easily recognize it
as a disease, since there are many disease entity mentions
in the dictionaries that are ended with syndrome. This motivates us to use headwords of entity mentions as indicators
of entity types, and thus improves the quality of the pseudo
annotations.
The second limitation in distantly supervised methods is
that most of the errors come from incorrect boundaries1 .
Most methods (including supervised methods) model the
NER problem as a sequence labeling task and use popular
architectures/classiﬁers like BiLSTM-CRF (Ma and Hovy
2016). However, CRFs suffer from sparse boundary tags (Li,
Ye, and Shang 2019), and pseudo annotations can only be
more sparse and noisy. In addition, CRFs focus more on
word-level information and thus cannot make full use of
span-level information (Zhuo et al. 2016). Some methods
choose to ﬁx the entity boundaries before predict the entity
type. Apparently, any incorrect boundary will deﬁnitely lead
to incorrect output, no matter how accurate the subsequent
classiﬁer is. Therefore, we propose to decide entity boundaries after predicting entity types. As such, there would be
more information, such as the types and conﬁdence scores of
entity mentions, which can help to determine more accurate
entity boundaries.

Abstract
To tackle Named Entity Recognition (NER) tasks, supervised methods need to obtain sufﬁcient cleanly annotated
data, which is labor and time consuming. On the contrary,
distantly supervised methods acquire automatically annotated
data using dictionaries to alleviate this requirement. Unfortunately, dictionaries hinder the effectiveness of distantly supervised methods for NER due to its limited coverage, especially in speciﬁc domains. In this paper, we aim at the limitations of the dictionary usage and mention boundary detection.
We generalize the distant supervision by extending the dictionary with headword based non-exact matching. We apply
a function to better weight the matched entity mentions. We
propose a span-level model, which classiﬁes all the possible
spans then infers the selected spans with a proposed dynamic
programming algorithm. Experiments on all three benchmark
datasets demonstrate that our method outperforms previous
state-of-the-art distantly supervised methods.

1

Introduction

Named entity recognition (NER) is a task that extracts entity
mentions from sentences and classiﬁes them into pre-deﬁned
types, such as person, location, disease, chemical, etc. It is a
vital task in natural language processing (NLP), which beneﬁts many downstream applications including relation extraction (Mintz et al. 2009), event extraction (Nguyen and
Grishman 2018), and co-reference resolution (Chang, Samdani, and Roth 2013).
With a sufﬁcient amount of cleanly annotated texts (i.e.,
the training data), supervised methods (Lample et al. 2016;
Ma and Hovy 2016) have shown their ability to achieve
high-quality performance in general domain NER tasks and
benchmarks. However, obtaining cleanly annotated texts is
labor-intensive and time-consuming, especially in speciﬁc
domains, such as the biomedical domain and the technical
domain. This hinders the usage of supervised methods in
real-world applications.
Distantly supervised methods circumvent the above issue by generating pseudo annotations according to domain speciﬁc dictionaries. Dictionary is a collection
of entity mention, entity type pairs. Distantly supervised

1
For example, even the state-of-the-art distantly supervised
method (Shang et al. 2018b) has at least 40% errors coming from
incorrect boundaries, on all three benchmarks that are evaluated in
this paper.

∗

S. Liu and W. Wang are the co-corresponding authors.
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8401

