The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-20)

Multiagent Evaluation Mechanisms
Tal Alon

Magdalen Dobson

Ariel D. Procaccia

Technion, Israel

Carnegie Mellon University, USA

Carnegie Mellon University, USA

Inbal Talgam-Cohen

Jamie Tucker-Foltz

Technion, Israel

University of Cambridge, UK

cheat). There are also effort conversion functions that map
the levels of effort invested in each action to features (e.g.,
homework grade, exam grade, or participation grade). The
evaluator’s task is to design a mechanism that maps the feature values to a score, which coincides with the agent’s utility. The agent seeks to distribute effort between actions to
achieve maximum utility. The evaluator’s goal, then, is to
design the mechanism to elicit a desirable effort proﬁle.
Importantly, an instance of the evaluation problem of
Kleinberg and Raghavan (2019) includes only a single
agent — or, equivalently, multiple agents that share the same
model. However, in the domains of interest there are multiple types of agents. For example, one student might optimize exam grades by studying alone, whereas another would
derive more beneﬁt from studying with peers. With this in
mind, we wish to extend the model and results of Kleinberg
and Raghavan to the multi-agent case. In other words, our
main research challenge is this:
Given a set of different agent models, design mechanisms that induce all agents, or as many agents as possible, to invest effort in desirable actions.

Abstract
We consider settings where agents are evaluated based on observed features, and assume they seek to achieve feature values that bring about good evaluations. Our goal is to craft
evaluation mechanisms that incentivize the agents to invest
effort in desirable actions; a notable application is the design
of course grading schemes. Previous work has studied this
problem in the case of a single agent. By contrast, we investigate the general, multi-agent model, and provide a complete
characterization of its computational complexity.

1

Introduction

Any reader who has ever taught a course would have
undoubtedly faced some variant of the grading-scheme
dilemma: Should the ﬁnal exam count for 30% of the grade,
and the homework assignments for 40%? Or should these
two components perhaps be weighted equally? Should the
lowest homework grade be dropped? Admittedly, grades
only serve as a proxy for students’ (unobservable) learning
outcomes. But once a grading scheme is in place, students
will optimize their grades by investing effort accordingly.
Therefore, the grading scheme must be designed to encourage desirable behaviors. For example, a participation grade
may make some students come to class, but those same students — who are now short on time — may elect to cheat on
their homework assignments.
The design of course grading schemes is an instance of a
much broader challenge. Whenever an evaluator designs a
scheme for evaluating an agent based on observed features,
the agent is incentivized to achieve feature values that lead
to a good evaluation. The hope is that the agent will do so
through genuine self-improvement rather than blatant gaming. The evaluation of creditworthiness through credit history in the United States serves as an especially egregious
example: instead of promoting true ﬁnancial responsibility,
it encourages idiosyncratic practices such as using a speciﬁc
percentage of one’s credit card limit.
In a very recent paper, Kleinberg and Raghavan (2019)
model and analyze these scenarios. In their model, an agent
has a given amount of effort that can be invested in different
actions (e.g., attempt to solve a homework assignment or

1.1

Our Results

The foregoing challenge gives rise to multiple problems,
each of which is determined by the answers to the following three questions.
First, what requirements must the mechanism satisfy? The
minimal assumption made by Kleinberg and Raghavan is
that the mechanism must be monotone, meaning that agents
should receive higher payoffs for higher feature scores. A
more restrictive requirement is that the mechanism be linear, meaning that the payoff is just a linear combination of
all feature scores.
Second, what is the goal of the evaluator? Is there some
speciﬁc admissible proﬁle of effort investment the evaluator
wishes to incentivize, or will they be content with any proﬁle, as long as all of the actions which the agent invests a
nonzero amount of effort into are admissible actions?
Third, are we interested in incentivizing all agents in a
particular way, or just a maximum number of agents?
With only one agent, the main result of Kleinberg and
Raghavan is that the answers to these questions do not matter: whenever a monotone mechanism exists a linear mechanism exists, and whether an effort proﬁle can be incentivized

c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1774

