Shadow Optimization from Structured Deep Edge Detection
Li Shen

Teck Wee Chua
Karianto Leman
Institute for Infocomm Research

Abstract

and compute the likelihood that the centre pixel contains a
shadow edge. Such classifiers are limited by their locality
since they treat each pixel independently. Optionally, the independent shadow predictions could then be combined using global reasoning by using CRF/GBP/MRF.

Local structures of shadow boundaries as well as complex interactions of image regions remain largely unexploited by previous shadow detection approaches. In this
paper, we present a novel learning-based framework for
shadow region recovery from a single image. We exploit local structures of shadow edges by using a structured CNN
learning framework. We show that using structured label information in classification can improve local consistency over pixel labels and avoid spurious labelling. We
further propose and formulate shadow/bright measure to
model complex interactions among image regions. The
shadow and bright measures of each patch are computed
from the shadow edges detected by the proposed CNN. Using the global interaction constraints on patches, we formulate a least-square optimization problem for shadow recovery that can be solved efficiently. Our shadow recovery
method achieves state-of-the-art results on major shadow
benchmark databases collected under various conditions.

Shadow edges in a local patch are actually highly interdependent, and exhibit common forms of local structures:
straight lines, corners, curves, parallel lines; while structures such as T-junctions or Y-junctions are highly unlikely
to be on shadow boundaries [8, 15].

1. Introduction

In this paper we propose a novel learning-based framework for shadow detection from a single image. We exploit the local structures of shadow edges by using a structured Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) framework.
A CNN learning framework is designed to capture the local
structure information of shadow edges and automatically
learn the most relevant features. We formulate the problem
of shadow edge detection as predicting local shadow edge
structures given input image patches. In contrast to unary
classification, we take structured labelling information of
the label neighbourhood into account. We show that using
the structured label information in the classification can improve the local consistency and avoid spurious labelling.

Shadow detection has long been considered a crucial
component of scene interpretation. Shadows in an image provide useful information about the scenes: the object shapes [18], the relative positions and 3D structures of
the scene [2, 1], the camera parameters and geo-location
cues [11], and the characteristics of the light sources [22,
14, 19]. However, they can also cause great difficulties to
many computer vision algorithms, such as background subtraction, segmentation, tracking and object recognition. Despite its importance and long tradition, shadow detection remains an extremely challenging problem, particularly from
a single image. The main difficulty is due to the complex
interactions of geometry, albedo, and illumination in nature
scenes. Since shadows correspond to a variety of visual
phenomena, finding a unified approach to shadow detection
is difficult.
Motivated by this observation, recent papers [10, 25, 15,
8, 6, 12] have explored the use of learning techniques for
shadow detection. These approaches take an image patch

We also propose a novel global shadow optimization framework.
In previous learning approaches,
CRF/GBP/MRF algorithm is usually employed to enforce
local consistency over neighbouring labels [25, 15, 12, 6]
and non-local constraints of region pairs with the same materials [6]. The size of the label images and presence of
loops in such a algorithm make it intractable to compute
the expectation values. Moreover, the memory requirement for loading all the training data is large and parameter
updating requires tremendous computing resources. Here,
we introduce novel shadow and bright measures to model
non-local interactions based on the spatial layout of image
regions. For each image patch, shadow and bright measures are computed according to its connectivities to all
the shadow and bright boundaries in the image, respectively. The shadow/bright boundaries are extracted from the
shadow edges detected by the proposed CNN. Using these
shadow and bright measures, we formulate a least-square
optimization problem for shadow recovery to solve for the
1

