PAIGE: PAirwise Image Geometry Encoding for Improved Efficiency in
Structure-from-Motion
Johannes L. Schönberger, Alexander C. Berg, Jan-Michael Frahm
Department of Computer Science, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
{jsch,aberg,jmf}@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
Large-scale Structure-from-Motion systems typically
spend major computational effort on pairwise image matching and geometric verification in order to discover connected components in large-scale, unordered image collections. In recent years, the research community has spent
significant effort on improving the efficiency of this stage.
In this paper, we present a comprehensive overview of
various state-of-the-art methods, evaluating and analyzing
their performance. Based on the insights of this evaluation, we propose a learning-based approach, the PAirwise
Image Geometry Encoding (PAIGE), to efficiently identify
image pairs with scene overlap without the need to perform exhaustive putative matching and geometric verification. PAIGE achieves state-of-the-art performance and integrates well into existing Structure-from-Motion pipelines.

1. Introduction
Over the last years, large-scale Structure-from-Motion
(SfM) has seen tremendous evolution in terms of robustness and speed in all stages of processing [1, 39, 13, 11,
42, 41, 37, 20]. Incremental SfM (Figure 2) commonly
starts with feature detection and extraction (Stage 1), followed by matching (Stage 2), and geometric verification
(Stage 3) of successfully matched pairs. After the matching and verification stage, typical SfM seeds the model with
a carefully selected initial two-view reconstruction, before
incrementally registering new cameras from 2D-3D correspondences, triangulating new 3D features, and refining the
reconstruction using bundle-adjustment (Stage 4).
Generally, major computational effort is spent on Stages
2–4. In Stages 2 and 3, it is essential to discover a sufficient number of image correspondences that link together
all parts of the scene to obtain complete and large-scale
reconstructions. In addition, robust and accurate alignment is aided by finding multiple redundant image-to-image

connections across the entire scene. However, exhaustively searching for these overlapping pairs is infeasible
for large-scale image collections due to quadratic computational complexity in the number of images and features.
Moreover, as the number of registered images grows, the
scalability of bundle-adjustment algorithms becomes a significant performance bottleneck.
This paper evaluates existing techniques for reducing the
cost of Stages 2 and 3, feature matching and geometric
verification. Usually, the majority of image pairs in unordered Internet photo-collections do not have scene overlap, so rejecting those pairs dominates execution time, even
though such pairs are not useful for 3D reconstruction. Consequently, various approaches have been proposed to efficiently find overlapping pairs in noisy datasets and only forward those pairs to Stages 2 and 3. A downside of sending
fewer image pairs to Stages 2 and 3 is that enough images
with overlapping geometry must be processed to produce
accurate camera alignment and complete reconstructions.
Hence, it is essential to find the right trade-off between computational efficiency and sufficient image connectivity.
Despite the impressive progress in reducing the cost of
the matching (Stage 2), relatively little attention has been
paid in comparing the techniques. The goals of this paper
are therefore twofold: First, we present a comprehensive
analysis and evaluation of various state-of-the-art matching
techniques; second, we use the insights gained from this
evaluation to propose the PAirwise Image Geometry Encoding (PAIGE) to build a scalable framework (Figure 1)
for the efficient recognition of the relative viewing geometry, all without explicit feature matching and without reconstructing the actual camera configuration using geometric
verification. The proposed encoding is based on location
and orientation properties efficiently inferred from approximate feature correspondences. A subsequent classification
strategy leverages the encoding to only perform matching
and geometric verification for image pairs that are identified as overlapping. As demonstrated in comprehensive experiments, this novel approach leads to a further speedup of
large-scale SfM than the existing state of the art.

