Illumination and Reflectance Spectra Separation of a Hyperspectral Image
Meets Low-Rank Matrix Factorization
Yinqiang Zheng
National Institute of Informatics

Imari Sato
National Institute of Informatics

Yoichi Sato
The University of Tokyo

yqzheng@nii.ac.jp

imarik@nii.ac.jp

ysato@iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract

This paper addresses a more practical variant of the classical separation problem of a single spectral signal under
restricted subspace illumination, namely, the illumination
and reflectance spectra separation problem of a whole hyperspectral image captured under general spectral illumination, hereafter referred to as the IRSS problem. We believe
that to explore this extension is necessary and worthwhile,
especially when considering that an image usually contains
greater color variation, which might be utilized to improve
the separation accuracy and relax the restriction of subspace
illumination. Unfortunately, the huge amount of pixels in a
hyperspectral image does impose great challenges on the
aspects of model expression and computational efficiency.
Under the ideal diffuse reflectance and spatially uniform illumination assumption, we have found that this IRSS
problem can be modeled into a low-rank matrix factorization problem. By doing so, the solution properties, like uniqueness, can be analyzed elegantly by means of singular value decomposition (SVD). Actually, we have proved
that this IRSS problem assumes a unique solution up to
an unknown scale between the illumination and reflectance
components, under the standard assumption that reflectance
spectra lie in a low-dimensional linear subspace. Considering that this subspace model is not perfectly errorless and
the image intensity values usually suffer from noise, we also develop a scalable algorithm that works in the presence
of both model error and image noise. Rather than explicitly
describing the physical imaging process of those complicated effects beyond diffuse reflectance, like shadows and
highlights, we treat them as outliers to our low-rank model,
which can be accounted for via low-rank matrix approximation operation of a nonnegative observation matrix under the
robust L1 -norm error metric.
Quantitative experiments on both synthetic data and real images have demonstrated that, our separation results of
scenes with sufficient color variation are reasonably accurate, and can benefit some important applications, such as
spectra relighting of a single view and illumination swapping between two different views.
Our major contributions can be summarized as follows:

This paper addresses the illumination and reflectance
spectra separation (IRSS) problem of a hyperspectral image captured under general spectral illumination. The huge
amount of pixels in a hypersepctral image poses tremendous challenges on computational efficiency, yet in turn offers greater color variety that might be utilized to improve
separation accuracy and relax the restrictive subspace illumination assumption in existing works. We show that this
IRSS problem can be modeled into a low-rank matrix factorization problem, and prove that the separation is unique up
to an unknown scale under the standard low-dimensionality
assumption of reflectance. We also develop a scalable algorithm for this separation task that works in the presence of
model error and image noise. Experiments on both synthetic data and real images have demonstrated that our separation results are sufficiently accurate, and can benefit some
important applications, such as spectra relighting and illumination swapping.

1. Introduction
A hyperspectral signal records the spectral radiance of a
reflective surface, which is the compound of the illumination spectral power distribution and the surface reflectance
spectra. To extract the illumination and the reflectance spectra from an observed hyperspectral signal has been a longstanding problem in photometric computer vision [8,10,15].
Obviously, this separation problem is underconstrained, since there are twice as many unknowns as observations. To
resolve this issue, a typical way is to introduce the lowdimensional subspace model of reflectance and that of illumination. Although it is widely believed that any practical reflectance spectrum can be well approximated by a
low-dimensional model [24, 25], this does not hold for the
illumination spectra in general, except the daylight spectra
family [19, 28] and a limited few spectra of artificial illuminants [27].
1

