A Stable Multi-Scale Kernel for Topological Machine Learning
Jan Reininghaus, Stefan Huber
IST Austria

Ulrich Bauer
IST Austria, TU München

Abstract
Topological data analysis offers a rich source of valuable information to study vision problems. Yet, so far we
lack a theoretically sound connection to popular kernelbased learning techniques, such as kernel SVMs or kernel
PCA. In this work, we establish such a connection by designing a multi-scale kernel for persistence diagrams, a stable summary representation of topological features in data.
We show that this kernel is positive definite and prove its
stability with respect to the 1-Wasserstein distance. Experiments on two benchmark datasets for 3D shape classification/retrieval and texture recognition show considerable performance gains of the proposed method compared
to an alternative approach that is based on the recently introduced persistence landscapes.

1. Introduction
In many computer vision problems, data (e.g., images,
meshes, point clouds, etc.) is piped through complex processing chains in order to extract information that can be
used to address high-level inference tasks, such as recognition, detection or segmentation. The extracted information
might be in the form of low-level appearance descriptors,
e.g., SIFT [20], or of higher-level nature, e.g., activations
at specific layers of deep convolutional networks [18]. In
recognition problems, for instance, it is then customary to
feed the consolidated data to a discriminant classifier such
as the popular support vector machine (SVM), a kernelbased learning technique.
While there has been substantial progress on extracting and encoding discriminative information, only recently
have people started looking into the topological structure
of the data as an additional source of information. With the
emergence of topological data analysis (TDA) [4], computational tools for efficiently identifying topological structure
have become readily available. Since then, several authors
have demonstrated that methods of TDA can capture characteristics of the data that other methods often fail to reveal,
cf. [26, 19].
Along these lines, studying persistent homology [11] is

Roland Kwitt
University of Salzburg, Austria

a particularly popular method for TDA, since it captures the
birth and death times of topological features, e.g., connected
components, holes, etc., at multiple scales. This information is summarized by the persistence diagram, a multiset
of points in the plane. The key feature of persistent homology is its stability: small changes in the input data lead
to small changes in the Wasserstein distance of the associated persistence diagrams [10]. Considering the discrete
nature of topological information, the existence of such a
well-behaved summary is perhaps surprising.
Note that persistence diagrams together with the Wasserstein distance only form a metric space. Thus it is not possible to directly employ persistent homology in the large
class of machine learning techniques that require a Hilbert
space structure, like SVMs or PCA. This obstacle is typically circumvented by defining a kernel function on the domain containing the data, which in turn defines a Hilbert
space structure implicitly. While the Wasserstein distance
itself does not naturally lead to a valid kernel (see supplementary material for details), we show that it is possible to
define a kernel for persistence diagrams that is stable w.r.t.
the 1-Wasserstein distance. This is the main contribution of
this paper.
Contribution. We propose a (positive definite) multiscale kernel for persistence diagrams (see Fig. 1). This kernel is defined via an L2 -valued feature map, based on ideas
from scale space theory [16]. We show that our feature map
is Lipschitz continuous with respect to the 1-Wasserstein
distance, thereby maintaining the stability property of persistent homology. The scale parameter of our kernel controls its robustness to noise and can be tuned to the data.
We investigate, in detail, the theoretical properties of the
kernel, and demonstrate its applicability on shape classification/retrieval and texture recognition benchmarks.

2. Related work
Methods that leverage topological information for computer vision or medical image analysis can roughly be
grouped into two categories. In the first category, we identify previous work that directly utilizes topological information to address a specific problem, such as topologyguided segmentation. In the second category, we identify

