Line-Sweep: Cross-Ratio for Wide-Baseline Matching and 3D Reconstruction
Srikumar Ramalingam1 Michel Antunes2 Daniel Snow1 Gim Hee Lee1 Sudeep Pillai3
1
Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories (MERL), Cambridge, USA
2
Interdisciplinary Centre for Security, Reliability and Trust (SnT), University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg
3
Massachussetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge, USA

Abstract
We propose a simple and useful idea based on crossratio constraint for wide-baseline matching and 3D reconstruction. Most existing methods exploit feature points and
planes from images. Lines have always been considered
notorious for both matching and reconstruction due to the
lack of good line descriptors. We propose a method to generate and match new points using virtual lines constructed
using pairs of keypoints, which are obtained using standard
feature point detectors. We use cross-ratio constraints to
obtain an initial set of new point matches, which are subsequently used to obtain line correspondences. We develop
a method that works for both calibrated and uncalibrated
camera configurations. We show compelling line-matching
and large-scale 3D reconstruction.

(a)

1. Introduction
3D reconstruction from images using points is one of the
success stories in computer vision [36, 40, 13, 10]. The success can be attributed to several well-researched and wellengineered tools: the availability of a variety of feature
point descriptors, the key insight to use millions of uncalibrated images from wild, RANSAC, 5-point motion estimation [27] and optimization packages [1, 40]. As shown
in Figure 1, lines are dominant in most urban scenes. However, lines are not used in 3D reconstruction algorithms as
much as points and planes. Although numerous fundamental results have been derived on line reconstruction, these
techniques are seldom applied in practice. The primary reason is the lack of good line descriptors and the noise in
line detection algorithms. This makes us wonder if linereconstruction can leverage from the existing machinery for
points. We address this question by proposing a novel approach to transfer the point correspondences to line correspondences.
The basic idea proposed in this paper is simple. Consider Figure 1(a). We show two images of an urban scene
with keypoint matches marked in blue obtained using stan-

(b)

Figure 1. The basic idea of line-sweeping. (a) We consider pairs of
keypoint correspondences (shown in blue) obtained using standard
feature detectors to form virtual lines (white) to identify several
hundreds of additional point matches (shown in red) using crossratio constraints. (b) Using 32 images, we generate line-based 3D
reconstruction of the bridge of Sighs in Oxford, where lines are
represented as pencil of points.

dard feature detectors. By considering pairs of such keypoint matches, we can form virtual lines across the images.
By looking at places where they intersect straight lines in
images, and using cross-ratio constraints, we match pixels lying on one image line to another. By accumulating
such correspondences (shown in red) we can match line
segments. Note that many prior line detection algorithms
only match lines from one image to another. There is no
pixel-wise correspondence between lines. In our approach
1

