DeepID-Net: Deformable Deep Convolutional Neural Networks
for Object Detection
Wanli Ouyang, Xiaogang Wang, Xingyu Zeng, Shi Qiu, Ping Luo, Yonglong Tian,
Hongsheng Li, Shuo Yang, Zhe Wang, Chen-Change Loy, Xiaoou Tang
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
wlouyang, xgwang@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract

Pretrained on object-level annoation

In this paper, we propose deformable deep convolutional
neural networks for generic object detection. This new
deep learning object detection framework has innovations
in multiple aspects. In the proposed new deep architecture,
a new deformation constrained pooling (def-pooling) layer
models the deformation of object parts with geometric constraint and penalty. A new pre-training strategy is proposed
to learn feature representations more suitable for the object
detection task and with good generalization capability. By
changing the net structures, training strategies, adding and
removing some key components in the detection pipeline,
a set of models with large diversity are obtained, which
significantly improves the effectiveness of model averaging. The proposed approach improves the mean averaged
precision obtained by RCNN [14], which was the state-ofthe-art, from 31% to 50.3% on the ILSVRC2014 detection
test set. It also outperforms the winner of ILSVRC2014,
GoogLeNet, by 6.1%. Detailed component-wise analysis
is also provided through extensive experimental evaluation,
which provide a global view for people to understand the
deep learning object detection pipeline.

Pretrained on image-level annotation

Image

Visualized
model

(a)
Deep model

Deformable pattern

Examples

...
Pattern

...

Deformation
penalty

Pattern

Deformation
penalty

(b)

Figure 1. The motivation of this paper in new pretraining scheme
(a) and jointly learning feature representation and deformable object parts shared by multiple object classes at different semantic
levels (b). In (a), a model pretrained on image-level annotation is
more robust to size and location change while a model pretrained
on object-level annotation is better in representing objects with
tight bounding boxes. In (b), when ipod rotates, its circular pattern
moves horizontally at the bottom of the bounding box. Therefore,
the circular patterns have smaller penalty moving horizontally but
higher penalty moving vertically. The curvature part of the circular pattern are often at the bottom right positions of the circular
pattern. Best viewed in color.

1. Introduction
Object detection is one of the fundamental challenges in
computer vision. It has attracted a great deal of research
interest [5, 39, 11, 19]. Intra-class variation in appearance
and deformation are among the main challenges of this task.
Because of its power in learning features, the convolutional neural network (CNN) is being widely used in recent large-scale object detection and recognition systems
[44, 38, 19, 22]. Since training deep models is a nonconvex optimization problem with millions of parameters,
the choice of a good initial point is a crucial but unsolved problem, especially when deep CNN goes deeper
[44, 38, 22]. It is also easy to overfit to a small train-

ing set. Researchers find that supervised pretraining on
large-scale image classification data and then finetuning for
the targeting object detection task is a practical solution
[10, 32, 57, 14]. However, we observe that there is still
a gap between the pretraining task and the finetuning task
that makes pretraining less effective. The problem of the
training scheme is the mismatch between pretraining with
1

