Beyond Spatial Pooling:
Fine-Grained Representation Learning in Multiple Domains
Chi Li
Austin Reiter
Gregory D. Hager
Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University
chi li@jhu.edu, {areiter, hager}@cs.jhu.edu

Abstract
Object recognition systems have shown great progress
over recent years. However, creating object representations
that are robust to changes in viewpoint while capturing local visual details continues to be a challenge. In particular, recent convolutional architectures employ spatial pooling to achieve scale and shift invariances, but they are still
sensitive to out-of-plane rotations. In this paper, we formulate a probabilistic framework for analyzing the performance of pooling. This framework suggests two directions
for improvement. First, we apply multiple scales of filters
coupled with different pooling granularities, and second we
make use of color as an additional pooling domain, thereby
reducing the sensitivity to spatial deformations. We evaluate our algorithm on the object instance recognition task
using two independent publicly available RGB-D datasets,
and demonstrate significant improvements over the current
state-of-the-art. In addition, we present a new dataset for
industrial objects to further validate the effectiveness of our
approach versus other state-of-the-art approaches for object recognition using RGB-D data.

Figure 1. A comparison of fine-grained pooling between spatial
(X, Y ) and color (A, B) (last two channels in CIELAB) domains
when an object undergoes a out-of-plane rotation. Fine-grained
gridding (8 × 8) is performed in both domains. Pooling indices
in the color domain are shown by different colors in the images.
Pooling results for all pixels in two local patterns (enclosed by red
and blue rectangles) are shown between pairs of images in each
block. Correct feature alignments are made by the color domain,
but fail in the spatial domain.

tive power provided by the spatial layout of features [29].
Conversely, fine-grained spatial pooling, which uses small
and dense pooling regions (i.e., receptive fields), encodes
fine-grained visual cues but is sensitive to spatial rearrangements in different object poses. This is demonstrated on
the left block of Fig. 1, where the same object parts are
pooled into different bins under an out-of-plane rotation.
One solution is to deploy ’deep’ convolutional architectures
[27, 9, 40, 37, 23] which hierarchically pool local responses
to boost the discrimination capability of features in the
coarse-grained pooling. However, local characteristics are
often lost due to the hierarchical pooling. This may not be
desirable for the object instance recognition (as opposed to
category recognition) where an object should be recognized
as exactly the same one that has previously been seen. Recently, [17] integrates part-based modeling [4] into a deep
convolutional neural network [27] to create more spatially
aligned representations. They achieve state-of-the-art performance in public fine-grained object recognition benchmarks. This implies that robust fine-grained cues can be

1. Introduction
The core challenge of object recognition is to create representations that are robust to appearance variations. Recent
advances in convolutional architectures [27, 26, 10, 8] have
achieved success in learning object representations with minor scale and shift invariances. Spatial Pooling, which
groups local features within spatial neighborhoods, is a key
component to achieve those invariance properties.
The discrimination and invariance capabilities of the
spatially pooled features can be examined with regard to
the density of pooling regions which we refer to as pooling granularity. The Bag-of-words model, which can be
viewed as the extreme case of coarse pooling granularity,
can tolerate large variations of object appearances caused
by out-of-plane rotations. However, it loses the discrimina1

