Pedestrian Detection aided by Deep Learning Semantic Tasks
Yonglong Tian1 , Ping Luo3,1 , Xiaogang Wang2,3 , Xiaoou Tang1,3
1
Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Department of Electronic Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
Shenzhen Key Lab of CVPR, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, China
{ty014,pluo,xtang}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, xgwang@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Deep learning methods have achieved great successes
in pedestrian detection, owing to its ability to learn discriminative features from raw pixels. However, they treat
pedestrian detection as a single binary classification task,
which may confuse positive with hard negative samples
(Fig.1 (a)). To address this ambiguity, this work jointly optimize pedestrian detection with semantic tasks, including
pedestrian attributes (e.g. ‘carrying backpack’) and scene
attributes (e.g. ‘vehicle’, ‘tree’, and ‘horizontal’). Rather
than expensively annotating scene attributes, we transfer
attributes information from existing scene segmentation
datasets to the pedestrian dataset, by proposing a novel
deep model to learn high-level features from multiple tasks
and multiple data sources. Since distinct tasks have distinct
convergence rates and data from different datasets have
different distributions, a multi-task deep model is carefully
designed to coordinate tasks and reduce discrepancies
among datasets. Extensive evaluations show that the
proposed approach outperforms the state-of-the-art on the
challenging Caltech [9] and ETH [10] datasets where it
reduces the miss rates of previous deep models by 17 and
5.5 percent, respectively.

(a) Positives and hard negatives

HOG

ACF

JointDeep
TA-CNN
(b)Comparison between models

Figure 1: Distinguishing pedestrians from hard negatives
is challenging due to their visual similarities. In (a), the
first and second row represent pedestrians and equivocal
background samples respectively. (b) shows that our TACNN rejects more hard negatives than the detectors using
hand-crafted features (such as HOG [5] and ACF [7]) and
the JointDeep model [22].

1. Introduction
Pedestrian detection has attracted wide attentions [5, 31,
28, 7, 8, 9, 17, 6, 36, 13]. This problem is challenging
because of large variations and confusions in the human
body and background, as shown in Fig.1 (a), where the
positive and hard negative patches have large ambiguities.
Current methods for pedestrian detection can be generally grouped into two categories, the models based on handcrafted features [31, 5, 32, 8, 7, 35, 11] and deep models
[21, 23, 28, 22, 16]. In the first category, conventional
methods extracted Haar [31], HOG[5], or HOG-LBP [32]
from images to train SVM [5] or boosting classifiers [8].

The learned weights of the classifier (e.g. SVM) can be
considered as a global template of the entire human body.
To account for more complex poses, the hierarchical deformable part models (DPM) [11, 37, 15] learned a mixture
of local templates for each body part. Although they are sufficient to certain pose changes, the feature representations
and the classifiers cannot be jointly optimized to improve
performance. In the second category, deep neural networks
1

