An Efficient Volumetric Framework for Shape Tracking
Benjamin Allain

Jean-Sébastien Franco

Edmond Boyer

Inria Grenoble Rhône-Alpes - LJK
Grenoble Universities, France
firstname.lastname@inria.fr

Abstract

temporal integration and tracking of the shape in the time
domain have then been considered, e.g. [11, 3]. In any case,
however, surface-based models, such as meshes, have been
largely dominant to represent and track shapes. This is due
to several factors, primarily to the fact that visual observations generally lie on the shape surface, but also to the
popularity of surface-based representations in the vision and
graphics communities and the availability of efficient tools
to manipulate them. Yet it has been observed that certain
forms of volume-preserving deformations may be beneficial to model shape deformations in graphics applications
such as [1, 5], or to enforce volumetric constraints, nevertheless based on surface tesselations, in dynamic shape
capture [10].
While the idea has led to interesting preliminary results,
a full volumetric treatment of dynamic shape capture is still
to be investigated and its benefits evaluated. Among the
expected advantages of this approach are its ability to express volume conservation as well as its ability to enforce
local volumetric deformation constraints. In this paper, we
address this problem with a twofold contribution: we first
propose a dedicated volumetric deformation model based
on Centroidal Voronoi Tesselations (CVT) [13], which integrates the latest advances of recent tracking models, and
second we propose an evaluation of the method based on a
hybrid multi-camera and marker-based capture dataset [21].

Recovering 3D shape motion using visual information
is an important problem with many applications in computer vision and computer graphics, among other domains.
Most existing approaches rely on surface-based strategies,
where surface models are fit to visual surface observations.
While numerically plausible, this paradigm ignores the fact
that the observed surfaces often delimit volumetric shapes,
for which deformations are constrained by the volume inside the shape. Consequently, surface-based strategies can
fail when the observations define several feasible surfaces,
whereas volumetric considerations are more restrictive with
respect to the admissible solutions. In this work, we investigate a novel volumetric shape parametrization to track
shapes over temporal sequences. In constrast to Eulerian
grid discretizations of the observation space, such as voxels, we consider general shape tesselations yielding more
convenient cell decompositions, in particular the Centroidal
Voronoi Tesselation. With this shape representation, we devise a tracking method that exploits volumetric information, both for the data term evaluating observation conformity, and for expressing deformation constraints that enforce prior assumptions on motion. Experiments on several
datasets demonstrate similar or improved precisions over
state-of-the-art methods, as well as improved robustness, a
critical issue when tracking sequentially over time frames.

1.1. Previous Work
A large set of techniques exist to capture moving shapes
as a time independent sequence of meshes representing the
object’s surface [24, 14]. For this process, many volumetric parameterizations have also been devised, based on regular or hierarchical Eulerian grid discretizations [30, 20],
although they are mainly dedicated to single time occupancy representation. Some approaches have taken these
representations a step further, by examining short term
motion characteristics of the shape using regular volume
grids [33, 17, 32], yet they do not retrieve long term motion information of the sequence, nor do they embed spe-

1. Introduction
The capture of shapes and their evolutions has been a
very active research topic for the last decade, motivated by
many applications for which dynamic shape models are useful. This ability is of interest for several fields of activity
such as computer-assisted design, virtual reality, entertainment, medical imaging, gesture and sports analysis. Ever
since the initial promises of free viewpoint video [9], many
models of shape capture have been explored. Initially examined as a per-time reconstruction problem, e.g. [24, 14],
1

