Real-time Visual Analysis of Microvascular Blood Flow for Critical Care
Chao Liu ∗

Hernando Gomez †

Srinivasa Narasimhan ∗

Michael R. Pinsky †

Artur Dubrawski ∗

Brian Zuckerbraun †

Abstract

or semi-manual operation and coarse sampling techniques,
which makes quantitative analysis of microcirculatory status and response to disease and treatment difficult and subjective [7]. We aim to remedy that. One of the portable
SDF imaging devices is shown in Fig. 1(a). As depicted
in Fig. 1(c), illumination is provided by the green lightemitting diodes (LEDs) arranged in a ring formation. The
wavelength (λ=530 nm) of the illumination is chosen to
maximize light absorption by the red blood cells (RBCs).
The tissue embedding the capillaries scatters and reflects
the illumination back to the camera, making the capillaries
imaged as dark curvilinear structures against the brighter
background. The LEDs and the lens system are optically
isolated to prevent the illumination generated by the LEDs
from contaminating the images.
Despite that the design is optimized for microcirculatory imaging, as shown in Fig. 1(b), it is not easy to extract
physiological features from SDF videos, such as the blood
flow velocity, for several reasons: (1) Subsurface scattering: scattering of light on the path from the capillaries to the
camera increases observed intensity of the vessels, reducing
contrast of the images; (2) Defocus: capillaries are embedded at varied depths within the tissue while the depth of
field of the camera is fixed to obtain desired magnification.
So some capillaries in the field of view appear blurred, making their features more difficult to estimate; (3) Sensor noise
that further reduces quality of images; (4) Limited texture:
low diameter capillaries of interest comprise only a small
part of the image, most of it is occupied by tissue without
substantial texture and in addition, plasma in the capillaries
is transparent, reducing texture in the frames even further,
so traditional texture-based image feature extraction methods will likely fail; (5) Sensor drift during video capture:
field of view changes due to the motions induced by heart
beat and respiration of the subject and movement of the device itself, relative to the observed tissue.
In this paper, we present an end-to-end, automated
framework for real-time analysis of micro-circulation including vessel detection, heart rate, breathing rate, blood
flow velocity estimation as well as variations of flow distributions over time during bleeding and resuscitation stages.
Our work can enable new research in critical care, helping

Microcirculatory monitoring plays an important role
in diagnosis and treatment of critical care patients.
Sidestream Dark Field (SDF) imaging devices have been
used to visualize and support interpretation of the microvascular blood flow. However, due to subsurface scattering
within the tissue that embeds the capillaries, transparency
of plasma, imaging noise and lack of features, it is difficult to obtain reliable physiological data from SDF videos.
Therefore, thus far microcirculatory videos have been analyzed manually with significant input from expert clinicians.
In this paper, we present a framework that automates the
analysis process. It includes stages of video stabilization,
enhancement, and micro-vessel extraction, in order to automatically estimate statistics of the micro blood flows from
SDF videos. Our method has been validated in critical care
experiments conducted carefully to record the microcirculatory blood flow in test animal subjects before, during and after induced bleeding episodes, as well as to study the effect
of fluid resuscitation. Our method is able to extract microcirculatory measurements that are consistent with clinical
intuition and it has a potential to become a useful tool in
critical care medicine.

1. Introduction
Microcirculation takes place in part of the circulatory
system embedded in tissue that involves the smallest vessels
and where diffusion of nutrients and oxygen into the cells
and removal of CO2 and waste from the cells take place.
Monitoring of microcirculation is useful for diagnosing of
vascular conditions and in monitoring patients for cardiorespiratory insufficiency.
Sidestream Dark Field (SDF) [6] video imaging was developed as a non-invasive imaging approach for real-time
visualization of superficial microvascular flow. However,
analysis of these videos is currently limited by manual
∗ Carnegie Mellon University, The Robotics Institute. Email:{chao.liu,
srinivas, awd}@cs.cmu.edu
† University of Pittsburgh, School of Medicine. Email:{gomezh, pinskymr, zuckerbraunbs}@upmc.edu

1

