Deep Roto-Translation Scattering for Object Classification
Edouard Oyallon and Stéphane Mallat
Département Informatique, Ecole Normale Supérieure
45 rue d’Ulm, 75005 Paris
edouard.oyallon@ens.fr

Abstract

spirit, unsupervised deep learning [13] as well as unsupervised bag of words [26] or dictionary learning with spatial
pyramid[12] have improved classification results previously
obtained with engineered feature vectors such as SIFT or
HOG, on complex object recognition databases. However,
these unsupervised learning algorithms are tailored to each
databases. One may wonder whether their improved performances result from an adaptation to the specific properties of each databases, or whether these unsupervised representations capture refined geometric image properties compared to SIFT or HOG features.

Dictionary learning algorithms or supervised deep convolution networks have considerably improved the efficiency of predefined feature representations such as SIFT.
We introduce a deep scattering convolution network, with
complex wavelet filters over spatial and angular variables.
This representation brings an important improvement to results previously obtained with predefined features over object image databases such as Caltech and CIFAR. The resulting accuracy is comparable to results obtained with unsupervised deep learning and dictionary based representations. This shows that refining image representations by using geometric priors is a promising direction to improve image classification and its understanding.

A scattering convolution network is constructed with
predefined complex wavelet filters, which are adapted to geometric image variabilities [22]. It provides a mathematical
and algorithmic framework to incorporate refined geometric image priors within the representation. Since images
are projections of 3D scenes under various view points, the
main source of geometric image variabilities comes from
rigid movements, and deformations resulting from perspective projections. An important issue is to build adaptive
invariants to these sources of variability, which preserve
essential information to discriminate different classes. A
translation invariant scattering network was studied in [5]
for digit image classification and texture recognition, but
which was not powerful enough to classify complex objects
as in Caltech or CIFAR. A translation and rotation invariant
deep scattering network was introduced in [25] to classify
textures with strong rotations and scalings. However, imposing rotation invariance is a prior which is too strong for
image object and scene classifications, which are typically
not fully rotation invariant.

1. Introduction
Learning image representations has considerably enhanced image classification results compared to geometric features such as edge descriptors, or, SIFT and HOG
[19, 7] patch representations. Learning may thus seem to
be a more promising direction for improving image analysis
rather than refining geometric image analysis. This paper
aims at showing that understanding how to take advantage
of geometrical image properties can define image representations, providing competitive results with state of the art
unsupervised learning algorithms. It shows that refining geometric image understanding remains highly promising for
image classification.
Supervised deep neural network learning achieves stateof-the-art results on many databases [11, 16]. However, several works [30, 8] have shown that the Alex-net [11] trained
on ImageNet still performs very well on different databases
such as Caltech or PASCAL VOC. The output of this neural network can thus be considered as a “super SIFT” image descriptor, which is used as an input to a linear SVM
classifier [30, 8]. It indicates that this deep network is capturing important generic image properties, which are not
dependent upon the classes used for training. In the same

Section 2 introduces a scattering representation which is
translation invariant, and which efficiently represents rotation variability without imposing full rotation invariance. It
yields a representation which complements SIFT type coefficients, with coefficients incorporating interactions between scales and angles. This roto-translation scattering
representation is nearly complete in the sense that good
quality images can be recovered from roto-translation scattering coefficients [4]. It is also stable to additive perturba1

