A New Retraction for Accelerating the Riemannian Three-Factor
Low-Rank Matrix Completion Algorithm
Zhizhong Li1,2 , Deli Zhao2 , Zhouchen Lin3,4∗, Edward Y. Chang5
1
School of Mathematics, Peking University, Beijing, China
2
Advanced Algorithm Research Group, HTC, Beijing, China
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University, Beijing, China
4
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai, China
5
HTC Research
lizz@pku.edu.cn, zhaodeli@gmail.com, zlin@pku.edu.cn, eyuchang@gmail.com

Abstract
The Riemannian three-factor matrix completion (R3MC)
algorithm is one of the state-of-the-art geometric optimization methods for the low-rank matrix completion problem.
It is a nonlinear conjugate-gradient method optimizing on
a quotient Riemannian manifold. In the line search step,
R3MC approximates the minimum point on the searching
curve by minimizing on the line tangent to the curve. However, finding the exact minimum point by iteration is too expensive. We address this issue by proposing a new retraction with a minimizing property. This special property provides the exact minimization for the line search by establishing correspondences between points on the searching curve
and points on the tangent line. Accelerated R3MC, which is
R3MC equipped with this new retraction, outperforms the
original algorithm and other geometric algorithms for matrix completion in our empirical study.

1. Introduction
The problem of low-rank matrix completion is completing a matrix X ∗ ∈ Rn×m from a small number of known
entries under the low-rank assumption. Applications of matrix completion pervade in machine learning [9], computer
vision [10], system identification [5], and so on. One formulation of the matrix completion problem [3] consists of
finding the lowest rank matrix that agrees with known entries of X ∗ . The other formulation takes the presence of
noise into consideration and admits misfit within a given
tolerance . We focus on the second approach with the rank
∗ Corresponding author.

information given, i.e., finding a rank-r matrix X such that
min

X∈Rn×m
r

f (X) :=

1
kPΩ (X) − PΩ (X ∗ )k2F ,
|Ω|

(1)

is the set of rank-r matrices of size n × m,
where Rn×m
r
∗
Ω := {(i, j)|Xi,j
is given} is the set of indices of known
entries and |Ω| the cardinality of Ω. kAkF is the Frobenius norm of matrix A, and PΩ is the orthogonal sampling
operator defined as
(
Xi,j
PΩ (X)i,j =
0

when (i, j) ∈ Ω,
otherwise.

(2)

We assume that the solution to Equation (1) exists.
It is well known in differential geometry that the set of
forms a submanifold of the
rank-r n × m matrices Rn×m
r
nm-dimensional vector space Rnm×1 . The fixed-rank matrix completion problem can be cast as a geometric optimization problem because the rank constraint could be incorporated into the manifold structure. In this point of view,
the problem is turned into an unconstrained optimization.
Notice that the dimension of Rn×m
, namely (n + m − r)r,
r
is much smaller than that of the ambient space Rn×m in
the case r  min(n, m), thus making geometric methods
suitable to solve large-scale matrix completion problems.
There are a few geometric optimization algorithms available for the matrix completion problem such as LRGeomCG [11], RTRMC [2], ScGrass-CG [8], and R3MC [7], etc.
They differ in manifold structures, Riemannian metrics and
optimization methods.
LRGeomCG is a nonlinear conjugate-gradient method
over the embedded submanifold Rrn×m ⊂ Rn×m , which
inherits the canonical Riemannian metric of Rn×m . The
algorithm takes the embedding point of view of Rn×m
.
r

