The S-H OCK Dataset: Analyzing Crowds at the Stadium
Davide Conigliaro1 , Paolo Rota2 , Francesco Setti3 , Chiara Bassetti3 , Nicola Conci4 , Nicu Sebe4 , and
Marco Cristani1
1

University of Verona , 2 Vienna University of Technology , 3 ISTC–CNR (Trento) , 4 University of
Trento

Abstract
The topic of crowd modeling in computer vision usually
assumes a single generic typology of crowd, which is very
simplistic. In this paper we adopt a taxonomy that is widely
accepted in sociology, focusing on a particular category,
the spectator crowd, which is formed by people “interested
in watching something specific that they came to see” [6].
This can be found at the stadiums, amphitheaters, cinema,
etc. In particular, we propose a novel dataset, the Spectators Hockey (S-H OCK), which deals with 4 hockey matches
during an international tournament. In the dataset, a massive annotation has been carried out, focusing on the spectators at different levels of details: at a higher level, people
have been labeled depending on the team they are supporting and the fact that they know the people close to them;
going to the lower levels, standard pose information has
been considered (regarding the head, the body) but also
fine grained actions such as hands on hips, clapping hands
etc. The labeling focused on the game field also, permitting to relate what is going on in the match with the crowd
behavior. This brought to more than 100 millions of annotations, useful for standard applications as people counting
and head pose estimation but also for novel tasks as spectator categorization. For all of these we provide protocols and
baseline results, encouraging further research.

Figure 1. Example of images collected for both the spectators and
the rink, plus the annotations.

many state-of-the-art algorithms for person detection and
re-identification, multi-target tracking, and action recognition cannot be directly applied in this context. As a consequence, crowd modeling has developed its own techniques
such as multi-resolution histograms [45], spatio-temporal
cuboids [24], appearance or motion descriptors [3], spatiotemporal volumes [28], dynamic textures [30], computed
on top of the flow information. The extracted information is
then employed to learn different dynamics like Lagrangian
particle dynamics [36], and in general fluid-dynamic models. The most important applications of crowd analysis are
abnormal behavior detection [30], detecting/tracking individuals in crowds [25], counting people in crowds [8], identifying different regions of motion and segmentation [40].
All these approaches focus on a generic definition of
crowd, while a thorough analysis of the sociological liter-

1. Introduction
Capturing and understanding crowd dynamics is an important problem under diverse perspectives. From sociology to public safety management, modeling and predicting
the crowd presence and its dynamics, possibly preventing
dangerous activities, is absolutely crucial.
In computer vision, crowd analysis focuses on modeling large masses, where a single person cannot be finely
characterized, due to the low resolution, frequent occlusions and the particular dynamics of the scene. Therefore,
1

