Sparse Projections for High-Dimensional Binary Codes
Yan Xia1∗

Kaiming He2
1

Pushmeet Kohli2

Jian Sun2

University of Science and Technology of China
2
Microsoft Research

0.9

This paper addresses the problem of learning long binary codes from high-dimensional data. We observe that
two key challenges arise while learning and using long
binary codes: (1) lack of an effective regularizer for the
learned high-dimensional mapping and (2) high computational cost for computing long codes. In this paper, we
overcome both these problems by introducing a sparsity
encouraging regularizer that reduces the effective number
of parameters involved in the learned projection operator.
This regularizer not only reduces overfitting but, due to the
sparse nature of the projection matrix, also leads to a dramatic reduction in the computational cost. To evaluate the
effectiveness of our method, we analyze its performance on
the problems of nearest neighbour search, image retrieval
and image classification. Experiments on a number of challenging datasets show that our method leads to better accuracy than dense projections (ITQ [11] and LSH [16]) with
the same code lengths, and meanwhile is over an order of
magnitude faster. Furthermore, our method is also more accurate and faster than other recently proposed methods for
speeding up high-dimensional binary encoding.

0.85

mAP

Abstract

b = 4096 bits

0.8

SP
BP
CBE

0.75
0.7

0

ITQ
LSH

10
20
Encoding Time (ms)

Figure 1. ANN accuracy vs. encoding time on a dataset of one
million 4096-d DNN features. Our sparse projection (SP) method,
with 5%, 10%, and 15% non-zero elements, is more accurate and
about 10× faster than ITQ [11] and LSH [16], and is more accurate
than BP [10] and CBE [32]. More details are in Figure. 2.

various recognition tasks such as object classification and
image retrieval. Unlike traditional hand-crafted features
[24, 25, 19, 26], these high-dimensional features are learned
from large-scale data [27] and thus are not structured. On
the other hand, it has been noticed that for input signals of
dimensionality d, the code-length b of the binary code required to achieve reasonable accuracy (compared with no
encoding) is usually O(d) [28, 10, 32]. Based on these reasons, we consider the problem of learning long binary codes
for high-dimensional arbitrary input signals.
We observe that there are two key challenges in learning
and using long binary codes: (1) lack of an effective regularizer for the learned high-dimensional mapping and (2)
expensive cost for computing the long codes. Consider a
simple and most popular way of generating a binary code:
project the d-dimensional data by a b-by-d matrix and then
binarize by thresholding. When d is large and b ∼ O(d), the
projection could involve millions or even billions of parameters. A model in this large scale can easily tend to overfit
the data, if without an effective regularizer. It is also computationally expensive in terms of both time and memory.
To overcome these problems, in this paper we incorporate a sparse regularizer in an objective function which
learns the projection matrix. This regularizer restricts the

1. Introduction
Learning efficient representations of data is an important task for many fields of computer science, such as computer vision and bio-informatics that work with high dimensional inputs. In computer vision, methods for generating binary representations have been successfully used for
problems like image retrieval [31, 21, 11], image classification [28, 10, 32], and descriptor matching [17]. While
methods for binary encoding have yielded good results, the
binary codes were kept short (tens of bits) [31, 21, 11] due
to computational and algorithmic reasons.
Recent work on representation learning using deep neural networks (DNN) [20, 7, 13] has shown that features
of thousands of dimensions or even more are useful for
∗ This work is done when Yan Xia is an intern at Microsoft Research.

1

