Modeling Video Evolution For Action Recognition
Basura Fernando, Efstratios Gavves, José Oramas M., Amir Ghodrati, Tinne Tuytelaars
KU Leuven, ESAT, PSI, iMinds
Leuven Belgium
firstname.lastname@esat.kuleuven.be

Abstract
In this paper we present a method to capture video-wide
temporal information for action recognition. We postulate
that a function capable of ordering the frames of a video
temporally (based on the appearance) captures well the
evolution of the appearance within the video. We learn such
ranking functions per video via a ranking machine and use
the parameters of these as a new video representation. The
proposed method is easy to interpret and implement, fast to
compute and effective in recognizing a wide variety of actions.
We perform a large number of evaluations on datasets
for generic action recognition (Hollywood2 and HMDB51),
fine-grained actions (MPII- cooking activities) and gestures
(Chalearn). Results show that the proposed method brings
an absolute improvement of 7-10%, while being compatible with and complementary to further improvements in appearance and local motion based methods.

Figure 1: Illustration of how VideoDarwin works. In this
video, as Emma moved out from the house, the appearance
of the frames evolves with time. A ranking machine learns
this evolution of the appearance over time and returns a
ranking function. We use the parameters of this ranking
function as a new video representation which captures vital
information about the action.

in actions (e.g. using HMM [39, 40], CRF-based methods
[31] or deep networks [34]), the impact of these on action
recognition performance so far has been somewhat disappointing. Nevertheless, it is clear that many actions have a
characteristic temporal ordering - see e.g. the “moving out
of the house” action in Figure 1. Intuitively, one would expect that a video representation that encodes this temporal
ordering should help to better distinguish between different
actions. In summary, obtaining a good video-wide representation remains a challenge.

1. Introduction
Most of the progress in the field of action recognition
over the last decade has been related to i) the development
of local spatio-temporal descriptors (going from spatiotemporal interest points [13], over dense sampling [14] to
dense trajectories [37], and from gradient-based descriptors
to motion-based [7] and motion-compensated ones), or ii)
the adoption of powerful encoding schemes with an already
proven track record in object recognition (e.g. Fisher Vectors [38]).
Modeling the video-wide temporal evolution of appearance in videos remains a challenging task, due to the large
variability and complexity of video data. Actions are performed at largely varying speeds. Also the speed of the
action often varies non-linearly within a single video. As a
result, simple but robust techniques such as temporal pyramids (similar to the popular spatial pyramids [15] in object
recognition) are insufficient. While several methods have
been proposed to model the video-wide temporal evolution

In this paper, we approach a new video representation
that captures this video-wide temporal evolution. We start
from the observation that, even if the execution time of actions varies greatly, the temporal ordering is typically preserved. We propose to capture the temporal ordering of a
particular video by training a linear ranking machine on the
frames of that video. More precisely, given all the frames
of the video, we learn how to arrange them in chronological
order, based on the content of the frames. The parameters of
the linear ranking functions encode the video-wide tempo1

