Learning graph structure for multi-label image classification
via clique generation
Mingkui Tan1 , Qinfeng Shi1∗, Anton van den Hengel1,3∗, Chunhua Shen1,3∗, Junbin Gao2 ,
Fuyuan Hu1 , Zhen Zhang1
1
University of Adelaide 2 Charles Sturt University 3 Australian Centre for Robotic Vision
e-mail: {mingkui.tan,javen.shi}@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
plane
plane bike

bird

boat bottle

cow

dog

train

person

Exploiting label dependency for multi-label image classification can significantly improve classification performance. Probabilistic Graphical Models are one of the primary methods for representing such dependencies. The
structure of graphical models, however, is either determined heuristically or learned from very limited information. Moreover, neither of these approaches scales well to
large or complex graphs. We propose a principled way to
learn the structure of a graphical model by considering input features and labels, together with loss functions. We formulate this problem into a max-margin framework initially,
and then transform it into a convex programming problem.
Finally, we propose a highly scalable procedure that activates a set of cliques iteratively. Our approach exhibits
both strong theoretical properties and a significant performance improvement over state-of-the-art methods on both
synthetic and real-world data sets.

1. Introduction
Multi-label image classification is the problem of predicting a binary label vector, each element of which indicates the presence or absence of a certain object category in
an image [1, 3]. Exploiting label dependency can significantly boost classification performance. For example, if an
instance of the ship category is present in an image, it is very
likely that the water category is also present. To capture label dependencies, it is common practice to use Probabilistic
Graphical Models (PGMs) [17], a standard workhorse for
modelling dependencies among random variables.
The dependencies in PGMs are often encoded in a graph
structure. However, how to correctly and efficiently esti∗ This work was in part funded by the Data to Decisions Cooperative

Research Centre, Australia, ARC Grant DP140102270, National Natural
Science Foundation Key Project #61231016, and National Natural Science
Foundation of China Grant #61472267.

bike

bird

cat

horse motor sheep

train

bus

chair

plant

sofa

car
boat

bus

table

chair

cow

plant

car

dog
sofa

motor

person

tv

tv
cat

table

horse

sheep

bottle

(a) Graph by ChowLiu Tree [5]

(b) Graph by proposed method

(c) Sample images of “plane” in PASCAL2007 database

Figure 1. Comparison of graphs learned from PASCAL2007. Unlike the graph in Figure (1(a)), the graph learned by proposed
method has identified categories not connected with other nodes,
e.g., “plane”. In fact, from Figure (1(c)), the presence of a “plane”
in an image is often independent of other objects (except “sky”,
which is not a labeled class).

mate such a graph is still a challenging problem. People
often use heuristics, such as manually specified graph structures based on domain knowledge, or simple rules like the
ChowLiu Tree [5, 2] which uses mutual information between labels but ignores features or visual contents of images completely.
We propose to learn the graph structure and parameters by considering both features and labels. In this way, the
learned graph structure and parameters will fit the data better. An important concern for graph structure learning is
that, while it is essential to find those relevant dependencies,
it is also important to identify the independent labels and
irrelevant dependencies. In Figure 1, we show the graph
constructed using ChowLiu Trees [5] (Figure 1(a)) and that
learned by our method (Figure 1(b)). Their main difference
is that, unlike the ChowLiu Tree graph wherein all the labels
are connected, some labels in our graph are isolated which
makes learning and inference faster and simpler.

