Multiple Random Walkers and Their Application to Image Cosegmentation
Chulwoo Lee
Won-Dong Jang
School of Electrical Engineering
Korea University

Jae-Young Sim
School of ECE
UNIST

Chang-Su Kim
School of Electrical Engineering
Korea University

{chulwoo, wdjang}@mcl.korea.ac.kr

jysim@unist.ac.kr

changsukim@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
A graph-based system to simulate the movements and interactions of multiple random walkers (MRW) is proposed
in this work. In the MRW system, multiple agents traverse
a single graph simultaneously. To achieve desired interactions among those agents, a restart rule can be designed,
which determines the restart distribution of each agent according to the probability distributions of all agents. In particular, we develop the repulsive rule for data clustering. We
illustrate that the MRW clustering can segment real images
reliably. Furthermore, we propose a novel image cosegmentation algorithm based on the MRW clustering. Specifically,
the proposed algorithm consists of two steps: inter-image
concurrence computation and intra-image MRW clustering.
Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed algorithm provides promising cosegmentation performance.

1. Introduction
A random walk, a process in which a walker moves randomly from one node to another in a graph, can be used to
analyze the underlying data structure of the graph. Many
properties of a random walk are quantifiable algebraically
based on graph theory [6], and can be solved by optimization tools efficiently. Therefore, random walks have been
used in various graph-based learning tasks, including data
mining [4, 35] and interactive image segmentation [11, 15].
A study in [18, 19] showed that spectral clustering [26] is
also related to the random walk theory.
Whereas the conventional random walk theory describes
the movements of a single walker (or agent), we propose
a system of multiple random walkers (MRW) to simulate
multiple agents on a graph simultaneously. Those agents
traverse the graph according to a transition matrix, but they
also interact with one another to achieve a desired goal. Our
MRW system can support a variety of interactions by employing different restart rules. In particular, we develop the
repulsive restart rule for data clustering. With this restart
rule, as the random process continues, multiple agents repel

one another and form their own dominant regions. Eventually, the power balance among the agents is achieved, and
their distributions converge. By comparing the stationary
distributions, clustering can be achieved. We demonstrate
that this MRW process can cluster point data and segment
real images reliably.
Moreover, we apply the proposed MRW system to the
problem of segmenting similar images jointly. Recently, attempts to extract common foreground objects from a set of
similar images have been made. This approach, called cosegmentation, was first addressed by Rother et al. [23] and
has been researched actively [20, 12, 14, 3, 5, 30, 7, 24, 31].
Compared with segmenting each image independently, it is
advantageous to delineate similar objects from multiple images. However, since repeating image features do not always imply the most important and informative parts of a
scene, cosegmentation is still a challenging vision problem.
For cosegmentation, we introduce the notion of concurrence distribution, which represents the similarity of each
node in an image to foreground objects in the other images.
Then, the MRW clustering is performed by incorporating
the concurrence distribution into the repulsive restart rule.
Experimental results show that the proposed MRW algorithm improves the segmentation accuracy significantly, as
compared with recent state-of-the-art cosegmentation techniques [14, 30, 24, 31], on the iCoseg dataset [3].
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2
reviews related work. Section 3 proposes the MRW system
for clustering. Section 4 discusses the characteristics of the
MRW clustering with image examples. Sections 5 develops
the MRW cosegmentation algorithm, and Section 6 presents
experimental results. Section 7 concludes this work.

2. Related Work
Data Clustering: The task of partitioning data into disjoint
subsets based on the underlying data structure is a primitive activity to perceive information. The volume of data
that people produce and process has grown rapidly, and discovering meaningful information from big data has become
an essential subject. Since robust clustering is difficult to

