Small-Variance Nonparametric Clustering on the Hypersphere
Julian Straub Trevor Campbell Jonathan P. How John W. Fisher III
CSAIL and LIDS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{jstraub, fisher}@csail.mit.edu, {tdjc, jhow}@.mit.edu

Abstract

t0

Structural regularities in man-made environments reflect
in the distribution of their surface normals. Describing
these surface normal distributions is important in many
computer vision applications, such as scene understanding,
plane segmentation, and regularization of 3D reconstructions. Based on the small-variance limit of Bayesian nonparametric von-Mises-Fisher (vMF) mixture distributions,
we propose two new flexible and efficient k-means-like clustering algorithms for directional data such as surface normals. The first, DP-vMF-means, is a batch clustering algorithm derived from the Dirichlet process (DP) vMF mixture. Recognizing the sequential nature of data collection in
many applications, we extend this algorithm to DDP-vMFmeans, which infers temporally evolving cluster structure
from streaming data. Both algorithms naturally respect the
geometry of directional data, which lies on the unit sphere.
We demonstrate their performance on synthetic directional
data and real 3D surface normals from RGB-D sensors.
While our experiments focus on 3D data, both algorithms
generalize to high dimensional directional data such as protein backbone configurations and semantic word vectors.

t1

t2

t3

movement

death

birth
revival

Figure 1: Evolution of the data distribution on the sphere
which we model using a dependent Dirichlet process vonMises-Fisher mixture model (DDP-vMF-MM).

face normal statistics of man-made structures often necessitates the temporal integration of observations from a vast
data stream of varying cluster mixtures. Additionally, such
applications pose hard constraints on the amount of computational power available, as well as tight timing constraints.
We address these challenges by focusing on flexible
Bayesian nonparametric (BNP) Dirichlet process mixture
models (DP-MM) which describe the distribution of surface
normals in their natural space, the unit sphere in 3D. Taking
the small-variance asymptotic limit of this DP-MM of vonMises-Fisher (vMF) distributions, we obtain a fast k-meanslike algorithm, which we call DP-vMF-means, to perform
nonparametric clustering of data on the unit hypersphere.
Furthermore, we propose a novel dependent DP mixture
of vMF distributions to achieve integration of directional
data into a temporally consistent streaming model (shown
in Fig. 1). Small-variance asymptotic analysis yields the
k-means-like DDP-vMF-means algorithm. Finally, we propose a method, inspired by optimistic concurrency control,
for parallelizing the inherently sequential labeling process
of BNP-derived algorithms. This allows real-time processing of batches of 300k data-points at 30 Hz.

1. Introduction
Man-made environments and objects exhibit clear structural regularities such as planar or rounded surfaces. These
properties are evident on all scales from small objects such
as books, to medium-sized scenes like tables, rooms and
buildings and even to the organization of whole cities. Such
regularities can be captured in the statistics of surface normals that describe the local differential structure of a shape.
These statistics contain valuable information that can be
used for scene understanding, plane segmentation, or to regularize a 3D reconstruction.
Inference algorithms in fields such as robotics or augmented reality, which would benefit from the use of surface
normal statistics, are not generally provided a single batch
of data a priori. Instead, they are often provided a stream of
data batches from depth cameras. Thus, capturing the sur-

Beyond the aforementioned vision applications, directional data is ubiquitous in many other fields, including protein backbone configurations in computational biology, semantic word vectors in natural language processing, and rotations expressed as quaternions in robotics. Further, many
of those sources are observed as a stream. The proposed
algorithms directly generalize to these other data sources as
well as higher-dimensional spherical data.
1

