Label Consistent Quadratic Surrogate Model for Visual Saliency Prediction
Yan Luo1 , Yongkang Wong2 , Qi Zhao1∗
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore
2
Interactive & Digital Media Institute, National University of Singapore
{luoyan, yongkang.wong, eleqiz}@nus.edu.sg

Abstract

tiple visual sources. To tackle the information overload
problem, visual saliency detection has emerged to be an
efficient solution to detect the regions of interest to enhance existing computer vision system. For example, image
and video compression [15], visual tracking [25] and object
recognition [28, 2, 33].
Conventional saliency models employ a straightforward
bottom-up solution to predict visual saliency [13, 14, 17,
39]. Recently, learning based saliency prediction models
were proposed to leverage the power of machine learning techniques and human knowledge (from human fixation maps), and decipher the pattern to better predict the
saliency regions. These models generally achieve stable
performance on various datasets. However, the conventional learning based models in saliency prediction assume
that the training data is fully observed and there exist sufficient training data. It is important to state that the collection of human fixations is time consuming and the existing
eye tracking datasets are relatively small when compared
with other domains. Thus, it consists a certain degree of
dataset bias due to the large variations in images (e.g., outdoor scenes vs. emotion-evoking images) and human subjects. In addition, existing learning based models are trained
and evaluated within the same dataset where cross dataset
validation is not yet a common practice. It is important
to note that existing models are unable to adapt a learned
model with new training data unless the model is retrained
from scratch.
To address all the aforementioned problems, we propose
a new saliency prediction model, namely Label Consistent
Quadratic Surrogate (LCQS) Algorithm, which employs an
iterative online dictionary learning framework with label
consistent constraint. The novelty of the proposed model
are as followed: First, we adapt the Quadratic Surrogate
(QS) algorithm [26] to solve the sparse dictionary learning
problem. It enables the dictionary learning process to depend on one training sample at a time, which provides good
training efficiency and convergence rate. Second, we add
label consistent constrain in the dictionary learning process

Recently, an increasing number of works have proposed
to learn visual saliency by leveraging human fixations.
However, the collection of human fixations is time consuming and the existing eye tracking datasets are generally
small when compared with other domains. Thus, it contains
a certain degree of dataset bias due to the large image variations (e.g., outdoor scenes vs. emotion-evoking images).
In the learning based saliency prediction literature, most
models are trained and evaluated within the same dataset
and cross dataset validation is not yet a common practice.
Instead of directly applying model learned from another
dataset in cross dataset fashion, it is better to transfer the
prior knowledge obtained from one dataset to improve the
training and prediction on another. In addition, since new
datasets are built and shared in the community from time
to time, it would be good not to retrain the entire model
when new data are added. To address these problems, we
proposed a new learning based saliency model, namely Label Consistent Quadratic Surrogate algorithm, which employs an iterative online algorithm to learn a sparse dictionary with label consistent constraint. The advantages of
the proposed model are three-folds: (1) the quadratic surrogate function guarantees convergence at each iteration,
(2) the label consistent constraint enforces the predicted
sparse code to be discriminative, and (3) the online properties enable the proposed algorithm to adapt existing model
with new data without retraining. As shown in this work, the
proposed saliency model achieves better performance than
the state-of-the-art saliency models.

1. Introduction
In the recent advances in sensor technology, computer
vision systems are undoubtedly facing great difficulty to
process the increasing number of pixels available from mul∗ Corresponding author.

1

