Hashing with Binary Autoencoders
Miguel Á. Carreira-Perpiñán
EECS, University of California, Merced

Ramin Raziperchikolaei
EECS, University of California, Merced

http://eecs.ucmerced.edu

http://eecs.ucmerced.edu

Abstract

capture some notion of neighborhood preservation. Most
of these approaches have two things in common: h typically performs dimensionality reduction (L < D) and, as
noted, it outputs binary codes (h: RD → {0, 1}L ). The latter implies a step function or binarization applied to a realvalued function of the input x. Optimizing this is difficult.
In practice, most approaches follow a two-step procedure:
first they learn a real hash function ignoring the binary constraints and then the output of the resulting hash function
is binarized (e.g. by thresholding or with an optimal rotation). For example, one can run a continuous dimensionality
reduction algorithm (by optimizing its objective function)
such as PCA and then apply a step function. This procedure
can be seen as a “filter” approach [14] and is suboptimal:
in the example, the thresholded PCA projection is not necessarily the best thresholded linear projection (i.e., the one
that minimizes the objective function under all thresholded
linear projections). To obtain the latter, we must optimize
the objective jointly over linear mappings and thresholds,
respecting the binary constraints while learning h; this is a
“wrapper” approach [14]. In other words, optimizing real
codes and then projecting them onto the binary space is not
the same as optimizing the codes in the binary space.

An attractive approach for fast search in image
databases is binary hashing, where each high-dimensional,
real-valued image is mapped onto a low-dimensional, binary vector and the search is done in this binary space.
Finding the optimal hash function is difficult because it involves binary constraints, and most approaches approximate the optimization by relaxing the constraints and then
binarizing the result. Here, we focus on the binary autoencoder model, which seeks to reconstruct an image from the
binary code produced by the hash function. We show that
the optimization can be simplified with the method of auxiliary coordinates. This reformulates the optimization as
alternating two easier steps: one that learns the encoder
and decoder separately, and one that optimizes the code for
each image. Image retrieval experiments show the resulting
hash function outperforms or is competitive with state-ofthe-art methods for binary hashing.

1. Introduction
We consider the problem of binary hashing, where given
a high-dimensional vector x ∈ RD , we want to map it to
an L-bit vector z = h(x) ∈ {0, 1}L using a hash function
h, while preserving the neighbors of x in the binary space.
Binary hashing has emerged in recent years as an effective
technique for fast search on image (and other) databases.
While the search in the original space would cost O(N D)
in both time and space, using floating point operations, the
search in the binary space costs O(N L) where L ≪ D
and the constant factor is much smaller. This is because
the hardware can compute binary operations very efficiently
and the entire dataset (N L bits) can fit in the main memory
of a workstation. And while the search in the binary space
will produce some false positives and negatives, one can
retrieve a larger set of neighbors and then verify these with
the ground-truth distance, while still being efficient.
Many different hashing approaches have been proposed
in the last few years. They formulate an objective function
of the hash function h or of the binary codes that tries to

In this paper we show this joint optimization, respecting
the binary constraints during training, can actually be done
reasonably efficiently. The idea is to use the recently proposed method of auxiliary coordinates (MAC) [5, 6]. This
is a general strategy to transform an original problem involving a nested function into separate problems without
nesting, each of which can be solved more easily. In our
case, this allows us to reduce drastically the complexity due
to the binary constraints. We focus on binary autoencoders,
i.e., where the code layer is binary. Section 2 describes the
binary autoencoder model and objective function. Section 3
derives a training algorithm using MAC and explains how,
with carefully implemented steps, the optimization in the
binary space can be carried out efficiently. Our hypothesis
is that constraining the optimization to the binary space results in better hash functions and we test this in experiments
(section 4). These show that our resulting hash function is
consistently competitive with the state-of-the-art.
1

