Unconstrained Realtime Facial Performance Capture
Pei-Lun Hsieh⇤
Chongyang Ma⇤
University of Southern California

⇤

†

Jihun Yu†
Hao Li⇤
Industrial Light & Magic

Figure 1: Calibration-free realtime facial performance capture on highly occluded subjects using an RGB-D sensor.

Abstract

surveillance, recognition, and numerous applications in the
consumer space, such as personalized games, make-up apps,
and video chats with virtual avatars. In these unconstrained
scenarios, new challenges arise: (1) occlusions caused by
accessories, hair, and involuntary hand-to-face gesticulations
challenge the face segmentation problem; (2) a facial
tracking model needs to be constructed on-the-fly to enable
instantaneous tracking and user switching for unobtrusive
performance capture.
While recent advances have shown promising results in
facilitating unconstrained facial tracking with data-driven
methods, they do not ensure uninterrupted tracking in the
presence of large and unexpected occlusions. Driven by
the growing availability of consumer-level realtime depth
sensors, we leverage the combination of reliable depth
data and RGB video and present a realtime facial capture
system that maximizes uninterrupted performance capture
in the wild. It is designed to handle large occlusion and
smoothly varying but uncontrolled illumination changes.
Our system also allows instant user switching without any
facial calibration (Figure 1).
Our approach unifies facial tracking, segmentation, and
tracking model personalization in both depth and RGB
channels. We detect dynamic occlusions caused by temporal
shape and texture variations using an outlier voting scheme in
superpixel space. As recently demonstrated by Li et al. [31],
the combination of sparse 2D facial features (e.g., eyes,
eyebrows, and mouth) with dense depth maps are particularly
effective in improving tracking fidelity. However, because
facial landmark detection becomes significantly less reliable
when the face is occluded, we synthesize plausible face
textures right after our face segmentation step. Concurrent
to the facial tracking thread, we progressively personalize
our tracking model to the current user as more data is being
collected. In each frame, we simultaneously solve for the
user’s identity (neutral pose) and expression. In summary,
we make the following contributions:

We introduce a realtime facial tracking system specifically
designed for performance capture in unconstrained settings
using a consumer-level RGB-D sensor. Our framework
provides uninterrupted 3D facial tracking, even in the
presence of extreme occlusions such as those caused by hair,
hand-to-face gestures, and wearable accessories. Anyone’s
face can be instantly tracked and the users can be switched
without an extra calibration step. During tracking, we
explicitly segment face regions from any occluding parts
by detecting outliers in the shape and appearance input
using an exponentially smoothed and user-adaptive tracking
model as prior. Our face segmentation combines depth
and RGB input data and is also robust against illumination
changes. To enable continuous and reliable facial feature
tracking in the color channels, we synthesize plausible face
textures in the occluded regions. Our tracking model is
personalized on-the-fly by progressively refining the user’s
identity, expressions, and texture with reliable samples and
temporal filtering. We demonstrate robust and high-fidelity
facial tracking on a wide range of subjects with highly
incomplete and largely occluded data. Our system works in
everyday environments and is fully unobtrusive to the user,
impacting consumer AR applications and surveillance.

1. Introduction
Facial performance capture is well-established in the film
and game industries for efficient and realistic animation
production. While professional studios tend to rely on
sophisticated solutions, realtime and markerless tracking
technologies using lightweight monocular sensors (video or
depth cameras) are becoming increasingly popular, due to
their ease of adoption, cost, and deployability.
In production, the capture process is typically constrained
for optimal performance: face visibility is maximized; the
environment is well lit; and an optimal facial tracking model
is built before tracking. Unconstrained facial performance
capture, on the other hand, has the potential to impact

• A framework that unifies tracking, segmentation, and
model personalization, designed to provide unobtrusive
and uninterrupted realtime 3D facial tracking.
1

