Landmarks-based Kernelized Subspace Alignment
for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Rahaf Aljundi, Rémi Emonet, Damien Muselet and Marc Sebban
rahaf.aljundi@gmail.com
remi.emonet, damien.muselet, marc.sebban @univ-st-etienne.fr

CNRS, UMR 5516, Laboratoire Hubert Curien, F-42000, Saint-Étienne, France
Université de Saint-Étienne, Jean-Monnet, F-42000, Saint-Étienne, France

Abstract
Domain adaptation (DA) has gained a lot of success in
the recent years in computer vision to deal with situations
where the learning process has to transfer knowledge from
a source to a target domain. In this paper, we introduce a
novel unsupervised DA approach based on both subspace
alignment and selection of landmarks similarly distributed
between the two domains. Those landmarks are selected so
as to reduce the discrepancy between the domains and then
are used to non linearly project the data in the same space
where an efficient subspace alignment (in closed-form) is
performed. We carry out a large experimental comparison
in visual domain adaptation showing that our new method
outperforms the most recent unsupervised DA approaches.

1. Introduction
While the standard machine learning setting assumes
that training and test data come from the same statistical
distribution, it turns out that many real world applications,
e.g., in Computer Vision or in Natural Language Processing, challenge this assumption. Indeed, the (source) data
from which the classifier is supposed to be learned often
differ from the (target) data the classifier will be deployed
on (see Figure 1). To deal with such situations, the learning system has to take into account the distribution shift
between the two domains in order to adapt well from the
source to the target. In this framework, two main categories
of domain adaptation (DA) methods are available. The first
one, called semi-supervised DA, can gain access to some
labeled examples from the target domain (as well as labeled
source data) in order to perform the adaptation process (see,
e.g., [6, 1, 18]). On the other hand, unsupervised DA assumes that no labeled information is available from the target domain. To deal with this more complex setting, DA

Figure 1. Example of distribution shift between images from two
datasets. First row, some bike helmets from the Amazon subset
and second row, bike helmets from the webcam subset. These 2
subsets are from the Office dataset.

methods (see [16] for a survey) usually assume that the distribution shift can be compensated either by a reweighting
scheme applied on the source data (so as to better match the
target distribution), or by a projection of both source and
target data in a common (possibly latent) space. In this paper, we focus on this second category of DA methods which
have the advantage of not assuming that source and target
data originally lie in the same feature space.
It is worth noting that the most promising recent approaches rely on the assumption of the existence of a common embedded low dimensional manifold space that minimizes the divergence between the two distributions. In
this context, subspace alignment-based DA methods have
attracted a lot of interest. For example, in [10, 9], source
and target data are projected onto intermediate (linear) subspaces that lie along the shortest geodesic path connecting the two original spaces. However, although effective,
the search for such subspaces is computationally costly and
subject to local perturbations. A recent work done by Fernando et al. [7] overcomes these drawbacks by optimizing a single linear mapping function that directly aligns the
source and target subspaces. This new method has shown
to be not only better than the state of the art but also computable in closed form. In this paper, we aim at going a

