Global Supervised Descent Method
Xuehan Xiong and Fernando De la Torre
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh PA
{xxiong,ftorre}@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
x∗

f (x) = h(x) − y 2

Mathematical optimization plays a fundamental role in
solving many problems in computer vision (e.g., camera
calibration, image alignment, structure from motion). It is
generally accepted that second order descent methods are
the most robust, fast, and reliable approaches for nonlinear
optimization of a general smooth function. However, in the
context of computer vision, second order descent methods
have two main drawbacks: 1) the function might not be analytically differentiable and numerical approximations are
impractical, and 2) the Hessian may be large and not positive definite. Recently, Supervised Descent Method (SDM),
a method that learns the “weighted averaged gradients” in
a supervised manner has been proposed to solve these issues. However, SDM is a local algorithm and it is likely
to average conflicting gradient directions. This paper proposes Global SDM (GSDM), an extension of SDM that divides the search space into regions of similar gradient directions. GSDM provides a better and more efficient strategy
to minimize non-linear least squares functions in computer
vision problems. We illustrate the effectiveness of GSDM
in two problems: non-rigid image alignment and extrinsic
camera calibration.

a)

x11
x10

x21
x20

f (x) = h(x) − y 2

x1

b)

x2

x3

Figure 1. a) A single Descent Map (DM) is used in SDM for minimizing a simple function. b) An example of a more complex objective function. In order to use SDM, its domain has to be split
into four regions (represented by different grays) and a separate
DM is learned for each region.

1. Introduction
Many computer vision problems (e.g., camera calibration, image alignment, structure from motion) are solved
with nonlinear optimization methods. In general, most
computer vision-related optimization problems of interest have multiple local minima and are NP-hard to solve.
Global optimization algorithms are typically very computationally expensive, have poor convergence properties, and
generally suitable for low dimensional search spaces. As
a compromise, local optimization methods are usually employed to find a local minimum. Whether global optimization can be solved in polynomial time is still unknown.
However, there is a large number of existing techniques that
approximate the solution. These techniques include Simulated Annealing [15, 31], Evolutionary algorithms [18],

Monte Carlo methods [29, 30] or Branch and Bound [7, 22].
Additionally, Sminchisescu et al. [39] proposed an interesting algorithm to systematically traverse nearby local minima by locating the transition states.
Most global optimization methods are computationally
expensive and do not guarantee the global optima in polynomial time. On the other hand, local optimization methods
based on gradient methods have achieved tremendous success in computer vision problems. When applying gradientbased methods to global optimization, multiple random
starts are typically required. Generally, initial values that
1

