Completing 3D Object Shape from One Depth Image
Jason Rock

Tanmay Gupta

Justin Thorsen
JunYoung Gwak
Derek Hoiem
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

Daeyun Shin

{jjrock2, tgupta6, thorsen1, gwak2, dshin11, dhoiem} @illinois.edu

vision.cs.illinois.edu/projects/shaperecon

Abstract

formed model will fit the observed surface, and hidden surfaces can be transferred from the model. In many cases,
however, the deformed model does not fit the details of the
observed surfaces, yet the query and retrieved object have
similar symmetries. Thus, rather than transferring surfaces
from the retrieved model, we instead transfer local symmetries to complete missing surfaces.

Our goal is to recover a complete 3D model from a depth
image of an object. Existing approaches rely on user interaction or apply to a limited class of objects, such as chairs.
We aim to fully automatically reconstruct a 3D model from
any category. We take an exemplar-based approach: retrieve similar objects in a database of 3D models using
view-based matching and transfer the symmetries and surfaces from retrieved models. We investigate completion of
3D models in three cases: novel view (model in database);
novel model (models for other objects of the same category
in database); and novel category (no models from the category in database).

1.1. Related Work
Most previous approaches in shape completion require
user interaction (e.g. [34, 33, 10, 40, 4]) or are restricted to
a limited set of objects or categories (e.g., [29, 2, 23, 32],
often chairs, as models are plentiful, and silhouettes informative. Our paper is unusual in its focus on quantitatively accurate reconstruction for a broad range of objects, rather than visually pleasing reconstruction for graphics content generation. We are the first to include a broad
quantitative analysis of automatic 3D shape reconstruction
of known objects from novel viewpoints, novel objects from
known categories, and novel objects from unknown categories. Our approach includes techniques for viewpointbased shape matching, 3D deformation, 3D mesh analysis,
and 3D model synthesis that draw from or relate to a rich
literature in graphics and computer vision.
Matching aims to find a complete 3D model from the library that has a similar shape to the depth-imaged object. A
common approach, which we adopt, is to render each object
from the library of meshes from many viewpoints and find a
depth image that matches the query depth image to recover
a similar 3D model from a similar viewpoint. For example, Ohbuchi et al. [28] propose an approach for retrieval
based on SIFT applied to depth images, which is used by
Goldfeder et al. [11] to retrieve models in order to transfer
grasp points. Wohlkinger and Vincze [37] describe a variety of matching features and an algorithm for partial-view
to partial-view matching. Hinterstoisser et al. [12] perform
template matching to localize objects in videos of cluttered
scenes. Tejani et al. [35] propose a tree based structured
prediction for determining object and pose from RGB-D

1. Introduction
Consider the building in Figure 1. Although we only
see a small portion of the object, we can accurately predict
the entire shape. This ability to infer complete 3D shape
from a single view is important for grasping, as we often
reach around an object to grasp its unseen surfaces. Likewise, shape provides cues to category, affordance, and other
properties. Recovery of 3D shape from a depth image is
also useful for content creation and augmented reality applications. But how do we guess the shape of unseen surfaces? One approach is to recognize the same object or a
similar object from past experience: the hidden surfaces of
a favorite coffee mug can be inferred from earlier views or
handling. Another is to infer missing surfaces using symmetries to duplicate and transform observed surfaces.
In this paper, we combine these strategies. Given a depth
image, we find similar 3D models in similar viewpoints using view-specific matching of observed surfaces. The retrieved models are deformed to better approximate the visible portion of the query object. Deformations are constrained by smoothness and symmetries recovered from the
3D models to maintain a plausible shape. In some cases,
such as when the instance or category is known, the de1

