Sparse Composite Quantization
Ting Zhang 1∗
Guo-Jun Qi2
Jinhui Tang3
Jingdong Wang4
1
University of Science and Technology of China, P.R. China 2 University of Central Florida, USA
3
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, P.R. China 4 Microsoft Research, P.R. China

Abstract
The quantization techniques have shown competitive
performance in approximate nearest neighbor search. The
state-of-the-art algorithm, composite quantization, takes
advantage of the compositionabity, i.e., the vector approximation accuracy, as opposed to product quantization and
Cartesian k-means. However, we have observed that the
runtime cost of computing the distance table in composite
quantization, which is used as a lookup table for fast distance computation, becomes nonnegligible in real applications, e.g., reordering the candidates retrieved from the inverted index when handling very large scale databases. To
address this problem, we develop a novel approach, called
sparse composite quantization, which constructs sparse dictionaries. The benefit is that the distance evaluation between the query and the dictionary element (a sparse vector) is accelerated using the efficient sparse vector operation, and thus the cost of distance table computation is reduced a lot. Experiment results on large scale ANN retrieval
tasks (1M SIFTs and 1B SIFTs) and applications to object retrieval show that the proposed approach yields competitive performance: superior search accuracy to product
quantization and Cartesian k-means with almost the same
computing cost, and much faster ANN search than composite quantization with the same level of accuracy.

1. Introduction
Nearest neighbor (NN) search has wide applications in
pattern classification, computer vision, and information retrieval, such as the K-NN classifier, similar image search,
object instance search, and similar document search. Unfortunately, exact NN search is often impractical in the largescale high-dimensional case because the computing cost is
very high, causing unaffordable latency to return the search
result. Thus, many research efforts have been devoted to
approximate nearest neighbor (ANN) search.
∗ This work was done when Ting Zhang was an intern at Microsoft Research, Beijing, P.R. China.

This paper concerns the quantization algorithms for
ANN search with high-dimensional data, which shows
competitive search accuracy with tractable storage and
search cost. Following product quantization [12] that divides the space into partitions and conducts k-means separately over each partition, the extensions with optimized
space partitions, Cartesian k-means [21], have been proposed. The recently proposed composite quantization approach [34] introduces a new framework generalizing those
algorithms.
The acceleration stems from the ability of efficiently
computing the distance between a query and a database
vector by looking up a distance table computed in the online query stage before scanning the whole database. Previous approaches mainly focus on improving the accuracy
of the distance approximation, while pay little attention to
reducing the cost of the online distance table construction.
The construction cost becomes a significant contribution to
the ANN search cost in real applications, e.g., reordering
the candidates retrieved from inverted index when handling
very large databases, especially when we use composite
quantization for higher search accuracy.
To handle this issue, we introduce a novel approach,
sparse composite quantization, which generalizes the composite quantization approach by allowing the words in the
dictionaries to be sparse. The key advantage of this approach is that the distance between the query and every dictionary word is evaluated very efficiently using sparse vector multiplication, which significantly reduces the search
time. As a consequence, the proposed approach constructs
the distance lookup table as fast as the most efficient algorithm, product quantization, while achieving a higher accuracy than product quantization, and also a similar or even
higher accuracy when compared to Cartesian k-means and
composite quantization. On the challenging search task
with 1 billion SIFT vectors, the proposed approach outperforms the state-of-the-art algorithms in terms of both search
efficiency and search accuracy. In particular, compared with
composite quantization that achieves the highest recall performance, the proposed approach has successfully reduced
the search time by at least 7% up to 36% in many cases,

