Deep Transfer Metric Learning
Junlin Hu1 , Jiwen Lu2∗, Yap-Peng Tan1
1
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Advanced Digital Sciences Center, Singapore
jhu007@e.ntu.edu.sg, jiwen.lu@adsc.com.sg, eyptan@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Conventional metric learning methods usually assume
that the training and test samples are captured in similar
scenarios so that their distributions are assumed to be the
same. This assumption doesn’t hold in many real visual
recognition applications, especially when samples are captured across different datasets. In this paper, we propose a
new deep transfer metric learning (DTML) method to learn
a set of hierarchical nonlinear transformations for crossdomain visual recognition by transferring discriminative
knowledge from the labeled source domain to the unlabeled
target domain. Specifically, our DTML learns a deep metric
network by maximizing the inter-class variations and minimizing the intra-class variations, and minimizing the distribution divergence between the source domain and the target domain at the top layer of the network. To better exploit
the discriminative information from the source domain, we
further develop a deeply supervised transfer metric learning (DSTML) method by including an additional objective
on DTML where the output of both the hidden layers and
the top layer are optimized jointly. Experimental results on
cross-dataset face verification and person re-identification
validate the effectiveness of the proposed methods.

1. Introduction
How to design a good similarity function plays an important role in many computer vision and pattern recognition
tasks. Generally, the optimal similarity function for a given
vision problem is task-specific because the underlying data
distributions for different tasks are usually different. Recent advances in machine learning have shown that learning a
distance metric directly from a set of training examples can
usually achieve proposing performance than hand-crafted
distance metrics [9, 32, 33]. In recent years, a variety of
metric learning algorithms have been proposed in the literature [9, 14, 16, 23, 25, 32, 33], and some of them have
∗ Corresponding author.

Source domain

Target domain

DTML

Source and target data
in transformed subspace

Figure 1. The basic idea of the proposed DTML method. For each
sample in the training sets from the source domain and the target
domain, we pass it to the developed deep neural network. We
enforce two constraints on the outputs of all training samples at
the top of the network: 1) the inter-class variations are maximized
and the intra-class variations are minimized, and 2) the distribution
divergence between the source domain and the target domain at the
top layer of the network is minimized.

successfully applied in visual analysis applications such as
face recognition [14, 16], image classification [9, 32], human activity recognition [31], person re-identification [19]
and visual search [26].
Existing metric learning methods can be mainly classified into two categories: unsupervised and supervised. For
the first category, a low-dimensional subspace or manifold
is learned to preserve the geometrical information of the
samples. For the second category, a discriminative distance
metric is learned to maximize the separability of samples
from different classes. Since the label information of training samples is used, supervised metric learning methods are
more suitable for the recognition task.
While many supervised metric learning algorithms have
been presented in recent years, there are still two shortcomings of these methods: 1) most of them usually seek a single
linear distance to transform sample into a linear feature space, so that the nonlinear relationship of samples cannot
be well exploited. Even if the kernel trick [36] can be em-

