Separating Objects and Clutter in Indoor Scenes
S. H. Khan∗ Xuming He† M. Bannamoun∗
∗
School of CSSE UWA † NICTA and ANU

F. Sohel∗ R. Togneri‡
‡
School of EECE UWA

{salman.khan,mohammed.bennamoun,ferdous.sohel,roberto.togneri}@uwa.edu.au, xuming.he@nicta.com.au

Abstract
Objects’ spatial layout estimation and clutter identiﬁcation are two important tasks to understand indoor
scenes. We propose to solve both of these problems in a
joint framework using RGBD images of indoor scenes.
In contrast to recent approaches which focus on either
one of these two problems, we perform ‘ﬁne grained
structure categorization’ by predicting all the major objects and simultaneously labeling the cluttered regions.
A conditional random ﬁeld model is proposed to incorporate a rich set of local appearance, geometric features
and interactions between the scene elements. We take
a structural learning approach with a loss of 3D localisation to estimate the model parameters from a large
annotated RGBD dataset, and a mixed integer linear
programming formulation for inference. We demonstrate that our approach is able to detect cuboids and
estimate cluttered regions across many diﬀerent object
and scene categories in the presence of occlusion, illumination and appearance variations.

Figure 1: With a given RGBD image (left column), our method
explores the 3D structures in an indoor scene and estimates their
geometry using cuboids (right image). It also identiﬁes cluttered/unorganized regions in a scene (shown in orange) which
can be of interest for tasks such as robot grasping.

tional depth information has recently been introduced
to obtain more robust estimation [23, 16, 13, 25]. However, real-world scenes are composed of not only large
regular-shaped structures and objects (such as walls,
ﬂoor, furniture), but also irregular shaped objects and
cluttered regions which cannot be represented well by
object-level primitives. The overlay of diﬀerent types
of scene elements makes the procedure of localizing 3D
objects fragile and prone to misalignment.
Most previous work has focused on clutter reasoning in the scene layout estimation problem [14, 29, 32].
Such object clutter is usually deﬁned at a coarselevel, including everything other than the global layout, which is insuﬃcient for object-level parsing. To
tackle the problem of 3D object cuboid estimation, we
attempt to use clutter in a more ﬁne-grained sense, referring to any unordered region other than the main
structures and major cuboid-like objects in the scene,
as shown in Fig. 1.
We aim to address the problem of 3D object cuboid
detection in a cluttered scene. In this work, we propose to jointly localize generic 3D objects (represented
by cuboids) and label cluttered regions from an RGBD
image. Unlike the recent cuboid detection techniques,
which consider such regions as background, our method
explicitly models the appearance and geometric property of the ﬁne-grained cluttered regions. We incorporate scene context (in the form of object and clutter)

1. Introduction
We live in a three dimensional world where objects
interact with each other according to a rich set of physical and geometrical constraints. Therefore, merely recognizing objects or segmenting an image into a set of
semantic classes does not always provide a meaningful
interpretation of the scene and its properties. A better
understanding of real-world scenes requires a holistic
perspective, exploring both semantic and 3D structures
of objects as well as the rich relationship among them
[12, 29, 19, 33]. To this end, one fundamental task
is that of the volumetric reasoning about generic 3D
objects and their 3D spatial layout.
Among diﬀerent approaches to tackle the generic
3D object reasoning problem, much progress has been
made based on representing objects as 3D geometric
primitives, such as cuboids. Some of the ﬁrst eﬀorts
focus on the 3D spatial layout and cuboid-like objects
in indoor scenes from monocular imagery [22, 14, 31].
Owing to the complex structure of the scenes, addi1

