Fine-Grained Histopathological Image Analysis
via Robust Segmentation and Large-Scale Retrieval

1

Xiaofan Zhang1 , Hai Su2 , Lin Yang2 , Shaoting Zhang1∗
University of North Carolina at Charlotte, Charlotte, NC, 28223, USA.
2
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, 32611, USA.
*Corresponding author: shaoting@cs.rutgers.edu

Abstract
Computer-aided diagnosis of medical images requires
thorough analysis of image details. For example,
examining all cells enables ﬁne-grained categorization
of histopathological images. Traditional computational
methods may have eﬃciency issues when performing
such detailed analysis. In this paper, we propose a robust and scalable solution to achieve this. Speciﬁcally,
a robust segmentation method is developed to delineate
region-of-interests (e.g., cells) accurately, using hierarchical voting and repulsive active contour. A hashingbased large-scale retrieval approach is also designed
to examine and classify them by comparing with a
massive training database. We evaluate this proposed
framework on a challenging and important clinical use
case, i.e., diﬀerentiation of two types of lung cancers
(the adenocarcinoma and the squamous carcinoma),
using thousands of histopathological images extracted
from hundreds of patients. Our method has achieved
promising performance, i.e., 87.3% accuracy and 1.68
seconds by searching among half-million cells.

1. Introduction
Recently, digitized tissue histopathology for microscopic examination and automatic disease grading
has become amenable to the application of computerized image analysis and computer-aided diagnosis [14].
Many methods have been proposed to tackle this
important and challenging use case, by investigating
object level and spatially related features [2, 31] and
employing diﬀerent classiﬁcation schemes [28, 26, 6].
Despite rapid progress in recent years, the main challenge in terms of the computational techniques is the
need of analyzing all individual cells for accurate diagnosis, since the diﬀerentiation of most disease grades
highly depends on the cell-level information, such as its

morphology, shape and appearance. In fact, most use
cases of medical image analysis require such thorough
examination. However, this is very time-consuming.
For example, a whole slide histopathological image may
have billions of pixels, and even a region-of-interest
(ROI) image contains thousands of cells. Analyzing
each cell is computational ineﬃcient using traditional
methods, if not infeasible. Therefore, many previous
methods encode the whole image as holistic features
by representing the statistics of cell-level information
(e.g., architecture features [6] and frequency of local
textures [33]), and may compress high-dimensional features to improve the computational eﬃciency [33, 34].
Despite the compactness and hence the eﬃciency, information loss is inevitable in such holistic representation.
In this paper, we design an automatic framework
to conduct large-scale analysis of histopathological
images, which can examine millions of cells eﬃciently. Our solution includes two important modules,
robust segmentation and large-scale retrieval. Given a
new image to be diagnosed, our system automatically
segments all cells and eﬃciently discovers the most
relevant cells by comparing them with a large-scale
training database (e.g., millions of cells extracted from
thousands of images). The diagnosis is decided by classifying each cell using the majority logic. We conduct
extensive experiments to diﬀerentiate lung cancers, a
very challenging use case of histopathological image
analysis, using a large dataset containing thousands of
lung microscopic tissue images acquired from hundreds
of patients. Early diagnosis and diﬀerentiation of lung
cancers is clinically important due to their diﬀerent
management protocols [8, 10]. However, few eﬀorts
have been put on the classiﬁcation of the adenocarcinoma and squamous carcinoma, i.e., two types of
lung cancers, which need cell-level examination to diﬀerentiate. Our proposed framework eﬀectively solves
this challenging problem, achieving 87.3% accuracy
by searching a massive database of half million cells

