Weakly Supervised Object Detection with Convex Clustering
Hakan Bilen†§
Marco Pedersoli†
Tinne Tuytelaars†
†
§
ESAT-PSI / iMinds,
VGG, Dept. of Eng. Sci.
KU Leuven, Belgium
University of Oxford
firstname.lastname@esat.kuleuven.be

Abstract
Weakly supervised object detection, is a challenging
task, where the training procedure involves learning at the
same time both, the model appearance and the object location in each image. The classical approach to solve this
problem is to consider the location of the object of interest
in each image as a latent variable and minimize the loss
generated by such latent variable during learning. However, as learning appearance and localization are two interconnected tasks, the optimization is not convex and the procedure can easily get stuck in a poor local minimum, i.e. the
algorithm “misses” the object in some images. In this paper, we help the optimization to get close to the global minimum by enforcing a “soft” similarity between each possible location in the image and a reduced set of “exemplars”,
or clusters, learned with a convex formulation in the training images. The help is effective because it comes from a
different and smooth source of information that is not directly connected with the main task. Results show that our
method improves a strong baseline based on convolutional
neural network features by more than 4 points without any
additional features or extra computation at testing time but
only adding a small increment of the training time due to
the convex clustering.

Figure 1. An illustration of our learning model: In the top row,
we show clusters of objects and object parts that are simultaneously learned with the detectors during training. Our method
encourages highly probable windows to be similar among them
through the jointly learned clusters during training. The colored lines indicate similarity between windows and clusters. Best
viewed in color.

solution that disentangles object instances from noisy and
cluttered background. The standard WSL paradigm alternates between labeling the missing annotations and learning a classifier based on these labellings in a spirit similar to
Expectation Maximization (EM). Due to the missing annotations, this optimization is non-convex and therefore prone
to getting stuck in a local minimum (and sensitive to initialization). In practice, although the optimal solution would
lead to a perfect localization of the objects, guiding the optimization to such point is quite challenging and the weakly
supervised detection performance is far from the supervised
one. We can comprehend the importance of properly guiding the optimization by considering the extreme case of perfect localization, i.e. the fully supervised case, which can
be considered an upper bound in terms of performance. For
instance, the best reported detection performance that relies
on the convolutional neural network (CNN) features of [6]
on the Pascal VOC 2007 dataset [7] is 58.5% ([10]) mean
average precision (AP) in the fully supervised case while it
is 30.9% ([30]) in the weakly supervised case. Thus improving the optimization of our non-convex problem is vital because it would directly lead to better detection performance.
Here, we investigate a possible way to improve the opti-

1. Introduction
The standard approach for supervised learning of object detection models requires the annotation of each target object instance with a bounding box in the training set.
This fully supervised paradigm is tedious and costly for
large-scale datasets. The alternative but more challenging
paradigm is to learn from the growing amount of noisily
and sparsely annotated visual data available. In this work,
we focus on the specific “weakly supervised” case when
the annotation at training time is restricted to presence or
absence of object instances at image-level.
An ideal weakly supervised learning (WSL) for object
detection is expected to guide the missing annotations to a
4321

