Clustering of Static-Adaptive Correspondences for Deformable Object Tracking
Georg Nebehay1,2
1
Institute for Computer Graphics and Vision
Graz University of Technology

Roman Pflugfelder2
2
Digital Safety and Security Department
Austrian Institute of Technology

gnebehay@gmail.com

roman.pflugfelder@ait.ac.at

Abstract
We propose a novel method for establishing correspondences on deformable objects for single-target object tracking. The key ingredient is a dissimilarity measure between correspondences that takes into account their geometric compatibility, allowing us to separate inlier correspondences from outliers. We employ both static correspondences from the initial appearance of the object as well as
adaptive correspondences from the previous frame to address the stability-plasticity dilemma. The geometric dissimilarity measure enables us to also disambiguate keypoints that are difficult to match. Based on these ideas we
build a keypoint-based tracker that outputs rotated bounding boxes. We demonstrate in a rigorous empirical analysis
that this tracker outperforms the state of the art on a dataset
of 77 sequences.

t0

t

t−1

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Top row: From the initial bounding box in frame t0
static keypoints are extracted. Both the static keypoints and adaptive keypoints from frame t − 1 are matched to the current frame
t. Bottom row: Based on a geometric dissimilarity measure, the
correspondences are clustered into inliers and outliers (left) and
ambiguous matches are resolved (middle). A rotated bounding
box (right) is computed as the algorithmic output.

Keypoints are one of the most widely used representations for objects in computer vision [12, 15, 19]. The main
idea of keypoints is to break down the object into individual parts that are easier to match to a descriptor database
than a holistic representation of the object. While matching
is error-prone due to similar descriptors on the object and
background clutter, robust methods such as RANSAC [4]
are often used to evaluate the fitness of the matches to a motion model. Typically, strong assumptions are made in this
motion model, of which the rigidity assumption probably is
the most common one. However, one of the biggest challenges in object tracking is the deformation of the object of
interest, often invalidating this assumption.
In object recognition, a strand of research has emerged
recently studying how to incorporate spatial constraints into
the matching of keypoints in addition to photometric constraints [23, 3, 9], aiming at replacing the strong assumptions by more flexible ones, allowing for deformations to
be handled. For instance, Cho et al. [3] cluster correspondences by means of a dissimilarity measure that incorpo-

rates geometric constraints. Specifically, the clustering of
correspondences has the appealing property that connected
correspondences act as mediators.
The primary contribution of our work is the formulation
of a novel dissimilarity measure for the clustering of correspondences. By applying standard hierarchical clustering
techniques [22], we achieve a partitioning of the correspondences into inliers and outliers. The second contribution is
a novel method for establishing correspondences based on
the insight that static and adaptive correspondences complement each other as they stem from opposite ends of
the adaptivity spectrum. The third contribution is a novel
method for disambiguating matches that is based on our
proposed dissimilarity measure.
The combination of our individual contributions forms a
simple tracking algorithm that stands in stark contrast to the
state of the art, as newly discovered appearance information
is not incorporated permanently into the object model. The
outline of our approach is shown in Figure 1. We show in

