A Solution for Multi-Alignment by Transformation Synchronisation
Florian Bernard1,2,3

Johan Thunberg2
Andreas Husch1,2,3

1

Peter Gemmar3

Frank Hertel1

Jorge Goncalves2

Centre Hospitalier de Luxembourg, Luxembourg

{bernard.florian,hertel.frank,husch.andreas}@chl.lu
2

Luxembourg Centre for Systems Biomedicine, University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg
{johan.thunberg,jorge.goncalves}@uni.lu
3

Trier University of Applied Sciences, Germany
p.gemmar@hochschule-trier.de

Abstract
The alignment of a set of objects by means of transformations plays an important role in computer vision. Whilst
the case for only two objects can be solved globally, when
multiple objects are considered usually iterative methods
are used. In practice the iterative methods perform well
if the relative transformations between any pair of objects
are free of noise. However, if only noisy relative transformations are available (e.g. due to missing data or wrong
correspondences) the iterative methods may fail.
Based on the observation that the underlying noise-free
transformations can be retrieved from the null space of a
matrix that can directly be obtained from pairwise alignments, this paper presents a novel method for the synchronisation of pairwise transformations such that they are transitively consistent.
Simulations demonstrate that for noisy transformations,
a large proportion of missing data and even for wrong correspondence assignments the method delivers encouraging
results.

1. Introduction
The alignment of a set of objects by means of transformations plays an important role in the field of computer
vision and recognition. For instance, for the creation of
statistical shape models (SSMs) [5] training shapes are initially aligned for removing pose differences in order to only
model shape variability.
The most common way of shape representation is by encoding each shape as a point-cloud. In order to be able to
process a set of shapes it is necessary that correspondences

between all shapes are established. Whilst there is a vast
amount of research in the field of shape correspondences
(for an overview see [11, 18]), in this paper we focus on the
alignment of shapes and we assume that correspondences
have already been established.
The alignment of two objects by removing location,
scale and rotation is known as Absolute Orientation Problem (AOP) [13] or Procrustes Analysis [8]. For the AOP
there are various closed-form solutions, among them methods based on singular value decomposition (SVD) [1, 16];
based on eigenvalue decomposition [13]; based on unit
quaternions [12] or based on dual quaternions [19]. A comparison of these methods [6] has revealed that the accuracy
and the robustness of all methods are comparable.
The alignment of more than two objects is known as
Generalised Procrustes Analysis (GPA). Whilst a computationally expensive global solution for GPA in two and three
dimensions has been presented in [15], the most common
way for solving the GPA is to align the objects with a reference object. However, fixing any of the objects as reference induces a bias. An unbiased alternative is to align
all objects with the adaptive mean object as reference. An
iterative algorithm then alternatingly updates the reference
object and estimates the transformations aligning the objects. The iterative nature of these methods constitutes a
problem if the relative transformation between any pair of
objects is noisy. This is for example the case if data is missing, correspondences are wrong or if the transformations are
observed by independent sensors (e.g. non-communicating
robots observe each other). Noisy relative transformations
can be characterised by transitive inconsistency, i.e. transforming A to B and B to C might lead to a different result
than transforming A directly to C.
This paper presents a novel method for synchronising

