The k-Support Norm and Convex Envelopes of Cardinality and Rank
Anders Eriksson
School of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science
Queensland University of Technology

Trung Thanh Pham, Tat-Jun Chin, Ian Reid
School of Computer Science
The University of Adelaide
{trung.pham,tat-jun.chin,ian.reid@adelaide.edu.au}

anders.eriksson@qut.edu.au

Abstract
Sparsity, or cardinality, as a tool for feature selection
is extremely common in a vast number of current computer
vision applications. The k-support norm is a recently proposed norm with the proven property of providing the tightest convex bound on cardinality over the Euclidean norm
unit ball. In this paper we present a re-derivation of this
norm, with the hope of shedding further light on this particular surrogate function. In addition, we also present a connection between the rank operator, the nuclear norm and
the k-support norm. Finally, based on the results established in this re-derivation, we propose a novel algorithm
with significantly improved computational efficiency, empirically validated on a number of different problems, using
both synthetic and real world data.

1. Introduction
The use of sparsity in the field of Computer Vision can
perhaps best be motivated by two main principles, computational efficiency and model simplicity. Selecting as few
variables or features as possible will hopefully yield both a
cheap and accurate model of the problem at hand.
Sparsity is typically obtained by regularizing the goodness of fit with the cardinality, (denoted card(·) or || · ||0 )
of the variables. However, as this typically leads to nonconvex optimization problems with high computational demands, the standard approach is to replace and relax these
regularizers with convex surrogates for cardinality. The
most popular such surrogate function is unquestionably the
l1 -norm. The use of which is regularly justified by saying
that the l1 -norm makes up the convex envelope of the cardinality function. However, as it was pointed out in [1],
this is an argument that must be used with care. Correctly
stated, we have that the l1 -norm is only the convex envelope
of || · ||0 on the bounded domain, {x ∈ Rd | ||x||∞ ≤ 1},
the l∞ -norm unit ball.
It was argued in [1] that in certain instances it might be

reasonable to not only expect that each individual entry of
the entering variables be bounded, but to have bounds on
their Euclidean norm as well. This led to the proposal of the
k-support norm, a norm that was shown to provide the tightest convex relaxation of cardinality on the Euclidean-norm
unit ball. It was also shown that this norm leads to improved
learning guarantees as well as better algorithmic stability.
However, as [1] did not address computational complexity issues, the proposed algorithm, employing an exhaustive
search method, has proven painfully slow for even modest
sized problems.

The authors of [10] presented an improved algorithm for
computing the solution of k-support norm regularized optimization problems. They proposed the use of binary search
as a replacement for certain subproblems in the original algorithm of [1]. Despite reporting significant speed-ups over
[1], this method was still exhaustive in nature and could for
larger problems and/or certain parameter choices still prove
to be quite inefficient.

In this paper we attempt to make progress towards shedding further light on a number of different aspects of the
k-support norm. In our opinion, there are three main contributions made here. Firstly, we present a slightly different
derivation of the k-support norm with a stronger emphasis on the concept of convex envelopes. By doing so we
hope to provide a different perspective to previous work and
also make the connection to the rank operator on matrices
perhaps more obvious. Secondly, we show that there is an
equivalence between cardinality, the rank operator and the
nuclear norm on domains shared between the elements of
vectors and singular values of matrices. Our final contribution is a proposed algorithm for solving optimization problems involving the k-support norm. This method is then
empirically proven to be orders of magnitude faster than the
existing state-of-the-art approaches.

