Simultaneous Pose and Non-Rigid Shape with Particle Dynamics
Antonio Agudo1
Francesc Moreno-Noguer2
1
Instituto de Investigación en Ingenierı́a de Aragón (I3A), Universidad de Zaragoza, Spain
2
Institut de Robòtica i Informàtica Industrial (CSIC-UPC), Barcelona, Spain

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a sequential solution to simultaneously estimate camera pose and non-rigid 3D shape
from a monocular video. In contrast to most existing approaches that rely on global representations of the shape,
we model the object at a local level, as an ensemble of particles, each ruled by the linear equation of the Newton’s second law of motion. This dynamic model is incorporated into
a bundle adjustment framework, in combination with simple
regularization components that ensure temporal and spatial
consistency of the estimated shape and camera poses. The
resulting approach is both efficient and robust to several artifacts such as noisy and missing data or sudden camera
motions, while it does not require any training data at all.
Validation is done in a variety of real video sequences, including articulated and non-rigid motion, both for continuous and discontinuous shapes. Our system is shown to perform comparable to competing batch, computationally expensive, methods and shows remarkable improvement with
respect to the sequential ones.

Figure 1. 3D Reconstruction using our physically-inspired velocity
model for different types of deformations: face, human torso and
articulated motion. Each line represents the per point non-rigid
motion detected by our algorithm. Best viewed in color.

encode global deformations, they cannot, in general, handle
non-linear motion patterns and strong local deformations.
Piecewise strategies [11, 28, 31, 34] allow recovering larger
deformations, although their performance highly depends
on having overlapping features in neighboring patches, or
require large number of correspondences to enforce local
rigidity constraints [11, 31, 34], which can be hard to obtain in practice. In any event, these previous approaches
batch process all frames of the sequence at once, after video
capture, preventing them from being used on-line and in
real-time applications. This has been recently addressed
in [2, 4, 24], which, however, still focus on global models
only valid for relatively small deformations [24] or continuous surfaces [2, 4].
An alternative to statistical and low-rank approaches is
to directly model the physical laws that locally govern object kinematics. Drawing inspiration from computer graphics [27], there have been several attempts at using these
models for tracking non-rigid motion [20] and human activities [10]. Unfortunately, these methods are usually focused
to specific types of motion, and their underlying laws rely
on non-linear relations complex to optimize. An interesting
exception is [29], which directly uses the Newton’s second
law of motion to build a convex formulation for tracking
purposes. This work, though, is not sequential, does not estimate the camera pose, as we do, and still holds on priors

1. Introduction
The problem of simultaneously recovering rigid shape
and camera pose from a monocular sequence, known
as Structure-from-Motion (SfM), has recently seen great
progress [1, 22], even when dense reconstructions are required [23]. Yet, these methods cannot be applied to scenes
undergoing non-rigid deformations. In these situations, the
fact that many different 3D shapes can have very similar image projections produces severe ambiguities that can only
be resolved by introducing prior knowledge about the camera trajectory and scene deformation.
Most Non-Rigid Structure from Motion (NRSfM) approaches solve this problem using statistical priors to model
the global deformable structure as a linear combination of
low-rank bases of shapes [9, 12, 21, 33] or 3D point trajectories [6, 16, 26]. This is typically used with additional
smoothness constraints that further disambiguate the problem [8, 14, 25]. Yet, while low-rank methods can effectively
1

