SWIFT: Sparse Withdrawal of Inliers in a First Trial∗
Maryam Jaberi1 , Marianna Pensky 2 , and Hassan Foroosh1
1

The Computational Imaging Lab., Computer Science, University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL, USA
2
Department of Mathematics, University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL, USA

Abstract

of the main challenges in a multi-structured environment
is the high percentage of outliers. This is due to the presence of two different types of outliers in the population: (i)
Gross outliers, which are basically points that do not belong
to any model instance, and (ii) Pseudo-outliers, which are
points that are inliers to one model instance but effectively
act as outliers to all other model instances in the population [2]. Early approaches in identifying multiple model instances estimated models sequentially using a single-model
fitting method [7]. At each iteration inliers to a model instance were detected and removed and the process was repeated iteratively [18, 17, 22] for detecting additional model
instances. However, the efficiency of these algorithms reduces significantly for multi-structure datasets, since the
stopping criterion is usually non-trivial, and the removing
of the inliers at each iteration can affect the detection of
the remaining model instances. Moreover, an assumption
in single-model estimation algorithms is that the outliers
are uniformly distributed, which is violated when multiple
model instances are present, because they form clusters of
points as pseudo-outliers to any given model instance as described above. This issue is discussed in [13], where it is
shown that clustered outliers are more difficult to handle
than uniformly distributed gross outliers. One of the most
popular single-model methods is the sequential RANSAC,
which explores one model per iteration, removes the associated inlier points from the dataset, and then proceeds iteratively to detect other instances [21]. As mentioned above, a
major drawback of these approaches, in addition to the difficulty of handling clustered outliers, is that the number of
model instances needs to be known in advance in order to
determine when to stop the iterations. This implies a supervised solution, where the number of model instances is assumed to be known a priori, which in many practical cases
is not feasible.

We study the simultaneous detection of multiple structures in the presence of overwhelming number of outliers
in a large population of points. Our approach reduces the
problem to sampling an extremely sparse subset of the original population of data in one grab, followed by an unsupervised clustering of the population based on a set of instantiated models from this sparse subset. We show that
the problem can be modeled using a multivariate hypergeometric distribution, and derive accurate mathematical
bounds to determine a tight approximation to the sample
size, leading thus to a sparse sampling strategy. We evaluate the method thoroughly in terms of accuracy, its behavior
against varying input parameters, and comparison against
existing methods, including the state of the art. The key features of the proposed approach are: (i) sparseness of the
sampled set, where the level of sparseness is independent of
the population size and the distribution of data, (ii) robustness in the presence of overwhelming number of outliers,
and (iii) unsupervised detection of all model instances, i.e.
without requiring any prior knowledge of the number of embedded structures. To demonstrate the generic nature of the
proposed method, we show experimental results on different computer vision problems, such as detection of physical
structures e.g. lines, planes, etc., as well as more abstract
structures such as fundamental matrices, and homographies
in multi-body structure from motion.

1. Introduction and Related Works
Extending robust parameter estimation methods, such as
least median of squares (LMedS) [14] and random sampling consensus (RANSAC) [7], to detect multiple model
instances simultaneously is an active area of research. One

More recent studies try to find all the model instances
and their parameters simultaneously. Generally, the research in this area is focused on two main aspects: (i) the
study of the sampling process, whereby subsets of the data

∗ This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under grants IIS-1212948, IIS-091686, DMS-1106564 and DMS1407475.

1

