Active Pictorial Structures
Epameinondas Antonakos
Joan Alabort-i-Medina
Stefanos Zafeiriou
Department of Computing, Imperial College London
180 Queens Gate, SW7 2AZ, London, U.K.
{e.antonakos, ja310, s.zafeiriou}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
In this paper we present a novel generative deformable
model motivated by Pictorial Structures (PS) and Active Appearance Models (AAMs) for object alignment in-the-wild.
Inspired by the tree structure used in PS, the proposed Active Pictorial Structures (APS)1 model the appearance of
the object using multiple graph-based pairwise normal distributions (Gaussian Markov Random Field) between the
patches extracted from the regions around adjacent landmarks. We show that this formulation is more accurate than
using a single multivariate distribution (Principal Component Analysis) as commonly done in the literature. APS employ a weighted inverse compositional Gauss-Newton optimization with fixed Jacobian and Hessian that achieves
close to real-time performance and state-of-the-art results.
Finally, APS have a spring-like graph-based deformation
prior term that makes them robust to bad initializations. We
present extensive experiments on the task of face alignment,
showing that APS outperform current state-of-the-art methods. To the best of our knowledge, the proposed method
is the first weighted inverse compositional technique that
proves to be so accurate and efficient at the same time.

Figure 1: A simple visualization motivating the main idea
behind APS1 . We propose to model the appearance of an
object using multiple pairwise distributions based on the
edges of a graph (GMRF) and show that this outperforms
the commonly used PCA model under an inverse GaussNewton optimization framework.

tical generative models of the shape and appearance of an
object. The shape model, usually referred to as Point Distribution Model (PDM), is built by applying Principal Component Analysis (PCA) on a set of aligned shapes. Similarly, the appearance model is built by applying PCA on a
set of shape-free appearance instances, acquired by warping
the training images into a reference shape. AAMs represent
the appearance in a holistic/global way, i.e. the whole texture is taken into account. Fitting AAMs involves solving
a non-linear least squares problem and it is typically solved
using a variant of the Gauss-Newton algorithm [5]. The Simultaneous [14] and Alternating [20, 27] inverse compositional algorithms have proved to be very accurate. They can
achieve state-of-the-art performance when combined with
powerful features [4]. The Project-Out inverse compositional (POIC) [19] algorithm has a real-time complexity but
is inaccurate, which makes it unsuitable for generic settings.
Therefore, AAMs have two disadvantages: (1) they are slow
and inappropriate for real-time applications, and (2) by employing PCA the appearance of the object is modelled with
a single multivariate normal distribution, which, as it will
be shown in this paper, restricts the fitting accuracy (Fig. 1).

1. Introduction
The task of object alignment in terms of landmark points
localization under unconstrained conditions is among the
most challenging problems in the field of Computer Vision.
Such challenging conditions are usually referred to as “inthe-wild”. Ongoing research efforts on generic Deformable
Models aim to provide robust and accurate techniques that
perform in real-time. Such methodologies can have an important impact in human-computer interaction applications,
such as multimodal interaction, entertainment, security etc.
One of the most well-studied deformable models are Active Appearance Models (AAMs) [7, 19]. AAMs are statis1 An open-source implementation of Active Pictorial Structures is available within the Menpo Project [1] in http://www.menpo.org/.

1

