Pose-Conditioned Joint Angle Limits for 3D Human Pose Reconstruction
Ijaz Akhter and Michael J. Black
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
{ijaz.akhter, black}@tuebingen.mpg.de

Abstract
Estimating 3D human pose from 2D joint locations is
central to the analysis of people in images and video. To address the fact that the problem is inherently ill posed, many
methods impose a prior over human poses. Unfortunately
these priors admit invalid poses because they do not model
how joint-limits vary with pose. Here we make two key contributions. First, we collect a motion capture dataset that
explores a wide range of human poses. From this we learn
a pose-dependent model of joint limits that forms our prior.
Both dataset and prior are available for research purposes.
Second, we define a general parametrization of body pose
and a new, multi-stage, method to estimate 3D pose from 2D
joint locations using an over-complete dictionary of poses.
Our method shows good generalization while avoiding impossible poses. We quantitatively compare our method with
recent work and show state-of-the-art results on 2D to 3D
pose estimation using the CMU mocap dataset. We also
show superior results using manual annotations on real images and automatic detections on the Leeds sports pose
dataset.

Figure 1. Joint-limit dataset. We captured a new dataset for learning pose-dependent joint angle limits. This includes an extensive
variety of stretching poses. A few sample images are shown here.

We found that existing mocap datasets (like the CMU
dataset) are insufficient to learn true joint angle limits, in
particular limits that are pose dependent. Therefore we captured a new dataset of human motions that includes an extensive variety of stretching poses performed by trained athletes and gymnasts (see Fig. 1). We learn pose-dependent
joint angle limits from this data and propose a novel prior
based on these limits.
The proposed prior can be used for problems where
estimating 3D human pose is ambiguous. Our pose
parametrization is particularly simple and general in that
the 3D pose of the kinematic skeleton is defined by the
two endpoints of each bone in Cartesian coordinates. Constraining a 3D pose to remain valid during an optimization
simply requires the addition of our penalty term in the objective function. We also show that our prior can be combined with a sparse representation of poses, selected from
an overcomplete dictionary, to define a general yet accurate
parametrization of human pose.
We use our prior to estimate 3D human pose from 2D
joint locations. Figure 2 demonstrates the main difficulty
in this problem. Given a single view in Fig. 2(a), the 3D
pose is ambiguous [27] and there exist several plausible 3D
poses as shown in Fig. 2(b), all resulting in the same 2D
observations. Thus no generic prior information about static
body pose is sufficient to guarantee a single correct 3D pose.
Here we seek the most probable, valid, human pose.
We show that a critical step for 3D pose estimation given

1. Introduction
Accurate modeling of priors over 3D human pose is fundamental to many problems in computer vision. Most previous priors are either not general enough for the diverse
nature of human poses or not restrictive enough to avoid
invalid 3D poses. We propose a physically-motivated prior
that only allows anthropometrically valid poses and restricts
the ones that are invalid.
One can use joint-angle limits to evaluate whether two
connected bones are valid or not. However, it is established
in biomechanics that there are dependencies in joint-angle
limits between certain pair of bones [12, 17]. For example
how much one can flex one’s arm depends on whether it
is in front of, or behind, the back. Medical textbooks only
provide joint-angle limits in a few positions [2, 26] and the
complete configuration of pose-dependent joint-angle limits
for the full body is unknown.
1

