Understanding Deep Image Representations by Inverting Them
Aravindh Mahendran
University of Oxford
aravindh@robots.ox.ac.uk

Andrea Vedaldi
University of Oxford
vedaldi@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Image representations, from SIFT and Bag of Visual
Words to Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), are a
crucial component of almost any image understanding system. Nevertheless, our understanding of them remains limited. In this paper we conduct a direct analysis of the visual
information contained in representations by asking the following question: given an encoding of an image, to which
extent is it possible to reconstruct the image itself? To answer this question we contribute a general framework to
invert representations. We show that this method can invert
representations such as HOG more accurately than recent
alternatives while being applicable to CNNs too. We then
use this technique to study the inverse of recent state-of-theart CNN image representations for the first time. Among our
findings, we show that several layers in CNNs retain photographically accurate information about the image, with
different degrees of geometric and photometric invariance.

Figure 1. What is encoded by a CNN? The figure shows five
possible reconstructions of the reference image obtained from the
1,000-dimensional code extracted at the penultimate layer of a reference CNN[15] (before the softmax is applied) trained on the ImageNet data. From the viewpoint of the model, all these images are
practically equivalent. This image is best viewed in color/screen.

lapse irrelevant differences in images (e.g. illumination or
viewpoint), so that Φ should not be uniquely invertible.
Hence, we pose this as a reconstruction problem and find
a number of possible reconstructions rather than a single
one. By doing so, we obtain insights into the invariances
captured by the representation.
Our contributions are as follows. First, we propose a
general method to invert representations, including SIFT,
HOG, and CNNs (Sect. 2). Crucially, this method uses only
information from the image representation and a generic
natural image prior, starting from random noise as initial
solution, and hence captures only the information contained
in the representation itself. We discuss and evaluate different regularization penalties as natural image priors. Second, we show that, despite its simplicity and generality, this
method recovers significantly better reconstructions from
HOG compared to recent alternatives [33]. As we do so,
we emphasise a number of subtle differences between these
representations and their effect on invertibility. Third, we
apply the inversion technique to the analysis of recent deep
CNNs, exploring their invariance by sampling possible approximate reconstructions. We relate this to the depth of the
representation, showing that the CNN gradually builds an

1. Introduction
Most image understanding and computer vision methods
build on image representations such as textons [17], histogram of oriented gradients (SIFT [20] and HOG [4]), bag
of visual words [3][27], sparse [37] and local coding [34],
super vector coding [40], VLAD [10], Fisher Vectors [23],
and, lately, deep neural networks, particularly of the convolutional variety [15, 25, 38]. However, despite the progress
in the development of visual representations, their design is
still driven empirically and a good understanding of their
properties is lacking. While this is true of shallower handcrafted features, it is even more so for the latest generation
of deep representations, where millions of parameters are
learned from data.
In this paper we conduct a direct analysis of representations by characterising the image information that they retain (Fig. 1). We do so by modeling a representation as a
function Φ(x) of the image x and then computing an approximated inverse φ−1 , reconstructing x from the code
Φ(x). A common hypothesis is that representations col1

