Robust Regression on Image Manifolds for Ordered Label Denoising
Hui Wu and Richard Souvenir
University of North Carolina at Charlotte
{hwu13,souvenir}@uncc.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we present a computationally efficient and
non-parametric method for robust regression on manifolds.
We apply our algorithm to the problem of correcting mislabeled examples from image collections with ordered (e.g.,
real-valued, ordinal) labels. Compared to related methods
for robust regression, our method achieves superior denoising accuracy on a variety of data sets, with label corruption levels as high as 80%. For a diverse set of widely-used,
large-scale, publicly-available data sets, our approach results in image labels that more accurately describe the associated images.

1. Introduction
Given the availability of images from the Web and increasingly cheap sensors and storage, amassing large image sets is relatively low-cost both in terms of effort and
computational resources. However, obtaining the associated labels, necessary for supervised learning, is often a
time-consuming, manual process that is becoming decreasingly viable with the staggering increase in the size of image collections. A recent trend is to acquire image labels via
crowdsourcing or co-located sensors. These approaches effectively automate the label collection process, allowing for
the rapid creation of labeled data sets at scales previously
impossible. However, label accuracy often suffers. For
example, Figure 1 shows representative images from two
publicly-available computer vision data sets (AMOS [14]
and Geofaces [13]) and the associated labels, including instances of mislabeled images. The goal of this paper is to
correct mislabeled examples for image sets with ordered labels. While there has been work that addresses the classification variant of this problem (i.e., categorical labels or
“tags”), there has not been much work for the problem of
denoising real-valued or ordinal labels.
In this paper, we present a method to address the problem of denoising ordered labels from natural image sets.
We take advantage of the fact that these data sets contain
semantically-related images whose relationship can be ex-

Original
Output

-90
-90

0
-52

45
43

45
90

Original
Output

Clear
Partly

Clear
Clear

Cloudy
Cloudy

Cloudy
Partly

Figure 1: Our method can be applied to image sets with
ordered labels (top: head pose estimates, bottom: cloudiness estimates). For each image, we show the original label
(top) and predicted value from our method (bottom). The
examples in red highlight errors in the original labels.

ploited to learn a smooth function of the labels with respect
to the images. From this point of view, the problem can be
framed as robust regression in the high-dimensional domain
of images. Unlike traditional robust regression methods,
our method incorporates the observation that many natural
image sets, although embedded in high-dimensional spaces,
have only a few underlying causes of change that are usually semantically meaningful and correlated with the visual
concept described by the image labels. We further combine
this manifold assumption with sparse regularization, which
allows our method to learn the underlying dependency between images and labels even with very high rate of label
corruption. The contributions of this paper are:
• introducing the problem of ordered label denosing;
• an efficient, data-driven algorithm, based on the Hessian regularizer, for high-dimensional robust regression; and
• providing more accurate labels for widely-used image
sets.

