Understanding Pedestrian Behaviors from Stationary Crowd Groups
Shuai Yi1
Hongsheng Li1,2
Xiaogang Wang1
Department of Electronic Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
School of Electronic Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
1

syi@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

lihongsheng@gmail.com

Abstract
Pedestrian behavior modeling and analysis is important
for crowd scene understanding and has various applications in video surveillance. Stationary crowd groups are
a key factor inﬂuencing pedestrian walking patterns but
was largely ignored in literature. In this paper, a novel
model is proposed for pedestrian behavior modeling by
including stationary crowd groups as a key component.
Through inference on the interactions between stationary
crowd groups and pedestrians, our model can be used to
investigate pedestrian behaviors. The effectiveness of the
proposed model is demonstrated through multiple applications, including walking path prediction, destination prediction, personality classiﬁcation, and abnormal event detection. To evaluate our model, a large pedestrian walking
route dataset 1 is built. The walking routes of 12, 684 pedestrians from a one-hour crowd surveillance video are manually annotated. It will be released to the public and beneﬁt
future research on pedestrian behavior analysis and crowd
scene understanding.

1. Introduction
Pedestrian behavior modeling and analysis is important
in video surveillance and has drawn increasing attentions in
recent years. It can be used for various applications including pedestrian walking path prediction [4, 45], trafﬁc ﬂow
segmentation [37, 41, 43], crowd counting and segmentation [40], and abnormal event detection [25, 27].
Pedestrian behavior modeling is challenging, especially
for scenes with crowds [8, 21]. Previous studies [5, 12, 42,
45] have shown that the walking behavior of an individual
can be inﬂuenced by a variety of factors including scene layout (e.g. entrances, exits, walls, and obstacles), pedestrian
beliefs (the choice of source and destination), and interactions with other moving pedestrians. However, an important
factor, i.e. stationary crowd groups, is missing in literature
1 Available at http://www.ee.cuhk.edu.hk/∼syi/

xgwang@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Figure 1. (a)-(b) Two video frames. (c)-(d) Energy maps calculated from (a) and (b) using the proposed model. Pedestrians are
more likely to walk through regions with warm colors. (e) An
illustration of multiple roles of a stationary crowd group. It can
serve as source (blue lines), destination (red lines), and obstacle
(black lines). (f) Energy map calculated from (b) without modeling the factor of stationary crowd groups.

of modeling pedestrian behaviors.
We argue that stationary crowd groups have considerable
inﬂuence on pedestrians and are crucial in pedestrian behavior modeling. As shown in Figure 1 (d), the walking path of
a pedestrian (black curve) is affected by a stationary crowd
group. However, without modeling the stationary crowd
group, it is difﬁcult to explain why the pedestrian detours
when approaching the destination, as shown in Figure 1 (f).
Studies also show that stationary crowd groups have
greater inﬂuences on pedestrian behaviors than moving
crowds [28, 38, 39]. A pedestrian usually changes the walking speed rather than direction to avoid collision with other
moving crowds. However, when moving crowds become
stationary, the walking pedestrian is forced to changed his
or her direction and the walking path is inﬂuenced signiﬁcantly.
As shown in Figure 1 (e), stationary crowd groups can

