DEEP-CARVING : Discovering Visual Attributes by Carving Deep Neural Nets
Sukrit Shankar† ,

Vikas K. Garg∗ and Roberto Cipolla†

†

∗

Machine Intelligence Lab (MIL), Cambridge University
Computer Science & Artificial Intelligence Lab (CSAIL), MIT

ss965@cam.ac.uk, vgarg@csail.mit.edu, rc10001@cam.ac.uk

Abstract

1. Introduction
Owing to an exponential increase in the number of images on the web, most image search engines, such as
Google, have started resorting to clustering in order to
present the search results. In particular, they now categorize the images based on common and key attributes. On
receiving a query about tall buildings, for instance, Google
image search finds thousands of images it thinks contain tall
buildings, and then clusters them together into some key attributes such as night, looking-up. Analysing the images
in these clusters, we observe that the categorization is generally based more on the text information associated with
the images than the visual cues. Therefore, the attributes
that are missing in the text are rarely inferred in the images. Thus, it is difficult for the engine to determine which
buildings in the cluster of tall buildings at night are curved,
glassy, stony. Hence, the visual cues need to be leveraged
for enhancing the search results.
Discovering Visual Attributes under a Practical Scenario - Consider a practical system that can predict
attribute-specific information within images using visual
cues. For simplicity, suppose that we have only 3 attributes
of mountains under consideration, viz. wide-span, hazy and
with-reflections. If we search for hazy mountains, it is likely
that we get most mountains that seem hazy (with the increased accuracy of search engines), but some of them will
also have wide-span, some will exhibit reflections, some
will portray both wide-span and reflections, and some neither; however, typically, such information will not be found
in the text and thus remain unknown. We can then search
for wide-span mountains to get the visual cues (e.g., how
a wide-span mountain looks like), but the resulting images
might again contain varying and unknown degrees of haziness and reflections. Thus, the following problem abstraction arises naturally while designing a practical system for
visual attribute prediction:
Each of the M given attributes corresponds to a class.
Every training image in the class m ∈ {1, . . . , M } comes
with only one label that indicates the presence of the mth
attribute. The task is to discover all the attributes present in

Most of the approaches for discovering visual attributes in
images demand significant supervision, which is cumbersome
to obtain. In this paper, we aim to discover visual attributes in
a weakly supervised setting that is commonly encountered with
contemporary image search engines.
For instance, given a noun (say forest) and its associated
attributes (say dense, sunlit, autumn), search engines can now
generate many valid images for any attribute-noun pair (dense
forests, autumn forests, etc). However, images for an attributenoun pair do not contain any information about other attributes (like which forests in the autumn are dense too). Thus,
a weakly supervised scenario occurs: each of the M attributes
corresponds to a class such that a training image in class
m ∈ {1, . . . , M } contains a single label that indicates the presence of the mth attribute only. The task is to discover all the
attributes present in a test image.
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [20] have enjoyed remarkable success in vision applications recently. However, in a weakly supervised scenario, widely used CNN training procedures do not learn a robust model for predicting multiple attribute labels simultaneously. The primary reason is
that the attributes highly co-occur within the training data, and
unlike objects, do not generally exist as well-defined spatial
boundaries within the image. To ameliorate this limitation, we
propose Deep-Carving, a novel training procedure with CNNs,
that helps the net efficiently carve itself for the task of multiple attribute prediction. During training, the responses of the
feature maps are exploited in an ingenious way to provide the
net with multiple pseudo-labels (for training images) for subsequent iterations. The process is repeated periodically after
a fixed number of iterations, and enables the net carve itself
iteratively for efficiently disentangling features.
Additionally, we contribute a noun-adjective pairing inspired Natural Scenes Attributes Dataset to the research community, CAMIT - NSAD, containing a number of co-occurring
attributes within a noun category. We describe, in detail,
salient aspects of this dataset. Our experiments on CAMITNSAD and the SUN Attributes Dataset [29], with weak supervision, clearly demonstrate that the Deep-Carved CNNs consistently achieve considerable improvement in the precision of
attribute prediction over popular baseline methods.

1

