Automatic Construction Of Robust Spherical Harmonic Subspaces
Patrick Snape

Yannis Panagakis
Stefanos Zafeiriou
Imperial College London
{p.snape,i.panagakis,s.zafeiriou}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
In this paper we propose a method to automatically
recover a class specific low dimensional spherical harmonic basis from a set of in-the-wild facial images. We
combine existing techniques for uncalibrated photometric stereo and low rank matrix decompositions in order
to robustly recover a combined model of shape and identity. We build this basis without aid from a 3D model
and show how it can be combined with recent efficient
sparse facial feature localisation techniques to recover
dense 3D facial shape. Unlike previous works in the
area, our method is very efficient and is an order of
magnitude faster to train, taking only a few minutes to
build a model with over 2000 images. Furthermore, it
can be used for real-time recovery of facial shape.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: An example reconstruction. Given the
input image (a) our algorithm can robustly recover
dense 3D shape using only images.

and expensive process involving specialised hardware
and manual guidance. Once the meshes have been collected, they must be placed into correspondence which
is a complex research issue in its own right.
In this paper, we look to borrow from ideas seen
within the photometric stereo literature in order to recover shape from objects under unconstrained settings
using only a set of images. Typically, these types of unconstrained photo collections are called ”in-the-wild”.
We seek to construct our models in an automatic manner, without manual feature point placement or careful
selection of the input images.
In particular, we seek to recover the shape of the object by exploiting the similarity within the object class.
In the case of faces, there are millions of available images that can be utilised to build in-the-wild models.
However, recovering shape from these images is incredibly challenging, as they have been captured in completely unconstrained conditions. No knowledge of the
lighting conditions, the facial location or the camera
geometric properties are provided with the images. To
address these problems, we propose to recover a class
specific spherical harmonic (SH) basis that exploits the
low-rank structure of faces [5, 16]. Spherical harmonics

1. Introduction
The recovery of 3D shape from images represents
an ill-posed and challenging problem. In its most difficult form, this involves recovering a representation
of shape for an object from a single image, under arbitrary illumination. However, for any given image,
there are an infinite number of shape, illumination and
reflectance inputs that can reproduce the image [1].
Therefore, shape recovery is commonly performed by
relaxing the problem by introducing prior information
or by adding constraints. The most impressive results
have been achieved by restricting the problem space
to a single class of objects such as faces. For example, Blanz and Vetter’s 3D morphable model (3DMM)
[7] is one of the most well-known shape recovery techniques and concentrates on the recovery of facial shape.
3DMMs constrain their reconstruction capabilities to
lying within the span of a linear combination of faces.
This allows for the synthesis of a large range of novel
faces. However, the major drawback of 3DMMs is their
complexity of construction. Morphable models require
a set of high quality 3D meshes and associated textures.
Currently, collecting these meshes is a time consuming
1

