EpicFlow: Edge-Preserving Interpolation of Correspondences for Optical Flow
Jerome Revauda

Philippe Weinzaepfela
a
Inria∗

Zaid Harchaouia,b
b
NYU

Cordelia Schmida

firstname.lastname@inria.fr

Abstract
We propose a novel approach for optical flow estimation, targeted at large displacements with significant occlusions. It consists of two steps: i) dense matching by
edge-preserving interpolation from a sparse set of matches;
ii) variational energy minimization initialized with the
dense matches. The sparse-to-dense interpolation relies
on an appropriate choice of the distance, namely an edgeaware geodesic distance. This distance is tailored to handle occlusions and motion boundaries – two common and
difficult issues for optical flow computation. We also propose an approximation scheme for the geodesic distance to
allow fast computation without loss of performance. Subsequent to the dense interpolation step, standard one-level
variational energy minimization is carried out on the dense
matches to obtain the final flow estimation. The proposed
approach, called Edge-Preserving Interpolation of Correspondences (EpicFlow) is fast and robust to large displacements. It significantly outperforms the state of the art on
MPI-Sintel and performs on par on Kitti and Middlebury.

1. Introduction
Accurate estimation of optical flow from real-world
videos remains a challenging problem [10], despite the
abundant literature on the topic. The main remaining challenges are occlusions, motion discontinuities and large displacements, all present in real-world videos.
Effective approaches were previously proposed for handling the case of small displacements (i.e., less than a few
pixels) [19, 35, 24]. These approaches cast the optical
flow problem into an energy minimization framework, often solved using efficient coarse-to-fine algorithms [8, 28].
However, due to the complexity of the minimization, such
methods get stuck in local minima and may fail to estimate large displacements, which often occur due to fast
motion. This problem has recently received significant attention. State-of-the-art approaches [9, 38] use descriptor
matching between adjacent frames together with the inte∗ LEAR team, Inria Grenoble Rhone-Alpes, Laboratoire Jean Kuntzmann, CNRS, Univ. Grenoble Alpes, France.

Figure 1. Image edges detected with SED [15] and ground-truth
optical flow. Motion discontinuities appear most of the time at
image edges.

gration of these matches in a variational approach. Indeed,
matching operators are robust to large displacements and
motion discontinuities [9, 34]. Energy minimization is carried out in a coarse-to-fine scheme in order to obtain a fullscale dense flow field guided by the matches. A major drawback of coarse-to-fine schemes is error-propagation, i.e.,
errors at coarser levels, where different motion layers can
overlap, can propagate across scales. Even if coarse-to-fine
techniques work well in most cases, we are not aware of a
theoretical guarantee or proof of convergence.
Instead, we propose to simply interpolate a sparse set of
matches in a dense manner to initiate the optical flow estimation. We then use this estimate to initialize a one-level
energy minimization, and obtain the final optical flow estimation. This enables us to leverage recent advances in
matching algorithms, which can now output quasi-dense
correspondence fields [6, 34]. In the same spirit as [22],
we perform a sparse-to-dense interpolation by fitting a local
affine model at each pixel based on nearby matches. A major issue arises for the preservation of motion boundaries.
We make the following observation: motion boundaries often tend to appear at image edges, see Figure 1. Consequently, we propose to exchange the Euclidean distance
with a better, i.e., edge-aware, distance and show that this
offers a natural way to handle motion discontinuities. Moreover, we show how an approximation of the edge-aware distance allows to fit only one affine model per input match (instead of one per pixel). This leads to an important speed-up
of the interpolation scheme without loss in performance.
The obtained interpolated field of correspondences is
sufficiently accurate to be used as initialization of a
one-level energy minimization. Our work suggests that
there may be better initialization strategies than the well-

