Online Sketching Hashing
Cong Leng1∗ Jiaxiang Wu1∗ Jian Cheng1
1

Xiao Bai2

Hanqing Lu1

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, China
{cong.leng, jiaxiang.wu, jcheng, luhq}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
baixiao@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, hashing based approximate nearest neighbor
(ANN) search has attracted much attention. Extensive new
algorithms have been developed and successfully applied to
different applications. However, two critical problems are
rarely mentioned. First, in real-world applications, the data often comes in a streaming fashion but most of existing
hashing methods are batch based models. Second, when the
dataset becomes huge, it is almost impossible to load all the
data into memory to train hashing models. In this paper, we
propose a novel approach to handle these two problems simultaneously based on the idea of data sketching. A sketch
of one dataset preserves its major characters but with significantly smaller size. With a small size sketch, our method
can learn hash functions in an online fashion, while needs rather low computational complexity and storage space.
Extensive experiments on two large scale benchmarks and
one synthetic dataset demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
With the rapid advance of digital devices and Internet,
we are entering the age of big data. The ubiquitous large
scale datasets pose significant challenges to the traditional
machine learning and computer vision. For example, nearest neighbors (NN) search is a critical component in many
learning algorithms such as clustering, retrieval and matching [3]. However, as the dataset becomes huge, exhaustive
NN search is prohibitive because of the high complexity in
both time and storage. As an alternative, hashing based
approximate nearest neighbors (ANN) search has attracted much attention recently, owing to its efficiency in both
search speed and storage.
In hashing based ANN approaches, data in the original
∗ These authors contributed equally to this work.

space is embedded to binary codes in the Hamming space
with hash functions. The goal is to approximate the input
distance with the Hamming distance which can be calculated extremely fast with XOR operation in modern CPU. Early works, such as Locality Sensitive Hashing (LSH) [14, 2],
construct hash functions based on random projection. These
data-independent methods often require long code length
to achieve acceptable search accuracy. To overcome this
problem, recent research attentions have been shifted to
data-dependent hashing techniques. Representative works include Iterative Quantization (ITQ) [9], Isotropic Hashing (IsoH) [17], Spherical Hashing (SpH) [12] and so on
[25, 19, 24]. In these methods, rather than randomly generated, hash functions are learned from data distribution or
supervised information. The learning process is driven by
a core principle, i.e., similar samples in the original space
should have close codes. Although promising results have
been obtained by these hashing methods for ANN search,
two critical problems are seldom mentioned.
First, in many real-world applications, data becomes
available continuously in streaming fashion. For example, a
search engine company like Google has numerous new web
pages and images continuously arriving at the data centers
every day. In such environments, the queries must be answered continuously, based on the total data that has arrived
so far. However, most of the existing hashing models are
based on a batch learning fashion. That is to say, when new
data arrives, they have to accumulate all the available data
and re-train new hash functions, which is apparently a less
efficient learning manner for streaming data. This problem
poses us the first challenge, i.e., how to learn from the newly
arrived data which is available after the hash functions have
already been generated from previous dataset.
Second, for truly large scale datasets, data is usually stored on a distributed disk group and is too large to be read
into memory. Actually, it is even not possible to load the data crawled in one day by Google into memory, let alone all
the data. Moreover, one processor is often incapable of han-

