3D Deep Shape Descriptor
Yi Fang† , Jin Xie† , Guoxian Dai† , Meng Wang† , Fan Zhu† , Tiantian Xu‡ , and Edward Wong‡
†

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, New York University Abu Dhabi
‡
Polytechnic School of Engineering, New York University
{yfang, jin.xie, guoxian.dai, mengw, fan.zhu, tx238, ewong}@nyu.edu

Abstract
Shape descriptor is a concise yet informative representation that provides a 3D object with an identification as
a member of some category. We have developed a concise
deep shape descriptor to address challenging issues from
ever-growing 3D datasets in areas as diverse as engineering, medicine, and biology. Specifically, in this paper, we
developed novel techniques to extract concise but geometrically informative shape descriptor and new methods of
defining Eigen-shape descriptor and Fisher-shape descriptor to guide the training of a deep neural network. Our deep
shape descriptor tends to maximize the inter-class margin
while minimize the intra-class variance. Our new shape descriptor addresses the challenges posed by the high complexity of 3D model and data representation, and the structural variations and noise present in 3D models. Experimental results on 3D shape retrieval demonstrate the superior performance of deep shape descriptor over other stateof-the-art techniques in handling noise, incompleteness and
structural variations.

1. Introduction
1.1. Background
With recent advancements in 3D acquisition and printing techniques, we have observed an exponential increase
in 3D-meshed surface models across a variety of fields,
such as engineering, entertainment, and medical imaging
[41, 36, 28, 12, 11, 8, 40, 1]. Shape descriptor refers to
an informative description that provides a 3D object with
an identification as a member of some category. The development of an effective and efficient 3D shape descriptor
poses several technical challenges, including, in particular,
the high data complexity of 3D models and their representations, the structural variations, noise, and incompleteness
present in 3D models [47, 24, 15, 49, 43, 36, 27, 23, 18, 35].

Therefore, effective solutions must be able to address the
following issues.
• The high data complexity of 3D models [36, 8, 46, 9].
3D geometric data is often featured as a highly complex and abstract representation for an object and with
severe loss of critical descriptive information such
as color, texture and appearance [6] to some extent.
The high data complexity in 3D model representation
therefore presents great challenges in the development
of a concise but geometrically informative description
for efficient and real-time 3D shape analysis.
• The structural variations present in 3D models [8, 46,
17]. Many 3D objects contain dynamical units with
their shape flexibility and variations play an essential
role in certain types of functional processes. Therefore, the geometric structures of 3D models are often compounded by highly variable complexity causing large structural variations. For instance, 3D human
models are dynamical units with different poses, and
3D protein models are functional units with their 3D
shape flexibility playing an essential role in a variety
of biological processes.
• Noise, incompleteness, and occlusions, etc [17, 16].
3D data are often noisy and incomplete after acquisition and meshing [36, 6]. A 3D model is composed
of an unorganized sets of polygons that form “polygon soups”. As stated in [36], a 3D model often contains missing, wrongly oriented, intersecting, disjoint,
and /or overlapping polygons. For example, the classic
model Utah teapot is missing its bottom and rim, and
the Stanford Bunny has several holes along its base.

1.2. Related Works
There have been several prior works that address the
challenging issues as discussed above. These prior works
follow two approaches: 1) develop better 3D shape signature and descriptor and 2) develop methods to automatically

