RGBD-Fusion: Real-Time High Precision Depth Recovery
Roy Or - El1

Guy Rosman2 Aaron Wetzler1 Ron Kimmel1 Alfred M. Bruckstein1
1
Technion, Israel Institute of Technology
2
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Lab, MIT

royorel@tx.technion.ac.il

rosman@csail.mit.edu

ron@cs.technion.ac.il

twerd@cs.technion.ac.il

freddy@cs.technion.ac.il

Abstract

even richer RGB-D-I fusion.
Reconstructing a shape from color or intensity images,
known as shape from shading [16, 5, 22], is a well researched area in computer vision. These shape estimation
problems usually suffer from ambiguities since there can
be several possible surfaces that can explain a given image.
Recently, attempts have been made to eliminate some of
these ambiguities by using more elaborated lighting models, and richer, natural illumination environments [19, 20].
Moreover, it was observed that data from depth sensors
combined with shape from shading methods can be used
to eliminate ambiguities and improve the depth maps [42,
41, 15].
We introduce a novel real-time method to directly enhance surface recovery that achieves state of the art accuracy. We apply a lighting model that uses normals estimated
from the depth profile, and eliminates the need for calibration of the scene lighting. The lighting model accounts for
light sources, multiple albedos, and local lighting effects
such as specularities, shadows and interreflections.
Assuming that the lighting model explains the smooth
nature of the intensity image, and that high frequency data
in the image is related to the surface geometry, we reconstruct a high quality surface without first finding and integrating its normals. Instead, we use the relation between
the surface gradient, its normals, and a smoothed version of
the input depth map to define a surface dependent cost functional. In order to achieve fast convergence, we relinearize
the variational problem.
The main contributions of this paper are:

The popularity of low-cost RGB-D scanners is increasing on a daily basis. Nevertheless, existing scanners often cannot capture subtle details in the environment. We
present a novel method to enhance the depth map by fusing the intensity and depth information to create more detailed range profiles. The lighting model we use can handle natural scene illumination. It is integrated in a shape
from shading like technique to improve the visual fidelity of
the reconstructed object. Unlike previous efforts in this domain, the detailed geometry is calculated directly, without
the need to explicitly find and integrate surface normals.
In addition, the proposed method operates four orders of
magnitude faster than the state of the art. Qualitative and
quantitative visual and statistical evidence support the improvement in the depth obtained by the suggested method.

1. Introduction
The availability of affordable depth scanners has sparked
a revolution in many applications of computer vision, such
as robotics, human motion capture, and scene modeling and
analysis. The increased availability of such scanners naturally raises the question of whether it is possible to exploit
the associated intensity image to improve their lack of accuracy. To obtain fine details such as facial features, one
must compensate for the measurement errors inherent in the
depth scanners.
Our goal is to fuse the captured data from the RGB-D
scanner in order to enhance the accuracy of the acquired
depth maps. For this purpose, we must accurately align and
combine both depth and scene color or intensity cues. Assuming that the scanner is stationary and its calibration parameters are known, aligning the intensity and depth data is
a relatively straightforward task. Recently, scanners that allow access to both infra-red scene illumination and depth
maps, have become available enabling the possibility of

1. Presenting a novel robust depth enhancement method
that operates under natural illumination and handles
multiple albedo objects.
2. Showing that depth accuracy can be enhanced in realtime by efficiently fusing the RGB-D inputs.
3. Showing that improved depth maps can be acquired directly using shape from shading technique that avoids
1

