Oriented Edge Forests for Boundary Detection
Sam Hallman
Charless C. Fowlkes
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Irvine
{shallman,fowlkes}@ics.uci.edu

Abstract

sistency [1] which enforce closure, boosting the contrast of
contours that completely enclose salient regions.
Recently, focus has turned to methods that learn appropriate feature representations from training data rather than
relying on carefully hand-designed texture and brightness
contrast measures. For example, [22] learns weightings for
each sparse code channel and hypothesized edge orientation while [8, 16] predict the probability of a boundary at
an image location using a cascade or randomized decision
forest built over simple image features. Taking this one
step further, the work of [17] and [9] learn not only input
features but also the output space using sparse coding or
structured-output decision forests respectively. While these
approaches haven’t yielded huge gains in boundary detection accuracy, they are appealing in that they can adapt to
other domains (e.g., learning input features for boundary
detection in RGB-D images [22, 9] or predicting semantic
segmentation outputs [17]). On the other hand, a key difficulty with these highly non-parametric approaches is that
it is difficult to control what is going on “under the hood”
and to understand why they fail or succeed where they do.
Like a fancy new car, they are great when they work, but if
ever stranded on a remote roadside, one suddenly discovers
there are very few user serviceable parts inside.
In this paper we to take a step back from non-parametric
outputs and instead apply the robust machinery of randomized decision forests to the simple task of accurately detecting straight-line boundaries at different candidate orientations and positions within a small image patch. Although
this ignores a large number of interesting possibilities such
as curved edges and junctions, it should certainly suffice for
most small patches of images containing big, smooth objects. We show that such a model, appropriately calibrated
and averaged across a small number of scales, along with
local sharpening of edge predictions outperforms the best
reported results on the BSDS500 boundary detection benchmark.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we describe our method for partitioning the space of
possible oriented edge patterns within a patch. This leads

We present a simple, efficient model for learning boundary detection based on a random forest classifier. Our approach combines (1) efficient clustering of training examples based on a simple partitioning of the space of local
edge orientations and (2) scale-dependent calibration of individual tree output probabilities prior to multiscale combination. The resulting model outperforms published results
on the challenging BSDS500 boundary detection benchmark. Further, on large datasets our model requires substantially less memory for training and speeds up training
time by a factor of 10 over the structured forest model. 1

1. Introduction
Accurately detecting boundaries between objects and
other regions in images has been a long standing goal since
the early days of computer vision. Accurate boundary estimation is an important first step for segmentation and detection of objects in a scene and boundaries provide useful
information about the shape and identity of those objects.
Early work such as the Canny edge detector [6] focused on
detecting brightness edges, estimating their orientation [11]
and analyzing the theoretical limits of detection in the presence of image noise. However, simple brightness or color
gradients are insufficient for handling many natural scenes
where local gradients are dominated by fine scale clutter and
texture arising from surface roughness and varying albedo.
Modern boundary detectors, such as [18], have emphasized the importance of suppressing such responses by explicit oriented analysis of higher order statistics which are
robust to such local variation. These statistics can be captured in a variety of ways, e.g. via textons [15], sparse coding [22], or measures of self-similarity [14]. Such boundary
detectors also generally benefit from global normalization
provided by graph-spectral analysis [2] or ultra-metric con1 This work was supported by NSF DBI-1053036, DBI-1262547, and
IIS-1253538

1

