GRSA: Generalized Range Swap Algorithm for the Efficient
Optimization of MRFs
Kangwei Liu, Junge Zhang, Peipei Yang and Kaiqi Huang
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing (CRIPAC)
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR)
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
{kwliu,jgzhang,ppyang,kqhuang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract

MRFs efficiently while ensuring good quality of solutions
is a problem of fundamental importance.

Markov Random Field (MRF) is an important tool and
has been widely used in many vision tasks. Thus, the optimization of MRFs is a problem of fundamental importance.
Recently, Veskler and Kumar et. al propose the range move
algorithms, which are one of the most successful solvers
to this problem. However, two problems have limited the
applicability of previous range move algorithms: 1) They
are limited in the types of energies they can handle (i.e. only
truncated convex functions); 2) These algorithms tend to be
very slow compared to other graph-cut based algorithms
(e.g. α-expansion and αβ-swap). In this paper, we propose
a generalized range swap algorithm (GRSA) for efficient
optimization of MRFs. To address the first problem, we
extend the GRSA to arbitrary semimetric energies by restricting the chosen labels in each move so that the energy is
submodular on the chosen subset. Furthermore, to feasibly
choose the labels satisfying the submodular condition, we
provide a sufficient condition of the submodularity. For
the second problem, unlike previous range move algorithms
which execute the set of all possible range moves, we dynamically obtain the iterative moves by solving a set cover
problem, which greatly reduces the number of moves during
the optimization. Experiments show that the GRSA offers a
great speedup over previous range swap algorithms, while
it obtains competitive solutions.

In the last decades, many kinds of optimization approaches have been developed, such as iterated conditional modes (ICM) [2], sequential belief propagation (BPS)
[25, 26], and sequential tree-reweighted message passing
(TRW-S) [14]. Recently, graph-cut based algorithms [5, 9–
11,16,17,28] have attracted significant attention due to their
good optimality properties. Boykov et al. [5] propose the
popular α-expansion and αβ-swap, both of which optimize
the MRFs by a series of iterative moves. In these two algorithms, each move refers to solving the st-mincut problem
of a corresponding graph. Although α-expansion and αβswap have been successfully applied in many vision tasks,
there is a main limitation which has greatly prevented the
algorithms from achieving a better solution. That is only
a choice of two labels is provided for the vertices in every
move [27]. Veksler [27, 28] effectively solves this problem
by developing the so-called range move algorithms, which
also decrease the energy by making a sequence of moves.
Different from α-expansion and αβ-swap, they allow every
vertex to have a choice of more than two labels, and this
brings about better solutions in practice. In [17, 18], Kumar
et al. propose an improved range move algorithm and point
that the range move algorithm obtains the same guarantee
as the linear programming (LP) relaxation [6].

1. Introduction
Markov Random Field (MRF) is an important tool and
has been widely used in many vision problems such as
stereo reconstruction [25], image restoration [5], segmentation [3], image matching [21] and medical image analysis
[4]. Solving these problems refers to the maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimation, or obtaining the label assignment
that minimizes the MRFs energy. Therefore, optimizing the

However, although the range move algorithms outperform α-expansion and αβ-swap in many cases, there are
two main problems which have limited their applicability in
practice: (i) they are limited in the types of energy functions
they can handle; (ii) the speed of the optimization is too
slow, and as a result, the range move algorithms are not
so popular as α-expansion and αβ-swap. For the former
limitation, previous range move algorithms [17, 18, 27, 28]
are restricted to only truncated convex functions. However, there are many more general energy functions, which
have been successfully used in different vision problems,

