Robust Reconstruction of Indoor Scenes
Sungjoon Choi∗ †

Qian-Yi Zhou∗ ‡

Abstract

Vladlen Koltun‡

tion of complete indoor scenes at a quality level appropriate
for particularly demanding applications. This is evidenced
by the recent effort of Xiao et al. to reconstruct a large number of indoor scenes. Due to the unreliability of automatic
scene reconstruction pipelines, the authors resorted to manual labeling to establish correspondences between different
views. (“existing automatic reconstruction methods are not
reliable enough for our purposes.” [65])
In this work, we present a fully automatic scene reconstruction pipeline that matches the reconstruction quality
obtained with manual assistance by Xiao et al. and significantly exceeds the accuracy of prior automatic approaches
to indoor reconstruction. An example reconstruction produced by our approach is shown in Figure 1. Our pipeline is
geometric: pairs of local scene fragments are registered and
a global model is constructed based on these pairwise alignments [31]. A critical weakness of such pipelines that we
address is the low precision of geometric registration. Geometric registration algorithms are error-prone due to sensor
noise, which leads to aliasing of fine geometric details and
inability to disambiguate different locations based on local
geometry. The difficulty is compounded by the necessity to
register loop closure fragments that have low overlap. In
practice, false pairwise alignments can outnumber correctly
aligned pairs.
Our approach resolves inconsistencies and identifies correct alignments using global optimization based on line processes. Line processes were introduced in the context of
image restoration as a means for automatically identifying discontinuities as part of a single global optimization
[22, 21]. They are closely related to robust estimation [4].
The advantage of the line process formulation is that the
optimization objective retains a least-squares form and can
be optimized by a standard high-performance least-squares
solver. We show that this framework is extremely effective
in dealing with pairwise registration errors. Our implementation automatically prunes false pairwise alignments even
when they significantly outnumber correct ones. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that our approach substantially increases reconstruction accuracy.
Our work contains a number of supporting contributions
of independent interest. First, we provide infrastructure for
rigorous evaluation of scene reconstruction accuracy, augmenting the ICL-NUIM dataset [26] with challenging cam-

We present an approach to indoor scene reconstruction
from RGB-D video. The key idea is to combine geometric registration of scene fragments with robust global optimization based on line processes. Geometric registration
is error-prone due to sensor noise, which leads to aliasing of geometric detail and inability to disambiguate different surfaces in the scene. The presented optimization approach disables erroneous geometric alignments even when
they significantly outnumber correct ones. Experimental results demonstrate that the presented approach substantially
increases the accuracy of reconstructed scene models.

1. Introduction
High-fidelity reconstruction of complete indoor scenes
is known as a particularly challenging problem [19, 29, 64,
7]. Many indoor reconstruction systems make simplifying
assumptions and forfeit detail in the reconstructed model
[19, 64, 7], rely on user interaction [17], or both [37, 53].
Other systems rely on substantial hardware setups based on
LiDAR scanners [11, 59].
The availability of consumer depth cameras provides an
opportunity to develop robust reconstruction systems but
does not in itself solve the associated challenges. While
3D models of real-world objects can now be created easily
[46, 70], the same combination of quality and reliability has
yet to be achieved for complete scenes. Unlike an object,
which can be entirely in the field of view of the camera,
a large scene must be reconstructed from views acquired
along a complex trajectory, each view exposing only a small
part of the environment. Camera paths that thoroughly image all surfaces at close range lead to significant odometry
drift and the necessity to match and register different views
globally.
Prior work on scene reconstruction with consumer depth
cameras recognized the importance of global registration
[29, 18, 69, 62, 65]. Nevertheless, no prior system appears
to be sufficiently reliable to support automatic reconstruc∗ Joint first authors
† Stanford University
‡ Intel Labs

1

