FAemb: a function approximation-based embedding method for image retrieval
Thanh-Toan Do
Quang D. Tran
Ngai-Man Cheung
Singapore University of Technology and Design
{thanhtoan do, quang tran, ngaiman cheung}@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
The objective of this paper is to design an embedding method mapping local features describing image (e.g.
SIFT) to a higher dimensional representation used for image retrieval problem.
By investigating the relationship between the linear approximation of a nonlinear function in high dimensional
space and state-of-the-art feature representation used in image retrieval, i.e., VLAD, we ﬁrst introduce a new approach
for the approximation. The embedded vectors resulted by
the function approximation process are then aggregated to
form a single representation used in the image retrieval
framework.
The evaluation shows that our embedding method gives
a performance boost over the state of the art in image retrieval, as demonstrated by our experiments on the standard
public image retrieval benchmarks.

1. Introduction
The problem of ﬁnding a single vector representing a set
of local vectors describing an image is an important problem in computer vision. This is because the single representation provides two main beneﬁts. First, it contains
the power of local descriptors, such as set of SIFT descriptors [17]. Second, the single represented vectors can
be either compared with standard distances used in image
retrieval problem or used by robust classiﬁcation methods
such as SVM in classiﬁcation problem.
There is a wide range of methods for ﬁnding a single vector to represent a set of local vectors proposed
in the literature such as bag-of-visual-words (BoW) [28],
Fisher vector [22], vector of locally aggregated descriptor
(VLAD) [12] and its improvements [7, 2], super vector coding [33], vector of locally aggregated tensor (VLAT) [26,
20] which is higher order (tensor) version of VLAD, triangulation embedding (Temb) [14], sparse coding [21], local
coordinate coding (LCC) [32], locality-constrained linear
coding [29] which is fast version of LCC, local coordinate
coding using local tangent (TLCC) [31] which is higher or-

der version of LCC. Among these methods, VLAD [13] and
VLAT [20] are well-known embedding methods used in image retrieval problem [13, 20] while TLCC [31] is one of
successful embedding methods used in image classiﬁcation
problem.
VLAD is designed for image retrieval problem while
TLCC is designed for image classiﬁcation problem. They
also come from different motivations. VLAD’s motivation
is to characterize the distribution of residual vectors over
Voronoi cells learned by a quantizer while TLCC’s motivation is to linearly approximate1 a nonlinear function in high
dimensional space. Despite above differences, we show that
VLAD is actually simpliﬁed version of TLCC. This means
that we can depart from the idea of linear approximation
of function to develop good embedding methods for image
retrieval problem.
To ﬁnd the single representation, all aforementioned
methods include two main steps in the processing: embedding and aggregating. The embedding step maps each local
descriptor to a high dimensional vector while the aggregating step converts set of mapped high dimensional vectors
to a single vector. This paper focuses on the ﬁrst step. In
particular, we develop a new embedding method which can
be seen as the generalization of TLCC and VLAT.
In next sections, we ﬁrst present a brief description
of TLCC and show the relationship between TLCC and
VLAD. We then present our motivation for designing new
embedding method.

1.1. TLCC
TLCC [31] is designed for image classiﬁcation problem.
Its goal is to linearly approximate a smooth nonlinear function f (x), i.e. a nonlinear classiﬁcation function, deﬁned
on a high dimensional feature space Rd . TLCC’s approach
ﬁnds an embedding scheme φ: Rd → RD mapping each
x ∈ Rd as
x → φ(x)

(1)

1 The meaning of “linear approximation” in this paper is that the nonlinear function f (x) deﬁned on Rd is approximated by a linear function
wT φ(x) deﬁned on RD where D > d.

