Efficient SDP Inference for Fully-connected CRFs
Based on Low-rank Decomposition

1

Peng Wang1 , Chunhua Shen1,2 , Anton van den Hengel1,2
2
University of Adelaide, Australia
Australian Centre for Robotic Vision

Abstract
Conditional Random Fields (CRFs) are one of the core
technologies in computer vision, and have been applied to
a wide variety of tasks. Conventional CRFs typically define edges between neighboring image pixels, resulting in a
sparse graph over which inference can be performed efficiently. However, these CRFs fail to model more complex
priors such as long-range contextual relationships. Fullyconnected CRFs have thus been proposed. While there
are efficient approximate inference methods for such CRFs,
usually they are sensitive to initialization and make strong
assumptions. In this work, we develop an efficient, yet general SDP algorithm for inference on fully-connected CRFs.
The core of the proposed algorithm is a tailored quasiNewton method, which solves a specialized SDP dual problem and takes advantage of the low-rank matrix approximation for fast computation. Experiments demonstrate that
our method can be applied to fully-connected CRFs that
could not previously be solved, such as those arising in
pixel-level image co-segmentation.

1. Introduction
Semantic image segmentation, or pixel labelling, is a key
problem in computer vision. Given an image, the task is to
label every pixel against one or multiple pre-defined object
categories. It is clear that to achieve satisfactory results, one
must exploit contextual information. Scalability and speed
of the algorithm are also of concerns, if we are to design an
algorithm applicable to high-resolution images.
Conditional random fields (CRFs) have been one of
the most successful approaches to semantic pixel labelling,
which solves the problem as maximum a posteriori (MAP)
estimation. Standard CRFs contain unary potentials that
are typically defined on low-level local features of texture,
color, and locations. Edge potentials, which are typically
defined on 4- or 8-neighboring pixels, consist of smoothness terms that penalize label disagreement between similar pixels, and terms that model contextual relationships between different classes. Although these CRF models have

achieved encouraging results for segmentation, they fail to
capture more complex priors such as long-range contextual
information.
In the literature, fully-connected CRFs have been proposed for this purpose. The main challenge for inference on
fully-connected CRFs stems from the computational cost.
A fully-connected CRF over N image pixels has N 2 edges.
Even for a small image with a few thousand pixels, the number of edges can be a few million. Although there have
been a variety of methods for MAP estimation [1–10], they
are usually computationally infeasible for such cases. The
authors of [11, 12] have proffered an efficient mean field approximation method for MAP inference in multi-label CRF
models with fully-connected pairwise terms. In their algorithms, the computational bottleneck can be expressed as
the product of kernel matrices and column vectors. Given
the assumption that the pairwise terms are in the form of a
weighted mixture of Gaussian kernels, a filter-based method
is used to accelerate the computation of the matrix-vector
product in [11, 12]. Other work [13, 14] on the MAP inference in fully-connected CRFs also incorporate filter-based
methods for fast computation, yet with different assumptions. The method proposed in [13] can be applied on generalized RBF kernels, instead of the original Gaussian kernels [11]. An efficient inference algorithm was developed
in [14] for a special type of fully-connected CRF, in which
the edge potentials are defined to capture spatial relationships among different objects, and only depend on their relative positions (that is they are spatially stationary). Note
that the assumptions in [11–14] limit the practical value of
these approaches. Note also that the mean field approximation adopted in [11–13] and the quadratic programming
approach used in [14] may converge to local optima.
In general, semidefinite programming (SDP) relaxation
provides accurate solutions for MAP estimation problems,
but it is usually computationally inefficient (see [3] for
a comparison of different relaxation methods). Standard
interior-point methods require O(q 3 + qn3 + q 2 n2 ) flops
to solve a generic SDP problem in worst-case, where n
and q are the semidefinite matrix dimension and the number of linear constraints respectively. Recently, several scal-

