Continuous Visibility Feature
Guilin Liu

Yotam Gingold

Jyh-Ming Lien∗

gliu2@gmu.edu

ygingold@gmu.edu

jmlien@cs.gmu.edu

Abstract
In this work, we propose a new type of visibility measurement named Continuous Visibility Feature (CVF). We
say that a point q on the mesh is continuously visible from
another point p if there exists a geodesic path connecting p
and q that is entirely visible by p. In order to efficiently estimate the continuous visibility for all the vertices in a model,
we propose two approaches that use specific CVF properties
to avoid exhaustive visibility tests. CVF is then measured
as the area of the continuously visible region. With this
stronger visibility measure, we show that CVF better encodes the surface and part information of mesh than the tradition line-of-sight based visibility. For example, we show
that existing segmentation algorithms can generate better
segmentation results using CVF and its variants than using other visibility-based shape descriptors, such as shape
diameter function. Similar to visibility and other mesh surface features, continuous visibility would have many applications.

1. Introduction
Feature extraction often serves as a fundamental engineering task for higher level applications. For example, almost all of the recognition tasks start with defining or learning features. This is particularly true for two-dimensional
image that has a simple and uniform grid structure and pixels can be indexed by a 2D vector in a continuous coordinate system. Each pixel has fixed number (usually 4 or 8) of
neighbors. Thus most of the image features are defined by
the convolution operations of the local areas. Consequently,
there are some default features like SIFT [15] and HOG [5]
used widely in computer vision research.
Unlike images, 3D models are usually modeled in the
continuous domain which makes defining 3D features challenging. Consequently, many of the features defined for 3D
models usually are designed for specific types of shapes.
For example, visibility among points inside a given
shape has been used directly or indirectly as shape features,
∗ All authors are with the Department of Computer Science, George
Mason University, Fairfax, VA, USA, 22030

in particular for the task of semantic shape segmentation.
The intuition behind most of these visibility-based features
is from the observation that two points sampled from the
same semantic part tend to be visible from each other. For
example, shape diameter function (SDF) [18] is a descriptor
to describe the thickness of a mesh defined via local visibility. The idea is initially proposed for shape segmentation
based on the assumption that a visually meaningful component should have similar thickness everywhere. However,
this assumption does not hold in many cases. For example,
for a long component, such as a leg, the thickness at one
end of the component may have different thickness from the
other end. Another example is a flat component or a component whose size grows gradually in a certain direction.
We believe that the traditional line-of-sight visibility
used in all existing visibility-based shape features is insufficient. In this paper, we will describe a new feature named
continuous visibility feature. The feature provides stronger
visibility measure by considering the continuously visible
region for a vertex or facet. Thus this feature is defined in a
per-vertex manner. We say that a q is continuously visible
by a point p if there exists a geodesic path connecting p and
q that is entirely visible by p. CVF of p is defined as the
area of a set of continuously visible points by p. A more
precise definition of CVF can be found in Sections 3. We
show that CVF better encodes the surface and part information of mesh than SDF does. Figure 1(a) illustrates some
example models color mapped by CVF and SDF values. We
also show that existing segmentation algorithms can generate better segmentation results using CVF than using other
shape descriptors, such as shape diameter function [18]. We
will demonstrate the segmentation results using the Princeton Segmentation Benchmark and applications of CVF and
its variants (namely CVFavg , strong CVF and weak CVF)
beyond segmentation in Section 5.
A major technical challenge of computing CVF is the
computational efficiency because it is known the determining the visibility of two points is expensive and determining
their continuous visibility will require many more pairwise
visibility checks. In Section 4, we will present two ways
to compute CVF efficiently. The first approach will use the
continuous property of CVF to construct the continuously

