DeepContour: A Deep Convolutional Feature Learned by Positive-sharing Loss
for Contour Detection
Wei Shen1∗, Xinggang Wang2 , Yan Wang3 , Xiang Bai2†, Zhijiang Zhang1
Key Lab of Specialty Fiber Optics and Optical Access Networks, Shanghai University
2
School of Electronic Information and Communications, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
3
Rapid-Rich Object Search Lab, Nanyang Technological University
1

Abstract

ownership from one object or surface to another. Therefore, contours involve the concept of objects, which casts
an obstacle to us: How to distinguish the changes caused
by cluttered textures and those that correspond to object boundaries? Many researchers have devoted their efforts to addressing this problem and achieved considerable
progress [34, 32, 38, 2, 39, 30, 11, 23, 12]. However, obvious performance gap is still observed between contour detections given by the algorithms and human annotations.
The traditional framework for contour detection designs a variety of gradient features for each image pixel, followed by learning a binary classifier to determine whether
an image pixel is passed through by contours or not. Although hand-designed features are widely used and support
top-ranking algorithms on the standard contour detection
benchmark [35, 2] in the past decade, we cannot ignore a
fact that they are not discriminative enough to differentiate
the semantic object boundaries and abrupt changes in low
level image cues. Driven by the recent prevailing trend of
deep neural networks, a few researchers try to learn the deep
features to address the contour vs non-contour classification problem [23, 19, 33]. The impressive performances for
many computer vision tasks have proved that the deep features outputted by deep neural networks are powerful [1, 37]
and tend to replace the traditional hand-designed features,
such like SIFT [31] and HOG [9]. Therefore, introducing the deep learning techniques into the contour detection
problem is reasonable and feasible. However, how to learn
discriminative and representative deep features for contour
detection is not trivial. The current usage of deep learning
for contour detection is to take deep networks as blackbox
models to learn the probability of the contour [23] or the
local contour map [19] for each pixel. By such a way, the
flexibility of deep networks may be insufficient even when
employing a very complex and deep architecture [19]. Why
deep networks can achieve breakthroughs on so many general object recognition tasks in a walk, while they are denied
by contour detection? The reason is that the diversity of
contours in a local patch is huge, as they contain many types

Contour detection serves as the basis of a variety of computer vision tasks such as image segmentation and object
recognition. The mainstream works to address this problem focus on designing engineered gradient features. In
this work, we show that contour detection accuracy can be
improved by instead making the use of the deep features
learned from convolutional neural networks (CNNs). While
rather than using the networks as a blackbox feature extractor, we customize the training strategy by partitioning contour (positive) data into subclasses and fitting each subclass
by different model parameters. A new loss function, named
positive-sharing loss, in which each subclass shares the loss
for the whole positive class, is proposed to learn the parameters. Compared to the sofmax loss function, the proposed
one, introduces an extra regularizer to emphasizes the losses for the positive and negative classes, which facilitates to
explore more discriminative features. Our experimental results demonstrate that learned deep features can achieve top
performance on Berkeley Segmentation Dataset and Benchmark (BSDS500) and obtain competitive cross dataset generalization result on the NYUD dataset.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we investigate a classical and fundamental problem in computer vision contour detection in natural
images. Accurately detecting object contours serves as the
basis for many tasks, such as image segmentation [2], scene
understanding [3] and object detection [17, 30, 48].
Contour detection is quite challenging and more difficult than edge detection. According to Martin’s definition [34], the latter one aims to detect the characteristic changes in brightness, color, and texture; In contrast,
the goal of the former one is to find the changes in pixel
∗ Part of this work was done in HUST

† Corresponding author, Email: xbai@hust.edu.cn

1

