A Geodesic-Preserving Method for Image Warping
Dongping Li1 , Kaiming He2 , Jian Sun2 , and Kun Zhou1
1

Zhejiang University , 2 Microsoft Research

Abstract The manipulation of panoramic/wide-angle images is usually achieved via image warping. Though various techniques have been developed for preserving shapes
and straight lines for warping, these are not sufficient for
panoramic/wide-angle images. The image projections will
turn the straight lines into curved “geodesic lines”, and it
is fundamentally impossible to keep all these lines straight.
In this work, we propose a geodesic-preserving method for
content-aware image warping. An energy term is introduced to preserve the geodesic appearance of the geodesic
lines, and can be used with shape-preserving terms. Our
method is demonstrated in various applications, including
rectangling panoramas, resizing panoramic/wide-angle images, and wide-angle image manipulation. An extension to
ellipse preservation for general images is also presented.

camera

geodesic
straight

spherical projection

cylindrical projection

Figure 1. When a straight line is projected to a manifold, it becomes a curve. In the case of spherical projection (left), the curve
is a section of a great circle; in the case of cylindrical projection
(right), the curve is a section of an ellipse.

Panoramic/wide-angle images are getting increasingly
popular for common users, thanks to the inexpensive and
convenient devices, such as phones that capture panoramas
[2] and GoPro cameras [1] that capture wide-angle photos. Panoramic/wide-angle images are inevitably warped
in the image formation procedures, so image warping is a
natural way of processing and manipulating these images
[14, 23, 3, 12, 6, 11, 9, 22].
Studies on image warping have paid particular attention to preserving shapes [10, 15, 24] and straight lines
[6, 11, 5, 7, 9]. However, these techniques are not sufficient
for warping panoramic/wide-angle images. It has been long
realized in cartography [16] and computer science [18] that
it is impossible to preserve all straight lines when projecting
panoramic/wide-angle images1 . As Carroll et al. [6] recognized, the straight-line-preserving methods can fail if the
number of straight lines is large. Carroll et al. [6] and Kopf
et al. [11] also observe if a straight line is long spanned,
preserving its straightness can seriously distort other content. In He et al.’s work [9], the straight lines are detected

on the projected images and then preserved. But if the lines
have become curved due to the projection, this method can
fail to address them (Fig. 2(b)).
Instead of preserving straightness, in this work we propose to preserve geodesic lines. We define “geodesic
lines” as projections of 3-D straight lines onto 2-D manifolds (Fig. 1). They are great circles on spheres and ellipses on cylinders2 . Unlike the methods in [6, 11] that
straighten geodesic lines, our method allows them to be
curved. But an unnaturally curved geodesic line can be
noticeable (Fig. 2(b)), because a geodesic line is not simply a locally smooth curve. In our solution, we constrain
a geodesic line to remain “geodesic”: it should be warped
into another geodesic line, so can preserve its geodesic appearance. Fig. 2(c) is an example of our solution.
Preserving geodesic lines is a challenging task. Firstly,
a geodesic line is a non-local geometric entity whose points
can be far away from each other. So we need to use
some non-local representations. Secondly, geodesic lines
are complex nonlinear entities, and it is difficult to represent them via curve equations. To address these problems,
we rely on 3-D planes that are linear and non-local. We
treat a geodesic line as the intersection of a 3-D plane and
the projection manifold. Then we constrain all points of a
geodesic line to be on another plane after warping, so as to

1 Perspective projection always preserves straight lines but only applies
to narrow-angles < 60◦ [26, 18].

2 A great circle is mathematically “geodesic” (shortest path), but an ellipse is not. For simplicity, in this paper we term them as “geodesic lines”.

1. Introduction

1

