Delving into Egocentric Actions
Yin Li
Zhefan Ye
James M. Rehg
School of Interactive Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology
{yli440, zye32, rehg}@gatech.edu

Abstract

on an object-centric representation for discriminating action
categories. However, most of these works did not test
motion-based representations on a common ground, e.g.
separating the foreground motion from the camera motion.
Thus, a systematic evaluation of motion cues in egocentric
action recognition remains missing.
What makes egocentric videos different from surveillance videos? The key is not simply that a camera is moving, but rather that the movement is driven by the camerawearer’s activities and attention. In a natural setting, the
camera wearer performs an action by coordinating his body
movement during an interaction with the physical world.
The action captured in an egocentric video contains a rich
set of signals, including the first person’s head/hand movement, hand pose and even gaze information. We consider
these signals as mid-level egocentric cues. They usually
come from low-level appearance or motion cues, e.g. hand
segmentation or motion estimation, and are complementary
to traditional visual features. These mid-level egocentric
cues reveal the underlying actions of the first person, yet
have been largely ignored by previous methods for egocentric action recognition.
We provide an extensive evaluation of motion, object
and egocentric features for egocentric action recognition.
We set up a baseline using local descriptors from Dense
Trajectories (DT) [36], a successful video representation
for action recognition in a surveillance setting. We then
systematically vary the method by adding motion compensation, object features and egocentric features on top
of DT. Our benchmark demonstrates how these choices
contribute to the final performance. We identify a key set of
practices that produce statistically significant improvement
over previous state-of-the-art methods. In particular, we
find that simply extracting features around the first-person’s
attention point works surprisingly well. Our findings lead to
a significant performance boost over state-of-the-art methods on three datasets. Figure 1 provides an overview of
our approach. Materials for reproducing our results can be
found in our project website.1
Our work has three major contributions: (1) We propose

We address the challenging problem of recognizing the
camera wearer’s actions from videos captured by an egocentric camera. Egocentric videos encode a rich set of
signals regarding the camera wearer, including head movement, hand pose and gaze information. We propose to
utilize these mid-level egocentric cues for egocentric action
recognition. We present a novel set of egocentric features
and show how they can be combined with motion and
object features. The result is a compact representation with
superior performance. In addition, we provide the first
systematic evaluation of motion, object and egocentric cues
in egocentric action recognition. Our benchmark leads to
several surprising findings. These findings uncover the best
practices for egocentric actions, with a significant performance boost over all previous state-of-the-art methods on
three publicly available datasets.

1. Introduction
Understanding human actions from videos has been a
well-studied topic in computer vision. The recent advent
of wearable devices has led to a growing interest in understanding egocentric actions, i.e. analyzing a person’s
behavior using wearable camera video, otherwise known
as First-Person Vision (FPV). Since an egocentric camera
is aligned with the wearer’s field of view, it is primed to
capture the first person’s daily activities without the need to
instrument the environment. Knowledge of these activities
facilitates a wide range of applications, including remote
assistance, mobile health and human-robot interaction.
Despite the tremendous effort on understanding actions
in a surveillance setting [1, 35], it remains unclear whether
previous methods for action recognition can be successfully
applied to egocentric videos. Our first observation is that
egocentric video includes frequent ego-motion due to body
movement. This camera motion can potentially hamper the
motion-based representations that underlie many successful
action recognition systems. In contrast, state-of-the-art
egocentric action recognition methods [6, 27, 7] rely mainly

1 www.cbi.gatech.edu/egocentric

1

