FaceNet: A Unified Embedding for Face Recognition and Clustering
Florian Schroff

Dmitry Kalenichenko

James Philbin

fschroff@google.com

dkalenichenko@google.com

jphilbin@google.com

Google Inc.

Google Inc.

Google Inc.

Abstract
Despite significant recent advances in the field of face
recognition [10, 14, 15, 17], implementing face verification
and recognition efficiently at scale presents serious challenges to current approaches. In this paper we present a
system, called FaceNet, that directly learns a mapping from
face images to a compact Euclidean space where distances
directly correspond to a measure of face similarity. Once
this space has been produced, tasks such as face recognition, verification and clustering can be easily implemented
using standard techniques with FaceNet embeddings as feature vectors.
Our method uses a deep convolutional network trained
to directly optimize the embedding itself, rather than an intermediate bottleneck layer as in previous deep learning
approaches. To train, we use triplets of roughly aligned
matching / non-matching face patches generated using a
novel online triplet mining method. The benefit of our
approach is much greater representational efficiency: we
achieve state-of-the-art face recognition performance using
only 128-bytes per face.
On the widely used Labeled Faces in the Wild (LFW)
dataset, our system achieves a new record accuracy of
99.63%. On YouTube Faces DB it achieves 95.12%. Our
system cuts the error rate in comparison to the best published result [15] by 30% on both datasets.

1.04

1.22

1.33

0.78

1.33

1.26

0.99

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Illumination and Pose invariance. Pose and illumination have been a long standing problem in face recognition. This
figure shows the output distances of FaceNet between pairs of
faces of the same and a different person in different pose and illumination combinations. A distance of 0.0 means the faces are
identical, 4.0 corresponds to the opposite spectrum, two different
identities. You can see that a threshold of 1.1 would classify every
pair correctly.

In this paper we present a unified system for face verification (is this the same person), recognition (who is this
person) and clustering (find common people among these
faces). Our method is based on learning a Euclidean embedding per image using a deep convolutional network. The
network is trained such that the squared L2 distances in
the embedding space directly correspond to face similarity:
faces of the same person have small distances and faces of
distinct people have large distances.
Once this embedding has been produced, then the aforementioned tasks become straight-forward: face verification simply involves thresholding the distance between the
two embeddings; recognition becomes a k-NN classifica-

tion problem; and clustering can be achieved using off-theshelf techniques such as k-means or agglomerative clustering.
Previous face recognition approaches based on deep networks use a classification layer [15, 17] trained over a set of
known face identities and then take an intermediate bottleneck layer as a representation used to generalize recognition
beyond the set of identities used in training. The downsides
of this approach are its indirectness and its inefficiency: one
has to hope that the bottleneck representation generalizes
well to new faces; and by using a bottleneck layer the representation size per face is usually very large (1000s of di1

