Optimal Graph Learning with Partial Tags and Multiple Features for Image and
Video Annotation
Lianli Gao1 , Jingkuan Song2 , Feiping Nie3 , Yan Yan2 , Nicu Sebe2 , Heng Tao Shen4
1
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China.
lianli.gao@uestc.edu.cn
2

3

University of Trento, Italy

{jingkuan.song,yan.yan,niculae.sebe}@unitn.it
4

University of Texas, Arlington
feipingnie@gmail.com

The University of Queensland, Australia
shenht@itee.uq.edu.au

Abstract

ing resources for optimizing annotation models, which is referred to semi-supervised learning (SSL). This is often done
by adding a geometrically based regularization term in the
objective function of a supervised learning model. To exploit the geometrical relationships among the training data
points, the algorithms treat both labeled and unlabeled samples as vertices (nodes) in a graph and build pairwise edges
between these vertices which are weighed by the afﬁnities
(similarities) between the corresponding sample pairs.
SSL has been widely studied [3, 28, 13, 32, 4] and applied to many challenging tasks [4, 2, 3] such as image annotation and image retrieval. By exploiting a large number
of unlabeled data with reasonable assumptions, SSL can reduce the need of expensive labeled data and thus achieve
promising results especially for noisy labels [25]. The harmonic function approach [35] and local and global consistency (LGC) [34] are two representative graph-based SSL
methods. The harmonic function approach [35] emphasizes
the harmonic nature of the energy function and LGC considers the spread of label information in an iterative way.
While these two methods are transductive, manifold regularization (MR) [1, 21] is inductive. In practice, MR extends
regression and SVM to semi-supervised learning methods
such as Laplacian Regularized Least Squares (LapRLS)
and Laplacian Support Vector Machines (LapSVM) respectively by adding a geometrically based regularization
term [17].
Recently, many applications [33, 25, 24] were proposed.
Zhang et al. [33] extended LDA to semi-supervised discriminant analysis, Tang et al. [25] addressed the noisy label issue for the task of semi-supervised image labeling, and
Song et al. [24] utilized weak-label information for crossmedia retrieval.
Since an informative graph is critical for the graph-

In multimedia annotation, due to the time constraints
and the tediousness of manual tagging, it is quite common
to utilize both tagged and untagged data to improve the performance of supervised learning when only limited tagged
training data are available. This is often done by adding
a geometrically based regularization term in the objective
function of a supervised learning model. In this case, a
similarity graph is indispensable to exploit the geometrical relationships among the training data points, and the
graph construction scheme essentially determines the performance of these graph-based learning algorithms. However, most of the existing works construct the graph empirically and are usually based on a single feature without using the label information. In this paper, we propose
a semi-supervised annotation approach by learning an optimal graph (OGL) from multi-cues (i.e., partial tags and
multiple features) which can more accurately embed the relationships among the data points. We further extend our
model to address out-of-sample and noisy label issues. Extensive experiments on four public datasets show the consistent superiority of OGL over state-of-the-art methods by
up to 12% in terms of mean average precision.

1. Introduction
Recently, we have witnessed an exponential growth of
user generated videos and images, due to the booming of social networks, such as Facebook and Flickr. Consequently,
there are increasing demands to effectively organize and access these multimedia data via tagging. One promising direction is to combine labeled data (often of limited amount)
and a huge pool of unlabeled data in forming abundant train1

