Subgraph Decomposition for Multi-Target Tracking
Siyu Tang1
Bjoern Andres1
Mykhaylo Andriluka1,2
Bernt Schiele1
1
2
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbrücken, Germany
Stanford University, USA

Abstract
Tracking multiple targets in a video, based on a finite
set of detection hypotheses, is a persistent problem in computer vision. A common strategy for tracking is to first
select hypotheses spatially and then to link these over time
while maintaining disjoint path constraints [14, 15, 24]. In
crowded scenes multiple hypotheses will often be similar to
each other making selection of optimal links an unnecessary
hard optimization problem due to the sequential treatment
of space and time. Embracing this observation, we propose
to link and cluster plausible detections jointly across space
and time. Specifically, we state multi-target tracking as a
Minimum Cost Subgraph Multicut Problem. Evidence about
pairs of detection hypotheses is incorporated whether the
detections are in the same frame, neighboring frames or distant frames. This facilitates long-range re-identification and
within-frame clustering. Results for published benchmark
sequences demonstrate the superiority of this approach.

Figure 1. Overview of the Subgraph Multicut tracking method:
(clockwise) detection hypotheses, overlapping tracklet hypotheses,
hypotheses decomposition (clustering jointly across space and time)
and final tracks (dotted rectangles are interpolated tracks).

detections of the same target. Within the Disjoint Paths
formulation, it becomes necessary to choose, for each time
frame and target, one best out of many similar (and plausible)
hypotheses. Various recipes are proposed in the literature to
address this challenge. E.g., [14, 1] rely on a greedy iterative
procedure that finds one track at a time and then removes
corresponding hypotheses, or [25] performs several rounds
of optimization that merge detections into tracklets and then
into full tracks. Unfortunately, all these methods depend
on parameters that need to be tuned carefully, as noted in
[14, 1, 25].
Embracing the possibility of having multiple plausible
hypotheses per target and frame motivates us to formulate
multi-target tracking as a Minimum Cost Subgraph Multicut
Problem. The feasible solutions of this formulation are such
that possibly multiple hypotheses per track and time frame
are selected and clustered, resulting in an overall rigorous
and elegant approach to link, cluster and track targets jointly
across space and time. To illustrate the similarities and differences to prior work we implement a version of a tracking
algorithm based on the Minimum Cost Disjoint Path Problem. Although conceptually simple, its output is already on
par with the state of the art for public benchmark sequences,
as we show in Sec. 6.
This paper makes the following contributions: First, to
our knowledge, our work is the first to propose a Subgraph

1. Introduction
Multi-target tracking can be formulated as an optimization problem with respect to a graph whose nodes correspond
to detection hypotheses and whose edges connect detection
hypotheses that hypothetically describe the same target. A
commonly employed objective of the optimization is to select a subset of nodes and edges in such a graph to maximize
similarity of connected detection hypotheses, while maintaining constraints that prevent splits and merges of tracks.
By far the most common approach is to choose the initial graph such that detection hypotheses are connected only
across time (not within the same time frame) and to constrain
the solution such that connected components of selected detection hypotheses are paths (that do not branch). With
respect to a linear objective function, this problem is a Minimum Cost Disjoint Paths Problem with respect to the initial
graph. It is used, explicitly or implicitly, in many modern
tracking algorithms including [14, 15, 1, 25].
While being intuitive, the Disjoint Paths formulation has
a notable caveat: Typical target detectors yield, for each
time frame, many similar (and typically equally plausible)
1

