Discriminative Shape from Shading in Uncalibrated Illumination
Stephan R. Richter
Stefan Roth
Department of Computer Science, TU Darmstadt

Abstract
Estimating surface normals from just a single image
is challenging. To simplify the problem, previous work
focused on special cases, including directional lighting,
known reflectance maps, etc., making shape from shading
impractical outside the lab. To cope with more realistic settings, shading cues need to be combined and generalized to
natural illumination. This significantly increases the complexity of the approach, as well as the number of parameters
that require tuning. Enabled by a new large-scale dataset
for training and analysis, we address this with a discriminative learning approach to shape from shading, which
uses regression forests for efficient pixel-independent prediction and fast learning. Von Mises-Fisher distributions in
the leaves of each tree enable the estimation of surface normals. To account for their expected spatial regularity, we introduce spatial features, including texton and silhouette features. The proposed silhouette features are computed from
the occluding contours of the surface and provide scaleinvariant context. Aside from computational efficiency, they
enable good generalization to unseen data and importantly
allow for a robust estimation of the reflectance map, extending our approach to the uncalibrated setting. Experiments
show that our discriminative approach outperforms stateof-the-art methods on synthetic and real-world datasets.

1. Introduction
Estimating surface normals from just a single image is
a severely under-constrained problem. Previous work has
thus made a number of simplifying assumptions, e.g., presuming smooth surfaces, uniform albedo, and directional
lighting from a single light source of known direction. Yet,
relying on a single directional light, or assuming a given reflectance map renders shape from shading impractical. To
go beyond the lab, some of these assumptions need to be
relaxed. We thus investigate estimating the reflectance map
of a diffuse object with uniform albedo together with its
surface under uncontrolled illumination, given only a single
image (Fig. 1). Moreover, we aim to avoid strong spatial
regularization to recover fine surface detail. To address this

Figure 1. Qualitative results for shape and reflectance estimation
from a single image: input image [30], estimated normals and reflectance map from our method, and novel view (from left to right).

challenging setting, shading cues need to be generalized to
more realistic lighting and also combined due to their complementary strengths. This increases the model and computational complexity, as well as the number of parameters.
We approach these challenges with a discriminative
learning approach to shape from shading. This notably
makes it easy to combine several shading cues. We begin
by considering (1) color, which helps under hued illumination [18], and can be exploited with a second order approximation to Lambertian shading [25]. While powerful, our
experimental investigation (Sec. 8.1) shows that correlated
color channels (e.g., in near white light) or the presence of
noise severely impair accuracy. We thus add (2) local context, which aids disambiguation [33], but until now has been
limited to directional lighting. Instead of using colors from
a neighborhood directly, we choose a Texton filter bank [28]
for capturing local context. Employing these filters in a
learning framework allows for automatic adaptation to uncontrolled lighting and fine surface detail. We finally exploit (3) silhouette features. Previous work has constrained
surface normals at the occluding contour [16, 20], and propagated this information to the surface interior during global
reasoning. We generalize the occluding contour constraint
to the surface interior and provide (spatial) contour information at every pixel. These silhouette features yield a coarse
estimate of the surface from just the silhouette, which we
additionally exploit for estimating the reflectance map.
Adopting a learning approach to uncalibrated shape from
shading poses several challenges: First, example-based

