Super-resolution Person Re-identification with Semi-coupled Low-rank
Discriminant Dictionary Learning
Xiao-Yuan Jing1,3 , Xiaoke Zhu1 , Fei Wu1,3 , Xinge You2 , Qinglong Liu1 ,
Dong Yue3 , Ruimin Hu4 , Baowen Xu1
1
2

State Key Laboratory of Software Engineering, School of Computer, Wuhan University, China

School of Electronic Information and Communications, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
3

4

College of Automation, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China

National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, School of Computer, Wuhan University, China

Abstract
Person re-identification has been widely studied due to
its importance in surveillance and forensics applications. In practice, gallery images are high-resolution (HR)
while probe images are usually low-resolution (LR) in the identification scenarios with large variation of illumination,
weather or quality of cameras. Person re-identification in
this kind of scenarios, which we call super-resolution (SR) person re-identification, has not been well studied. In
this paper, we propose a semi-coupled low-rank discriminant dictionary learning (SLD2 L) approach for SR person
re-identification. For the given training image set which
consists of HR gallery and LR probe images, we aim to
convert the features of LR images into discriminating HR
features. Specifically, our approach learns a pair of HR
and LR dictionaries and a mapping from the features of HR
gallery images and LR probe images. To ensure that the
converted features using the learned dictionaries and mapping have favorable discriminative capability, we design a
discriminant term which requires the converted HR features
of LR probe images should be close to the features of HR
gallery images from the same person, but far away from
the features of HR gallery images from different persons.
In addition, we apply low-rank regularization in dictionary
learning procedure such that the learned dictionaries can
well characterize intrinsic feature space of HR and LR images. Experimental results on public datasets demonstrate
the effectiveness of SLD2 L.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification is a fundamental task in automated video surveillance and has been widely researched
in recent years. Given an image/video of a person taken
from one camera, re-identification is the process of identi-

gallery
Which is the true match?

probe
Figure 1. Super-resolution person re-identification problem.

fying the person from images/videos taken from a different
camera [2]. Many methods have been presented for person
re-identification [34, 33, 13, 15, 17, 21]. These methods
can be roughly classified into two categories: (1) Methods
on feature representation [1, 6, 23, 31]: they focus on seeking a distinct and robust feature representation for matching.
The Literature [9] seeks a more distinctive representation
by exploiting the class information to overcome the large
intra-class appearance variations. Literature [24] is presented to solve the feature selection problem. Literature [22]
is proposed to learn the most discriminative attribute that
characterizes a particular individual, in which saliency detection is utilized to drive automatically the PTZ camera to
focus on certain parts of a human body. (2) Methods on
distance learning [10, 14, 19, 35, 36]: they focus on seeking an optimal distance metric for person re-identification.
In [10], Hirzer et al. learned a metric from pairs of samples
belonging to different cameras using discriminative Mahalanobis metric learning, which can be efficiently solved after some relaxations. In [14], a distance metric is learned
based on equivalence constraints from a statistical inference perspective. In [36], Zheng et al. learned a Mahalanobis distance metric with a probabilistic relative distance
comparison (RDC) method. Recently, dictionary learning

