Situational Object Boundary Detection
J.R.R. Uijlings
University of Edinburgh

Abstract
Intuitively, the appearance of true object boundaries
varies from image to image. Hence the usual monolithic
approach of training a single boundary predictor and applying it to all images regardless of their content is bound
to be suboptimal. In this paper we therefore propose situational object boundary detection: We first define a variety
of situations and train a specialized object boundary detector for each of them using [10]. Then given a test image,
we classify it into these situations using its context, which
we model by global image appearance. We apply the corresponding situational object boundary detectors, and fuse
them based on the classification probabilities. In experiments on ImageNet [35], Microsoft COCO [24], and Pascal
VOC 2012 segmentation [13] we show that our situational
object boundary detection gives significant improvements
over a monolithic approach. Additionally, our method substantially outperforms [17] on semantic contour detection
on their SBD dataset.

1. Introduction
Most methods for object boundary detection are monolithic and use a single predictor to predict all object boundaries in an image [2, 10, 23] regardless of the image content. But intuitively, the appearance of object boundaries
is dependent on what is depicted in the image. For example, black-white transitions are often good indicators of object boundaries, unless the image depicts a zebra as in Figure 1. Outdoors, the sun may cast shadows which create
strong contrasts that are not object boundaries, while similar
colour contrasts in an indoor environment with diffuse lighting may be caused by object boundaries. Furthermore, not
all objects are equally important in all circumstances: one
may want to detect the boundary between a snowy mountain and the sky in images of winter holidays, while ignoring
sky-cloud transitions in images depicting air balloons, even
though such boundaries may be visually very similar. These
examples show that one cannot expect a monolithic predictor to accurately predict object boundaries in all situations.
In this work we recognize the need for different object
boundary detectors in different situations: first we define a

V. Ferrari
University of Edinburgh
input image

situational object boundary detection

zebra boundaries

+

snowboard boundaries

shared local appearance

monolithic object boundary detection

Figure 1. Monolithic vs situational object boundary detection.
Black-white transitions indicate an object boundary for the snowboard, but are false object boundaries for a zebra. This ambiguity
cannot be resolved by a monolithic detector. In contrast, by training class specific object boundary detectors and classifying the
image as a zebra, we correctly ignore most of the stripes.

set of situations and pre-train object boundary detectors for
each of them. For a test image, we classify which situations
the image depicts based on its context, modelled by global
image appearance. Then we apply the appropriate set of object boundary detectors. Hence conditioned on the situation
of an image we choose which object boundary detectors to
run. We call this Situational Object Boundary Detection.
One important question is how to define such situations.
Since the appearance of object boundaries are for a large
part dependent on the object class, one natural choice is to
use each object class as a single situation. This results in
class specific object boundary detectors, which can deal for
example with the zebra in Figure 1. However, object boundaries are also determined by the object pose and the background or context of the image. Since this can vary within
a single object class, we propose to cluster images of a single class into subclasses based on global image appearance.
This leads to subclass specific object boundary detectors.
Finally, one can imagine that the context of the image itself determines what kind of object boundaries to expect.
For example, one can expect cow-grass boundaries in the
countryside and street-car boundaries in the city. Therefore
we cluster images based on their global image appearance,
which results in class agnostic object boundary detectors.

