Global Refinement of Random Forest
Shaoqing Ren

Xudong Cao

Yichen Wei

Jian Sun

University of Science and Technology of China

Microsoft Research

sqren@mail.ustc.edu.cn

{xudongca,yichenw,jiansun}@microsoft.com

y

Abstract
Random forest is well known as one of the best learning
methods. In spite of its great success, it also has certain
drawbacks: the heuristic learning rule does not effectively
minimize the global training loss; the model size is usually
too large for many real applications. To address the issues,
we propose two techniques, global refinement and global
pruning, to improve a pre-trained random forest. The proposed global refinement jointly relearns the leaf nodes of all
trees under a global objective function so that the complementary information between multiple trees is well exploited. In this way, the fitting power of the forest is significantly
enhanced. The global pruning is developed to reduce the
model size as well as the over-fitting risk. The refined model
has better performance and smaller storage cost, as verified
in extensive experiments.

x
Green : Foreground
White : Background

Training Samples

Ours 2K Leaf Nodes

RF 2K Leaf Nodes

RF 10K Leaf Nodes

RF 100K Leaf Nodes

Figure 1. A toy classification task. From left to right, the first
row shows the groundtruth label map, training data points, and the
probability map predicted by our refined forest. The second row
shows the probability map predicted by standard random forest
(RF) trained with various depth (Dmax = 5, 8, 12). Our refined
forest can clearly separate the two classes using a smaller number
of leaf nodes. In all cases, we use 100 trees in the forest.

1. Introduction
Random forest [4] is one of the most popular learning
methods and has many ideal properties: 1) it is simple to
understand and implement; 2) it is strong in handling nonlinearity and outliers; 3) it is friendly to parallel training
and large data; and 4) it is fast in testing. Recently, it has
proven extremely successful on important applications in
data mining [33] and computer vision [31, 14, 30].

especially for embedded devices such as mobile phone or
Kinect. While tree pruning can reduce the tree size, existing methods [25, 19] are independently performed on individual trees and could degrade the performance of random
forest.
To address the above problems, we propose a simple and
effective method to refine a pre-trained random forest. We
notice that the learning and prediction of random forest is
inconsistent: the learning of individual trees is independent
but the prediction averages all trees’ outputs. The loss functions implied from these two processes are actually different. This limits the fitting power of random forest. To alleviate
such inconsistency, we discard the old values stored in all tree leaves of a pre-trained random forest and relearn them
through a ”global” refinement: all tree leaves are simultaneously optimized by explicitly minimizing a global loss
function defined on all training samples, according to the

In spite of its great success, random forest has certain insufficiency from both theoretical and practical viewpoints.
Theoretically, the heuristic learning of random forest is suboptimal in terms of minimizing training error. Specifically, each individual tree is learnt independently and greedily.
Such learning does not fully utilize complementary information among different trees.
Practically, for complex real problems [31, 14, 12, 10],
deep trees are usually required to fit the training data well.
This results in high storage cost, which is a serious issue
1

