Evaluation of Output Embeddings for Fine-Grained Image Classification
Zeynep Akata∗ , Scott Reed† , Daniel Walter† , Honglak Lee† and Bernt Schiele∗
∗

Computer Vision and Multimodal Computing
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbrucken, Germany

†

Computer Science and Engineering Division
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

Abstract
Image classification has advanced significantly in recent years with the availability of large-scale image sets.
However, fine-grained classification remains a major challenge due to the annotation cost of large numbers of finegrained categories. This project shows that compelling
classification performance can be achieved on such categories even without labeled training data. Given image
and class embeddings, we learn a compatibility function
such that matching embeddings are assigned a higher score
than mismatching ones; zero-shot classification of an image proceeds by finding the label yielding the highest joint
compatibility score. We use state-of-the-art image features
and focus on different supervised attributes and unsupervised output embeddings either derived from hierarchies or
learned from unlabeled text corpora. We establish a substantially improved state-of-the-art on the Animals with Attributes and Caltech-UCSD Birds datasets. Most encouragingly, we demonstrate that purely unsupervised output embeddings (learned from Wikipedia and improved with finegrained text) achieve compelling results, even outperforming the previous supervised state-of-the-art. By combining
different output embeddings, we further improve results.

Figure 1. Structured Joint Embedding leverages images (xi ) and
labels (yi ) by learning parameters W of a function F (xi , yi , W )
that measures the compatibility between input (θ(xi )) and output
embeddings (ϕ(yi )). It is a general framework that can be applied
to any learning problem with more than one modality.

describe well-known common characteristics of objects, are
an appealing source of information, and they can be easily
obtained through crowd-sourcing techniques [8, 41]. However, fine-grained concepts present a special challenge: due
to the high degree of similarity among categories, a large
number of attributes are required to effectively model these
subtle differences. This increases the cost of attribute annotation. One aim of this work is to move towards eliminating
the human labeling component from zero-shot learning, e.g.
by using alternative sources of information.
On the other hand, large-margin support vector machines
(SVM) operate with labeled training images, so a lack of labels limits their use for this task. Inspired by previous work
on label embedding [56, 3, 1] and structured SVMs [52, 38],
we propose to use a Structured Joint Embedding (SJE)
framework (Fig. 1) that relates input embeddings (i.e. image features) and output embeddings (i.e. side information)
through a compatibility function, therefore taking advantage of a structure in the output space. The SJE framework
separates the subspace learning problem from the specific
input and output features used in a given application. As a
general framework, it can be applied to any learning problem where more than one modality is provided for an object.
Our contributions are: (1) We demonstrate that unsuper-

1. Introduction
The image classification problem has been redefined by
the emergence of large scale datasets such as ImageNet [7].
Since deep learning methods [27] dominated recent LargeScale Visual Recognition Challenges (ILSVRC12-14), the
attention of the computer vision community has been drawn
to Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) [31]. Training
CNNs requires massive amounts of labeled data; but, in
fine-grained image collections, where the categories are visually very similar, the data population decreases significantly. We are interested in the most extreme case of learning with a limited amount of labeled data, zero-shot learning, in which no labeled data is available for some classes.
Without labels, we need alternative sources of information that relate object classes. Attributes [15, 14, 29], which
1

