Learning with Dataset Bias in Latent Subcategory Models
Dimitris Stamos1

Samuele Martelli2

Moin Nabi2

d.stamos@cs.ucl.ac.uk

samuele.martelli@iit.it

moin.nabi@iit.it

Andrew McDonald1

Vittorio Murino2,3

Massimiliano Pontil1

a.mcdonals@cs.ucl.ac.uk

vittorio.murino@iit.it

m.pontil@cs.ucl.ac.uk

1
2

Department of Computer Science, University College London, UK

Pattern Analysis & Computer Vision, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Italy
3

Dipartimento di Informatica, Università di Verona, Italy

Abstract
Latent subcategory models (LSMs) offer significant improvements over training linear support vector machines
(SVMs). Training LSMs is a challenging task due to the
potentially large number of local optima in the objective
function and the increased model complexity which requires
large training set sizes. Often, larger datasets are available as a collection of heterogeneous datasets. However,
previous work has highlighted the possible danger of simply training a model from the combined datasets, due to
the presence of bias. In this paper, we present a model
which jointly learns an LSM for each dataset as well as a
compound LSM. The method provides a means to borrow
statistical strength from the datasets while reducing their
inherent bias. In experiments we demonstrate that the compound LSM, when tested on PASCAL, LabelMe, Caltech101
and SUN09 in a leave-one-dataset-out fashion, achieves an
average improvement of over 6.5% over a previous SVMbased undoing bias approach and an average improvement
of over 8.5% over a standard LSM trained on the concatenation of the datasets.

1. Introduction
The problem of object recognition has received much attention in Computer Vision. One of the most successful object recognition systems is based on Deformable Part-based
Models (DPM), see [5, 9, 10, 30] and references therein. A
special case of Latent SVMs are latent subcategory models
(LSM) [5, 11, 30]. This approach has proved useful when
the object we wish to classify/detect consists of multiple
components, each of which captures different characteristics of the object class. For example, components may be
associated with different viewpoints, light conditions, etc.

Under these circumstances, training a single global classifier on the full dataset may result in a low complexity model
which underfits the data. To address this, latent subcategory
models train multiple subclassifiers simultaneously, each of
which is associated with a specific linear classifier capturing
specific characteristics of the object class.
Training these models is a challenging task due to the
presence of many local optima in the objective function and
the increased model complexity which requires large training set sizes. An obvious way to have larger training set
sizes is to merge datasets from different sources. However,
it has been observed by [21, 26] that training from combined datasets needs to be done with care. Although we
would expect training a classifier from all available data to
be beneficial, it may in fact result in decreased performance
because standard machine learning methods do not take into
account the bias inherent in each dataset. To address this
problem several approaches have been considered, some of
which we review in the next section.
The principal contribution of this paper is to extend
LSMs to deal with multiple biased datasets. We address this
problem from a multitask learning perspective [7], combining ideas from Computer Vision which have been put forward in [15]. This methodology leverages the availability of
multiple biased datasets to tackle a common classification
task (e.g. car classification) in a principled way. Specifically, we simultaneously learn a set of biased LSMs as well
as a compound LSM (visual world model) which is constrained to perform well on a concatenation of all datasets.
Although we focus on LSMs, the framework we present in
this paper extends in a natural manner to training multiple
latent part-based models. We describe a training procedure
for our method and provide experimental analysis, which
indicates that the method offers a significant improvement
over both simply training a latent subcategory model from
the concatenation of all datasets as well as the undoing bias

