Subgraph Matching using Compactness Prior
for Robust Feature Correspondence
Yumin Suh

Kamil Adamczewski

n12345@snu.ac.kr

kamil.m.adamczewski@gmail.com

Kyoung Mu Lee
kyoungmu@snu.ac.kr

Department of ECE, ASRI, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea

Abstract
Feature correspondence plays a central role in various
computer vision applications. It is widely formulated as
a graph matching problem due to its robust performance
under challenging conditions, such as background clutter,
object deformation and repetitive patterns. A variety of
fast and accurate algorithms have been proposed for graph
matching. However, most of them focus on improving the
recall of the solution while rarely considering its precision, thus inducing a solution with numerous outliers. To
address both precision and recall feature correspondence
should rather be formulated as a subgraph matching problem. This paper proposes a new subgraph matching formulation which uses a compactness prior, an additional constraint that prefers sparser solutions and effectively eliminates outliers. To solve the new optimization problem, we
propose a meta-algorithm based on Markov chain Monte
Carlo. By constructing Markov chain on the restricted
search space instead of the original solution space, our
method approximates the solution effectively. The experiments indicate that our proposed formulation and algorithm significantly improve the baseline performance under
challenging conditions when both outliers and deformation
noise are present.

(a) Input images

(b) Proposed

(c) Graph matching [30]
Figure 1. An example of feature matching. True positive matches
are represented by blue lines and false positive matches are represented by red lines.

ing provides a powerful tool for feature correspondence by
modeling feature appearances and their relationships as a
graph. This paper proposes a new formulation and algorithm for subgraph matching that enables robust feature correspondence under clutter and appearance variation.
Graph matching has been widely formulated as an Integer Quadratic Programming (IQP) due to its representation power [11, 15, 16, 27, 8, 30]. Compared with
other formulations, that allow only simple dot product or
squared error as affinity/distance measures [4], IQP can
model more complex affinity measures [5]. Also, it is
extendable to higher-order graph matching, which uses

1. Introduction
Feature correspondence plays a central role in various
computer vision applications such as object detection [28],
object recognition [6, 3], and tracking [12]. It is a challenging problem because background clutter, appearance variation, and repetitive patterns frequently occur in real world
images, thus reducing the informativeness of the local descriptors. Therefore, the geometric relationship between
features is commonly used to compensate for the unreliable
match scores obtained from local descriptors. Graph match1

