On the Appearance of Translucent Edges
Ioannis Gkioulekas
Harvard SEAS

Bruce Walter
Cornell University

Edward H. Adelson
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

igkiou@seas.harvard.edu

bruce.walter@cornell.edu

adelson@csail.mit.edu

Kavita Bala
Cornell University

Todd Zickler
Harvard SEAS

kb@cs.cornell.edu

zickler@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
Edges in images of translucent objects are very different
from edges in images of opaque objects. The physical
causes for these differences are hard to characterize analytically and are not well understood. This paper considers one class of translucency edges—those caused by a discontinuity in surface orientation—and describes the physical causes of their appearance. We simulate thousands of
translucency edge profiles using many different scattering
material parameters, and we explain the resulting variety of
edge patterns by qualitatively analyzing light transport. We
also discuss the existence of shape and material metamers,
or combinations of distinct shape or material parameters
that generate the same edge profile. This knowledge is relevant to visual inference tasks that involve translucent objects, such as shape or material estimation.

1. Introduction
Translucency is a common visual phenomenon. It occurs
whenever light penetrates a material and scatters within it
before re-emerging toward the observer. This internal scattering can create a variety of image effects, depending on an
object’s shape and material; its distance from the observer;
and the composition of the lighting around it. Common human experience suggests that these image effects contain
useful material information, and there is psychophysical evidence that humans can discriminate subtle differences in
translucent appearance, recognize translucent material categories, and make inferences about physical scattering parameters [2, 11, 13, 27].
There ought to be specific patterns of image brightness, or
their statistics, that constrain the set of plausible shapes and
materials in an image of translucency. If we understood
these patterns, we could use them to develop inference algorithms, analogous to those that exist for opaque scenes.

Figure 1: Radiance profiles at a discontinuity in orientation.
The wedge configuration is a horizontal cross-section of two
planar faces that meet in a vertical line. Here it is lit from
the left. If the material were opaque (as below) the profile
would be a step edge. When it is translucent (as above), the
profiles can be very different, often with multiple extrema
that are displaced from the discontinuity.
One prominent class of brightness patterns is edges, or
sharp local changes in image brightness. Edges have a variety of causes—cast shadows, material boundaries, occlusions, etc.—and models of edges play prominent roles in
a variety of inference algorithms, including contour detection, deblurring, and material recognition. In this paper, we
focus on edges that are caused by a discontinuous change
in surface orientation, such as at the corners of the cubes in
Figure 1. Locally, this geometry can be modeled by the onedimensional wedge of Figure 2. We use this as an archetypal
configuration for studying edges of translucency.
The radiance profile observed from an opaque wedge would
be the familiar step function, which is a popular edge model
in image processing and computer vision. But the radiance
profiles for translucent wedges are very different. As shown
in Figure 1, they tend to exhibit multiple extrema in the
vicinity of an orientation discontinuity, and these extrema
are often displaced away from the geometric discontinuity.
The physical causes of these profile phenomena are not well
understood. One reason is that they are hard to describe

