ActivityNet: A Large-Scale Video Benchmark for Human Activity
Understanding
Fabian Caba Heilbron1,2 , Victor Escorcia1,2 , Bernard Ghanem2 and Juan Carlos Niebles1
Universidad del Norte, Colombia
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Saudi Arabia
1

2

Abstract

techniques is the state of existing video datasets and benchmarks available to action/activity recognition researchers.

In spite of many dataset efforts for human action recognition, current computer vision algorithms are still severely
limited in terms of the variability and complexity of the actions that they can recognize. This is in part due to the simplicity of current benchmarks, which mostly focus on simple actions and movements occurring on manually trimmed
videos. In this paper we introduce ActivityNet, a new largescale video benchmark for human activity understanding.
Our benchmark aims at covering a wide range of complex
human activities that are of interest to people in their daily
living. In its current version, ActivityNet provides samples
from 203 activity classes with an average of 137 untrimmed
videos per class and 1.41 activity instances per video, for
a total of 849 video hours. We illustrate three scenarios in
which ActivityNet can be used to compare algorithms for
human activity understanding: untrimmed video classification, trimmed activity classification and activity detection.

For example, note that the range of activities performed
by one person in a day varies from making the bed after
waking up to brushing teeth before going to sleep. Between
these moments, he/she performs many activities relevant to
his/her daily life. The American Time Use Survey reports
that Americans spent an average 1.7 hours in household activities against only 18 minutes participating in sports, exercise or recreation per day [37]. In spite of this fact, most
computer vision algorithms for human activity understanding are benchmarked on datasets that cover a limited number of activity types. In fact, existing databases tend to be
specific and focus on certain types of activities i.e. sports,
cooking or simple actions. Typically, these datasets have a
small number of categories (around 100), a small number of
samples (short clips) per category (around 100), and limited
category diversity.
In this paper, we address these dataset limitations by
using a flexible framework that allows continuous acquisition, crowdsourced annotation, and segmentation of online videos, thus, culminating in a large-scale (large in
the number of categories and number of samples per category), rich (diverse taxonomy), and easy-to-use (annotations, baseline classification models will be available online) activity dataset, known as ActivityNet. One of the
most important aspects of ActivityNet is that it is structured
around a semantic ontology which organizes activities according to social interactions and where they usually take
place. It provides a rich activity hierarchy with at least four
levels of depth. For example, the activity Filing nails falls
under the third tier category Washing, dressing and grooming, which belongs to the second tier Grooming and finally
the major category Personal care. Figure 1 illustrates other
examples of this organization. To the best of our knowledge, ActivityNet is the first database for human activity
recognition organized under a rich semantic taxonomy.

1. Introduction
With the growth of online media, surveillance and mobile cameras, the amount and size of video databases are
increasing at an incredible pace. For example, YouTube
reported that over 300 hours of video are uploaded every
minute to their servers [43]. Arguably, people are the most
important and interesting subjects of such videos. The computer vision community has embraced this observation to
validate the crucial role that human activity/action recognition plays in building smarter surveillance systems, semantically aware video indexes, and more natural humancomputer interfaces. However, despite the explosion of
video data, the ability to automatically recognize and understand human activities is still rather limited. This is primarily due to impeding challenges inherent to the task, namely
the large variability in execution styles, complexity of the
visual stimuli in terms of camera motion, background clutter and viewpoint changes, as well as, the level of detail
and number of activities that can be recognized. An important limitation that hinders the performance of current

We organize the paper as follows: we first review and
summarize existing benchmarks for human activity understanding. Then, we present the details of our dataset
collection and annotation framework and provide a summary of the properties of ActivityNet. We illustrate three
1

