Modeling Deformable Gradient Compositions for Single-Image Super-resolution
Yu Zhu1 , Yanning Zhang1 , Boyan Bonev2 , Alan L. Yuille2
1
School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
2
Department of Statistics, University of California, Los Angeles, USA
zhuyu1986@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, ynzhang@nwpu.edu.cn, bonev@ucla.edu, yuille@stat.ucla.edu

Abstract
We propose a single-image super-resolution method
based on the gradient reconstruction. To predict the gradient field, we collect a dictionary of gradient patterns
from an external set of images. We observe that there
are patches representing singular primitive structures (e.g.
a single edge), and non-singular ones (e.g. a triplet of
edges). Based on the fact that singular primitive patches
are more invariant to the scale change (i.e. have less ambiguity across different scales), we represent the non-singular
primitives as compositions of singular ones, each of which
is allowed some deformation. Both the input patches and
dictionary elements are decomposed to contain only singular primitives. The compositional aspect of the model
makes the gradient field more reliable. The deformable aspect makes the dictionary more expressive. As shown in our
experimental results, the proposed method outperforms the
state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Single-image super-resolution is becoming more important with the development of high-definition display devices. However, recovering the high-resolution (HR) details
from single low-resolution (LR) image is still challenging.
It is an ill-posed problem because many details are lost during the degradation.
Recent works exploit various priors to regularize the
ill-posed problem. Besides the image smoothness prior
used by traditional interpolation methods, more sophisticated priors such as gradient based prior [7, 19] are proposed. But modeling the gradient distribution via a few parameters is not easy, because the local image structure is far
more complicated than the parametric representation.
Alternatively, example-based methods offer a good way
to represent the local structure by patches. These methods
either exploit the self-repeated example patches [4, 8, 11] or
estimate the high-resolution details from the high/low resolution pairs [2, 4, 9, 13, 15, 21, 24, 25, 26, 28, 30]. Recent
work [4, 6] tries to utilize deep networks to learn the inher-

LR Patch

HR Estimation

Components

Sparse
Coding
Singular
Structure

Deformable
Patches
Proposed

Deformed Gradient

Sparse
Coding
Non-singular
Structure

Deformable
Patches
Proposed

=

+

Deformed Gradient

Figure 1. Singular and Non-singular cases approached by sparse
coding [24], deformable patches [30] and the proposed method.
The HR estimation and the components shown to illustrate that
sparse coding and deformable patches work better on singular case
than non-singular case. By the proposed deformable compositional model, the non-singular patches can be well reconstructed.

ent relationship between the HR/LR patch pairs.
The ambiguity of HR/LR patch pairs is a common problem in the example-based methods. Different HR patches
may be corresponded to similar LR patches. To address this
problem, Freeman et al. [9] consider local consistency between adjacent patches and use Markov Random Fields to
find the appropriate candidates from the ambiguous patches.
Later methods try to learn the best linear combination of
the ambiguous patterns through sparse coding dictionary
[24, 25], Deep Network Cascade (DNC) [4] or Convolutions Neural Network(CNN) [6]. Recent work by Zhu et
al. [30] also suggest that deformable patches can relax the
problem.
Singular structures such as single edges and corners
are more robust to scale change, as pointed out in some
works [1, 11, 23]. In other words they are less ambiguous across different scales. Also, the non-singular structures are more likely to be lost during the degradation. Most
methods work better on singular structures. Figure 1 illustrates two broad method categories (sparse coding [24] and
deformable patches [30]), showing the HR estimation and
their components (linear [25] and weighed [30] combinations ). All of them work well on singular structures. But

