Learning semantic relationships for better action retrieval in images
Vignesh Ramanathan1,2 , Congcong Li2 , Jia Deng3,2 , Wei Han2 ,
Zhen Li2 , Kunlong Gu2 , Yang Song2 , Samy Bengio2 , Chuck Rossenberg2 and Li Fei-Fei1
1

Stanford University, 2 Google, 3 University of Michigan

vigneshr@cs.stanford.edu, congcongli@google.com, jiadeng@umich.edu ∗
{weihan, zhenli, kunlonggu, yangsong, bengio, chuck}@google.com, feifeili@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract

(a) Standard action recongition model for “person holding panda”

Human actions capture a wide variety of interactions
between people and objects. As a result, the set of possible actions is extremely large and it is difficult to obtain
sufficient training examples for all actions. However, we
could compensate for this sparsity in supervision by leveraging the rich semantic relationship between different actions. A single action is often composed of other smaller
actions and is exclusive of certain others. We need a method
which can reason about such relationships and extrapolate
unobserved actions from known actions. Hence, we propose a novel neural network framework which jointly extracts the relationship between actions and uses them for
training better action retrieval models. Our model incorporates linguistic, visual and logical consistency based cues
to effectively identify these relationships. We train and test
our model on a largescale image dataset of human actions.
We show a significant improvement in mean AP compared
to different baseline methods including the HEX-graph approach from Deng et al. [8].

Person interact- Person feeding Person holding Person feeding
ing with panda
animals
calf
panda

(b) Our model for “person holding panda”

Person interact- Person feeding Person holding Person feeding
ing with panda
panda
animals
calf

implied-by

type-of

mutual-exclusive

Figure 1. Given a query, such as “Person interacting with panda”
(a) standard models for action recognition treat every action independently, while (b) our method identifies the relation between
actions, and uses these relations to extrapolate labels for images of
related actions. In this example, “person interacting with panda”
is implied-by “person feeding panda”, and mutually exclusive of
“Person feeding a calf”. Hence, the images of these actions could
also be used to train a model for “person interacting with panda”.
The green and the red boxes indicate the positive and negative examples considered by the methods for training the model.

1. Introduction
Humans appear in majority of visual scenes, and understanding their actions is the basis of successful human
computer interaction. While action retrieval poses the same
challenges as object recognition, one key difference is that
the semantic space of actions is much larger. As shown
in Fig. 1, actions are compositions of objects and there are
many possible interactions even between the same set of objects. The distribution of objects in images is already long
tailed; consequently actions would be distributed in a much
more skewed way since most object combinations are quite
rare. Thus for successful action retrieval, one has to address

the fundamental challenge of learning with few examples.
In the current work, we learn action models for retrieving
images corresponding to a large number of human actions
in this challenging setting.
An action such as “person interacting with panda” yields
very few relevant results on image search. Can we still learn
a reliable model with such sparse supervision? As shown
in Fig. 1, the answer lies in the key observation that ac-

∗ This work was done while Vignesh Ramanathan and Jia Deng were
with Google

1

