Structural Sparse Tracking
Tianzhu Zhang1,2 Si Liu3 Changsheng Xu2,4 Shuicheng Yan5 Bernard Ghanem1,6
Narendra Ahuja1,7 Ming-Hsuan Yang8
1
4

2

Advanced Digital Sciences Center

China-Singapore Institute of Digital Media
7

5

Institute of Automation, CAS

3

National University of Singapore

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

Abstract

8

Institute of Information Engineering, CAS
6

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology

University of California at Merced

one and develops an ensemble tracking method. Collins et
al. [6] demonstrate that the most discriminative features can
be learned online to separate the target object from the background. In [9], Grabner et al. propose an online boosting
method to update discriminative features and a semi-online
boosting algorithm [10] to handle the drifting problem in object tracking. Babenko et al. [3] introduce multiple instance
learning into online object tracking where samples are considered within positive and negative bags or sets. Kalal et
al. [16] propose the P-N learning algorithm to exploit the underlying structure of positive and negative samples to learn
classifiers for object tracking.
In contrast, generative tracking methods typically learn
a model to represent the target object and then use it to
search for the image region with minimal reconstruction error [5, 7, 14, 1, 25, 31, 18]. Black et al. [5] learn an off-line
subspace model to represent the object of interest for tracking. The mean shift tracking algorithm [7] models a target
with nonparametric distributions of features (e.g., color pixels) and locates the object with mode shifts. The Frag tracker
[1] addresses the partial occlusion problem by modeling object appearance with histograms of local patches. The IVT
method [25] utilizes an incremental subspace model to adapt
appearance changes. Kwon et al. [18] use multiple observation models to cover a wide range of appearance changes,
caused by pose and illumination variation, for tracking. Most
of these methods use holistic representations to describe objects and hence do not handle occlusions or distracters well.
Recently, sparse representation based generative tracking
methods have been developed for object tracking [21, 20, 19,
23, 22, 34, 37, 36, 4, 15, 13, 39, 42, 41, 29]. These trackers can be categorized based on the representation schemes
into global, local, and joint sparse appearance models as
shown in Figure 1. In [21, 19, 23, 22, 34, 4], the sparse
trackers represent each target candidate xi as a sparse linear
combination of target templates T that can be dynamically
updated to account for appearance changes. These models
have been shown to be robust against partial occlusions with
demonstrated performance for tracking. However, all these
methods model a target object as a single entity as shown in

Sparse representation has been applied to visual tracking
by finding the best target candidate with minimal reconstruction error by use of target templates. However, most sparse
representation based trackers only consider holistic or local representations and do not make full use of the intrinsic
structure among and inside target candidates, thereby making the representation less effective when similar objects appear or under occlusion. In this paper, we propose a novel
Structural Sparse Tracking (SST) algorithm, which not only exploits the intrinsic relationship among target candidates
and their local patches to learn their sparse representations
jointly, but also preserves the spatial layout structure among
the local patches inside each target candidate. We show that
our SST algorithm accommodates most existing sparse trackers with the respective merits. Both qualitative and quantitative evaluations on challenging benchmark image sequences
demonstrate that the proposed SST algorithm performs favorably against several state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Visual tracking aims to estimate the states of a moving
target in a video. It has long been one of the most important and fundamental topics in computer vision with a
plethora of applications such as surveillance, vehicle navigation, human computer interface, and human motion analysis,
to name a few. Despite numerous object tracking methods [33, 26, 35, 30, 17, 24] having been proposed in recent
years, it remains a challenging task to develop a robust algorithm for complex and dynamic scenes due to the factors
such as partial occlusions, illumination, pose, scale, camera
motion, background clutter, and viewpoint.
Most tracking algorithms are developed from the discriminative or generative perspectives. Discriminative approaches formulate the tracking problem as a binary classification
task in order to find the decision boundary for separating
the target object from the background [2, 6, 9, 10, 3, 16].
Avidan [2] combines a set of weak classifiers into a strong
1

