Diversity-induced Multi-view Subspace Clustering
Xiaochun Cao1,2
Changqing Zhang1
Huazhu Fu3
Si Liu2
Hua Zhang1
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, China
2
State Key Laboratory of Information Security, IIE, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100093, China
3
School of Computer Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Nanyang Avenue 639798, Singapore
caoxiaochun@iie.ac.cn

zhangchangqing@tju.edu.cn

hzfu@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
In this paper, we focus on how to boost the multi-view
clustering by exploring the complementary information among multi-view features. A multi-view clustering framework, called Diversity-induced Multi-view Subspace Clustering (DiMSC), is proposed for this task. In our method, we
extend the existing subspace clustering into the multi-view
domain, and utilize the Hilbert Schmidt Independence Criterion (HSIC) as a diversity term to explore the complementarity of multi-view representations, which could be solved
efficiently by using the alternating minimizing optimization.
Compared to other multi-view clustering methods, the enhanced complementarity reduces the redundancy between
the multi-view representations, and improves the accuracy
of the clustering results. Experiments on both image and
video face clustering well demonstrate that the proposed
method outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Multi-view data are very common in many real world
applications because data is often collected from diverse
domains or obtained from different feature extractors. For
example, color and texture information can be utilized as different kinds of features in images and videos. Web pages
are also able to be represented using the multi-view features
based on text and hyperlinks. Taken alone, these views will
often be deficient or incomplete because different views describe distinct perspectives of data. Therefore, a key problem for data analysis is how to integrate the multiple views
and discover the underlying structures. Recently, some approaches of learning from multi-view data have been proposed. However, most of them concentrate on supervised
or semi-supervised learning [1, 6, 22, 31], in which a validation set is required. In this paper, we focus on multiview clustering, which is much more challenging for lacking training information to guide the learning process.
The complementary principle of multi-view setting s-

fifthzombiesi@gmail.com

huazhang@tju.edu.cn

tates that, each view of the data may contain some knowledge that other views do not have. Therefore, multiple
views can be employed to comprehensively and accurately describe the data [30, 31]. Furthermore, some theoretical results [4, 5, 26] have shown that the independence of
different views can serve as a helpful complement to the
multi-view learning. Nevertheless, the main limitation of
the existing methods [8, 9, 12, 16, 17, 24, 25] is that they
could not guarantee the complementarity across different
similarity matrices corresponding to different views. In other words, they assume that the complementary information
is abundant across the independently constructed similarity
matrices or the views are sufficiently independent to each
other. However, we find that exploiting the specific independently constructed matrices is insufficient, and exploring the underlying complementarity is of great importance
for the success of multi-view clustering.
Figure 1(a-c) illustrates the straightforward way to combine the multi-view features, which independently constructs the similarity matrix of each feature according to
some specific distance metric. By contrast, we consider
the complementary information of all the different views in
depth, and find that the complementary information is explored more thoroughly, while the similarity matrices of the
multi-view features are more diverse. In this paper, a novel multi-view subspace clustering method, called Diversityinduced Multi-view Subspace Clustering (DiMSC), is proposed to explore the complementary information. As shown
in Figure 1(d-f), our method learns all the different subspace representations jointly with the help of the diversity constraint. The Hilbert-Schmidt Independence Criterion
(HSIC) is employed to measure dependence in terms of a
kernel dependence measure. With this term, we explicitly
co-regularize different views to enforce the diversity of the
jointly learned subspace representations.
The main contribution of our work is that we extend
the self-representation based subspace clustering to multiview setting, and propose a Diversity-induced Multi-view
Subspace Clustering method, which outperforms the related

