Simultaneous Video Defogging and Stereo Reconstruction
Zhuwen Li1 , Ping Tan2 , Robby T. Tan3 , Danping Zou4∗, Steven Zhiying Zhou1,5 and Loong-Fah Cheong1
1
4

National University of Singapore 2 Simon Fraser University 3 SIM University

Shanghai Jiao Tong University 5 National University of Singapore (Suzhou) Research Institute

Abstract

[21], which provides a detail preserving smoothness prior
on scene depth.
At the same time, stereo vision helps defogging. Previous defogging techniques are mainly designed to defog a
single image, which is essentially an ill posed problem due
to the airlight-albedo ambiguity [10]. Recent techniques rely on additional heuristic assumptions, such as piecewise
constant albedo [10], maximum local contrast [35] or dark
channel prior [17]. But all these assumptions can be fooled
by the airlight-albedo ambiguity. As a result, nearby objects
with unsaturated color are often mistaken as faraway objects
with saturated color. It is demonstrated [19] that even rough
depth information can significantly improve the defogging
performance. A precise depth estimation from stereo will
help to reduce the airlight-albedo ambiguity in defogging.
A naive solution for simultaneous stereo and defogging
is to apply both algorithms iteratively, e.g. iteratively defog
all images and then apply stereo vision to the defogged results. However, most of existing defogging algorithms are
designed for a single image, and will generate temporally
inconsistent results when they are process on a frame-byframe manner. Thus, the following stereo algorithms will
generate large error on these inconsistently defogged images. This problem is shown in our experiments.
In this paper, we study stereo vision and defogging problems jointly, and design an algorithm that simultaneously
estimates scene depth and defogs the input images. Our
method is based on the observation that the depth cues from
stereo and fog thickness are complementary to each other
(i.e. stereo cues are more reliable for nearby objects and fog
thickness cues are more reliable for faraway objects). Our
method performs best on scenes with thick fog or large camera movement when both depth cues are strong at close and
far. This feature makes our algorithm especially suitable
for applications in autonomous navigation of unmanned vehicles in bad weather or underwater, such as in [23, 29].
Our method includes four key features. Firstly, we improve the photo-consistency term in stereo matching to incorporate the scattering effect. When evaluating the consistency of two pixels from different viewpoints, we explicitly
model their appearance change due to fog. Secondly, we

We present a method to jointly estimate scene depth and
recover the clear latent image from a foggy video sequence.
In our formulation, the depth cues from stereo matching and
fog information reinforce each other, and produce superior results than conventional stereo or defogging algorithms. We first improve the photo-consistency term to explicitly
model the appearance change due to the scattering effects.
The prior matting Laplacian constraint on fog transmission
imposes a detail-preserving smoothness constraint on the
scene depth. We further enforce the ordering consistency
between scene depth and fog transmission at neighboring
points. These novel constraints are formulated together in
an MRF framework, which is optimized iteratively by introducing auxiliary variables. The experiment results on real
videos demonstrate the strength of our method.

1. Introduction
Multi-view stereo receives intensive investigations [32].
Most of these methods, however, are designed for images
captured in clear scenes, and consequently foggy or underwater images present a significant challenge. One of the
reasons is because these images are associated with poor
image contrast, which causes image features to be less distinctive and confuses stereo matching. Another reason is
that the photo-consistency measure in conventional stereo algorithms does not consider the scattering and absorption phenomenon during light propagation, and thus generate systematic matching errors.
While fog poses challenges for stereo algorithm, it also brings compensatory advantages. From a computational
viewpoint, it is well known [16] that stereo does not work
well for large distances. The depth smoothness prior further results in loss of surface details [42] such as thin elongated structures and holes. Fog transmission information (i.e. the α-channel) contains depth cues that are qualitatively different, because: 1) fog transmission provides
depth ordering, since thicker fog is associated with larger
distance, 2) fog transmission satisfies the matting Laplacian
∗ D. Zou worked on this project as a research fellow with P. Tan.

1

