Interaction Part Mining: A Mid-Level Approach for Fine-Grained Action
Recognition
Yang Zhou1 , Bingbing Ni2 , Richang Hong3 , Meng Wang3 , and Qi Tian1
1
University of Texas at San Antonio, US
2
Advanced Digital Sciences Center, Singapore
3
HeFei University of Technology, China
myh511@my.utsa.edu bingbing.ni@adsc.com.sg hongrc@hfut.edu.cn
eric.mengwang@gmail.com qi.tian@utsa.edu

Abstract
Modeling human-object interactions and manipulating
motions lies in the heart of fine-grained action recognition. Previous methods heavily rely on explicit detection
of the object being interacted, which requires intensive human labour on object annotation. To bypass this constraint and achieve better classification performance, in
this work, we propose a novel fine-grained action recognition pipeline by interaction part proposal and discriminative mid-level part mining. Firstly, we generate a large
number of candidate object regions using off-the-shelf object proposal tool, e.g., BING. Secondly, these object regions are matched and tracked across frames to form a large
spatio-temporal graph based on the appearance matching
and the dense motion trajectories through them. We then
propose an efficient approximate graph segmentation algorithm to partition and filter the graph into consistent local dense sub-graphs. These sub-graphs, which are spatiotemporal sub-volumes, represent our candidate interaction
parts. Finally, we mine discriminative mid-level part detectors from the features computed over the candidate interaction parts. Bag-of-detection scores based on a novel MaxN pooling scheme are computed as the action representation for a video sample. We conduct extensive experiments
on human-object interaction datasets including MPII Cooking and MSR Daily Activity 3D. The experimental results
demonstrate that the proposed framework achieves consistent improvements over the state-of-the-art action recognition accuracies on the benchmarks, without using any object annotation.

1. Introduction
In recent years, fine-grained action recognition has
raised extensive research [21, 13] due to its potential ap-

Figure 1: Our mid-level approach for fine-grained action
recognition includes interaction part formation to generate
candidate human-object interaction parts, and interaction
part mining to train discriminative exemplar part detectors.
plications in assisted daily living, medical surveillance and
smart home.
On one hand, fine-grained manipulation actions involve
a large amount of interactions between human and objects.
Therefore, how to model the interactions between human
and objects plays a critical role in action representation and
recognition. Many research works [36, 16, 17, 33, 32, 11,
35, 7, 10, 20, 21, 4, 24] have devoted to modeling the contextual information between human and objects/scenes for
action recognition. However, to model human and object
contextual information, explicit detection of objects is often
required by the above methods. Training these object detectors requires labour-extensive human annotation work.
In fine-grained action recognition where many types of objects are manipulated in a single action, it is not feasible to
1) label the training object instances; and 2) detect those
objects with decent detection accuracy.
On the other hand, the spatio-temporal features [12], especially the recent proposed dense trajectories [29] encoded

