Integrating Parametric and Non-parametric Models For Scene Labeling
Bing Shuai, Gang Wang, Zhen Zuo, Bing Wang, Lifan Zhao
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University.
50 Nanyang Avenue, Singapore, 639798.
{bshuai001,wanggang,zzuo1,wang0775,zhao0145}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

k
ro
c

al
k

d
ro
a

ew
sid

nt

n

ou
m

pe
rs
o

bo

ai
n

Final labeling

at

Global labeling
nd

Local labeling

sa

1. Introduction

Input image

se
a

sk

y

We adopt Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) as our
parametric model to learn discriminative features and classifiers for local patch classification. As visually similar pixels are indistinguishable from local context, we alleviate
such ambiguity by introducing a global scene constraint.
We estimate the global potential in a non-parametric framework. Furthermore, a large margin based CNN metric
learning method is proposed for better global potential
estimation. The final pixel class prediction is performed
by integrating local and global beliefs. Even without any
post-processing, we achieve state-of-the-art performance
on SiftFlow and competitive results on Stanford Background
benchmark.

Figure 1. Motivation of our method: the parametric model can
distinguish visually different pixels very well, but get confused
for pixels that are visually similar in local context. However, the
local features can be disambiguated from global scene semantics.
A more consistent labeling result can be achieved by integrating
their beliefs. The figure is best viewed in color.

Scene labeling builds a bridge towards better scene understanding. The goal is to relate one semantic class (road,
water, sea, etc) to each pixel. Generally, “thing” pixels (car,
person, etc) in real world images can be quite different due
to their scale, illumination and pose variation, meanwhile
“stuff” pixels are very similar (road, sea, etc) in a local
close-up view. These issues pose scene labeling as one of
the most challenging problems in computer vision.
The recent advance of Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNN) [13, 15] has dazzled computer vision community
due to its outstanding performance ranging from large scale
object recognition, detection [2, 13, 20, 33, 36] to pose estimation [27, 28]. It has also been demonstrated that this
network is able to learn compact, discriminative and highlevel features [35]. Recently, Farabet [4] and Pinheiro [21]
has applied CNNs to scene labeling. In this scenario, CNNs
are used to model the class likelihood of pixels from local
context by parameterizing it in terms of features and classifiers. They can produce satisfactory labeling results by
learning strong features and classifiers to discriminate visually dissimilar pixels.
However, CNNs struggle in visually similar pixels due to

using their limited context. As shown in Figure 1, the sand
pixels are highly confused with road and sidewalk pixels in
a local view. Previous works have addressed this issue from
two perspectives:
• Augmenting the scale of context to represent pixels:
[4] considers multi-scale context input, [21] increases
the size of context input in a recurrent convolutional
neural network. These methods somehow mitigate the
local ambiguity, however they may have an negative
effect for small objects and may also degrade the efficiency of the system.
• Building a graphical model to capture dependencies
among pixels [9, 11, 23, 37]. However, the parametric
1

