Robust Multi-Image Based Blind Face Hallucination
Yonggang Jin
University of Bristol

Abstract
This paper proposes a robust multi-image based blind
face hallucination framework to super-resolve LR faces.
The proposed framework first estimates both blurring kernel and transformations of multiple LR faces by robust deblurring and registration in PCA subspace. A patch-wise
mixture of probabilistic PCA prior is then incorporated for
face super-resolution. Previous work on face SR using PCA
prior can be viewed as special cases of the framework. Experimental results in both simulated and real LR sequences
demonstrate very promising performance of the proposed
method.

1. Introduction
The paper focuses on multi-image based blind face hallucination to super-resolve low-resolution (LR) faces in image sequences. There has been much previous work carried
out on face hallucination [1, 3, 15, 29, 7, 4, 27, 13, 17, 10]
and face subspace based methods are often employed for
face super-resolution (SR). PCA prior based face SR was
presented in [3] with two MAP formulations, FS-MAP and
IS-MAP. PCA prior is used in [15] as global constraints
in combination with a patch-based local constraint from
[6] for face SR, where the soft-constraint is essentially the
same as FS-MAP in [3]. Nonnegative Matrix Factorization
(NMF) was adopted in [29] as the global constraint, which
is then combined with sparse coding for face hallucination.
Face SR in eigen-domain was presented in [7]. Tensorbased approaches were introduced in [13, 17] to hallucinate facial expression using multi-modal faces. The asymmetry of registration of LR faces was pointed out in [4],
where a Resolution-Aware Fitting (RAF) based on AAM
[5] was proposed for joint registration and super-resolution
to avoid interpolating LR images. Face SR based on image
alignment was recently proposed where exemplars of HR
faces are matched to an LR face by either dense SIFT flow
[24, 11] or facial feature matching [28].
Most previous work on face SR utilizes only a single LR
face, which may limit SR performance due to insufficient
measurements available. Multiple LR images are often ex-

Christos-Savvas Bouganis
Imperial College London

ploited for generic image SR [22, 8, 19], in combination
with generic image priors, such as Tikhonov regularization,
Total Variation (TV) or Huber MRF based sparsity prior.
However for multi-image based SR, often a lot of LR images are used and registration errors will arise for moving
objects or multi-view images. Recent work [26, 16, 23, 9]
proposed to combine registration and/or deblurring with
multi-image SR.
This paper presents a robust multi-image based blind
face hallucination framework to super-resolve LR faces in
image sequences. The proposed method first estimate both
blurring kernel and transformations of multiple LR faces
by robust deblurring and registration in PCA subspace using PCA prior. A patch-wise mixture of probabilistic PCA
(MPPCA) prior [25] is then incorporated for face SR. Previous work on face SR using PCA prior can be viewed as
special cases and it can be shown that FS-MAP[3]/SoftConstraint[15] reduces to one iteration step in the framework. Previous work [15, 4, 27, 13] on face SR using single LR face manually or automatically aligned a face to a
normalized face. For face SR using multiple LR faces [3],
additional transformations between multiple LR faces need
to be estimated by feature matching or tracking. However,
due to low visual quality of LR faces, there are often significant errors in the initial alignment, which actually may degrade performance of face SR. In addition, fixed and small
blurring is often assumed in previous work, be it Gaussian
or square, which may not be valid in practice. The proposed method is in the similar spirit of [26, 16], but explores face PCA subspace, rather than original high resolution (HR) image space, for robust deblurring and registration. In addition, a new patch-wise MPPCA prior, rather
than weak generic image priors, is applied to improve SR
performance. The proposed method improves face SR performance, by combining robust blurring kernel and transformation estimation with the patch-wise MPPCA prior, with
very promising results in both simulated and real LR sequences.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Face
hallucination is formulated in section 2. Section 3 describes
the multi-image based blind face hallucination framework.
Results in both simulated and real LR sequences are pre-

