Traditional Saliency Reloaded:
A Good Old Model in New Shape
Simone Frintrop, Thomas Werner, and Germán M. Garcı́a
Institute of Computer Science III
Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität Bonn, Germany
frintrop@iai.uni-bonn.de

Abstract

a huge progress in the field. But do these new methods
compute saliency in a better, or just in a different way? In
other words, did the original Itti model miss essential ideas
to compute saliency that newer approaches include?
In this paper, we show that the traditional structure
of saliency models based on multi-scale Difference-ofGaussians is still competitive with current salient object
detection methods. We present the new saliency system
VOCUS2 that follows in its basic structure the Itti-Koch
model [21]: feature channels are computed in parallel, pyramids enable a multi-scale computation, contrasts are computed by Difference-of-Gaussians. Since the original model
was designed to simulate eye movements, we need some
adaptations to achieve high performance for salient object
segmentation. Especially important is the scale-space structure (we use a new twin pyramid) and the center-surround
ratio, which has turned out to be the most crucial parameter
of saliency systems. Like the approach of Itti, the resulting system has a simple and elegant structure which follows
concepts from human perception. Furthermore, it is applicable not only to web images with few prominent objects
but also especially well suited for applications on mobile
systems since it is fast and does not require center or background priors for good performance.
Our system produces pixel-precise saliency maps, instead of segment-based ones. We believe that this is an important quality of a general saliency method, since pixels
actually do have different saliency. Even if they have exactly the same color value, they might be perceived differently, due to their neighborhood: a pixel that differs strongly
from its neighbors, e.g., at an object border, is considered
more salient than one surrounded by similar pixels. However, for some tasks, segment-based saliency maps are beneficial, especially if precise object boundaries are required.
To obtain these, we show how to integrate the presented
saliency method into an object proposal generation framework [30]. The resulting object proposals are then combined to form a segment-based saliency map, which gives
especially good results on several benchmark datasets for

In this paper, we show that the seminal, biologicallyinspired saliency model by Itti et al. [21] is still competitive with current state-of-the-art methods for salient object segmentation if some important adaptions are made.
We show which changes are necessary to achieve high
performance, with special emphasis on the scale-space:
we introduce a twin pyramid for computing Difference-ofGaussians, which enables a flexible center-surround ratio.
The resulting system, called VOCUS2, is elegant and coherent in structure, fast, and computes saliency at the pixel
level. It is not only suitable for images with few objects, but
also for complex scenes as captured by mobile devices. Furthermore, we integrate the saliency system into an object
proposal generation framework to obtain segment-based
saliency maps and boost the results for salient object segmentation. We show that our system achieves state-of-theart performance on a large collection of benchmark data.

1. Introduction
More than 15 years ago, Laurent Itti and colleagues published one of the first computational attention and saliency
systems: the iNVT (iLab Neuromorphic Vision Toolkit)
[21]. It was designed to simulate the mechanisms of human visual attention and thus to find regions of interest in
images. The approach is considered to be the origin of computational saliency systems and has been cited more than
6000 times. Since then, the interest in the computer vision
community in saliency computation has increased strongly,
since it is a valuable method for tasks such as thumbnailing, retargeting, or object recognition. Several databases
for evaluating systems have been created and many new sophisticated saliency systems are presented every year (see
[5, 7] for surveys). Many systems show now impressive results with precise saliency maps: obviously there has been
1

