Geo-semantic Segmentation
Shervin Ardeshir1
Kofi Malcolm Collins-Sibley2
Mubarak Shah1
1
Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida
2
Northeastern University
ardeshir@cs.ucf.edu, collins-sibley.k@husky.neu.edu, shah@crcv.ucf.edu

Abstract
The availability of GIS (Geographical Information System) databases for many urban areas, provides a valuable source of information for improving the performance
of many computer vision tasks. In this paper, we propose
a method which leverages information acquired from GIS
databases to perform semantic segmentation of the image
alongside with geo-referencing each semantic segment with
its address and geo-location. First, the image is segmented
into a set of initial super-pixels. Then, by projecting the information from GIS databases, a set of priors are obtained
about the approximate location of the semantic entities such
as buildings and streets in the image plane. However, there
are significant inaccuracies (misalignments) in the projections, mainly due to inaccurate GPS-tags and camera parameters. In order to address this misalignment issue, we
perform data fusion such that it improves the segmentation
and GIS projections accuracy simultaneously with an iterative approach. At each iteration, the projections are evaluated and weighted in terms of reliability, and then fused
with the super-pixel segmentations. First segmentation is
performed using random walks, based on the GIS projections. Then the global transformation which best aligns the
projections to their corresponding semantic entities is computed and applied to the projections to further align them to
the content of the image. The iterative approach continues
until the projections and segments are well aligned.

Figure 1: Labeling semantic entities in the image such as
buildings (red) and streets (green) alongside with their geosemantic labels (addresses).

availability of a plethora of geographical information, geosemantic segmentation could be a relevant topic of research
in computer vision. In particular, GIS databases containing information about the exact boundaries (2D footprints
in long-lat domain) of semantic regions such as buildings,
roads, etc. and are available for many urban areas, making it a suitable source of information for performing geosemantic segmentation. In this work, we propose a method
to leverage the information extracted from GIS, to perform
geo-semantic segmentation of the image content, and simultaneously refine the misalignment of the projections. First,
the image is segmented into a set of initial super-pixels.
Also, camera matrix is formed using the provided camera
parameters such as sensor size and focal length, alongside
with the GPS location of the camera using which the image
was captured. Using the camera matrix, 3D points in the
GIS (which belong to regions of interest, in our case buildings and streets) are projected onto the 2D image plane. In
many cases, due to the inaccuracies in the meta-data and
mosty due to the GPS location (EXIF Tag), the projections
are far from perfect and usually not aligned with the objects
of interest. This misalignment is more intense for regions
which are at larger distances from the camera and/or have
smaller projection sizes in the field of view of the camera.
We show that these misaligned projections turn into misleading priors for the semantic segmentation step. Therefore, we evaluate each of the projections in terms of reliabil-

1. Introduction
Segmentation of an in image into coherent and semantically meaningful regions is a fundamental problem in
computer vision. Many methods employing image content have been proposed in the literature during the last few
decades. In particular, semantic segmentation of images
taken from urban areas has been studied in the past few
years [10, 14, 2, 4]. However, to the best of our knowledge, the problem of segmenting images into exact georeferenced semantic labels has yet to be studied. Given the
1

