A Dynamic Programming Approach for Fast and Robust Object Pose
Recognition from Range Images
Christopher Zach
Toshiba Research Europe
Cambridge, UK

Adrian Penate-Sanchez
CSIC-UPC
Barcelona, Spain

Minh-Tri Pham
Toshiba Research Europe
Cambridge, UK

christopher.m.zach@gmail.com

apenate@iri.upc.edu

mtpham@crl.toshiba.co.uk

Abstract

pling) in the query image. Further, real depth sensors exhibit several shortcomings at depth discontinuities, such
as half-occlusions and foreground fattening occurring with
triangulation-based sensors (passive stereo or Kinect-type
active stereo), and mixed pixels with time-of-flight sensors.
Overall, many depth sensing technologies report reliable
and accurate depth values only in smooth regions of the true
scene geometry. Beside that, the piecewise smooth appearance of range images also implies that extracting a full 3D
local coordinate frame is not reliable, but at least estimating
surface normals is rather stable. Thus, feature extraction
can be easily made invariant with respect to two degrees of
freedom (i.e. the surface normal) but not reliably invariant
with respect to the remaining 2D rotation in the local tangent plane. We also believe that for the same reason predicting poses directly based on feature correspondences leads
to large uncertainties in the estimates, and therefore we follow [20, 3] in predicting “object coordinates” (i.e. 3D vertices on the object of interest) and computing more certain
and accurate poses from multiple correspondences.
Finally, objects of interest can be occluded and only be
partially visible. A sensible principle to add robustness with
respect to occlusions is to employ a compositional method,
i.e. to detect the object and estimating its pose by detecting and aligning smaller parts. Due to the locally ambiguous appearance of depth images, we expect a much higher
false-positive rate than with color images when matching
features extracted in the query images with the ones in the
training database, and it will be essential to maintain several
predictions of object coordinates per pixel to address the
amount of false positive matches. In summary, object detection solely from depth data is facing the following challenges: (i) few salient regions in range images, (ii) unreliable depth discontinuities, and (iii) uninformative features
and descriptors.
Since depth cameras report 3D geometry, and our
method is based on predicting 3D object coordinates for
pixels in the range image, we are able to assess the internal
consistency of putative object coordinates by comparing the

Joint object recognition and pose estimation solely from
range images is an important task e.g. in robotics applications and in automated manufacturing environments. The
lack of color information and limitations of current commodity depth sensors make this task a challenging computer
vision problem, and a standard random sampling based approach is prohibitively time-consuming. We propose to address this difficult problem by generating promising inlier
sets for pose estimation by early rejection of clear outliers
with the help of local belief propagation (or dynamic programming). By exploiting data-parallelism our method is
fast, and we also do not rely on a computationally expensive training phase. We demonstrate state-of-the art performance on a standard dataset and illustrate our approach on
challenging real sequences.

1. Introduction
Since the emergence of commodity depth sensors in the
past few years, recognizing objects and estimating their
pose using such depth sensors is an active research topic.
Several approaches demonstrate that the results for this task
can be improved over methods using only color images by
combining RGB and depth features (e.g. [8, 17, 21]), but
in many situations color cues are either not available, not
informative or unreliable. In particular, in the context of
automated manufacturing and mechanical assembling, objects may need to be recognized and their pose estimated
from depth data only.
In contrast to color images, depth maps are usually far
less discriminative in their appearance. While a good statistical model for color images is still an open research
topic, a sensible and simple prior for depth images is given
by a piecewise smooth regularizer. Consequently, we do
not rely on any interest point detection in depth images
and evaluate features densely (or quasi-densely by subsam1

