The Stitched Puppet: A Graphical Model of 3D Human Shape and Pose
Silvia Zuffi1,2
Michael J. Black1
1
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
2
ITC - Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Milan, Italy

Abstract
We propose a new 3D model of the human body that is
both realistic and part-based. The body is represented by a
graphical model in which nodes of the graph correspond to
body parts that can independently translate and rotate in 3D
and deform to represent different body shapes and to capture pose-dependent shape variations. Pairwise potentials
define a “stitching cost” for pulling the limbs apart, giving rise to the stitched puppet (SP) model. Unlike existing
realistic 3D body models, the distributed representation facilitates inference by allowing the model to more effectively
explore the space of poses, much like existing 2D pictorial
structures models. We infer pose and body shape using
a form of particle-based max-product belief propagation.
This gives SP the realism of recent 3D body models with the
computational advantages of part-based models. We apply
SP to two challenging problems involving estimating human
shape and pose from 3D data. The first is the FAUST mesh
alignment challenge, where ours is the first method to successfully align all 3D meshes with no pose prior. The second
involves estimating pose and shape from crude visual hull
representations of complex body movements.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. 3D Body Models. (a) A SCAPE body model [7] realistically represents 3D body shape and pose using a single highdimensional state space. (b) A graphical body model composed
of geometric primitives connected by pairwise potentials (image
reproduced from [35]). (c) The stitched puppet model has the realism of (a) and the graphical structure of (b). Each body part is
described by its own low-dimensional state space and the parts are
connected via pairwise potentials that “stitch” the parts together.

as belief propagation (BP). These models are advantageous
for inference but have a crude geometric structure that does
not make it possible to recover body shape and that does not
match well to image evidence.
Here we propose a new stitched puppet (SP) model that
offers the best features of both approaches in that it is
both part-based and highly realistic (Fig. 1(c)). The SP
model is learned from a detailed 3D body model based
on SCAPE [7]. Each body part is represented by a mean
shape and two subspaces of shape deformations, learned using principal component analysis (PCA), that model deformations related to intrinsic body shape and pose-dependent
shape changes. These shape variations allow SP to capture
and fit a wide range of human body shapes. Each part can
also undergo translation and rotation in 3D. As with other
part-based models, the parts form a graph with pairwise potentials between nodes in the graph. The SP potentials represent a “stitching cost” that penalizes parts that do not fit
properly together in 3D to form a coherent shape. Unlike
the SCAPE model, parts can move away from each other

1. Introduction
Inference of human body shape and pose from images [19], depth data [28, 39], 3D scans [3, 10, 20, 32],
and sparse markers [23] is of great interest. There are two
main classes of 3D body models in use. The first represents 3D body shape and pose-dependent shape variation
with high realism (Fig. 1(a)) [4, 7, 14, 20, 28]. Such models are described using a relatively high dimensional state
space, combing shape and pose parameters, making inference computationally challenging [31]. The second class of
models is based on simple geometric parts connected in a
graphical model (Fig. 1(b)) [34, 35]. This approach breaks
the global state space into smaller ones allowing each part’s
parameters to be estimated independently from data. Such
models connect the parts via potential functions and inference is performed using message passing algorithms such
1

