Class Consistent Multi-Modal Fusion with Binary Features
Ashish Shrivastava

Mohammad Rastegari
Sumit Shekhar
Larry S. Davis
University of Maryland, College Park

Rama Chellappa

{ashish, mrastega, sshekha, rama, lsd}@umiacs.umd.edu

Abstract
Many existing recognition algorithms combine different
modalities based on training accuracy but do not consider
the possibility of noise at test time. We describe an algorithm that perturbs test features so that all modalities predict the same class. We enforce this perturbation to be as
small as possible via a quadratic program (QP) for continuous features, and a mixed integer program (MIP) for
binary features. To efficiently solve the MIP, we provide a
greedy algorithm and empirically show that its solution is
very close to that of a state-of-the-art MIP solver. We evaluate our algorithm on several datasets and show that the
method outperforms existing approaches.

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed Class Consistent Multi-Modal
(CCMM) fusion. The proposed algorithm perturbs the input features until all the modalities predict a consistent class.

(SVM) [2]. A straight-forward way of combining the features is to concatenate them, which has been used in biometrics [33, 41, 36], object recognition [21], scene classification [34] etc. Feature concatenation preserves the raw
information so that the classifier can utilize the correlation
among modalities. However, these features are often very
high dimensional and hence simple concatenation can be
inefficient. Another approach to feature level fusion is multiple kernel learning (MKL), which learns a linear combination of multiple kernels. Finding appropriate feature combinations entails designing good kernel functions among a set
of candidate kernels. MKL is a powerful way of determining the mixing weights of multiple kernels [15, 29, 38, 39].
For multi-modal fusion, each modality can be used to form a
kernel matrix; an optimal linear combination of kernel matrices translates into optimal feature level fusion. When using only a linear kernel for each modality, the MKL methods are similar to feature concatenation, except that the features from each modality are weighted based on training
accuracy. However, in order to make a good decision at test
time, it is important that we also determine the quality of
the test features from each modality. For example, from a
training database of depth and intensity images, we might
conclude that both modalities are equally useful for classification; however, at test time, the depth image may be noisy
due to specularity on an object’s surface. In such situations,
it is useful to make the prediction based on score level or

1. Introduction
Combining information from multiple sources - multiple sensor modalities or multiple feature channels applied
to a single sensor modality - is generally advantageous for
recognition problems. For example, a self-driving car can
better navigate its environment using multiple sensors including color cameras, depth sensors, inertial sensors, etc.
Using both color and depth cameras, instead of either, can
significantly improve performance of computer vision tasks
such as object categorization, detection, tracking, segmentation and others [22, 9, 25]. In biometrics, fingerprints
from multiple fingers can be used, or fingerprint and iris
can be combined to determine identity. In this paper, we
consider classification by fusing information from multiple
modalities and present an algorithm for multi-modal fusion
by enforcing the intuitive constraint that the predicted class
label should be consistent across all modalities.
Fusing multiple modalities for classification has been explored in many computer vision applications. These approaches can broadly be divided into three categories: (1)
feature level fusion, (2) score level fusion, and (3) decision
level fusion. In feature level fusion, features from multiple modalities are combined before feeding them to the
decision unit or a classifier, e.g., a support vector machine
1

