Joint Inference of Groups, Events and Human Roles in Aerial Videos
Tianmin Shu1 , Dan Xie1 , Brandon Rothrock2 , Sinisa Todorovic3 and Song-Chun Zhu1
1

Center for Vision, Cognition, Learning and Art, University of California, Los Angeles
{stm512, xiedan}@g.ucla.edu sczhu@stat.ucla.edu
2

Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology
brandon.rothrock@jpl.nasa.gov

3

School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Oregon State University
sinisa@onid.orst.edu

Abstract
With the advent of drones, aerial video analysis becomes
increasingly important; yet, it has received scant attention
in the literature. This paper addresses a new problem of
parsing low-resolution aerial videos of large spatial areas,
in terms of 1) grouping, 2) recognizing events and 3) assigning roles to people engaged in events. We propose a novel
framework aimed at conducting joint inference of the above
tasks, as reasoning about each in isolation typically fails in
our setting. Given noisy tracklets of people and detections
of large objects and scene surfaces (e.g., building, grass),
we use a spatiotemporal AND-OR graph to drive our joint
inference, using Markov Chain Monte Carlo and dynamic
programming. We also introduce a new formalism of spatiotemporal templates characterizing latent sub-events. For
evaluation, we have collected and released a new aerial
videos dataset using a hex-rotor flying over picnic areas
rich with group events. Our results demonstrate that we
successfully address above inference tasks under challenging conditions.

...

...

...

...

Figure 1: Our low-resolution aerial videos show top-down
views of people engaged in a number of concurrent events,
under camera motion. Different types of challenges are
color-coded. The red box marks a zoomed-in video part
with varying dynamics among people and their roles Deliverer and Receiver in Exchange Box. The green marks
extremely low resolution and shadows. The blue indicates
only partially visible Car. The cyan marks noisy tracking
of person and the small object Frisbee.

1. Introduction
1.1. Motivation and Objective

Towards advancing aerial video understanding, this paper presents a new problem of parsing extremely lowresolution aerial videos of large spatial areas, such as picnic
areas rich with co-occurring group events, viewed top-down
under camera motion, as illustrated in Fig. 1 and 2. Given
an aerial video, our objectives include:
1. Grouping people based on their events;
2. Recognizing events present in each group;
3. Recognizing roles of people involved in these events.

Video surveillance of large spatial areas using unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAVs) becomes increasingly important in a
wide range of civil, military and homeland security applications. For example, identifying suspicious human activities in aerial videos has the potential of saving human lives
and preventing catastrophic events. Yet, there is scant prior
work on aerial video analysis [13, 12, 29], which for the
most part is focused on tracking people and vehicles (with
few exceptions [23]) in relatively sanitized settings.
1

