One-day outdoor photometric stereo via skylight estimation
Jiyoung Jung
Joon-Young Lee
In So Kweon
Robotics and Computer Vision Lab, KAIST
{jyjung,jylee}@rcv.kaist.ac.kr

iskweon77@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
We present an outdoor photometric stereo method using images captured in a single day. We simulate a sky
hemisphere for each image according to its GPS and timestamp, and parameterize the obtained sky hemisphere into
a quadratic skylight and a Gaussian sunlight distribution.
Unlike previous works which usually model outdoor illumination as a sum of constant ambient light and a distant
point light, our method models natural illumination according to a popular sky model and thus provides sufficient constraints for shape reconstruction from one day images. We
generate pixel profiles of uniformly sampled unit vectors for
the corresponding time of captures and evaluate them using
correlation with the actual pixel profiles. The estimated surface normal is refined by MRF optimization. We have tested
our method to recover objects and scenes of various sizes in
real-world outdoor daylight.

(a) Input image

(b) Albedo estimation

(c) Normal estimation

(d) 3D reconstruction

Figure 1: An example of one-day outdoor photometric
stereo result. 15 input images are captured at intervals of
30 minutes. The surface is reconstructed using Poisson
solver [35].

1. Introduction
3D reconstruction of the scene from images has drawn
interests from many researchers in computer vision for
decades. There are several 3D reconstruction methods using
more than two images such as multi-view stereo using images from different viewpoints [6], photometric stereo using
images under different light directions [38], and depth from
focus [7] and defocus [36] using images with different focal settings. There have been successful approaches using a
single image as well, such as shape from shading [9], with
appropriate assumptions and constraints.
The related experiments were originally conducted inside the lab where the equipments and environments can
be controlled. Then the methods have been improved to
overcome the difficulties of uncontrolled elements one by
one. For example, multi-view stereo has been evolved from
using images captured by uniformly placed cameras in the
lab [25] to searching and downloading images of the scene
of interest from the web [4]. The results are promising even
though the input images are taken from different cameras in
different time, viewpoints, and many other conditions.

Compared to multi-view stereo, which reconstructs the
scene based on feature matching, photometric stereo has an
advantage to recover details on the surface up to the level of
image resolution since the method is based on the reflected
radiance determined by the incoming light direction and the
surface normal of the object of interest. Photometric stereo
methods had required specific conditions on experimental
environments, which are recently being alleviated.
Traditional photometric stereo methods require three
or more input images under different distant point light
sources of which the directions are non-planar on the unit
sphere [38]. There are approaches named uncalibrated
photometric stereo [24] and self calibrating photometric
stereo [34] that deal with unknown light directions. There
are methods to handle less than three light directions or with
the presence of ambient light [40]. In particular, natural illumination plays an important role in photometric stereo to
1

