Discriminant Analysis on Riemannian Manifold of Gaussian Distributions
for Face Recognition with Image Sets

1

Wen Wang1,2 , Ruiping Wang1 , Zhiwu Huang1,2 , Shiguang Shan1 , Xilin Chen1
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
{wen.wang, zhiwu.huang}@vipl.ict.ac.cn, {wangruiping, sgshan, xlchen}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
This paper presents a method named Discriminant Analysis on Riemannian manifold of Gaussian distributions
(DARG) to solve the problem of face recognition with image
sets. Our goal is to capture the underlying data distribution
in each set and thus facilitate more robust classification. To
this end, we represent image set as Gaussian Mixture Model
(GMM) comprising a number of Gaussian components with
prior probabilities and seek to discriminate Gaussian components from different classes. In the light of information
geometry, the Gaussians lie on a specific Riemannian manifold. To encode such Riemannian geometry properly, we investigate several distances between Gaussians and further
derive a series of provably positive definite probabilistic kernels. Through these kernels, a weighted Kernel Discriminant Analysis is finally devised which treats the Gaussians
in GMMs as samples and their prior probabilities as sample weights. The proposed method is evaluated by face identification and verification tasks on four most challenging
and largest databases, YouTube Celebrities, COX, YouTube
Face DB and Point-and-Shoot Challenge, to demonstrate its
superiority over the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
In contrast to traditional face recognition task based on
single-shot images, image-set based face recognition problem attracts more and more attention recently. For the task
of image-set based face recognition, both the gallery and
probe samples are image sets, each of which contains many
facial images or video frames belonging to one single person. Compared with recognition from single image, the numerous images in each set naturally cover more variations
in the subject’s face appearance due to changes of pose, expression and/or lighting. Therefore, how to represent the
variations and further discover invariance from them are the
key issues of image-set based face recognition [23, 36, 34].

To represent the variations in an image set, a probabilistic model seems a natural choice. Among many others,
Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) can precisely capture the
data variations with a multi-modal density, by using a varying number of Gaussian components. Theoretically, after
modeling image set by GMM, the dissimilarity between any
two image sets can be computed as the distribution divergence between their GMMs. However, divergence in distribution is not adequate for classification tasks that need more
discriminability. Especially, when the gallery and probe sets
have weak statistical correlations, larger fluctuations in performance were observed [23, 36, 6, 18, 13].
To address the above problem, in this paper we propose
to learn a discriminative and compact representation for
Gaussian distributions and thus measure the dissimilarity of
two sets with the distance between the learned representations of pair-wise Gaussian components respectively from
either GMM. However, Gaussian distributions lie on a specific Riemannian manifold according to information geometry [1]. Therefore, discriminant analysis methods developed in the Euclidean space cannot be applied directly. We
thus propose a novel method of Discriminant Analysis on
Riemannian manifold of Gaussian distributions (DARG). In
this method, by exploring various distances between Gaussians, we derive corresponding provably positive definite
probabilistic kernels, which encode the Riemannian geometry of such manifold properly. Then through these kernels,
a deliberately devised weighted Kernel Discriminant Analysis is utilized to discriminate the Gaussians from different
subjects with their prior probabilities incorporated.

1.1. Previous work
For face recognition with image sets, a lot of relevant
approaches have been proposed recently. According to how
to model the image sets, these approaches can be roughly
classified into three categories: linear/affine subspace based
methods, nonlinear manifold based methods and statistical

