Multi-Task Deep Visual-Semantic Embedding for Video Thumbnail Selection
Wu Liu 1,3 , Tao Mei 2 , Yongdong Zhang 1 , Cherry Che 2 , and Jiebo Luo 4
1
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
2
Microsoft Research, Beijing 100080, China
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
4
University of Rochester, Rochester, NY 14627, USA
liuwu@live.cn; {tmei, cherc}@microsoft.com; zhyd@ict.ac.cn; jluo@cs.rochester.edu

Abstract

Side Semantic Information
Title: How to replace an AC compressor in the car

Given the tremendous growth of online videos, video
thumbnail, as the common visualization form of video content, is becoming increasingly important to influence user’s
browsing and searching experience. However, conventional
methods for video thumbnail selection often fail to produce
satisfying results as they ignore the side semantic information (e.g., title, description, and query) associated with the
video. As a result, the selected thumbnail cannot always
represent video semantics and the click-through rate is adversely affected even when the retrieved videos are relevant.
In this paper, we have developed a multi-task deep visualsemantic embedding model, which can automatically select
query-dependent video thumbnails according to both visual
and side information. Different from most existing methods,
the proposed approach employs the deep visual-semantic
embedding model to directly compute the similarity between
the query and video thumbnails by mapping them into a
common latent semantic space, where even unseen querythumbnail pairs can be correctly matched. In particular,
we train the embedding model by exploring the large-scale
and freely accessible click-through video and image data,
as well as employing a multi-task learning strategy to holistically exploit the query-thumbnail relevance from these two
highly related datasets. Finally, a thumbnail is selected by
fusing both the representative and query relevance scores.
The evaluations on 1,000 query-thumbnail dataset labeled
by 191 workers in Amazon Mechanical Turk have demonstrated the effectiveness of our proposed method.

1. Introduction
As the most widely adopted representation of video content, a video thumbnail provides a vivid yet condensed preview of the entire video. Most conventional methods for
video thumbnail selection have focused on learning visual

Query: AC compressor replacement videos
(a) Video and Side Semantic Information

(b) Thumbnails Selected by Visual Representativeness based Method

(c) Thumbnails Selected by Multi-Task Visual-Semantic Embedding Method

Figure 1. Examples of query-dependent thumbnails. (a) is the
video and its side semantic information, (b) shows the thumbnails
selected by the visual representativeness based method, and (c)
contains the query-dependent thumbnails selected by multi-task
deep visual-semantic embedding. Compared with (b), the thumbnails in (c) are more representative and semantically meaningful.

representativeness purely from visual content [5, 12, 13].
However, these methods ignore the abundant semantic information associated with the video. For example, a video is
usually associated with a title, a short description, a piece of
transcript, or a textual query for searching this video. This
side information is important for thumbnail selection and
often overlooked in previous research. As shown in Figure 1, a video with the title “AC compressor replacement”
should be represented by the thumbnails which are truly related to the action of “compressor replacement.”
In this paper, we study the problem of video thumbnail
selection with side semantic information, which is overlooked in previous research. We investigate how to embed
this side semantic information (e.g., title, description, query,
and transcript) with visual content to select semantically
meaningful thumbnails. The problem has a wide variety
of real world applications such as online video summarization [24] where a video is usually associated with a title or
a description, and video search where the video thumbnails

