Real-time part-based visual tracking via adaptive correlation ﬁlters
Ting Liu,
Gang Wang
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering,
Nanyang Technological University.

Qingxiong Yang
Department of Computer Science,
City University of Hong Kong.

{liut0016, wanggang}@ntu.edu.sg

qiyang@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Robust object tracking is a challenging task in computer vision. To better solve the partial occlusion issue, partbased methods are widely used in visual object trackers.
However, due to the complicated online training and updating process, most of these part-based trackers cannot run
in real-time. Correlation ﬁlters have been used in tracking
tasks recently because of the high efﬁciency. However, the
conventional correlation ﬁlter based trackers cannot deal
with occlusion. Furthermore, most correlation ﬁlter based
trackers ﬁx the scale and rotation of the target which makes
the trackers unreliable in long-term tracking tasks. In this
paper, we propose a novel tracking method which track objects based on parts with multiple correlation ﬁlters. Our
method can run in real-time. Additionally, the Bayesian
inference framework and a structural constraint mask are
adopted to enable our tracker to be robust to various appearance changes. Extensive experiments have been done
to prove the effectiveness of our method.

1. Introduction
Visual tracking is an important technique in computer vision with various applications such as security and surveillance, human computer interaction and auto-control systems [25, 43, 50]. With the development of single object
tracking methods, most of the tracking tasks in simple environment with slow motion and slight occlusion can be
solved well by current algorithms. However, in more complicated situations, more robust tracking methods are required to realize accurate and real-time tracking.
Current tracking algorithms are classiﬁed as either generative or discriminative methods. Generative methods treat
tracking problem as searching for the regions which are the
most similar to the tracked targets [3, 4, 6, 22, 24, 26–
28, 46, 52]. The targets are often represented by a set of
basis vectors from a subspace (or a series of templates). Different from generative trackers, discriminative approaches
cast tracking as a classiﬁcation problem that distinguishes

the tracked targets from the backgrounds [2, 29, 42, 56].
It employs the information from both the target and background. For example, Avidan [3] proposed a strong classiﬁer based on a set of weak classiﬁers to do ensemble tracking. In [4], Babenko et al. used an online multiple instance
learning which puts all ambiguous positive and negative
samples into bags to learn a discriminative model for tracking. Kalal et al. [21] proposed a P-N learning algorithm
to learn tracking classiﬁers from positive and negative samples. In [16], Hare et al. used an online structured output
support vector machine to adaptively track the targets. This
category of approach is termed tracking-by-detection. Recently, correlation ﬁlter based tracking-by-detection methods have been proven to be able to achieve fairly high speed
and robust tracking performance in relatively simple environments [7, 17].
Recently part-based tracking methods [1, 9, 19, 34, 37,
47] become more popular partially because of their favorable property of robustness against partial occlusion. They
model the object appearance based on multiple parts of the
target. Obviously, when the target is partially occluded,
remaining visible parts can still provide reliable cues for
tracking. Most of these methods can be viewed as tracking by part-based object matching over time in a video sequence. Because computational complexity of these methods is high, it is difﬁcult to realize real-time tracking.
In this paper, We aim to build a real-time part-based visual object tracker which is able to handle partial occlusion
and other challenging factors. Our key idea is to adopt the
correlation ﬁlters as part classiﬁers. Hence, the part evaluation speed can be fast. However, it becomes very critical
to combine the tracking scores of different parts in a proper way. If some parts are occluded, and we still assign big
weights to them, then there will be tracking errors. Our
contribution is to develop new criteria to measure the performance of different parts, and assign proper weights to
them. Speciﬁcally, we propose to use Smooth Constraint of Conﬁdence Maps as a criterion to measure how likely
a part is occluded. The experiments proved the effectiveness of the SCCM criterion. Besides, we developed the s-

