Deformable Part Models are Convolutional Neural Networks
Ross Girshick1 Forrest Iandola2
1
Microsoft Research
rbg@microsoft.com

Trevor Darrell2 Jitendra Malik2
2
UC Berkeley

{forresti,trevor,malik}@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract

CNN. In other words, deformable part models are convolutional neural networks. Our construction relies on a new
network layer, distance transform pooling, which generalizes max pooling.
DPMs typically operate on a scale-space pyramid of gradient orientation feature maps (HOG [5]). But we now
know that for object detection this feature representation is
suboptimal compared to features computed by deep convolutional networks [17]. As a second innovation, we replace HOG with features learned by a fully-convolutional
network. This “front-end” network generates a pyramid of
deep features, analogous to a HOG feature pyramid. We
call the full model a DeepPyramid DPM.
We experimentally validate DeepPyramid DPMs by
measuring object detection performance on PASCAL VOC
[9]. Since traditional DPMs have been tuned for HOG features over many years, we first analyze the differences between HOG feature pyramids and deep feature pyramids.
We then select a good model structure and train a DeepPyramid DPM that significantly outperforms the best HOGbased DPMs. While we don’t expect our approach to outperform a fine-tuned R-CNN detector [17], we do find that it
slightly outperforms a comparable R-CNN (specifically, an
R-CNN on the same conv5 features, without fine-tuning),
while running about 20x faster (0.6s vs. 12s per image).
Our experiments also shed some light the relative merits of region-based detection methods, such as R-CNN, and
sliding-window methods like DPM. We find that region proposals and sliding windows are complementary approaches
that will likely benefit each other if used in an ensemble.
This makes sense; some object classes are easy to segment
(e.g., cats) while others are difficult (e.g., bottles, people).
Interpreted more generally, this paper shows that slidingwindow detectors on deep feature pyramids significantly
outperform equivalent models on HOG. While not surprising, the implementation details are crucial and challenging to pin down. As a result, HOG-based detectors are
still used in a wide range of systems, such as recent hybrid deep/conventional approaches [3, 46], and especially
where region-based methods are ill-suited (poselets [1] being a prime example). We therefore believe that the results

Deformable part models (DPMs) and convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are two widely used tools for visual recognition. They are typically viewed as distinct approaches: DPMs are graphical models (Markov random
fields), while CNNs are “black-box” non-linear classifiers.
In this paper, we show that a DPM can be formulated as a
CNN, thus providing a synthesis of the two ideas. Our construction involves unrolling the DPM inference algorithm
and mapping each step to an equivalent CNN layer. From
this perspective, it is natural to replace the standard image features used in DPMs with a learned feature extractor.
We call the resulting model a DeepPyramid DPM and experimentally validate it on PASCAL VOC object detection.
We find that DeepPyramid DPMs significantly outperform
DPMs based on histograms of oriented gradients features
(HOG) and slightly outperforms a comparable version of
the recently introduced R-CNN detection system, while running significantly faster.

1. Introduction
Part-based representations are widely used in visual
recognition. In particular, deformable part models (DPMs)
[10] have been effective for generic object category detection. DPMs update pictorial structure models [11], which
date back to the 1970s [14], with modern image features
and machine learning algorithms.
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are another influential class of models for visual recognition. CNNs also
have a long history [15, 28, 33], and have resurged over the
last two years due to good performance on image classification [27], object detection [17], and more recently a wide
variety of vision tasks (e.g., [3, 6, 22, 38, 45]).
These two models, DPMs and CNNs, are typically
viewed as distinct approaches to visual recognition. DPMs
are graphical models (Markov random fields), while CNNs
are “black-box” non-linear classifiers. In this paper, we ask:
Are these models actually distinct? To answer this question
we show that any DPM can be formulated as an equivalent
1

