Fully Convolutional Networks for Semantic Segmentation
Jonathan Long∗

Evan Shelhamer∗
UC Berkeley

Trevor Darrell

{jonlong,shelhamer,trevor}@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract

forward/inference
backward/learning

Convolutional networks are powerful visual models that
yield hierarchies of features. We show that convolutional networks by themselves, trained end-to-end, pixelsto-pixels, exceed the state-of-the-art in semantic segmentation. Our key insight is to build “fully convolutional”
networks that take input of arbitrary size and produce
correspondingly-sized output with efficient inference and
learning. We define and detail the space of fully convolutional networks, explain their application to spatially dense
prediction tasks, and draw connections to prior models. We
adapt contemporary classification networks (AlexNet [20],
the VGG net [31], and GoogLeNet [32]) into fully convolutional networks and transfer their learned representations
by fine-tuning [3] to the segmentation task. We then define a
skip architecture that combines semantic information from
a deep, coarse layer with appearance information from a
shallow, fine layer to produce accurate and detailed segmentations. Our fully convolutional network achieves stateof-the-art segmentation of PASCAL VOC (20% relative improvement to 62.2% mean IU on 2012), NYUDv2, and SIFT
Flow, while inference takes less than one fifth of a second
for a typical image.

4

56

38

4

38

6 40

25

.
ion
g.t
ict
ion
ed
t
r
a
p
nt
ise
me
elw
eg
s
x
i
p

96 096 21
4

2
96

21

Figure 1. Fully convolutional networks can efficiently learn to
make dense predictions for per-pixel tasks like semantic segmentation.

We show that a fully convolutional network (FCN)
trained end-to-end, pixels-to-pixels on semantic segmentation exceeds the state-of-the-art without further machinery. To our knowledge, this is the first work to train FCNs
end-to-end (1) for pixelwise prediction and (2) from supervised pre-training. Fully convolutional versions of existing
networks predict dense outputs from arbitrary-sized inputs.
Both learning and inference are performed whole-image-ata-time by dense feedforward computation and backpropagation. In-network upsampling layers enable pixelwise prediction and learning in nets with subsampled pooling.
This method is efficient, both asymptotically and absolutely, and precludes the need for the complications in other
works. Patchwise training is common [27, 2, 7, 28, 9], but
lacks the efficiency of fully convolutional training. Our approach does not make use of pre- and post-processing complications, including superpixels [7, 15], proposals [15, 13],
or post-hoc refinement by random fields or local classifiers
[7, 15]. Our model transfers recent success in classification [20, 31, 32] to dense prediction by reinterpreting classification nets as fully convolutional and fine-tuning from
their learned representations. In contrast, previous works
have applied small convnets without supervised pre-training
[7, 28, 27].

1. Introduction
Convolutional networks are driving advances in recognition. Convnets are not only improving for whole-image
classification [20, 31, 32], but also making progress on local tasks with structured output. These include advances in
bounding box object detection [29, 10, 17], part and keypoint prediction [39, 24], and local correspondence [24, 8].
The natural next step in the progression from coarse to
fine inference is to make a prediction at every pixel. Prior
approaches have used convnets for semantic segmentation
[27, 2, 7, 28, 15, 13, 9], in which each pixel is labeled with
the class of its enclosing object or region, but with shortcomings that this work addresses.

Semantic segmentation faces an inherent tension between semantics and location: global information resolves
what while local information resolves where. Deep feature
hierarchies encode location and semantics in a nonlinear

∗ Authors contributed equally

1

