Reflection Removal for In-Vehicle Black Box Videos
Christian Simon and In Kyu Park
Department of Information and Communication Engineering, Inha University
Incheon 402-751, Korea
{sen.christiansimon@gmail.com, pik@inha.ac.kr}

Abstract
The in-vehicle black box camera (dashboard camera)
has become a popular device in many countries for security
monitoring and event capturing. The readability of video
content is the most critical matter, however, the content is
often degraded due to the windscreen reflection of objects
inside. In this paper, we propose a novel method to remove
the reflection on the windscreen from in-vehicle black box
videos. The method exploits the spatio-temporal coherence
of reflection, which states that a vehicle is moving forward
while the reflection of the internal objects remains static.
The average image prior is proposed by imposing a heavytail distribution with a higher peak to remove the reflection.
The two-layered scene composed of reflection and background layers is the basis of the separation model. A nonconvex cost function is developed based on this property and
optimized in a fast way in a half quadratic form. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed approach successfully separates the reflection layer in several real black
box videos.

(a)

(b)

1. Introduction
The evolving paradigm of the automobile industry has
changed the concept of a car from being not only a conventional driving machine but also a convergence of advanced IT technologies. Computer vision technologies, in
particular, function to automatically provide the car with
the capability of viewing and understanding the outside
scene. The ultimate objectives of these technologies include
vision-based lane detection, pedestrian detection, and collision avoidance.
In this regard, in-vehicle black box camera, as shown in
Figure 1(a), has become a popular device for security monitoring and possible car accident recording. These devices
are now being widely distributed in many countries. For
example, in South Korea, more than 30% of personal vehicles and almost 100% of cabs and buses are equipped with

Figure 1: Reflection layer separation from the in-vehicle
black box video. (a) Black box examples attached inside a
car. (b) Example results of the proposed method in which
the background scene (L) and reflection (R) are separated
¯ of the frame sequence (It ) and
using the average image (I)
the proposed optimization technique.

in-vehicle black box cameras.
However, most research on the in-vehicle black box camera has focused on enhancing its video resolution and compression. Despite the fact that the readability of video content is the most important aspect, few works have targeted
this function. To address the readability issue, there are several problems that should be tackled. In this paper, we focus on video quality degradation due to the reflection on the

