Fast Action Proposals for Human Action Detection and Search
Gang Yu,
Junsong Yuan
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
iskicy@gmail.com, jsyuan@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

Search space for action proposals

In this paper we target at generating generic action proposals in unconstrained videos. Each action proposal corresponds to a temporal series of spatial bounding boxes,
i.e., a spatio-temporal video tube, which has a good potential to locate one human action. Assuming each action is
performed by a human with meaningful motion, both appearance and motion cues are utilized to measure the actionness of the video tubes. After picking those spatiotemporal paths of high actionness scores, our action proposal
generation is formulated as a maximum set coverage problem, where greedy search is performed to select a set of
action proposals that can maximize the overall actionness
score. Compared with existing action proposal approaches,
our action proposals do not rely on video segmentation and
can be generated in nearly real-time. Experimental results
on two challenging datasets, MSRII and UCF 101, validate
the superior performance of our action proposals as well as
competitive results on action detection and search.

Path 3

Path 1

t

Path 2

Path 1

Figure 1. An illustration of action proposals. The red paths in the
upper ﬁgure represent three detected action proposals, where each
action proposal corresponds to a series of bounding boxes in the
video space. The green and blue paths, which have large spatialtemporal overlap with the red paths, should be removed for the
path diversity.

1. Introduction

ness measure that relies on visual appearance only, action
proposals need to take both appearance and motion cues
into consideration. For example, actions should be coupled with human with meaningful motion. However, due to
the diversity and variations of human actions, it is difﬁcult
to learn the actionness measure that can well differentiate
human actions from the background clutters and other dynamic motions, which are quite common in unconstrained
videos. Second, the candidate number of action proposals
can be much larger than that of the object proposals. Given
a video of size M × N × T , even with the ﬁxed size bounding box, the candidate number of action proposals can be
as large as O(M N T k T ) [30], where k is the number of
spatial neighbors a bounding box will consider to link in
the next frame, which controls the smoothness of the action
proposal tube. As the spatial extent of the action can vary
across frames, if we consider a ﬂexible bounding box size,
it becomes an even much larger size of O(M 2 N 2 T k T ). As

Motivated by fast object detection and recognition using object proposals [8, 31, 33], we present an approach to
efﬁciently propose action candidates of generic type in unconstrained videos. Each proposed action candidate corresponds to a temporal series of spatial bounding boxes, i.e., a
spatio-temporal video tube, which locates the potential action in the video. For many video analytics tasks, e.g., action detection [21, 17, 25] and action search [26], we argue
that a quick generation of action proposals is of great importance, because sophisticated action recognition can focus
on the action proposals rather than the whole video to save
computational cost and improve the performance, similar to
the beneﬁts of using object proposals for object detection
and recognition.
Despite the success of object proposals, generating action proposals in videos is however a more challenging
problem due to two reasons. First, different from object1

