Transferring a Semantic Representation for Person Re-Identification and Search
Zhiyuan Shi, Timothy M. Hospedales, Tao Xiang
Queen Mary, University of London, London E1 4NS, UK
{z.shi,t.hospedales,t.xiang}@qmul.ac.uk
Abstract

operating procedure of human experts, and revolve around
the idea of learning detectors for person attributes (such as
Blue-Jeans). In particular, a number of approaches are developed for person re-identification using an attribute-based
representation [28, 45, 30]. It was demonstrated [28] that if
the each person’s attributes can be reliably detected, re-id is
essentially solved (since a K binary attribute descriptor can
potentially disambiguate 2K people). For person search,
since most textual descriptions used for query are attributes,
an attribute-based approach is often the only option.

Learning semantic attributes for person re-identification
and description-based person search has gained increasing interest due to attributes’ great potential as a pose and
view-invariant representation. However, existing attributecentric approaches have thus far underperformed state-ofthe-art conventional approaches. This is due to their nonscalable need for extensive domain (camera) specific annotation. In this paper we present a new semantic attribute learning approach for person re-identification and
search. Our model is trained on existing fashion photography datasets – either weakly or strongly labelled. It
can then be transferred and adapted to provide a powerful semantic description of surveillance person detections, without requiring any surveillance domain supervision. The resulting representation is useful for both unsupervised and supervised person re-identification, achieving state-of-the-art and near state-of-the-art performance
respectively. Furthermore, as a semantic representation
it allows description-based person search to be integrated
within the same framework.

Despite their hoped-for potentials, attribute-centric approaches to person re-identification have until now not
achieved state-of-the-art performance compared to conventional alternatives focused on learning effective low-level
features and matching models [54]. We argue that this is
largely due to the difficulty of obtaining sufficient and sufficiently detailed annotations to learn robust and accurate
attribute detectors. In particular, to achieve good attribute
detection, per camera/dataset annotations need to be obtained, since attribute models typically do not generalise
well across cameras (e.g. a blue shirt may look purple in
a different camera view). This is exacerbated, because unlike annotation of person identity used in learning a re-id
matching model, attributes require multiple labels per image. Moreover since most human attributes are associated
with a specific body part, to learn accurate attribute detectors, ideally annotation needs to be done at the patch-level
rather than the image-level. In short, an attribute-based approach is limited by the scale of its annotation requirements.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (re-id) and description-based
search are crucial tasks in visual surveillance. They underpin many fundamental applications including multi-camera
tracking, crowd analysis and forensic search. Both tasks
aim to retrieve images of a specific person, but differ in the
query used. Person re-identification queries using an image
from a different view (e.g., in multi-camera tracking), while
person search uses a textual person description (e.g., eyewitness description). Despite extensive research [20, 54],
these tasks remain unsolved due to various challenges including the variability of viewpoints, illumination, pose,
partial occlusion, low-resolution and motion-blur [19].
Attributes, as a mid-level semantic representation, could
potentially address these shared challenges, as they are intrinsically invariant to these variabilities in viewing conditions. Attribute-centric approaches are inspired by the

Although attribute-centric approaches to surveillance are
limited by the lack of annotation, extensive person attribute
annotations already exist in other domains, notably fashion image analysis [34, 59, 60, 58, 35]. In this line of
work, many high resolution images have been annotated
with clothing properties – sometimes strongly (per-pixel).
However, learning attribute detectors from the fashion domain, and applying them directly to person re-id and search
will fail, due to the severe domain shift problem – compared with surveillance data, the image characteristics are
completely different (see Fig. 2). In particular, many of the
challenges in surveillance are absent (e.g. illumination vari1

