SUN RGB-D: A RGB-D Scene Understanding Benchmark Suite
Shuran Song

Samuel P. Lichtenberg Jianxiong Xiao
Princeton University
http://rgbd.cs.princeton.edu

Abstract
Although RGB-D sensors have enabled major breakthroughs for several vision tasks, such as 3D reconstruction, we have not attained the same level of success in highlevel scene understanding. Perhaps one of the main reasons is the lack of a large-scale benchmark with 3D annotations and 3D evaluation metrics. In this paper, we introduce an RGB-D benchmark suite for the goal of advancing
the state-of-the-arts in all major scene understanding tasks.
Our dataset is captured by four different sensors and contains 10,335 RGB-D images, at a similar scale as PASCAL
VOC. The whole dataset is densely annotated and includes
146,617 2D polygons and 64,595 3D bounding boxes with
accurate object orientations, as well as a 3D room layout
and scene category for each image. This dataset enables
us to train data-hungry algorithms for scene-understanding
tasks, evaluate them using meaningful 3D metrics, avoid
overfitting to a small testing set, and study cross-sensor
bias.

(a) NYU Depth v2

(b) UW Object Dataset

(c) SUN3D

(d) Ours

Figure 1. Comparison of RGB-D recognition benchmarks.
Apart from 2D annotation, our benchmark provided high quality
3D annotation for both objects and room layout.

small datasets successfully bootstrapped initial progress in
RGB-D scene understanding in the past few years, the size
limit is now becoming the critical common bottleneck in
advancing research to the next level. Besides causing overfitting of the algorithm during evaluation, they cannot support training data-hungry algorithms that are currently the
state-of-the-arts in color-based recognition (e.g. [15, 36]).
If a large-scale RGB-D dataset were available, we could
borrow the same success to the RGB-D domain as well.
(Table 1 shows the performance improvement for a RGBD deep learning algorithm [20] when a bigger training set
is used.) Furthermore, although the RGB-D images in these
datasets contain depth maps, the annotation and evaluation
metrics are mostly in 2D image domain, but not directly in
3D (Figure 1). Scene understanding is much more useful in
the real 3D space for most applications. We desire to reason
about scenes and evaluate algorithms in 3D.

1. Introduction
Scene understanding is one of the most fundamental problems in computer vision. Although remarkable
progress has been achieved in the past decades, generalpurpose scene understanding is still considered to be very
challenging. Meanwhile, the recent arrival of affordable
depth sensors in consumer markets enables us to acquire
reliable depth maps at a very low cost, stimulating breakthroughs in several vision tasks, such as body pose recognition [56, 58], intrinsic image estimation [4], 3D modeling
[27] and SfM reconstruction [72].
RGB-D sensors have also enabled rapid progress for
scene understanding (e.g. [20, 19, 53, 38, 30, 17, 32, 49]).
However, while we can crawl color images from the Internet easily, it is not possible to obtain large-scale RGB-D
data online. Consequently, the existing RGB-D recognition benchmarks, such as NYU Depth v2 [49], are an orderof-magnitude smaller than modern recognition datasets for
color images (e.g. PASCAL VOC [9]). Although these

To this end, we introduce SUN RGB-D, a dataset containing 10,335 RGB-D images with dense annotations in
both 2D and 3D, for both objects and rooms. Based on
this dataset, we focus on six important recognition tasks
1

