Deep Hashing for Compact Binary Codes Learning
Venice Erin Liong1 , Jiwen Lu1∗, Gang Wang1,2 , Pierre Moulin1,3 , and Jie Zhou4
1
Advanced Digital Sciences Center, Singapore
2
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
Department of ECE, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, IL USA
4
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
venice.l@adsc.com.sg; jiwen.lu@adsc.com.sg; wanggang@ntu.edu.sg;
moulin@ifp.uiuc.edu;jzhou@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

11100100110
00010011000

In this paper, we propose a new deep hashing (DH) approach to learn compact binary codes for large scale visual
search. Unlike most existing binary codes learning methods which seek a single linear projection to map each sample into a binary vector, we develop a deep neural network
to seek multiple hierarchical non-linear transformations to
learn these binary codes, so that the nonlinear relationship
of samples can be well exploited. Our model is learned under three constraints at the top layer of the deep network:
1) the loss between the original real-valued feature descriptor and the learned binary vector is minimized, 2) the binary codes distribute evenly on each bit, and 3) different bits
are as independent as possible. To further improve the discriminative power of the learned binary codes, we extend
DH into supervised DH (SDH) by including one discriminative term into the objective function of DH which simultaneously maximizes the inter-class variations and minimizes
the intra-class variations of the learned binary codes. Experimental results show the superiority of the proposed approach over the state-of-the-arts.

Quantization Loss
Balanced Bits

10011001011
01001100101

Independent Bits

Binarization

Gallery images

Figure 1. The basic idea of our proposed approach for compact
binary codes learning. Given a gallery image set, we develop a
deep neural network and learn the parameters of the network by
using three criterions for the codes obtained at the top layer of
the network: 1) minimizing loss between the original real-valued
feature and the learned binary vector; 2) binary codes distribute
evenly on each bit, and 3) each bit is as independent as possible.
The parameters of the networks are updated by back-propagation
based on the optimization objective function at the top layer.

1. Introduction
Large scale visual search has attracted great attention in
computer vision due to its wide potential applications in recent years [4]. Hashing is a powerful technique for largescale visual search and a variety of hashing-based methods have been proposed [6, 7, 20, 34, 36]. The basic idea of
hashing-based approach is to construct a series of hash functions to map each visual object into a binary feature vector
so that visually similar samples are mapped into similar binary codes.

Existing hashing-based methods can be classified into two categories: data-independent [1, 3, 11, 23] and datadependent [5, 6, 8, 15, 21, 34]. For the first category, random projections are first employed to map samples into a
feature space and then binarization is performed. Representative methods in this category are locality sensitive hashing (LSH) [1] and its kernelized or discriminative exten-

∗ Corresponding author.

1

