3D Model-Based Continuous Emotion Recognition
Hui Chen1 , Jiangdong Li2 , Fengjun Zhang3 , Yang Li1 , Hongan Wang2,3
Beijing Key Lab of Human-computer Interaction, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences1
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences2
State Key Lab of Computer Science, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences3
Beijing, China, 100190

Abstract
We propose a real-time 3D model-based method that
continuously recognizes dimensional emotions from facial
expressions in natural communications. In our method, 3D
facial models are restored from 2D images, which provide
crucial clues for the enhancement of robustness to overcome large changes including out-of-plane head rotations,
fast head motions and partial facial occlusions. To accurately recognize the emotion, a novel random forest-based
algorithm which simultaneously integrates two regressions
for 3D facial tracking and continuous emotion estimation
is constructed. Moreover, via the reconstructed 3D facial
model, temporal information and user-independent emotion presentations are also taken into account through our
image fusion process. The experimental results show that
our algorithm can achieve state-of-the-art result with higher Pearson’s correlation coefficient of continuous emotion
recognition in real time.

1. Introduction
Continuous emotion analysis refers to acquire and process long unsegmented naturalistic inputs and to predicate affective values represented in dimensional space [15].
It has been recognized that computers which can understand emotions in natural interactions have the ability to
make smarter decisions and provide better interactive experiences [17, 27]. By classifying emotions as different categories, some human-centered systems like [12, 20] have
been designed to react differently for different user emotion
categories, which provide better interactive experiences for
users and show the importance and necessity of emotion estimation in human-computer interactions. In natural communications, people talk and think continuously, and the
human emotions are also revealed naturally. Thus emotions
in natural communications should be estimated as real values of different affective dimensions for higher quality of
human-computer interactions.

Visual signals have been proved to be the most effective
and important cues for emotion recognition [1, 18, 22]. Presented in a spontaneous way, emotions in natural communications tend to change more slowly than acted ones, leading to more subtle sequential expressions. The significant presentations in natural exchanges are usually not fullyexpressed, resulting in fuzzy difference between different
emotion states. Additionally, people express their emotions
in variable ways which introduces larger confused information of similar emotions and brings greater challenge about
how to link a certain user’s expression with more common presentations. Besides, emotions captured from natural interactions are always with large changes, such as more
freely head rotations, fast head motions, partial facial occlusions, etc. These characteristics increase the complexity of
continuous emotions and make it hard to estimate emotions
in natural communications accurately and robustly.
To meet these challenges, we propose a real-time 3D
model-based method that recognizes human emotions in dimensional space under natural communications. Our approach introduces 3D facial model into continuous emotion recognition, which brings higher robustness to handle
changes of large head rotations, fast head motions and partial facial occlusions. User-specific temporal features and
user-independent emotion presentations are also constructed to describe emotions more precisely. The emotions are
estimated by a novel random forest-based framework, in
which the 3D facial tracking and continuous emotion estimation are taken simultaneously in a regression way.

2. Related work
Human emotions are usually represented in two ways:
categorical and dimensional. According to the Facial Action Coding System (FACS) proposed by P. Ekman [9], emotions can be categorized as six classes: happiness, sadness, anger, surprise, fear and disgust. Naturalistic human
emotions are complex with fuzzy boundaries in expressions, thus discrete categories may not reflect the subtle emotion transitions and the diversity emotions. Therefore, many

