Deep LAC: Deep Localization, Alignment and Classification
for Fine-grained Recognition
Di Lin†
†

Xiaoyong Shen†

The Chinese University of Hong Kong

‡

Cewu Lu‡

Jiaya Jia†

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Localized
Part

Abstract

Template
Alignment

Pose-aligned
Part
Forwardpropagation

We propose a fine-grained recognition system that incorporates part localization, alignment, and classification in
one deep neural network. This is a nontrivial process, as the
input to the classification module should be functions that
enable back-propagation in constructing the solver. Our
major contribution is to propose a valve linkage function
(VLF) for back-propagation chaining and form our deep localization, alignment and classification (LAC) system. The
VLF can adaptively compromise the errors of classification
and alignment when training the LAC model. It in turn helps update localization. The performance on fine-grained object data bears out the effectiveness of our LAC system.

Backwardpropagation

Ite
rat
ion

1. Introduction

Alignment
Error

Classification
Error

Figure 1: The one-way procedure from localization to template alignment makes each module rely on results from the
previous one. Contrarily, back-propagation highlighted by
dashed arrow makes it possible to refine localization according to the classification and alignment results. It forms a
bi-directional refinement process.

Fine-grained object recognition aims to identify subcategory object classes, which includes finding subtle difference among species of animals, product brands, and even
architectural styles. Thanks to recent success of convolutional neural networks (CNN) [13], good performance was
achieved on fine-grained tasks [4, 27].
The large flexibility of CNN structures makes finegrained recognition still have much room to improve. One
challenge is that discriminative patterns (e.g., bird head in
bird species recognition) appear possibly in different locations, and with rotation and scaling in the collected images.
Although research of [17, 10] showed that CNN features are
reasonably robust to scale and rotation variation, it is necessary to directly capture these types of change to increase
the recognition accuracy [27, 4].
Existing solutions perform localization, alignment, and
classification independently and consecutively. This procedure is illustrated in Figure 1 using solid-line arrows where
parts are localized, aligned according to templates, and then
fed into the classification neural network. Obviously, any
error arising during localization could influence alignment
and classification.
In this paper, we propose a feedback-control framework

to back-propagate alignment and classification errors to localization, in order to optimally update all states in iterations. This process is highlighted by dashed arrows in Figure 1, which, in our experiments, benefits final classification. This framework is constructed as one deep neural network including all localization, alignment and classification
tasks.
The difficulty of forming a neural network for all modules stems from the special requirement of classification
sub-network input. As shown in Figure 1, the input to classification is an image after alignment. It cannot achieve the
back-propagation chain during the whole network solving
due to the fact that the derivation of a constant, which is the
aligned region, is zero.
The main focus of this paper is thus to propose a valve
linkage function (VLF) in alignment sub-network to opti1

