Multihypothesis Trajectory Analysis for Robust Visual Tracking
Dae-Youn Lee† , Jae-Young Sim‡ , and Chang-Su Kim†
†
School of Electrical Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, Korea
‡
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology, Ulsan, Korea
daeyounlee@mcl.korea.ac.kr, jysim@unist.ac.kr, changsukim@korea.ac.kr

Abstract

Recently, tracking systems with memory [23, 21, 31],
which can refine past trajectories or appearance models of a
tracker, have been proposed to suppress the error propagation. In the long-term trackers in [23, 21], most probable positions of a target object are memorized in each frame, and
then the trajectory of the target object is estimated by dynamic programming, which considers both the confidence
of each position and the temporal relation between positions in consecutive frames. Also, in [31], several appearance models from past frames are recorded and processed
to yield a proper appearance model and reduce tracking errors. However, these trackers with memory employ fixed
feature descriptors, which cannot effectively separate a target object from its background in some sequences. Therefore, they still yield inaccurate tracking results depending
on the feature selection.

The notion of multihypothesis trajectory analysis (MTA)
for robust visual tracking is proposed in this work. We employ multiple component trackers using texture, color, and
illumination invariant features, respectively. Each component tracker traces a target object forwardly and then backwardly over a time interval. By analyzing the pair of the
forward and backward trajectories, we measure the robustness of the component tracker. To this end, we extract the
geometry similarity, the cyclic weight, and the appearance
similarity from the forward and backward trajectories. We
select the optimal component tracker to yield the maximum
robustness score, and use its forward trajectory as the final tracking result. Experimental results show that the proposed MTA tracker improves the robustness and the accuracy of tracking, outperforming the state-of-the-art trackers
on a recent benchmark dataset.

In this paper, we propose a novel multihypothesis tracking algorithm, which combines the concept of the ‘tracking using multiple trackers’ with that of the ‘tracking with
memory.’ We employ three forward trackers using different features, which are based on texture information, color
information, and illumination invariant information, respectively. From frame t − τ to frame t, each forward tracker
traces a target object independently of the other trackers.
Then, at frame t, each backward tracker is initialized at
the estimated position of the corresponding forward tracker,
and then computes a backward trajectory in a time-reversed
manner. To select the best tracking result among the three
forward trackers, we calculate their robustness scores. To
this end, we extract the geometric similarity, the cyclic
weight, and the appearance similarity from each pair of
the forward and backward trajectories. After selecting the
best forward trajectory, the appearance models of all forward trackers revert to the previous conditions at frame
t − τ , and are updated using the bounding boxes along the
selected forward trajectory. When all forward trajectories
have low geometric and appearance similarities in consecutive frames, the forward trackers are not updated and the
search range is increased for next frames. The main contri-

1. Introduction
For decades, numerous visual tracking algorithms have
been proposed [30, 29, 20]. Most tracking algorithms experience a drift problem due to various reasons, including
non-discriminative feature descriptors, occlusions, and sudden illumination changes. For more robust tracking, recent
tracking algorithms attempt to overcome such interferences.
Since a certain feature type may fail to distinguish a target object from its background depending on input video
sequences, multiple trackers using different features can be
combined adaptively to achieve robust tracking [19, 24, 16,
17]. More specifically, the tracked positions of multiple
trackers are compared and processed to yield an overall estimated position. Then, all the trackers are updated using
the information at the estimated position. However, if the
multiple-tracker algorithm loses the position of a target object in a frame because of any interruption, the tracking error may propagate to future frames.
1

