Effective Face Frontalization in Unconstrained Images
Tal Hassner1

Shai Harel1 †
1

Eran Paz1 †

Roee Enbar2

The open University of Israel
2

Adience

Figure 1: Frontalized faces. Top: Input photos; bottom: our frontalizations, obtained without estimating 3D facial shapes.

Abstract

pass those of humans. Rather than signaling the end of
face recognition research, these results have led to a redefinition of the problem, shifting attention from highly regulated, controlled image settings to faces captured in unconstrained conditions (a.k.a., “in the wild”).

“Frontalization” is the process of synthesizing frontal
facing views of faces appearing in single unconstrained
photos. Recent reports have suggested that this process may
substantially boost the performance of face recognition systems. This, by transforming the challenging problem of recognizing faces viewed from unconstrained viewpoints to the
easier problem of recognizing faces in constrained, forward
facing poses. Previous frontalization methods did this by
attempting to approximate 3D facial shapes for each query
image. We observe that 3D face shape estimation from unconstrained photos may be a harder problem than frontalization and can potentially introduce facial misalignments.
Instead, we explore the simpler approach of using a single,
unmodified, 3D surface as an approximation to the shape of
all input faces. We show that this leads to a straightforward,
efficient and easy to implement method for frontalization.
More importantly, it produces aesthetic new frontal views
and is surprisingly effective when used for face recognition
and gender estimation.

This change of focus, from constrained to unconstrained
images, has toppled recognition rates (see, e.g., the original
results [15] on the Labeled Faces in the Wild [17] benchmark, published in the same year as [23]). This drop was
not surprising: Unconstrained photos of faces represented a
myriad of new challenges, including changing expressions,
occlusions, varying lighting, and non-frontal, often extreme
poses. Yet in recent years recognition performance has
gradually improved to the point where once again claims
are being made for super-human face recognition capabilities (e.g., [20, 28, 29]).
Modern methods vary in how they address the many
challenges of unconstrained face recognition. Facial pose
variations in particular have often been considered by designing representations that pool information over large image regions, thereby accounting for possible misalignments
due to pose changes (e.g., [20, 25, 33, 36]), by improving 2D face alignment accuracy [14, 15, 35], or by using
massive face collections to learn pose-robust representations [13, 26, 27, 41].

1. Introduction
Face recognition performances, reported as far back
as [23], have shown computer vision capabilities to sur-

Recently, some proposed to simplify unconstrained face
recognition by reducing it, at least in terms of pose variations, to the simpler, constrained settings. This, by automatic synthesis of new, frontal facing views, or “frontal-

† These authors ordered alphabetically due to equal contribution.
∗ For code and data, please see project page at

www.openu.ac.il/home/hassner/projects/frontalize

1

