Improving Object Detection with Deep Convolutional Networks
via Bayesian Optimization and Structured Prediction
Yuting Zhang*† , Kihyuk Sohn† , Ruben Villegas† , Gang Pan* , Honglak Lee†
*

Department of Computer Science,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China,

†

{zyt,gpan}@zju.edu.cn

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA,
{yutingzh,kihyuks,rubville,honglak}@umich.edu

Abstract
Object detection systems based on the deep convolutional neural network (CNN) have recently made groundbreaking advances on several object detection benchmarks.
While the features learned by these high-capacity neural
networks are discriminative for categorization, inaccurate
localization is still a major source of error for detection.
Building upon high-capacity CNN architectures, we address the localization problem by 1) using a search algorithm based on Bayesian optimization that sequentially proposes candidate regions for an object bounding box, and
2) training the CNN with a structured loss that explicitly
penalizes the localization inaccuracy. In experiments, we
demonstrate that each of the proposed methods improves
the detection performance over the baseline method on
PASCAL VOC 2007 and 2012 datasets. Furthermore, two
methods are complementary and significantly outperform
the previous state-of-the-art when combined.

1. Introduction
Object detection is one of the long-standing and important problems in computer vision. Motivated by the recent
success of deep learning [26, 21, 3, 6, 27, 4, 35] on visual object recognition tasks [25, 38, 46, 39, 42], significant improvements have been made in the object detection
problem [41, 11, 20]. Most notably, Girshick et al. [18]
proposed the “regions with convolutional neural network”
(R-CNN) framework for object detection and demonstrated
state-of-the-art performance on standard detection benchmarks (e.g., PASCAL VOC [12, 13], ILSVRC [34]) with a
large margin over the previous arts, which are mostly based
on deformable part model (DPM) [15].
There are two major keys to the success of the R-CNN.
First, features matter [18]. In the R-CNN, the low-level
image features (e.g., HOG [8]) are replaced with the CNN
features, which are arguably more discriminative representations. One drawback of CNN features, however, is that
they are expensive to compute. The R-CNN overcomes this
issue by proposing a few hundreds or thousands candidate

bounding boxes via the selective search algorithm [44] to
effectively reduce the computational cost required to evaluate the detection scores at all regions of an image.
Despite the success of R-CNN, it has been pointed out
through an error analysis [22] that inaccurate localization
causes the most egregious errors in the R-CNN framework [18]. For example, if there is no bounding box in the
close proximity of ground truth among those proposed by
selective search, no matter what we have for the features
or classifiers, there is no way to detect the correct bounding box of the object. Indeed, there are many applications
that require accurate localization of an object bounding box,
such as detecting moving objects (e.g., car, pedestrian, bicycles) for autonomous driving [17], detecting objects for
robotic grasping or manipulation in robotic surgery or manufacturing [28], and many others.
In this work, we address the localization difficulty of the
R-CNN detection framework with two ideas. First, we develop a fine-grained search algorithm to expand an initial
set of bounding boxes by proposing new bounding boxes
with scores that are likely to be higher than the initial ones.
By doing so, even if the initial region proposals were poor,
the algorithm can find a region that is getting closer to
the ground truth after a few iterations. We build our algorithm in the Bayesian optimization framework [31, 40],
where evaluation of the complex detection function is replaced with queries from a probabilistic distribution of the
function values defined with a computationally efficient surrogate model. Second, we train a CNN classifier with a
structured SVM objective that aims at classification and localization simultaneously. We define the structured SVM
objective function with a hinge loss that balances between
classification (i.e., determines whether an object exists) and
localization (i.e., determines how much it overlaps with the
ground truth) to be used as the last layer of the CNN.
In experiments, we evaluated our methods on PASCAL
VOC 2007 and 2012 detection tasks and compared to other
competing methods. We demonstrated significantly improved performance over the state-of-the-art at different lev-

