Direct Structure Estimation for 3D Reconstruction
Nianjuan Jiang†∗ , Wen-Yan Lin† , Minh N. Do‡ , Jiangbo Lu†∗
†
Advanced Digital Sciences Center, Singapore
‡
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

Abstract

x i ni

n
X

Most conventional structure-from-motion (SFM) techniques require camera pose estimation before computing
any scene structure. In this work we show that when combined with single/multiple homography estimation, the general Euclidean rigidity constraint provides a simple formulation for scene structure recovery without explicit camera
pose computation. This direct structure estimation (DSE)
opens a new way to design a SFM system that reverses the
order of structure and motion estimation. We show that this
alternative approach works well for recovering scene structure and camera poses from sideway motion given planar
or general man-made scenes.

i

i

j

d

j

di

O

di

dj

dj
ij

di
di
dj
dj
di
dj

p'

p
R, t

O
O

O

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. The proposed DSE utilizes the homography induced
depth ratio and Euclidean rigidity constraint to estimate the structure directly without camera pose recovery. (a) Geometric interpretation of homography decomposition. (b) Homography induced depth ratios λi and λj together with the rigidity constraint
give the estimate for αij .

1. Introduction

reconstruction quality [3, 11, 32].
Besides this well-known limitation of state-of-the-art
SFM systems, there is also a technique ‘void’ in the general methodology of SFM as pointed out by Li [14]. In
almost all traditional SFM methods, camera motion estimation always comes first, then followed by 3D structure
computation1 . The work by Li [14] is among the earliest to
propose an actual implementation that bypasses the motion
estimation.
While appreciating the rationales behind the traditional
SFM schemes, such as theoretical elegance and practical
effectiveness, we are interested in the feasibility and advantage of a structure-first approach for practical SFM systems.
In fact, we observed that, with known intrinsic camera parameters, the ratio of the depths of a 3D point in two different views can be directly inferred from a homography relating the two image points (see Fig. 1(b) and Section 3.1).
Furthermore, the Euclidean rigidity constraint implies that
the Euclidean distance between two 3D points is invariant
under a rigid body transformation. When combined with
the aforementioned homography induced depth ratio across
different views, we can derive a simple equation from the
rigidity constraint to solve for the relative depths of two 3D
points uniquely given at least three different views, i.e. the

Structure from motion (SFM) is a classical problem in
computer vision and has been studied actively for decades.
In recent years, driven by the increasing demands of industrial applications such as navigation, augmented reality,
robotics and film/game production, significant progresses
have been made that advance the SFM techniques in terms
of the system reliability and scalability [21, 24]. Almost
all modern SFM systems start with relative pose estimation from feature correspondences (e.g. SIFT[15]) between
two [8, 19] or three views [20, 22]. These relative poses
will be merged into a global coordinate system afterwards
[24, 13, 17, 4, 10]. The scene structure is then computed and
refined together with all camera parameters, e.g. by bundle
adjustment (BA) [29]. Therefore, reliable and accurate relative pose estimation is critical for a robust SFM system.
However, to compute relative poses reliably is a non-trivial
task. Most techniques suffer from instability caused by planar scenes [19], which is commonly seen in man-made environments. As a result, a separate process for detecting
a dominant homography is often adopted in SFM systems.
On the other hand, planar structure by itself actually gives
a strong geometric constraint and can be utilized for better
*Corresponding
authors:
Nianjuan
Jiang
juan.jiang@adsc.com.sg), Jiangbo Lu (jiangbo.lu@adsc.com.sg)

xj n j

1 Tomasi-Kanade factorization is an exception which recovers structure
and motion simultaneously.

(nian-

1

