Effective Learning-Based Illuminant Estimation Using Simple Features
Dongliang Cheng1

2

National University of Singapore

E(λ)R(λ, x)Sc (λ) dλ

Grey-World

Good

Gamut-mapping

Bayesian

5°
4°

Shades-of-Grey

19 Edge-moment
correction

3°

Angular error

Grey-Edge

Spatio-spectral
Learning-based methods

Statistical methods

Proposed
0.4s

Fast

0.6s

0.8s

1.0s

2.6s

6.8s

Evaluation time

96.5s

Slow

Figure 1: Evaluation time vs. performance of representative illuminant estimation methods. Statistics-based methods are fast but
have lower accuracy than learning-based methods. The slow speed
of learning-based methods makes them impractical for onboard
camera white-balancing. Our proposed learning-based method
achieves high accuracy and fast evaluation. (Mean angular error
and time statistics for this plot are based results in Table 1 and
Table 3). Note time axis is nonlinear.

illumination. When the illumination is not sufficiently white
(e.g. daylight), this can cause a notable color cast in the
image. One of the key pre-processing steps applied to most
images is to remove color casts caused by illumination to
improve an image’s aesthetics and to aid in the performance
of various color-based computer vision applications.
Scene illumination can be modeled as a direction in the
camera’s RGB color space [17]. Based on the estimated
illumination, the image colors are transformed such that
the scene illumination direction is mapped to lie along the
achromatic white-line (i.e. [0, 0, 0] to [1, 1, 1]), thus making
the illumination ‘white’ and therefore removing the color
cast. The challenge of camera-based color constancy lies in
E E
estimating the illuminant color (ρE
R , ρG , ρB ) defined as:

An RGB image captured by a camera is a combination of
three factors: 1) the scene’s spectral reflectance properties;
2) the spectral illumination of the scene; and 3) the camera RGB sensors spectral sensitivities. Assuming the scene
is illuminated uniformly by a single illuminant, the image
formation model takes the form:
λ∈Ω

White-Patch

0.2s

1. Introduction and Related Work

R

Adobe Research

6°

Illumination estimation is the process of determining the
chromaticity of the illumination in an imaged scene in order
to remove undesirable color casts through white-balancing.
While computational color constancy is a well-studied topic
in computer vision, it remains challenging due to the illposed nature of the problem. One class of techniques relies
on low-level statistical information in the image color distribution and works under various assumptions (e.g. GreyWorld, White-Patch, etc). These methods have an advantage that they are simple and fast, but often do not perform well. More recent state-of-the-art methods employ
learning-based techniques that produce better results, but
often rely on complex features and have long evaluation and
training times. In this paper, we present a learning-based
method based on four simple color features and show how
to use this with an ensemble of regression trees to estimate
the illumination. We demonstrate that our approach is not
only faster than existing learning-based methods in terms of
both evaluation and training time, but also gives the best results reported to date on modern color constancy data sets.

7°

Bad

Abstract

ρc (x) =

Michael S. Brown1

{bprice, scohen}@adobe.com

{dcheng, brown}@comp.nus.edu.sg

2°

1

Scott Cohen2

Brian Price2

c ∈ {R, G, B}, (1)

where each channel (Red, Green, Blue) at pixel location x is
an integrated signal resulting from the camera’s sensitivity
Sc (λ), the spectral scene content R(λ, x), and the scene
illumination E(λ) over the visible spectrum Ω. From Eq. 1
it is clear that the RGB colors are biased by the color of the

ρE
c =

Z
E(λ)Sc (λ) dλ
λ∈Ω

1

c ∈ {R, G, B}.

(2)

