Leveraging Stereo Matching with Learning-based Confidence Measures
Min-Gyu Park and Kuk-Jin Yoon
Computer Vision Laboratory, GIST, South Korea
{mpark,kjyoon}@gist.ac.kr

Abstract
We propose a new approach to associate supervised
learning-based confidence prediction with the stereo matching problem. First of all, we analyze the characteristics of
various confidence measures in the regression forest framework to select effective confidence measures using training
data. We then train regression forests again to predict the
correctness (confidence) of a match by using selected confidence measures. In addition, we present a confidence-based
matching cost modulation scheme based on the predicted
correctness for improving the robustness and accuracy of
various stereo matching algorithms. We apply the proposed
scheme to the semi-global matching algorithm to make it
robust under unexpected difficulties that can occur in outdoor environments. We verify the proposed confidence measure selection and cost modulation methods through extensive experimentation with various aspects using KITTI and
challenging outdoor datasets.

(a) Input image (sun flare) [15]

(b) Predicted confidence map

(c) Original SGM [8]

(d) SGM with our method

Figure 1. Stereo matching results in a challenging environment.
(b) shows the predicted confidence map. (c) and (d) show colored
disparity maps overlaid on the input image.

1. Introduction
sign high values to correct matches and low values to false
matches so that false matches can be determined by examining the confidence value of a pixel. One commonly used
measure is the left-right consistency (LRC) measure [10],
assuming that the consistently matched pixels are correct
matches. This assumption is a necessary condition because
correct matches satisfy the left-right consistency. However,
this assumption is not a sufficient condition because consistently matched pixels are not always correct. Thus, the
LRC measure does not detect all the incorrect matches, and
the detection performance depends on the quality of initial
disparity maps and a predefined threshold value.
On the other hand, several papers address the error detection problem from a learning perspective [1, 7] since
learning-based approaches have distinct advantages. First,
multiple confidence measures can be used jointly to construct a feature vector that demonstrates a better performance than individual confidence measures [1, 7]. Secondly, learning-based approaches can identify which of the

Stereo matching has long been an important topic in
computer vision, and its difficulties such as pixel indistinctiveness [14] and occlusions [3] are thoroughly examined
in the literature. Based on those researches, several papers
[1, 7, 10, 12, 18, 25] confirm the feasibility of detecting mismatched pixels not only to improve the quality of disparity
maps [1, 12] but also to leverage a mid-level scene representation (stixel) [18]. Hence, the problem of detecting mismatched pixels becomes more important as the degree of illconditioning increases [7] because current solutions usually
fail to find correct answers. For example, Fig. 1(a) shows
a challenging stereo image captured in an uncontrolled outdoor environment [15]. The sun flare phenomenon severely
degrades the quality of the disparity map computed by the
semi-global matching (SGM) algorithm [8].
Regarding the detection of mismatched pixels, various confidence measures have been studied and surveyed
[2, 3, 10]. A confidence measure is a function of matching
costs, disparity values, or image intensities, and it should as1

