VIP: Finding Important People in Images
Clint Solomon Mathialagan
Virginia Tech

Andrew C. Gallagher
Google Inc.

Project: https://computing.ece.vt.edu/~mclint/vip/

Dhruv Batra
Virginia Tech
Demo: http://cloudcv.org/vip/

Abstract
People preserve memories of events such as birthdays, weddings, or vacations by capturing photos, often depicting
groups of people. Invariably, some individuals in the image are more important than others given the context of the
event. This paper analyzes the concept of the importance
of individuals in group photographs. We address two specific questions – Given an image, who are the most important individuals in it? Given multiple images of a person,
which image depicts the person in the most important role?
We introduce a measure of importance of people in images
and investigate the correlation between importance and visual saliency. We find that not only can we automatically
predict the importance of people from purely visual cues,
incorporating this predicted importance results in significant improvement in applications such as im2text (generating sentences that describe images of groups of people).

1. Introduction
When multiple people are present in a photograph, there
is usually a story behind the situation that brought them together: a concert, a wedding, a presidential swearing-in ceremony (Fig. 1), or just a gathering of a group of friends. In
this story, not everyone plays an equal part. Some person(s)
are the main character(s) and play a more central role.
Consider the picture in Fig. 2a. Here, the important characters are the couple who appear to be the British Queen
and the Lord Mayor. Notice that their identities and social status play a role in establishing their positions as the
key characters in that image. However, it is clear that even
someone unfamiliar with the oddities and eccentricities of
the British Monarchy, who simply views this as a picture
of an elderly woman and a gentleman in costume receiving attention from a crowd, would consider those two to be
central characters in that scene.
Fig. 2b shows an example with people who do not appear
to be celebrities. We can see that two people in foreground
are clearly the focus of attention, and two others in the back-

Figure 1: Goal: Predict the importance of individuals in group
photographs (without assuming knowledge about their identities).

ground are not. Fig. 2c shows a common group photograph,
where everyone is nearly equally important. It is clear that
even without recognizing the identities of people, we as humans have a remarkable ability to understand social roles
and identify important players.
Goal and Overview. The goal of our work is to automatically predict the importance of individuals in group photographs. In order to keep our approach general and applicable to any input image, we focus purely on visual cues
available in the image, and do not assume identification of
the individuals. Thus, we do not use social prominence
cues. For example, in Fig. 2a, we want an algorithm that
identifies the elderly woman and the gentleman as the top2 most important people that image without utilizing the
knowledge that the elderly woman is the British Queen.

