Bilinear Random Projections for Locality-Sensitive Binary Codes
Saehoon Kim and Seungjin Choi
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Pohang University of Science and Technology, Korea
{kshkawa,seungjin}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
Locality-sensitive hashing (LSH) is a popular dataindependent indexing method for approximate similarity
search, where random projections followed by quantization
hash the points from the database so as to ensure that the
probability of collision is much higher for objects that are
close to each other than for those that are far apart. Most
of high-dimensional visual descriptors for images exhibit a
natural matrix structure. When visual descriptors are represented by high-dimensional feature vectors and long binary
codes are assigned, a random projection matrix requires expensive complexities in both space and time. In this paper we analyze a bilinear random projection method where
feature matrices are transformed to binary codes by two
smaller random projection matrices. We base our theoretical analysis on extending Raginsky and Lazebnik’s result
where random Fourier features are composed with random
binary quantizers to form locality sensitive binary codes.
To this end, we answer the following two questions: (1)
whether a bilinear random projection also yields similaritypreserving binary codes; (2) whether a bilinear random
projection yields performance gain or loss, compared to
a large linear projection. Regarding the first question, we
present upper and lower bounds on the expected Hamming
distance between binary codes produced by bilinear random projections. In regards to the second question, we analyze the upper and lower bounds on covariance between
two bits of binary codes, showing that the correlation between two bits is small. Numerical experiments on MNIST
and Flickr45K datasets confirm the validity of our method.

Feature Extraction

Pooling

Concatenation

Feature Extraction

Feature Averaging

Concatenation

Figure 1. Two exemplary visual descriptors, which have a natural
matrix structure, are often converted to long vectors. The above illustration describes LLC [15], where spatial information of initial
descriptors is summarized into a final concatenated feature with
spatial pyramid structure. The bottom shows VLAD [7], where
the residual between initial descriptors and their nearest visual vocabulary (marked as a triangle) is encoded in a matrix form.

ear scan where all items in database are sorted according
to their similarity to the query, in order to find relevant
items, requiring linear complexity. In practical applications,
however, linear scan is not scalable due to the size of examples in database. Approximate nearest neighbor search,
which trades accuracy for scalability, becomes more important than ever. Earlier work [4, 1] is a tree-based approach
that exploits spatial partitions of data space via various tree
structures to speed up search. While tree-based methods
are successful for low-dimensional data, their performance
is not satisfactory for high-dimensional data and does not
guarantee faster search compared to linear scan [5].
For high-dimensional data, a promising approach is
approximate similarity search via hashing. Localitysensitive hashing (LSH) is a notable data-independent hashing method, where randomly generates binary codes such
that two similar items in database are hashed to have high
probability of collision [5, 2, 11]. Different similarity
metric leads to various LSH, including angle preservation
[2], ℓp norm (p ∈ (0, 2]) [3], and shift-invariant kernels
[11]. Since LSH is a pure data-independent approach, it

1. Introduction
Nearest neighbor search, the goal of which is to find
most relevant items to a query given a pre-defined distance
metric, is a core problem in various applications such as
classification [14], object matching [9], retrieval [10], and
so on. A naive solution to nearest neighbor search is lin1

