Nested Motion Descriptors
Jeffrey Byrne
University of Pennsylvania, GRASP Lab
Systems and Technology Research
jeffrey.byrne@stresearch.com

Abstract
A nested motion descriptor is a spatiotemporal representation of motion that is invariant to global camera translation, without requiring an explicit estimate of optical flow
or camera stabilization. This descriptor is a natural spatiotemporal extension of the nested shape descriptor [2]
to the representation of motion. We demonstrate that the
quadrature steerable pyramid can be used to pool phase,
and that pooling phase rather than magnitude provides an
estimate of camera motion. This motion can be removed using the log-spiral normalization as introduced in the nested
shape descriptor. Furthermore, this structure enables an elegant visualization of salient motion using the reconstruction properties of the steerable pyramid. We compare our
descriptor to local motion descriptors, HOG-3D and HOGHOF, and show improvements on three activity recognition
datasets.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Nested Motion Descriptors (NMD). (left) Compute relative magnitude and phase for orientations and scales for a set of
frames, (right) Pool the robust component velocity derived from
relative phase in a set of circular pooling regions all intersecting
at the center interest point. Log-spiral normalization computes
the difference between phases in neighboring scales and positions
along a log-spiral curve. The phase pooling aggregates component
velocities, so this difference computes an acceleration which represents local motion which is invariant to constant velocity of the
camera.

The problem of activity recognition is a central problem
in video understanding. This problem is concerned with
detecting actions in a subsequence of images, and assigning this detected activity a unique semantic label. The core
problem of activity recognition is concerned with the representation of motion, such that the motion representation
captures the informative or meaningful properties of the
activity, and discards irrelevant motions due to camera or
background clutter.
A key challenge of activity recognition is motion representation in unconstrained video. Classic activity recognition datasets [21] focused on tens of actions collected with a
static camera of actors performing scripted activities, however the state-of-the-art has moved to recognition of hundreds of activities captured with moving cameras of ”activities in the wild” [12][19][15]. Moving cameras exhibit
unconstrained translation, rotation and zoom, which introduces motion at every pixel in addition to pixel motion due
to the foreground activity. The motion due to camera move-

ment is not informative for the activity, and has been shown
to strongly affect activity representation performance [8].
Recent work has focused on motion descriptors that are
invariant to camera motion [11, 7, 31, 8, 26, 25, 27, 16, 29].
Local spatiotemporal descriptors such as, such as HOGHOF [3, 14] or HOG-3D [10], have shown to be a useful
motion representation for activity recognition. However,
these local descriptors are not invariant to dominant camera
motion. Recent work has focused on aggregating these local motion descriptors into dense trajectories, where optical
flow techniques are used to provide local tracking of each
pixel. Then, the local motion descriptors are constructed using differences in the flow field, and then are concatenated
along a trajectory for invariance to global motion. However,
these approaches all rely on estimation of the motion field
using optical flow techniques, which have shown to introduce artifacts into a video stream due to an early commitment to motion or over-regularization of the motion field,
1

