Membership Representation for Detecting
Block-diagonal Structure in Low-rank or Sparse Subspace Clustering
Minsik Lee†
Jieun Lee‡
Hyeogjin Lee§
Nojun Kwak§
Division of EE, Hanyang University, Korea†
Department of ECE, Ajou University, Korea‡
Graduate School of CST, Seoul National University, Korea§
mleepaper@hanyang.ac.kr

mokona85@ajou.ac.kr

Abstract
Recently, there have been many proposals with stateof-the-art results in subspace clustering that take advantages of the low-rank or sparse optimization techniques.
These methods are based on self-expressive models, which
have well-defined theoretical aspects. They produce matrices with (approximately) block-diagonal structure, which
is then applied to spectral clustering. However, there is
no definitive way to construct affinity matrices from these
block-diagonal matrices and it is ambiguous how the performance will be affected by the construction method. In
this paper, we propose an alternative approach to detect
block-diagonal structures from these matrices. The proposed method shares the philosophy of the above subspace
clustering methods, in that it is a self-expressive system
based on a Hadamard product of a membership matrix.
To resolve the difficulty in handling the membership matrix, we solve the convex relaxation of the problem and then
transform the representation to a doubly stochastic matrix,
which is closely related to spectral clustering. The result
of our method has eigenvalues normalized in between zero
and one, which is more reliable to estimate the number of
clusters and to perform spectral clustering. The proposed
method shows competitive results in our experiments, even
though we simply count the number of eigenvalues larger
than a certain threshold to find the number of clusters.

1. Introduction
Subspace clustering [6, 7, 11, 15, 25, 26] is a subfield
of clustering research which has been established recently.
Unlike K-means or kernel K-means clustering1 which
forms clusters based on minimizing the intra-cluster vari1 Since spectral clustering was shown to be equivalent to kernel Kmeans clustering [27, 29], spectral clustering can also be classified as this
type of clustering problem.

{hjinlee, nojunk}@snu.ac.kr

ance in the data space or in a high-dimensional kernel space,
it aims to segment data into low-dimensional subspaces.
Subspace clustering can be a useful tool in computer vision, because there are many types of data that can be wellrepresented by a low-dimensional structure such as face,
motion, video segments, etc. Accordingly, there have been
many successful applications of subspace clustering [4, 31].
Subspace clustering has been studied extensively, and
there are tons of different approaches. According to [5],
they can be roughly categorized into 7 different classes.
Among them, the focus of this paper is the low-rank or
sparse optimization approach, which is largely based on the
recent advances in nonsmooth optimization [1, 2, 14] and
shows state-of-the-art results. Most of the methods in this
approach model the data by self-expressive dictionaries in
conjunction with low-rank or sparse coefficients, i.e., they
find a simplest way to represent the original data by using
the data itself. Sparse subspace clustering (SSC) [5, 6] assumes the coefficients to be sparse, while low-rank representation (LRR) [15] assumes them to be low-rank. Lowrank subspace clustering (LRSC) [7] extends both methods
and proposes an alternative non-convex formulation, which
can be solved efficiently and gives a closed-form solution
when there is no outlier. These methods have advantages
in handling noise and outliers in data, and do not require to
know the dimension of each cluster in advance. Theoretically speaking, even the number of clusters is not required if
the input data is clean, i.e., there is neither noise nor outlier.
Unlike the well-defined theory, however, they need postprocessing steps that can impact the performance significantly but are not clearly explained in theory. The outputs
of these methods are matrices that have (approximately)
block-diagonal structure, which we call as latent matrices
in this paper. These latent matrices are used for spectral
clustering to find the actual clusters, and to do that, they
need to be transformed to affinity matrices. For example,
LRR uses a heuristic post-processing step to make the ma-

