Fast and Flexible Convolutional Sparse Coding
Felix Heide
Stanford University, UBC

Wolfgang Heidrich
KAUST, UBC

Abstract

Gordon Wetzstein
Stanford University

sions of the same features and latent structures of the underlying signal may be lost when dividing it into small patches.
A more elegant way to model many of these problems is
to use a sum of sparsely-distributed convolutional features.
The main drawback of convolutional models, however, is
their computational complexity. Not only is it very challenging to find a solution to convolutional sparse coding
problems in a reasonable amount of time, but finding a good
local minimum is difficult as well. Generally, CSC is a nonconvex problem and many existing methods provide little
to no guarantees for global convergence. Seminal advances
in fast convolutional sparse coding have recently shown
that feature learning via CSC can be efficiently solved in
the frequency domain. Grosse et al. [9] were the first to
propose a frequency domain method for 1D audio signals,
while [3, 4, 14] later demonstrate efficient frequency domain approaches for 2D image data. While this is the first
step towards making CSC practical, these frequency methods can introduce boundary artifacts for both learning and
reconstruction [13] and, as inherently global approaches,
make it difficult to work with incomplete data.
Building on recent advances in optimization [6, 2, 19, 1,
20], we propose a new splitting-based approach to convolutional sparse coding. We not only show that our formulation
allows us to easily incorporate proper boundary conditions
and learn from sparse observations, but we also demonstrate
that the proposed method is faster and converges to better
solutions than the state of the art. In particular, we make the
following contributions:

Convolutional sparse coding (CSC) has become an increasingly important tool in machine learning and computer vision. Image features can be learned and subsequently used for classification and reconstruction tasks. As
opposed to patch-based methods, convolutional sparse coding operates on whole images, thereby seamlessly capturing
the correlation between local neighborhoods. In this paper, we propose a new approach to solving CSC problems
and show that our method converges significantly faster and
also finds better solutions than the state of the art. In addition, the proposed method is the first efficient approach to
allow for proper boundary conditions to be imposed and it
also supports feature learning from incomplete data as well
as general reconstruction problems.

1. Introduction
An increasing number of computer vision tasks rely
on natural image statistics. Low-level problems that benefit from good priors include inpainting, denoising, deblurring, and super-resolution, while recognition, classification and other higher-level tasks often use learned features as priors for natural images. In this paper, we revisit one strategy for unsupervised learning of image features: convolutional sparse coding (CSC). CSC was introduced in the context of modeling receptive fields in human vision [18], but it has recently been demonstrated to
have important applications in a wide range of computer vision problems such as low/mid-level feature learning, lowlevel reconstruction [21, 7], as part of more complex hierarchical structures or networks in high-level computer vision challenges [13, 22, 23], and in physically-motivated
computational imaging problems [12, 11]. Beyond these
applications, CSC could find applications in many other
reconstruction tasks and feature-based methods, including
deblurring, denoising, inpaiting, classification, localization,
and tracking.
CSC is closely related to popular patch-based learning
and reconstruction methods [5, 16, 24]. However, features
learned with patch-based methods often contain shifted ver-

• We derive a flexible formulation of the convolutional
sparse coding problem, and an efficient solution by
splitting the objective into a sum of simple, convex functions. This formulation fits into most recent
forward-backward optimization frameworks.
• We demonstrate that the proposed method allows for
proper boundary conditions to be imposed without sacrificing performance; it converges faster than alternative methods and finds better solutions. We verify the
latter using several low-level reconstruction problems.
• We show feature learning from incomplete observations, which has not been demonstrated with existing
1

