Riemannian Coding and Dictionary Learning: Kernels to the Rescue
Mehrtash Harandi
Australian National University & NICTA∗
Canberra, Australia

Mathieu Salzmann
Australian National University & NICTA∗
Canberra, Australia

mehrtash.harandi@nicta.com.au

mathieu.salzmann@nicta.com.au

Abstract
While sparse coding on non-flat Riemannian manifolds
has recently become increasingly popular, existing solutions either are dedicated to specific manifolds, or rely on
optimization problems that are difficult to solve, especially
when it comes to dictionary learning. In this paper, we propose to make use of kernels to perform coding and dictionary learning on Riemannian manifolds. To this end, we
introduce a general Riemannian coding framework with its
kernel-based counterpart. This lets us (i) generalize beyond the special case of sparse coding; (ii) introduce efficient solutions to two coding schemes; (iii) learn the kernel parameters; (iv) perform unsupervised and supervised
dictionary learning in a much simpler manner than previous Riemannian coding methods. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on three different types of non-flat
manifolds, and illustrate its generality by applying it to Euclidean spaces, which also are Riemannian manifolds.

1. Introduction
Over the years, coding -in its broadest definition- has
proven a crucial step in visual recognition systems [4, 9, 26,
44]. Many techniques have been investigated, such as bag
of words [32, 15, 34, 1, 51, 38], sparse coding [43, 55], collaborative coding [58] and locality-based coding [56, 52].
All these techniques follow a similar flow: Given a dictionary of codewords, a query is associated to one or multiple
dictionary elements with different weights. These weights,
or codes, act as the new representation for the query and
serve as input to a classifier.
This paper addresses the problem of coding and dictionary learning on Riemannian manifolds. Many powerful
image and video descriptors, such as covariance descrip∗ NICTA is funded by the Australian Government as represented by
Department of Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy,
as well as by the ARC through the ICT Centre of Excellence program.
This research was supported under Australian Research Councils Discovery Projects funding scheme (project DP150104645).

tors [50, 21, 36, 7], normalized histograms [48], linear subspaces [53, 20, 39] and 2D shape outlines [29, 49, 18, 25],
are known to lie on Riemannian manifolds. While it may
therefore seem natural to extend coding techniques to such
manifold-valued data, the nonlinear structure of Riemannian manifolds makes this task significantly more complicated than in Euclidean space.
Recently, a few approaches have been proposed to tackle
the special case of sparse coding on Riemannian manifolds [57, 16, 47, 21, 23, 36, 20, 7, 6]. However, these techniques either are designed for specific manifolds [47, 21, 20,
7] and thus do not generalize well, or rely on the computation of the logarithm map [57, 16, 23, 36, 6], which makes
coding and dictionary learning complicated, if tractable at
all, for arbitrary Riemannian manifolds.
In this paper, we propose to formulate Riemannian coding and dictionary learning in Reproducing Kernel Hilbert
Space (RKHS). With the rapidly growing number of known
positive definite kernels on Riemannian manifolds [17, 24,
36, 25, 22], our approach generalizes to many manifolds,
such as the manifold of Symmetric Positive Definite (SPD)
matrices, the Grassmann manifold, the unit hypersphere and
the shape manifold. Furthermore, since an RKHS is a linear
space, this lets us derive simple, yet effective solutions for
both coding and dictionary learning on Riemannian manifolds. Last but not least, as usual with kernel-based algorithms, the high dimensionality of the RKHS typically
yields a more discriminative representation than the original data space, which translates into codes and dictionaries
potentially better suited for visual recognition.
In contrast with existing nonlinear methods that tackle
the special case of sparse coding in Euclidean space [12,
35, 42, 30], here we derive a general coding formulation,
together with its kernel-based counterpart, for Riemannian
manifolds, which Euclidean spaces are specific instances
of. Our general formulation lets us study different coding
strategies, such as sparse coding and locality-constrained
coding. In this context, we introduce an approach to learning the kernel parameters, thus avoiding the need to tune
them manually. Finally, we show how the dictionary can

