Joint Photo Stream and Blog Post Summarization and Exploration
Gunhee Kim
Seoul National University

Seungwhan Moon
Carnegie Mellon University

Leonid Sigal
Disney Research Pittsburgh

gunhee@snu.ac.kr

seungwhm@cs.cmu.edu

lsigal@disneyresearch.com

Abstract
We propose an approach that utilizes large collections
of photo streams and blog posts, two of the most prevalent sources of data on the Web, for joint story-based summarization and exploration. Blogs consist of sequences of
images and associated text; they portray events and experiences with concise sentences and representative images.
We leverage blogs to help achieve story-based semantic
summarization of collections of photo streams. In the opposite direction, blog posts can be enhanced with sets of
photo streams by showing interpolations between consecutive images in the blogs. We formulate the problem of joint
alignment from blogs to photo streams and photo stream
summarization in a unified latent ranking SVM framework.
We alternate between solving the two coupled latent SVM
problems, by first fixing the summarization and solving
for the alignment from blog images to photo streams and
vice versa. On a newly collected large-scale Disneyland
dataset of 10K blogs (120K associated images) and 6K
photo streams (540K images), we demonstrate that blog
posts and photo streams are mutually beneficial for summarization, exploration, semantic knowledge transfer, and
photo interpolation.

Figure 1. Motivation for joint summarization and exploration between large collections of photo streams and blog posts. (a) The
input is two-fold: a set of photo streams and blog posts from Disneyland, which are captured by multiple users and at different
times. (b) Blogs benefit photo stream summarization by transferring semantic knowledge: Examples are automatic image titling and attraction-based image localization. (c) Photo streams
enhance blog posts by allowing interpolation between blog images. Two blog images of an attraction entrance used as a query,
result in an illustration of what happens inside the attraction.

1. Introduction
Photographs taken by general users can be regarded as
personal statements of what stories they want to remember and tell about their experiences. Fig.1 shows one of the
most evident examples, visiting Disneyland. In a single day,
tens of thousands of people visit Disneyland, and many of
them take large streams of photos about their special experiences with families or friends. In addition, some of the more
enthusiastic visitors are also willing to write travel blogs, in
which their personal stories unfold with itineraries, commentaries, impressions, and fun facts about the attractions.
Most blogs include informative text along with the photos
that users carefully choose as the most representative ones
out of their large collections taken during their trip.

In this paper, as shown in Fig.1, we propose to take
advantage of large collections of photo streams and blog
posts in a mutually-beneficial way for the purpose of summarization and exploration. Blogs usually consist of sequences of images and associated text; they are written in a
way of storytelling [16], by digesting key events with concise sentences and representative images. Thus, blog posts
can help achieve a story-based semantic summarization of
large-scale and ever-growing collections of photo streams

∗ This work has been done when Gunhee Kim was a postdoctoral researcher, and Seungwhan Moon was an intern at Disney Research.

1

