Video Magnification in Presence of Large Motions∗
Mohamed A. Elgharib1 , Mohamed Hefeeda1 , Frédo Durand2 , and William T. Freeman2
Qatar Computing Research Institute

2

MIT CSAIL

time

1

Original

y

Eulerian

Lagrangian

DVMAG (this paper)

Figure 1: The Eye sequence and its magnification with (from left): the Lagrangian approach [7], the Eulerian approach [14] and DVMAG
(ours). The Region of Interest is the dashed yellow region (left). For each magnification we show the spatio-temporal slice for the green
line (left). For easier comparison all slices are temporally stabilized. This sequence shows an eye moving along the horizontal direction.
Processing the sequence with DVMAG shows that the Iris wobbles as the eye moves (see DVMAG, spatio-temporal slice). Such wobbling
is too small to be observed in the original sequence (left). The global motion of the eye causes significant blurring artifacts when processed
with the Eulerian approach. The Lagrangian approach sensitivity to motion errors generates noisy magnification (see dashed blue).

Abstract

be magnified computationally to reveal a fascinating and
meaningful world of small motions [7, 2, 17, 11, 14, 15].
Current video magnification approaches assume that the objects of interest have very small motion. However, many
interesting deformations occur within or because of larger
motion. For example, our skin deforms subtly when we
make large body motion. A toll gate that closes exhibits
tiny vibrations in addition to the large rotational motion.
And microsaccades are often combined with large-scale eye
movements (Fig. 1). Furthermore, videos or objects might
be shot by handheld cameras and may not be perfectly still,
and a standard video magnification technique will amplify
handshake in addition to the motion of interest. When applied to videos that contain large motions, current magnification techniques result in large artifacts such as haloes or
ripples, and the small motion remains hard to see because it
is overshadowed by the then magnified large motion and its
artifacts (see Fig. 1).
In the special case of camera motion, it might be possible to apply video stabilization as a preprocess to remove
the undesirable large handshake, e.g. [8, 3, 9, 10], before
magnification. However, this approach does not work for
general object motion, and even in the case of camera shake,
one has to be careful because any error in video stabilization will be amplified by the video magnification step. This
problem is especially challenging at the boundary between

Video magnification reveals subtle variations that would
be otherwise invisible to the naked eye. Current techniques
require all motion in the video to be very small, which is
unfortunately not always the case. Tiny yet meaningful motions are often combined with larger motions, such as the
small vibrations of a gate as it rotates, or the microsaccades
in a moving eye. We present a layer-based video magnification approach that can amplify small motions within large
ones. An examined region/layer is temporally aligned and
subtle variations are magnified. Matting is used to magnify
only region of interest while maintaining integrity of nearby
sites. Results show handling larger motions, larger amplification factors and significant reduction in artifacts over
state of the art.

1. Introduction
The world is full of small temporal variations that are
hard to see with naked eyes. Variations in skin color occur
as blood circulates [11], structures sway imperceptibly in
the wind [11], and human heads wobble with each heart beat
[2]. While usually too small to notice, such variations can
∗ This research was supported in part by Qatar Computing Research
Institute (QCRI).

1

