Predicting the Future Behavior of a Time-Varying Probability Distribution
Christoph H. Lampert
IST Austria
chl@ist.ac.at

Abstract

having access to data from this situation already. One can
also use the estimate to create a new sample set, which then
can serve as a drop-in replacement for an actual sample set
from the future.

We study the problem of predicting the future, though
only in the probabilistic sense of estimating a future state
of a time-varying probability distribution. This is not only
an interesting academic problem, but solving this extrapolation problem also has many practical application, e.g. for
training classifiers that have to operate under time-varying
conditions.
Our main contribution is a method for predicting the next
step of the time-varying distribution from a given sequence
of sample sets from earlier time steps. For this we rely on
two recent machine learning techniques: embedding probability distributions into a reproducing kernel Hilbert space,
and learning operators by vector-valued regression.
We illustrate the working principles and the practical
usefulness of our method by experiments on synthetic and
real data. We also highlight an exemplary application:
training a classifier in a domain adaptation setting without
having access to examples from the test time distribution at
training time.

2. Method
We first define the problem setting of predicting the future of a time-varying probability distribution. Let Z be a
data domain (formally a Polish space [22]), and let dt (z) for
t ∈ N be a time-varying data distribution over z ∈ Z. At
a fixed point of time, T , we assume that we have access to
sequences of sets, St = {z1t , . . . , znt t }, for t = 1, . . . , T ,
that are sampled i.i.d. from the respective distributions,
d1 , . . . , dT . Our goal is to construct a distribution, d˜T +1 ,
that is as close as possible to the so far unobserved dT +1 ,
i.e. it provides an estimate of the data distribution one step
into the future. Optionally, we are also interested in obtaining a set, S̃, of samples that are distributed approximated
according to the unknown dT +1 .
Our main contribution is a regression-based method that
tackles the above problem for the case when the distribution
dt evolves smoothly (Sections 2.1 and 2.2). We evaluate
this method experimentally in Section 4. Subsequently, we
show how the ability to extrapolate the distribution dynamics can be exploited to improve the accuracy of a classifier
in a domain adaptation setting without observed data from
the test time distribution (Section 5).

1. Introduction
It is a long lasting dream of humanity to build a machine
that can predict the future. For long time intervals this is
likely going to stay a dream. For shorter time spans, however, this is not such an unreasonable goal. For example, humans can predict rather reliably how a video will continue
over the next few seconds. In this work we aim at making a
first step towards giving computers similar abilities.
We study the situation of a time-varying probability distribution from which sample sets at different time points are
observed. Our main result is a method for learning an operator that captures the dynamics of the time-varying data
distribution. It relies on two recent techniques: the embedding of probability distributions into a reproducing kernel
Hilbert space, and vector-valued regression. By extrapolating the learned dynamics into the future we obtain an estimate of the future distribution. This estimate can be used
to solve practical tasks, for example, learn a classifier that is
adapted to the data distribution at a future time step, without

2.1. Extrapolating the Distribution Dynamics
We propose a method for extrapolating the distribution
dynamics (EDD) that consists of four steps:
a) represent each sample set as a vector in a Hilbert space,
b) learn an operator that reflects the dynamics between
the vectors,
c) apply the operator to the last vector in the sequence,
thereby extrapolating the dynamics by one step,
d) (optionally) create a new sample set for the extrapolated distribution.
In the rest of this section we discuss the details of each step,
see Figure 1 for a schematic illustration.
1

