Designing Deep Networks for Surface Normal Estimation
Xiaolong Wang, David F. Fouhey, Abhinav Gupta
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University

Input Image

Surface Normal (Output)

Input Image

Surface Normal (Output)

Figure 1: Given a single image, our algorithm estimates the surface normal at each pixel. Notice how our algorithm not only
estimates the coarse structure but also captures fine local details. For example, on the left, the normals of the couch arm and
side table legs are estimated accurately (see zoomed version). On the right, the chair surface and legs and even the top of the
shopping bags are captured correctly. Normal legend: blue ! X; green ! Y; red ! Z.

Abstract

task and directly apply a CNN, for instance as was done
for depth prediction in [8]. However, decades of research
have shown that the output space of this task is governed
by powerful physical constraints and researchers have exploited these constraints from the very beginning of computer vision [27] through the line-labeling era [17, 2, 19] all
the way to recent investigations [14, 24, 12, 30, 40, 10].
In this paper, we demonstrate how to incorporate insights
about 3D representation and reasoning into a deep learning
framework for surface normal prediction. While deep networks have been particularly successful for learning image
representations, we believe their design can benefit from
past research in 3D scene understanding. We achieve this
by developing CNNs that operate locally in a window as
well as globally on the whole image; these predict not just
surface normals, but also edges and cuboid room layout.
A final CNN considers these predictions as well as evidence from vanishing points to yield a final prediction. Our
method obtains state-of-the-art performance in surface normal estimation and shows a substantial improvement over a
standard feed-forward architecture. Additionally, we show
that our physical constraints enable 4.6 percentage points of
our performance in the most strict evaluation metric. More
importantly, our networks provide a deeper understanding
of the scene in terms of not just surface normals, but also
room layout and edge labels (Figure 2).

In the past few years, convolutional neural nets (CNN)
have shown incredible promise for learning visual representations. In this paper, we use CNNs for the task of predicting surface normals from a single image. But what is the
right architecture? We propose to build upon the decades
of hard work in 3D scene understanding to design a new
CNN architecture for the task of surface normal estimation.
We show that incorporating several constraints (man-made,
Manhattan world) and meaningful intermediate representations (room layout, edge labels) in the architecture leads to
state of the art performance on surface normal estimation.
We also show that our network is quite robust and show
state of the art results on other datasets as well without any
fine-tuning.

1. Introduction
The last two years in computer vision have generated
a lot of excitement: deep convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) have broken the barriers of performance on tasks
ranging from scene classification to object detection and
fine-grained categorization. For instance, on object detection, performance on the standard dataset has gone up from
a mAP of 33.7 to 58.5 in just two years. While CNNs have
shown tremendous success on semantic tasks such as detection and categorization, their performance on other vision
tasks such as 3D scene understanding and establishing correspondence has been not as extensively studied.
We want to explore the effectiveness of CNNs on the
task of predicting surface orientation, or normals, from a
single image. One could treat this as a per-pixel regression

2. Related Work
The topic of 3D understanding goes back to the beginning of computer vision, starting from the first thesis,
Roberts’ Blocks World [27]. At the heart of this problem
1

