The Aperture Problem for Refractive Motion
Tianfan Xue, Hossein Mobahi, Frédo Durand, and William T. Freeman
MIT Computer Science and Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory
{tfxue,hmobahi,fredo,billf}@mit.edu

(b)

(e)

t=1
t=2
Time
Horizontal component of the
motion can be recovered

(a)

(c)

t=1

t=3
t=2
t=4
Horizontal component of the motion cannot be recovered

t=1

t=2
t=3
t=4
Vertical component of the motion can be recovered

t=5 Time

(f)
t=1
t=2 Time
Vertical component of the
motion cannot be recovered

(d)
t=5
Time

Figure 1. The aperture problem for an opaque object. (a) A camera is imaging an opaque moving object (gray). (b) When a vertical
edge is observed within the aperture (the white circular mask), we can resolve the horizontal component of the motion. (c) The vertical
component of the motion is ambiguous, because when the object moves vertically, no change is observed through this aperture. The
aperture problem for a refractive object. (d) A camera is viewing a stationary and planar background (white and red) through a moving
Gaussian-shaped glass (blue). (e) The horizontal motion is ambiguous, because the observed sequence is symmetric. That is, if the glass
moves in the opposite direction, the same sequence will be observed. (f) The vertical motion can be recovered, e.g. by tracking the observed
tip of the bump.

sequence, and can only recover one component of the
motion from 2D structure. Results on both simulated and
real sequences are shown to illustrate our theory.

Abstract
When viewed through a small aperture, a moving image
provides incomplete information about the local motion.
Only the component of motion along the local image
gradient is constrained. In an essential part of optical ﬂow
algorithms, information must be aggregated from nearby
image locations in order to estimate all components of
motion. This limitation of local evidence for estimating
optical ﬂow is called “the aperture problem”.
We pose and solve a generalization of the aperture
problem for moving refractive elements. We consider a
common setup in air ﬂow imaging or telescope observation:
a camera is viewing a static background, and an unknown
refractive elements undergoing unknown motion between
them. Then we are addressing this fundamental question:
what does the local image motion tell us about the motion
of refractive elements?
We show that the information gleaned through a local
aperture for this case is very different than that for optical
ﬂow. In optical ﬂow, the movement of 1D structure already
constrains the motion in a certain direction. However,
we cannot infer any information about the refractive
motion from the movement of 1D structure in the observed

1. Introduction
Our visual system integrates many pieces of ambiguous
local information to achieve a global scene interpretation.
An example of a global percept inferred from such local
data is motion. We unambiguously see objects moving
coherently in the world, although the local motion signals
may be ambiguous. The local ambiguous motion signals
are studied under the name of the “aperture problem”.
The traditional form of the aperture problem focuses on
the motion of opaque objects. It describes the ambiguity
of the inferred motions when the observing local image
structures which only vary along one direction [3, 10, 4].
When the region of analysis–the aperture–becomes large
enough, the image is likely to have a two-dimensional
structure, and the motion ambiguity then disappears.
Conversely, when the aperture is too small, the ambiguity
is often present. This is illustrated in Figure 1(a,b,c)
for a vertical edge surface. The local observation only
1

