How Do We Use Our Hands?
Discovering a Diverse Set of Common Grasps
De-An Huang, Minghuang Ma∗, Wei-Chiu Ma∗ , and Kris M. Kitani
The Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
{deanh, minghuam, weichium}@andrew.cmu.edu, kkitani@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Our aim is to show how state-of-the-art computer vision
techniques can be used to advance prehensile analysis (i.e.,
understanding the functionality of human hands). Prehensile analysis is a broad field of multi-disciplinary interest,
where researchers painstakingly manually analyze hours of
hand-object interaction videos to understand the mechanics of hand manipulation. In this work, we present promising empirical results indicating that wearable cameras and
unsupervised clustering techniques can be used to automatically discover common modes of human hand use. In particular, we use a first-person point-of-view camera to record
common manipulation tasks and leverage its strengths for
reliably observing human hand use. To learn a diverse set
of hand-object interactions, we propose a fast online clustering algorithm based on the Determinantal Point Process
(DPP). Furthermore, we develop a hierarchical extension
to the DPP clustering algorithm and show that it can be
used to discover appearance-based grasp taxonomies. Using a purely data-driven approach, our proposed algorithm
is able to obtain hand grasp taxonomies that roughly correspond to the classic Cutkosky grasp taxonomy. We validate
our approach on over 10 hours of first-person point-of-view
videos in both choreographed and real-life scenarios.

1. Motivation
Why hands? Human hands provide a rich source of information about physical manipulation. However, extracting information about the mechanisms of the hand requires
persistent and diligent observation; thus, automating the visual inspection of hand interactions will facilitate large scale
analysis and has the potential for significant impact in multiple disciplines.
The earliest work on understanding the mechanism of the
hand was highly influential and helped lay the ground work
for many disciplines. In this paper, we are particularly interested in work that explored the space of hand manipulation
∗ indicates equal contribution

Figure 1. Canonical grasp types [11]

through discrete grasp categories or taxonomies [16, 17, 18,
28, 40, 41, 49, 52, 63]. Early work by Schlesinger [63] classified grasps into six major types based on hand and object
properties. Keller [41] observed object-contact patterns in
various activities of daily living to understand the statistics
of hand usage. The basic findings of Keller in the 1940s
played an influential role in the design of the modern artificial hand. Napier’s [54] 1956 categorizations of grasps
into precision and power grasps was widely adopted by researchers in the medical, bio-mechanical, and robotic fields.
In the context of robotic manipulation, domain constrained categorical representations of grasps such as
Cutkosky and Wright’s hand grasp taxonomy [11] played
an important role in guiding robotic hand design. To this
day, robotics researchers painstakingly analyze hours of
hand-object interactions, manually categorizing and labeling hand use [6] because of the benefits it brings to understanding robotic arm design. In the early 1990’s, Kang and
Ikeuchi [37, 38, 39] presented a computational framework
for grasp identification, allowing a robotic system to ‘understand’ a demonstrated human grasp in order to replicate the
action with a robotic arm. Their work presented an important paradigm of using the visual classification of a human
grasp to automate robotic manipulation; a theme which we
will develop in this paper.
The use of grasp categories and taxonomies also play an
important role in fields such as gesture recognition [3], com-

