Depth and surface normal estimation from monocular images using regression
on deep features and hierarchical CRFs
Bo Li1,2 , Chunhua Shen2,3 , Yuchao Dai4 , Anton van den Hengel2,3 , Mingyi He1
1
Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
2
University of Adelaide, Australia; 3 Australian Centre for Robotic Vision
4
Australian National University

Abstract
Predicting the depth (or surface normal) of a scene
from single monocular color images is a challenging task.
This paper tackles this challenging and essentially underdetermined problem by regression on deep convolutional
neural network (DCNN) features, combined with a postprocessing refining step using conditional random fields
(CRF). Our framework works at two levels, super-pixel
level and pixel level. First, we design a DCNN model to
learn the mapping from multi-scale image patches to depth
or surface normal values at the super-pixel level. Second,
the estimated super-pixel depth or surface normal is refined to the pixel level by exploiting various potentials on
the depth or surface normal map, which includes a data
term, a smoothness term among super-pixels and an autoregression term characterizing the local structure of the
estimation map. The inference problem can be efficiently
solved because it admits a closed-form solution. Experiments on the Make3D and NYU Depth V2 datasets show
competitive results compared with recent state-of-the-art
methods.

1. Introduction
Both depth and surface normal estimation are common
intermediate components in understanding 3D scene structure. Many approaches have been proposed to tackle these
two problems. We propose a common deep learning framework for predicting both depth and surface normals in this
work. Depth estimation is to predict pixel-wise depth for
a single or multiple images. It was shown that depth information can benefit tasks such as recognition [1, 2], human computer interaction [3], and 3D model reconstruction [4]. Traditional techniques have predominantly worked
with multiple images to make the problem of depth prediction well posed, which include N -view reconstruction,
structure from motion (SfM) and simultaneous localization

and mapping (SLAM). However depth estimation from a
monocular, static viewpoint lags far behind its multi-view
counterpart. This is mainly due to the fact that the problem
is ill-posed and inherently ambiguous: a single image on its
own does not provide any depth cue explicitly (i.e., given
a color image of a scene, there are infinite number of 3D
scene structures explaining the 2D measurements exactly).
When specific scene dependant knowledge is available,
depth estimation or 3D reconstruction from single images
can be achieved by utilizing geometric assumptions such
as the “Blocks World” model [5], the “Origami World”
model [6], shape from shading [7] and repetition of structures [8]. These cues typically work for images with specific
structures and may not be applied as a general framework.
Data-driven depth estimation methods, predicting scene
geometry directly by learning from data, have gained popularity. Typically, such approaches recast the underlying
depth estimation problem in a scene labeling pipeline by exploiting relationship between image features and depth [9,
10]. These method can be roughly categorized as parametric approaches and non-parametric approaches. Parametric
approaches such as [9] and [11] make a planar model for
each super-pixel, where the model parameters are inferred
by exploiting different unary, pair-wise and high-order cues.
These work generally uses hand crafted features [10, 12].
In contrast, non-parametric approaches such as [13, 11, 14]
adopt a depth transfer framework, where the whole depth
map is transferred from retrieved candidate depth maps.
Usually, a final optimization is required to enforce constraints on the depth map. However, these methods generally search the training data set online, thus prohibiting
their use in real world applications.
To tackle the above shortcomings in depth estimation
from a single image, in this paper, we present a new framework consisting of depth regression via deep features and
depth refining via hierarchical CRF. First, to exploit the
inherent relation between a color image and its associated
depth, we use a deep network and formulate the problem of
depth estimation as a regression problem. Multi-scale deep

