Project-Out Cascaded Regression with an application to Face Alignment
Georgios Tzimiropoulos
School of Computer Science
University of Nottingham, U.K.
yorgos.tzimiropoulos@nottingham.ac.uk

Abstract
Cascaded regression approaches have been recently
shown to achieve state-of-the-art performance for many
computer vision tasks. Beyond its connection to boosting,
cascaded regression has been interpreted as a learningbased approach to iterative optimization methods like the
Newton’s method. However, in prior work, the connection
to optimization theory is limited only in learning a mapping
from image features to problem parameters.
In this paper, we consider the problem of facial deformable model fitting using cascaded regression and make
the following contributions: (a) We propose regression to
learn a sequence of averaged Jacobian and Hessian matrices from data, and from them descent directions in a fashion
inspired by Gauss-Newton optimization. (b) We show that
the optimization problem in hand has structure and devise
a learning strategy for a cascaded regression approach that
takes the problem structure into account. By doing so, the
proposed method learns and employs a sequence of averaged Jacobians and descent directions in a subspace orthogonal to the facial appearance variation; hence, we call
it Project-Out Cascaded Regression (PO-CR). (c) Based on
the principles of PO-CR, we built a face alignment system
that produces remarkably accurate results on the challenging iBUG data set outperforming previously proposed systems by a large margin. Code for our system is available
from http://www.cs.nott.ac.uk/˜yzt/.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Project-Out Cascaded Regression vs Gauss-Newton optimization. In prior work in face alignment, given the current estimate of the landmarks’ location (a)-(b), image specific Jacobians
are calculated to be used in analytic gradient descent. In (c), the
image Jacobian with respect to the 3rd shape parameter is shown.
In this work, we propose regression to learn a sequence of averaged Jacobians from data, and from them descent directions. In
(d), the learned averaged Jacobian with respect to the 3rd shape parameter for the first level of the cascade is shown. Notably, PO-CR
learns averaged Jacobians from which facial appearance variation
is projected-out.

shown to produce state-of-the-art performance for many of
the aforementioned tasks. At the same time, regressionbased methods enjoy a high degree of computational efficiency in both training and testing. In this work, the focus
is on regression-based fitting of facial deformable models
to unconstrained images, also known as face alignment inthe-wild. Arguably, for this problem, regression-based approaches have recently emerged as the state-of-the-art.
A plethora of regression methods have been employed to
tackle the above mentioned problems including linear and
ridge [4], Support Vector [31], Boosted [13], Gaussian process [26], and more recently, Deep Neural Nets [18]. A
recent notable approach that is of particular interest in this
work is the so-called Cascaded Pose Regression (CPR) [11].
CPR is an iterative (cascaded) regression method that is related to boosting with the main difference being that it uses
pose-indexed features i.e. features that are sampled from
the image based on the current pose estimate. This idea
has been shown to produce excellent results on a variety of
tasks and, owing to its efficiency and accuracy, it has been
recently extensively explored by a number of authors for the
problem of face alignment [6, 38, 32, 40, 39, 27, 1, 17].

1. Introduction
Regression is a standard tool for approaching various
computer vision problems like human and head pose estimation [30, 12], deformable model fitting [7, 37], object
localization and tracking [33], and face and behaviour analysis [24] to name a few. Typically, regression-based methods wish to learn a function that maps object appearance
to the desired target output variables. Being discriminative in nature and by capitalizing on the very large annotated data sets that are now readily available, they have been
1

