Projection Metric Learning on Grassmann Manifold with Application to Video
based Face Recognition

1

Zhiwu Huang1,2 , Ruiping Wang1 , Shiguang Shan1 , Xilin Chen1
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
zhiwu.huang@vipl.ict.ac.cn, {wangruiping, sgshan, xlchen}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
In video based face recognition, great success has been
made by representing videos as linear subspaces, which typically lie in a special type of non-Euclidean space known as
Grassmann manifold. To leverage the kernel-based methods developed for Euclidean space, several recent methods have been proposed to embed the Grassmann manifold into a high dimensional Hilbert space by exploiting
the well established Project Metric, which can approximate
the Riemannian geometry of Grassmann manifold. Nevertheless, they inevitably introduce the drawbacks from traditional kernel-based methods such as implicit map and
high computational cost to the Grassmann manifold. To
overcome such limitations, we propose a novel method to
learn the Projection Metric directly on Grassmann manifold
rather than in Hilbert space. From the perspective of manifold learning, our method can be regarded as performing a
geometry-aware dimensionality reduction from the original
Grassmann manifold to a lower-dimensional, more discriminative Grassmann manifold where more favorable classification can be achieved. Experiments on several real-world
video face datasets demonstrate that the proposed method
yields competitive performance compared with the state-ofthe-art algorithms.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, linear subspaces have proven a powerful representation for video based face recognition [43, 41, 10, 30,
27, 12, 11, 16, 7], where each video can be treated as a set of
face images without considering temporal information. As
well recognized, a set of face images of a single person can
be well approximated by a low dimensional linear subspace
[43]. The benefits of using subspaces lie in its much lower
computational cost of comparing large data sets and its well
justified capacity of modeling complex appearance varia-

tions in the set data [12]. However, such advantages come
along with the challenge of representing and handling the
subspaces appropriately, with their unique geometric structure being concerned.
As is mostly studied in [42, 28, 9, 32, 12, 34, 21, 22],
linear subspaces with the same dimensionality reside on a
special type of Riemannian manifold, i.e. Grassmann manifold, which has a nonlinear structure. As a consequence,
popular techniques developed for Euclidean spaces are not
directly eligible for the Grassmannian data. To tackle this
problem, a number of works [42, 9, 32, 1, 12, 11, 5, 16,
15] studied and explored the Riemannian geometry of the
Grassmann manifold. Among them, quite a few works
[42, 9, 12, 11, 5, 16, 15] exploited the projection mapping to
represent each element (i.e., linear subspace) on the Grassmann manifold with its projection operator. The resulting
projection distance, i.e., Projection Metric developed in [9],
is related to the true geodesic distance on the Grassmann
manifold at an infinitesimal scale [15]. By encoding the geometry of the Grassmann manifold, traditional algorithms
developed in Euclidean space can be extended to new versions on the nonlinear manifold. For example, Cetingul [5]
et al. proposed a new clustering approach on the Grassmann
manifold, and Harandi et al. [15] presented a Grassmannian
Dictionary Leaning approach.
In this paper, we focus on the problem of conducting discriminant analysis on the Grassmann manifold for
video based face recognition. Under the projection mapping framework, most of recent studies [12, 11, 16, 14, 36]
exploited a series of positive definite kernel functions on
Grassmann manifold to first embed the manifold into a high
dimensional Hilbert space, which actually obeys Euclidean
geometry. Then, the flattened manifold is mapped into a
lower-dimensional Euclidean space (see Fig.1 (a)-(b)-(d)(e)). The Grassmann kernels allow us to treat the Grassmann manifold as if it were a Euclidean vector space. As a
result, kernel learning algorithms (e.g., kernel discriminant

