Hierarchically-Constrained Optical Flow
Ryan Kennedy and Camillo J. Taylor
Department of Computer and Information Science
University of Pennsylvania
{kenry,cjtaylor}@cis.upenn.edu

Abstract
This paper presents a novel approach to solving optical flow problems using a discrete, tree-structured MRF derived from a hierarchical segmentation of the image. Our
method can be used to find globally-optimal matching solutions even for problems involving very large motions. Experiments demonstrate that our approach is competitive on
the MPI-Sintel dataset and that it can significantly outperform existing methods on problems involving large motions.

1. Introduction
Optical flow algorithms attempt to estimate the perceived
motion of each pixel between two successive frames of an
image sequence [30]. Often, a grid-based graphical model
is employed that connects each pixel with its immediate
neighbors in the image and each variable can be considered
as either continuous or discrete. While continuous-valued
optimization allows for sub-pixel motion estimates [4], it is
also subject to getting stuck in local optima. This is especially problematic for large motions, which are often missed
in a local search.
In contrast, discrete graphical models can sometimes be
solved optimally [23]. Even when the problems are NPhard, approximate methods can often provide a bound on
the globally-optimal energy [18]. These discrete optimization methods, however, tend to have computational complexities that are highly dependent on the size of the label
space, and they cannot be easily used for complex optical
flow problems that may involve offsets of several hundred
pixels between frames [6].
In this paper, we propose the use of a tree-based graphical model derived from a hierarchical image segmentation.
In any choice of model, there is an inherent tradeoff between the model’s representational power and its optimization complexity. We argue that a hierarchical approach is
capable of accurately modeling natural images while also
being computationally tractable. Indeed, we show how the
global optimum of this discrete optimization problem can

Hierarchy derived
from segmentation
Superpixel layer
Image

Figure 1: Depiction of our model, shown in 1D for simplicity. We use a hierarchical image segmentation, and each
segment has an associated variable that is connected to its
children. The root of the tree represents the entire image
and leaves represent pixels. Edge weights are a function of
the weights in the segmentation, denoted here by the thickness of black edges. Variables in the graphical model are
denoted by red circles. After optimization, the final motion
estimate is given by labels assigned to the pixel variables.

be found by using efficient methods borrowed from the literature on deformable-parts models [9], even for problems
involving hundreds of thousands of labels. This allows us
to optimally solve large optical flow problems using a discrete, global model for the first time. We also introduce
several small approximations that dramatically speed up the
algorithm while still yielding solutions that are very-nearly
optimal.
Additionally, we describe a simple method of incorporating information from multiple frames in optical flow. We
use the idea of inertial estimates from [16], where several
estimates of the optical flow are computed using nearby
frames and subsequently fused using a classifier. We show
how the inertial estimates can instead be directly modeled
in our cost function.
In Section 6, we show that state-of-the-art motion estimation schemes based on local optimization can have difficulties even on relatively simple motion analysis problems
that contain large displacements. We illustrate this issue
with both synthetic datasets and real images and show how
our proposed global method can significantly improve performance in these situations. We also evaluate the proposed
method on the challenging MPI-Sintel dataset [6] and compare its performance to other recent methods.

