Feature-Independent Context Estimation for Automatic Image Annotation∗
Amara Tariq
Hassan Foroosh
The Computational Imaging Lab., Computer Science,
University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL, USA

Abstract
Automatic image annotation is a highly valuable tool for
image search, retrieval and archival systems. In the absence
of an annotation tool, such systems have to rely on either
users’ input or large amount of text on the webpage of the
image, to acquire its textual description. Users may provide insufficient/noisy tags and all the text on the webpage
may not be a description or an explanation of the accompanying image. Therefore, it is of extreme importance to
develop efficient tools for automatic annotation of images
with correct and sufficient tags. The context of the image
plays a significant role in this process, along with the content of the image. A suitable quantification of the context of
the image may reduce the semantic gap between visual features and appropriate textual description of the image. In
this paper, we present an unsupervised feature-independent
quantification of the context of the image through tensor decomposition. We incorporate the estimated context as prior
knowledge in the process of automatic image annotation.
Evaluation of the predicted annotations provides evidence
of the effectiveness of our feature-independent context estimation method.

1. Introduction
Image search and retrieval systems rely heavily on the
availability of the textual descriptions of images to satisfy the textual queries of users. Such systems can benefit
greatly from image annotation systems which aim at producing accurate and concise textual descriptions for images.
Automatic image annotation is a very challenging problem
as low-level visual features (HOG, mean and standard deviation of color channels, edge filters, etc.) used to describe
the contents of an image do not represent any ready and
comprehensible connection to the textual description of the
image. This distance between low-level visual features and
textual description of image is described as semantic gap.
The context of the image may help reduce this gap. The
∗ This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation
under grants IIS-1212948 and IIS-091686.

context information may be used as prior knowledge in the
process of automatic image annotation to bridge the gap between low-level representation of content of the image and
its textual description.
Estimation of the context of image is essential to the task
of incorporating this information in image annotation process. The meta-data or any additional data available with
images may provide understandable context but the availability of such additional information is not a very practical
assumption. In the ideal scenario, the context should be estimated from the image itself. Some forms of image representation may be suitable for context representation. For example, visual features representing scene of an image may
be used as prior knowledge in the process of identification
of details of the scene, i.e., content of the image. Still, the
context estimation task is tied to some for of visual features
with the inherent problem of semantic gap.
In this paper, we propose a feature-independent and unsupervised context estimation process. The proposed process does not depend upon availability of additional information with images or any form of visual features. It involves tucker decomposition of tensors, typically used for
video processing. We devise a unique strategy to transform
images into suitable tensors, which are capable of providing useful context information for individual images. We
incorporate estimated context in the process of automatic
image annotation as prior knowledge. The evaluation of this
process over two popular image annotation datasets, i.e.,
IAPR1 and ESP game2 , provides encouraging evidence of
the effectiveness of our context estimation strategy.
The rest of this paper is arranged as follows. We present
a survey of image annotation and tensor decomposition related literature in section 2. The problem is properly formulated in section 3. The proposed feature-independent context estimation strategy is presented in section 4. In section
5, we describe the annotation scheme incorporating context
information. We explain the intuition behind our context estimation strategy in section 6. Sections 7 and 8 describe the
results of our evaluation and conclusion, respectively.
1 http://www.imageclef.org/photodata
2 http://hunch.net/ jl/

