Object-based RGBD Image Co-segmentation with Mutex Constraint
Huazhu Fu1
1

Dong Xu1

Jiang Liu3

School of Computer Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2

3

Stephen Lin2

Microsoft Research, Beijing, China

Institute for Infocomm Research, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore

Abstract
We present an object-based co-segmentation method that
takes advantage of depth data and is able to correctly handle noisy images in which the common foreground object is
missing. With RGBD images, our method utilizes the depth
channel to enhance identification of similar foreground objects via a proposed RGBD co-saliency map, as well as to
improve detection of object-like regions and provide depthbased local features for region comparison. To accurately
deal with noisy images where the common object appears
more than or less than once, we formulate co-segmentation
in a fully-connected graph structure together with mutual exclusion (mutex) constraints that prevent improper solutions. Experiments show that this object-based RGBD
co-segmentation with mutex constraints outperforms related techniques on an RGBD co-segmentation dataset, while
effectively processing noisy images. Moreover, we show that
this method also provides performance comparable to stateof-the-art RGB co-segmentation techniques on regular RGB
images with depth maps estimated from them.

(a) RGB image

(b) Depth image

(c) Result with RGB

(d) Result with RGBD

Figure 1. Co-segmentation with RGB vs. RGBD images. (a) A set
of RGB images which all contain a white cap in common. (b) The
corresponding depth maps. (c) Co-segmentation results based on
RGB images, which exhibit errors due to similarly colored background objects (second row) or illumination change (third row).
(d) Co-segmentation results with RGBD images. Our use of depth
cues notably improves co-segmentation quality.

to reduce ambiguities with color descriptors. How to effectively utilize depth information in co-segmentation is not straightforward. In single RGBD image segmentation, depth
can be treated as an additional color channel, since the depth
over a foreground object is generally consistent yet distinct from the background [25]. However, in co-segmentation
where commonalities among images are exploited, different depth values for the same object in different images can
create matching problems.
In this paper, we present an object-based RGBD image
co-segmentation method based on RGBD co-saliency maps,
which capitalize on depth cues to enhance identification of
common foreground objects among images. Depth is also
utilized to provide additional local features for region comparison and to improve selection of object-like regions [14].
Objectness has been used in co-segmentation to overcome
limitations of low-level features in separating complex foregrounds and backgrounds [35], but such methods have been
formulated with an assumption that exactly one common
object exists in all of the images. If the common foreground

1. Introduction
The goal of co-segmentation is to extract similar foreground objects from among a set of related images [30, 17,
19, 36, 31]. In contrast to single-image segmentation, cosegmentation makes use of the information in multiple images to infer the objects to extract. Existing methods operate on RGB images and utilize descriptors such as color histograms, SIFT and HOG to perform co-segmentation.
However, color-based features have limitations, as they cannot distinguish a foreground from a similarly colored background, and are sensitive to illumination differences among
images. These issues are illustrated in Fig. 1(c), where the
common foreground object is merged with a background
object of similar color in the second row, and illumination
change causes the target to be missed in the third row.
To address this problem, we propose in this paper to introduce the depth cue into co-segmentation, which can help
1

