Region-based Temporally Consistent Video Post-processing
Xuan Dong
Tsinghua University

Boyan Bonev
UC Los Angeles

Yu Zhu
Northwestern Polytechnical University

dongx10@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

bonev@ucla.edu

zhuyu1986@mail.nwpu.edu.cn

Alan L. Yuille
UC Los Angeles
yuille@stat.ucla.edu

Abstract

ment videos (with flickering artifacts), and do not know
or cannot have access to the enhancement algorithms. For
example, 1) the enhancement algorithms of industrial softwares are not known to the public, like Pr and Instagram.
2) For embedded/hard-ware enhancement algorithms, the
device may not provide interfaces to revise the algorithms for temporal consistency. 3) In practical development of
a software or an application for video editing, several enhancement algorithms may be required which are all different. So designing a temporally consistent method for each
separate algorithm will be time-consuming. In such cases,
it is desirable to do temporally consistent enhancement as
post-processing, by simply analyzing the input videos and
original enhancement videos.

We study the problem of temporally consistent video
post-processing. Previous post-processing algorithms usually either fail to keep high fidelity or fail to keep temporal consistency of output videos. In this paper, we observe
experimentally that many image/video enhancement algorithms enforce a spatially consistent prior on the enhancement. More precisely, within a local region, the enhancement is consistent, i.e., pixels with the same RGB values
will get the same enhancement values. Using this prior, we
segment each frame into several regions and temporallyspatially adjust the enhancement of regions of different frames, taking into account fidelity, temporal consistency
and spatial consistency. User study, objective measurement
and visual quality comparisons are conducted. The experimental results demonstrate that our output videos can keep
high fidelity and temporal consistency at the same time.

In this paper, we study the problem of temporally consistent video post-processing when the original input and
enhancement videos are available. The goal is to keep both
temporal consistency and fidelity of the output videos. 1)
Temporal consistency means that for the same objects in different frames, the enhancement should be consistent. 2)
Fidelity means that the final results should have similar effects as the original enhancement videos. In the other words, the output frames should be similar with the original enhancement results at non-flickering frames, and the objects
in flickering frames should be adjusted referred to the corresponding objects in non-flickering frames. The challenges
of the problem include: 1) the original enhancement methods are unknown and cannot be revised at all, 2) motions
of videos are complicated, 3) the method should be able to
remove flickering artifacts caused by different enhancement
methods.

1. Introduction
The consumption of videos is increasing dramatically in
video streaming and surveillance systems. This results in
mass demands for video enhancement of exposure , color,
contrast, etc. In computer vision, there exist many image
enhancement algorithms such as exposure correction [22],
color grading [4], etc. Their enhancement effects are very
impressive, and they are used in many video applications and systems such as video editing softwares like Adobe
Premiere (Pr), mobile phone apps like Instagram, etc.
However, there are usually significant flickering artifacts
when performing video enhancement, or image enhancement methods frame by frame for videos, due to lack of
built-in temporal consistency. To remove these artifacts is
non-trival because they have a profound effect on the visual
quality. In addition, in practical systems, we usually only
have access to the input videos and the original enhance-

We discover experimentally the spatially consistent enhancement (SCE) prior which is valid for many leading
image enhancement methods, including Pr auto color, auto level, auto contrast, exposure correction [22], and color grading [2] [4]. The prior is based on the observation
that in a local region, image enhancement methods tend to
1

