Real-time 3D Head Pose and Facial Landmark Estimation from Depth Images
Using Triangular Surface Patch Features
Chavdar Papazov

Tim K. Marks

Michael Jones

chavdar.papazov@gmail.com

tmarks@merl.com

mjones@merl.com

Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories (MERL)
201 Broadway, Cambridge, MA 02139
Abstract

posed method consists of an offline training and an online
testing phase. Both phases are based on a new triangular
surface patch (TSP) descriptor. Our method is robust to
noise, is rotation and translation invariant, and runs on a
frame-by-frame basis without the need for initialization. It
can process 10 to 25 frames per second, depending on the
desired accuracy, on a single CPU core, without using parallel hardware such as GPUs.
We test the proposed algorithm using the data from the
Biwi Kinect Head Pose Database [9]. However, our method
is trained on synthetically generated 3D head models [21],
rather than on depth maps from a Kinect sensor. As a result, our method should be easily adaptable to other types
of 3D sensors, sensor locations, and resolutions, without
the need to re-train it on new sensor-specific or situationspecific data. The test results show that the proposed
method achieves better accuracy than state-of-the-art approaches [2, 9], while maintaining real-time processing.

We present a real-time system for 3D head pose estimation and facial landmark localization using a commodity
depth sensor. We introduce a novel triangular surface patch
(TSP) descriptor, which encodes the shape of the 3D surface of the face within a triangular area. The proposed
descriptor is viewpoint invariant, and it is robust to noise
and to variations in the data resolution. Using a fast nearest neighbor lookup, TSP descriptors from an input depth
map are matched to the most similar ones that were computed from synthetic head models in a training phase. The
matched triangular surface patches in the training set are
used to compute estimates of the 3D head pose and facial
landmark positions in the input depth map. By sampling
many TSP descriptors, many votes for pose and landmark
positions are generated which together yield robust final estimates. We evaluate our approach on the publicly available Biwi Kinect Head Pose Database to compare it against
state-of-the-art methods. Our results show a significant improvement in the accuracy of both pose and landmark location estimates while maintaining real-time speed.

2. Related Work
Previous approaches to head pose estimation include
both 2D image-based and 3D depth-based approaches. We
will not discuss 2D image-based methods here except to
note that previous work has found them to be less accurate
than 3D depth-based algorithms [22].
One of the earliest methods for real-time head pose estimation from depth data was the one proposed by Seeman et
al. [22]. They used a stereo camera pair to compute depth
and then detected the head using skin color. A 3-layer neural network estimated the pose angles given the scaled depth
map of the head region. Breitenstein et al. [7] presented a
more accurate and faster system for head pose estimation
that took advantage of less noisy depth map acquisition and
the speed of GPUs. First, candidate 3D nose positions were
detected in the high quality depth map. Then, the GPU was
used to quickly find the best match between the input depth
map and a number of stored depth maps from an average
head model located at each candidate nose position. Their

1. Introduction
Head pose estimation and facial landmark localization
are challenging computer vision problems with important
applications in various fields such as human-computer interaction [22], face recognition [25, 1], and character animation [5], just to name a few. Recent advances in real-time
3D geometry acquisition have led to a growing interest in
methods that operate on 3D data. Furthermore, in contrast
to 2D image-based approaches, the 3D methods do not have
to deal with changes in illumination and viewpoint. This
makes them, as shown in [22], more accurate and robust.
In this paper, we present an algorithm for 3D head pose
estimation and facial landmark localization using a commodity depth sensor such as Microsoft’s Kinect. The pro1

