Towards Unified Depth and Semantic Prediction from a Single Image
Peng Wang1 Xiaohui Shen2 Zhe Lin2 Scott Cohen2 Brian Price2 Alan Yuille1
1
University of California, Los Angeles 2 Adobe Research

Abstract

evitably propagated to the depth results. On the other hand,
in semantic segmentation, with the increasing availability
of RGBD data from additional depth sensors, many methods use depth as another channel to regularize the segmentation [28, 31, 12] and have achieved much better performance than using RGB images alone.

Depth estimation and semantic segmentation are two
fundamental problems in image understanding. While the
two tasks are strongly correlated and mutually beneficial,
they are usually solved separately or sequentially. Motivated by the complementary properties of the two tasks, we
propose a unified framework for joint depth and semantic
prediction. Given an image, we first use a trained Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) to jointly predict a global
layout composed of pixel-wise depth values and semantic
labels. By allowing for interactions between the depth and
semantic information, the joint network provides more accurate depth prediction than a state-of-the-art CNN trained
solely for depth prediction [6]. To further obtain fine-level
details, the image is decomposed into local segments for
region-level depth and semantic prediction under the guidance of global layout. Utilizing the pixel-wise global prediction and region-wise local prediction, we formulate the
inference problem in a two-layer Hierarchical Conditional
Random Field (HCRF) to produce the final depth and semantic map. As demonstrated in the experiments, our approach effectively leverages the advantages of both tasks
and provides the state-of-the-art results.

Since the two tasks are mutually beneficial, extensive investigations have been done towards jointly solving them
in videos [2, 8, 19, 34], in which 3D information can be
easily obtained through structure from motion. However,
the efforts in jointly tackling the two problems from a single image are preliminary [21], mostly because the inference of both tasks are more ill-posed in a single image. It
is not trivial to formulate the joint inference problem, in
which the two tasks could benefit each other. This paper
is another step towards this direction. Unlike previous approaches [21], in which the consistency between the semantic and geometric property is limited to local segments or
objects, we propose a unified framework to incorporate both
global context from the whole image and local prediction
from regions, through which the consistency between depth
and semantic information is automatically learned through
joint training.
Fig. 1 illustrates the framework of our approach. We formulate the joint inference problem in a two-layer Hierarchical Conditional Random Field (HCRF). The unary potentials in the bottom layer are pixel-wise depth values and semantic labels, which are predicted by a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) trained globally from the whole image,
while the unary potentials in the upper layer are region-wise
depth and semantic maps, which come from another CNNbased regressor trained on local regions. The output of the
global CNN, though coarse, provides very accurate global
scale and semantic guidance, while the local regressor gives
more details in depth and semantic boundaries. The mutual interactions between depth and semantic information
are captured through the joint training of the CNNs, and are
further enforced in the joint inference of HCRF.

1. Introduction
Depth estimation and semantic segmentation from a single image are two fundamental yet challenging tasks in
computer vision. While they address different aspects in
scene understanding, there exist strong consistencies among
the semantic and geometric properties of image regions.
When the information from one task is available, it would
provide valuable prior knowledge to guide the other one.
In the depth estimation literature, semantic information
has long been used as a high-level guidance [14, 15, 23,
11, 29]. Certain semantic classes have strong geometric
implications. For example, the ground is usually a horizontal plane in a canonical view, while the building facades are mostly vertical surfaces [14]. However, these approaches either assume the semantic labels are known [29],
or perform semantic segmentation to generate the semantic labels [23]. Since the two tasks are performed sequentially, the errors in the predicted semantic labels are in-

We evaluated our method on the NYU v2 dataset [31] on
both depth estimation and semantic segmentation. By inference using our joint global CNN, the depth prediction improves over the depth only CNN by an average 8% relative
1

