Non-rigid Registration of Images with Geometric and Photometric Deformation
by Using Local Affine Fourier-Moment Matching
Hong-Ren Su
Institute of Information Systems and Applications
National Tsing Hua University
Hsinchu,Taiwan

Shang-Hong Lai
Department of Computer Science
National Tsing Hua University
Hsinchu,Taiwan

suhongren@gmail.com

lai@cs.nthu.edu.tw

Abstract
Registration between images taken with different cameras, from different viewpoints or under different lighting
conditions is a challenging problem. It needs to solve not
only the geometric registration problem but also the photometric matching problem. In this paper, we propose to estimate the integrated geometric and photometric transformations between two images based on a local affine Fouriermoment matching framework, which is developed to achieve
deformable registration. We combine the local Fourier moment constraints with the smoothness constraints to determine the local affine transforms in a hierarchal block model.
Our experimental results on registering some real images
related by large color and geometric transformations show
the proposed registration algorithm provides superior image registration results compared to the state-of-the-art image registration methods.

Figure 1. Reference, target images and its warp and overlapping
area

An available strategy is to model and correct the appearance variations under different imaging conditions before
registering images. Color optical flow [2][23], Eigenflows
[19] and NRDC [25] were proposed to transform a target
image to similar color distribution as that of the reference
image for color transforms and photometrically invariant
image representations. However, modeling all possibilities
of appearance variations is impossible, thus the registration
problem become very challenging when the color images
contain large exposure differences or there are few corresponding points between two images.
Hence most previous research works dealing with the
image registration taken under different camera and environment conditions are based on feature point correspondences. The SIFT-based feature matching approach [17],
such as SURF [4], A-SIFT [20], SIFT flow [16] and CSIFT
[1], is robust against lighting changes and can be considered
a weak form of photometric invariance [15]. Although the
SIFT-based feature matching is robust against illumination
changes, the accuracy of feature point matching degrades
as the appearance variation increases. In fact, the accuracy

1. Introduction
Image registration is a very fundamental problem in
many fields [5][27], such as computer vision, image processing, computer graphics, and so on. However, images could be acquired from different sensors, with different camera acquisition settings, under different illumination
conditions, or from different viewpoints. Therefore, the intensities and colors may not have the same distributions between the images to be registered [18], which makes the traditional geometric registration [8][12] methods easy to fail.
Figure 1 shows this kind of image registration problems
with very different illumination conditions. For example,
some images capture the same scene at different time, such
as different mountain views acquired in summer or winter,
and the city view changes with differen traffic flows. Partial
matching is another challenging problem for image registration.
1

