Image Denoising via Adaptive Soft-Thresholding Based on Non-Local Samples
Hangfan Liu, Ruiqin Xiong, Jian Zhang and Wen Gao ∗
Institute of Digital Media, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
Email:{liuhf, rqxiong, jian.zhang, wgao}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

ill-posed problem, it is critical to exploit the prior knowledge that characterizes the statistical features of the images.

This paper proposes a new image denoising approach using adaptive signal modeling and adaptive softthresholding. It improves the image quality by regularizing
all the patches in image based on distribution modeling in
transform domain. Instead of using a global model for all
patches, it employs content adaptive models to address the
non-stationarity of image signals. The distribution model
of each patch is estimated individually and can vary for different transform bands and for different patch locations. In
particular, we allow the distribution model for each individual patch to have non-zero expectation. To estimate the expectation and variance parameters for the transform bands
of a particular patch, we exploit the non-local correlation of
image and collect a set of similar patches as data samples
to form the distribution. Irrelevant patches are excluded so
that this non-local based modeling is more accurate than
global modeling. Adaptive soft-thresholding is employed since we observed that the distribution of non-local samples
can be approximated by Laplacian distribution. Experimental results show that the proposed scheme outperforms the
state-of-the-art denoising methods such as BM3D and CSR
in both the PSNR and the perceptual quality.

Early regularization techniques mainly utilize the local
correlation among image pixels. A typical example of this
kind is the total variation (TV) regularization [9, 11]. It depicts the feature that natural images are smooth in most regions, and can be seen as a kind of sparsity regularization
in gradient domain. Typical sparsity regularization models are based on the assumption that images can be sparsely
presented in transform domain, e.g. discrete cosine transform (DCT) domain or discrete wavelet transform (DWT)
domain [4,5,10,14,15]. These transforms are orthogonal or
nearly orthogonal, and use ﬁxed transform basis. However,
it is impossible to efﬁciently present all kinds of patterns in
images using a ﬁxed basis. Therefore, [6] advocates to use
content adaptive basis with the assistance of principal component analysis (PCA). Some later works use over-complete
dictionary to represent the image signal and try to learn an
optimal dictionary so that the sparsity of the signal is maximized [3, 23].

1. Introduction
Image denoising is an important problem in many image
processing tasks. It has attracted a lot of research interest in
the past few decades [1–22]. It aims to recover the original
image signal from its observed noisy version, which can be
formulated as
y = x + n,

(1)

where x is the desired original image, n represents the additive noise, and y is the corrupted observation. To solve such
∗ Corresponding author: R. Xiong. This work was supported in part by
the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61370114, 61421062),
Beijing Natural Science Foundation (4132039), Research Fund for the
Doctoral Program of Higher Education (20120001110090) and also by the
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center.

Since the invention of non-local means (NLM) denoising [7] which exploits the repetitiveness of patch patterns
in image signals, extensive research works are motivated to
take advantage of non-local similarity for image restoration
tasks, and achieve superior performance over local regularization [2, 8, 12, 18–20, 22, 24–26]. Among these non-local
similarity based schemes, the famous benchmark BM3D [2]
is basically a combination of DCT coefﬁcient thresholding and nonlocal block matching. It stacks similar blocks
of a reference patch into a three dimensional (3D) block,
on which 3D transform is applied, and hard thresholding
(in the ﬁrst step) or Wiener ﬁltering (in the second step) is
performed. Dong et al. [13] also proposed a two-stage denoising scheme but adopts PCA instead of DCT for local
decorrelation. The so-called LPG-PCA method uses nonlocal similar patches as data samples to estimate statistical
parameters for PCA training. Combining the ideas of structural clustering and dictionary learning, CSR [8] attempts
to unify local and nonlocal sparsity constraints.
This paper aims to develop an effective image denoising scheme using adaptive signal modeling and adaptive

