Object Detection by Labeling Superpixels
Junjie Yan1,2
Yinan Yu3
Xiangyu Zhu1
Zhen Lei 1
Stan Z. Li 1
1
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Institute of Data Science and Technology, Alibaba Group
3
Institute of Deep Learning, Baidu Research

Abstract

ous scales and locations. The recently popular paradigm is
to generate about 2, 000 proposals by clustering or segmentation according to low-level image cues. After that, image
classification techniques are used to classify each proposal.
The classification has achieved great advances recently, due
to the robust low level features [8, 35], sophisticated models [40, 4, 15] and convolutional neural networks (CNN)
[28, 46].
Through the transformation, the detection performance
can benefit from the advances in image classification. It
leads to the great improvement in detection of face, pedestrian and more general object categories in the last two
decades. However, it also results in two problems. The
first is that if an object is missed in object proposal step,
such as an object with partially occlusion or unusual aspect
ratio, the detection system would definitely miss the object.
The second is that the independent classification of proposals cannot incorporate the global image context, which is
very important to detect overlapped objects and distinguish
object part and object itself.
To alleviate the two problems, we believe one possible
solution is to move the focus in detection from proposals to
superpixels. The superpixels are compact and perceptually
meaningful atomic regions for images. The pixels in one superpixel can be safely assumed to belong to the same object
(as long as the scale of superpixel is small enough) and superpixels can be grouped together flexibly to form objects.
The interaction between objects, which is hard to model in
object level, also becomes easier in superpixel level. If we
know the label of each superpixel (e.g., it belongs to which
object in what category), then the object detection problem
becomes trivial. To this end, we conduct object detection
by labeling superpixels.
However, reliable inference of a superpixel’s label can be
very difficult, due to the ambiguity in its appearance. In this
paper, we exploit three types of information on entire image
jointly by constructing an energy function on image’s superpixel partition. The appearance of the superpixel is captured
by a data cost term, which is propagated from classification
result of the regions it belongs to by RCNN[20]. The spa-

Object detection is often conducted by object proposal
generation and classification sequentially. This paper handles object detection in a superpixel oriented manner instead of the proposal oriented. Specially, this paper takes
object detection as a multi-label superpixel labeling problem by minimizing an energy function. It uses the data cost
term to capture the appearance, smooth cost term to encode
the spatial context and label cost term to favor compact detection. The data cost is learned through a convolutional
neural network and the parameters in the labeling model
are learned through a structural SVM. Compared with proposal generation and classification based methods, the proposed superpixel labeling method can naturally detect objects missed by proposal generation step and capture the
global image context to infer the overlapping objects.
The proposed method shows its advantage in Pascal
VOC and ImageNet. Notably, it performs better than the ImageNet ILSVRC2014 winner GoogLeNet (45.0% V.S. 43.9%
in mAP) with much shallower and fewer CNNs.

1. Introduction
Object detection is a computer vision task to automatically localize objects in categories of interest from images. Starting from early methods which can successfully
localize constrained object categories, such as face [42, 52]
or pedestrian [8, 11], state-of-the-art methods [15, 20] are
moving focus to the detection of varying categories with
large appearance variations, such as the twenty categories in
Pascal VOC [13] and two hundred categories in ImageNet
[43].
While numerous works have been proposed for object
detection, most of them actually transform the object detection to image classification. They first generate object proposals and then classify each proposal independently by the
image classification techniques. The traditional paradigm
to get proposal [38, 52] is to use the sliding window to exhaustively sample about 100, 000 bounding boxes in vari1

