Joint SFM and Detection Cues for Monocular 3D Localization in Road Scenes
Shiyu Song
Manmohan Chandraker
NEC Labs America, Cupertino, CA

Abstract
We present a system for fast and highly accurate 3D localization of objects like cars in autonomous driving applications, using a single camera. Our localization framework jointly uses information from complementary modalities such as structure from motion (SFM) and object detection to achieve high localization accuracy in both near
and far fields. This is in contrast to prior works that rely
purely on detector outputs, or motion segmentation based
on sparse feature tracks. Rather than completely commit
to tracklets generated by a 2D tracker, we make novel use
of raw detection scores to allow our 3D bounding boxes to
adapt to better quality 3D cues. To extract SFM cues, we
demonstrate the advantages of dense tracking over sparse
mechanisms in autonomous driving scenarios. In contrast
to complex scene understanding, our formulation for 3D
localization is efficient and can be regarded as an extension
of sparse bundle adjustment to incorporate object detection
cues. Experiments on the KITTI dataset show the efficacy of
our cues, as well as the accuracy and robustness of our 3D
object localization relative to ground truth and prior works.

Figure 1. We demonstrate a 3D object localization framework that
combines cues from SFM and object detection. Red denotes 2D
bounding boxes, the horizontal line is the horizon from estimated
ground plane, green denotes estimated 3D localization for far and
near objects, with distances in magenta. Notice that for the closest
object, the 3D bounding box is accurate even though the 2D one
is not. This shows the effectiveness of our joint optimization, that
incorporates SFM cues, raw detection scores and 3D priors.

Intuitively, SFM can estimate accurate 3D points on
nearby objects, but suffers due to the low resolution of those
far away. On the other hand, bounding boxes from object
detection are obtainable for distant objects, but are often inconsistent with the 3D scene in the near field. Thus, we seek
3D bounding boxes that are most consistent with 2D tracked
ones, while also maximizing the alignment of estimated
object pose with tracked 3D points (Figure 1).
Besides detected 2D bounding boxes, we also make novel
use of object detection scores. Our system is designed for a
real-time application, so cannot afford complex scene understanding approaches. Rather, SFM, object detection, object
tracking and 3D localization are sequential operations in our
system, so inaccuracies in earlier stages must be compensated. The input to 3D object localization are 2D tracklets
from tracking-by-detection, which are often noisy and poorly
localized. Section 4 proposes a method to incorporate raw
detection scores in our joint optimization, while avoiding the
prohibitive cost of evaluating the detector model for every
object pose configuration. This allows us to efficiently use
detection bounding boxes with high enough scores that are
more consistent with 3D geometry, to effectively undo any
poor localization of the 2D object tracks.
An important aspect of our object localization is the use
of 3D points as SFM cues, for which we use dense tracking
that exploits intensity-aligned pose optimization [9]. Section

1. Introduction
The rapid advent of autonomous driving technologies has
introduced the need for accurate 3D localization of objects
such as cars in real-world driving scenarios. The applications
of real-time object localization range from driver safety, to
danger prediction, to better understanding of traffic scenes.
This paper presents a framework for 3D object localization
that combines cues from structure from motion (SFM), object detection and ground plane estimation to achieve high
accuracy, using only monocular video as input.
The key to our accurate 3D object localization is the joint
optimization framework of Section 4 that accounts for SFM
and object detection as complementary modalities for scene
understanding. Monocular SFM cues consist of 3D points
on the object and a per-frame estimate of the ground plane,
while detection cues include 2D bounding boxes and detector
scores. The mutual interactions of these cues is governed by
our joint optimization to exploit their relative strengths.
1

