Rotating Your Face Using Multi-task Deep Neural Network
Junho Yim1 Heechul Jung1 ByungIn Yoo1,2 Changkyu Choi2 Dusik Park2 Junmo Kim1
1
School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, South Korea
2
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology
{junho.yim, heechul, junmo.kim}@kaist.ac.kr
{byungin.yoo, changkyu choi, dusikpark}@samsung.com

Abstract
Face recognition under viewpoint and illumination
changes is a difficult problem, so many researchers have
tried to solve this problem by producing the pose- and
illumination- invariant feature. Zhu et al. [26] changed all
arbitrary pose and illumination images to the frontal view
image to use for the invariant feature. In this scheme, preserving identity while rotating pose image is a crucial issue. This paper proposes a new deep architecture based
on a novel type of multitask learning, which can achieve
superior performance in rotating to a target-pose face image from an arbitrary pose and illumination image while
preserving identity. The target pose can be controlled by
the user’s intention. This novel type of multi-task model
significantly improves identity preservation over the single
task model. By using all the synthesized controlled pose
images, called Controlled Pose Image (CPI), for the poseillumination- invariant feature and voting among the multiple face recognition results, we clearly outperform the stateof-the-art algorithms by more than 4∼6% on the MultiPIE
dataset.

Figure 1. Conceptual diagram of our proposed model. The Input
image under an arbitrary pose and illumination is transformed into
another pose image. The Remote Code represents the target pose
code corresponding to the output image. By interacting between
the input image and the Remote Code, our model produces desired
pose image.

instance, DeepFace also relies on a preprocessing stage that
rotates the input face images to a canonical view. A recent
work [27] that extends [26] can generate not only a canonical view but also many face images with arbitrary poses
preserving the identity.
This paper improves upon these recent achievements
by proposing a simple yet powerful way to rotate a twodimensional face image to a different pose selected by a
user. More specifically, an arbitrary pose and illumination
are used for input to the network, and a controlled pose under frontal illumination is generated as output. The concept
is illustrated in Figure 1. We train a deep neural network
(DNN) that takes a face image and a binary code encoding
a target pose, which we call Remote Code, and generates
a face image with the same identity viewed at the target
pose indicated by the Remote Code. It is as if the user has
a remote control and a black-box rotator, which can rotate
a given face image according to the user’s Remote Code.
The quality of this rotator can be measured by the degree to

1. Introduction
Recently, there have been significant advances in face
recognition technologies, especially due to deep learning.
Zhu et al. [26] proposed a deep model that can convert
a face image with an arbitrary pose and illumination to a
so-called canonical face image as if it is viewed from the
front with a standard illumination. DeepFace [18] achieved
a human-level performance in face recognition for the first
time with a 97% recognition rate on very challengning LFW
dataset [6], and this record has recently been updated by a
more powerful deep learning method [17] achieving an impressive 99% recognition rate on LFW dataset.
One important challenge related to face recognition is
changing the viewpoint of a face image or synthesizing a
novel view while preserving the identity of the face. For
1

