Salient Object Subitizing
Jianming Zhang1 Shugao Ma1 Mehrnoosh Sameki1 Stan Sclaroff1 Margrit Betke1
Zhe Lin2 Xiaohui Shen2 Brian Price2 Radomı́r Mĕch2
1
2
Boston University
Adobe Research

Abstract
People can immediately and precisely identify that an image contains 1, 2, 3 or 4 items by a simple glance. The
phenomenon, known as Subitizing, inspires us to pursue
the task of Salient Object Subitizing (SOS), i.e. predicting
the existence and the number of salient objects in a scene
using holistic cues. To study this problem, we propose a
new image dataset annotated using an online crowdsourcing marketplace. We show that a proposed subitizing technique using an end-to-end Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) model achieves significantly better than chance performance in matching human labels on our dataset. It attains 94% accuracy in detecting the existence of salient objects, and 42-82% accuracy (chance is 20%) in predicting
the number of salient objects (1, 2, 3, and 4+), without
resorting to any object localization process. Finally, we
demonstrate the usefulness of the proposed subitizing technique in two computer vision applications: salient object
detection and object proposal.

Figure 1: How fast can you tell the number of prominent
objects in each of these images?

In this paper, we propose a subitizing-like approach to
estimate the number (0, 1, 2, 3 and 4+) of salient objects in a
scene, without resorting to any object localization process.
Solving this Salient Object Subitizing (SOS) problem can
benefit many computer vision tasks and applications.
Knowing the existence and the number of salient objects
without the expensive detection process (e.g., sliding window detection) can enable a machine vision system to select different processing pipelines at an early stage, making
it more intelligent and reducing computational cost. For example, SOS can help a computer vision system suppress the
object detection process, until the existence of salient objects is detected, and it can also provide cues for selecting
among search strategies and early stopping criteria based on
the predicted number. Differentiating between scenes with
zero, a single and multiple salient objects can also facilitate
applications like robot vision [45], egocentric video summarization [31], snap point prediction [57], iconic image
detection [7] and image thumbnailing [14], etc.
To study the SOS problem, we provide a new image
dataset of about 7000 images, where the number of salient
objects in each image has been annotated by Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT) workers. In Fig. 2, we show some
sample images in the proposed SOS dataset with the collected ground-truth labels. Although there are no bounding
box annotations accompanying the numbers, it is usually
pretty straightforward to see which objects these numbers
refer to. The annotations from the AMT workers are further
analyzed in a more controlled offline setting, which shows a
high inter-subject consistency in subitizing salient objects.
Our ultimate goal is to develop a fast and accurate computational method to estimate the number of salient objects

1. Introduction
How quickly can you tell the number of salient objects
in each image in Fig. 1? It was found over a century ago
that people are equipped with a remarkable capacity to effortlessly and consistently identify 1, 2, 3 or 4 items by
a simple glance [27]. This phenomenon, later coined by
Kaufman, et al. as Subitizing [29], has been observed under
various measurements [6, 37]. It is shown that apprehension of small numbers up to three or four is highly accurate,
quick and confident, while beyond this subitizing range, the
feeling is lost. Accumulating evidence also shows that infants and even certain species of animals can differentiate
between small numbers of items within the subitizing range
[18, 25, 17, 40], suggesting that subitizing may be an inborn numeric capacity of humans and animals. It is speculated that subitizing is a preattentive and parallel process
[18, 52, 54], and that it can help humans and animals make
prompt decisions in basic tasks like navigation, searching
and choice making [42, 24].
1

