Kernel Fusion for Better Image Deblurring
Long Mai
Portland State University

Feng Liu
Portland State University

mtlong@cs.pdx.edu

fliu@cs.pdx.edu

Abstract
Kernel estimation for image deblurring is a challenging
task and a large number of algorithms have been developed.
Our hypothesis is that while individual kernels estimated
using different methods alone are sometimes inadequate,
they often complement each other. This paper addresses the
problem of fusing multiple kernels estimated using different methods into a more accurate one that can better support image deblurring than each individual kernel. In this
paper, we develop a data-driven approach to kernel fusion
that learns how each kernel contributes to the final kernel
and how they interact with each other. We discuss various kernel fusion models and find that kernel fusion using
Gaussian Conditional Random Fields performs best. This
Gaussian Conditional Random Fields-based kernel fusion
method not only models how individual kernels are fused at
each kernel element but also the interaction of kernel fusion
among multiple kernel elements. Our experiments show that
our method can significantly improve image deblurring by
combining kernels from multiple methods into a better one.

1. Introduction
Images taken by consumer photographers often come out
blurry due to camera shake caused by the sensor movement
during the exposure time. In many cases, the problem is
inevitable without using equipments like tripods, which are
often not available. Removing the effect of camera shake
from images has long been an important research topic in
computer vision and graphics.
Under the assumption of white noise and spatially invariant blur, the image blur process can be modeled mathematically as image convolution
B =k∗I +n

(1)

where ∗ is the convolution operator. B is the acquired blurry
image, I is the sharp image, k is the convolution kernel
representing the blurring process, and n is the noise. The
goal of image deconvolution is to recover the sharp image I
given its blurry observation B.

There is now a rich literature on image deconvolution [1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15, 16, 20, 21, 22,
23, 24, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39]. In
this paper, we focus on blind image deconvolution where the
blur kernel k is unknown and needs to be recovered along
with the sharp image. Blind deconvolution is a severely
under-constrained problem. Given an observed blurry image B, there are infinitely many pairs of k and I that satisfy
Equation 1.
It has been noted by Levin et al. that estimating accurate blur kernel is a critical component in image deblurring [19]. Over the past decade, remarkable research effort
has been devoted to developing methods that can accurately
recover blur kernels [4, 5, 7, 8, 14, 18, 23, 28, 30, 32, 34].
Levin et al. provide an iterative framework to approximate
the maximum posterior inference for the blur kernel k given
the blurry input B, marginalizing over all possible latent
images I [18]. Recent research directly exploits information from the blurry image to estimate blur kernels. Joshi et
al. [14] and Cho et al. [4] predict the sharp edges from the
blurry image and use the predicted edge profile to constrain
kernel estimation. Sun et al. employs patch-based priors to
focus on the image regions that are more informative for
blur kernel estimation [30]. Cho et al. construct the Radon
transform of the blur kernel from the blurry image and use
that to obtain the kernel estimation [5].
While existing blind deblurring methods have shown significant improvement in terms of kernel estimation accuracy
(and thus the deblurring results), their performance can still
be improved. As illustrated in Figure 1, while each method
can estimate good kernels for some images, none of the
methods can perfectly recover the kernels in all the cases.
More interestingly, we observed that as different methods
often incorporate different prior knowledge into their deblurring frameworks, they often complement each other.
We believe that combining multiple kernels from different
methods can lead to a better kernel, as illustrated in Figure
1 and Figure 6.
This paper presents a method to leverage existing blur
kernel estimation methods to better support image deblurring than these existing methods themselves. Our idea is to

