Semi-supervised Low-Rank Mapping Learning for Multi-label Classification
Liping Jing, Liu Yang, Jian Yu
Beijing Key Lab of Traffic Data Analysis and Mining
Beijing Jiaotong University

Michael K. Ng
Department of Mathematics
Hong Kong Baptist Unviersity

{lpjing, 11112091, jianyu}@bjtu.edu.cn

mng@math.hkbu.edu.hk

Abstract

learning is how to exploit and make use of label correlations.
In literatures, three label-embedding strategies [1] are
usually adopted to identify label correlations. The first is
derived from side information [4] such as text descriptions
and taxonomies. The second is data-independent, i.e., it
explicitly and implicitly exploits multi-label relationships
from only label information. The main idea of explicit
methods is to extract label relationships, and then construct label hierarchies [24], co-occurrence pairs [12], hypergraphs [26], networks [9], label power-sets [28] and etc.
These methods can be quite effective in multi-label learning, but their computational complexities are usually high
especially when the number of labels is large. In implicit
methods, a low-dimensional latent space is learned to represent the original data information. Hsu et al. [14] adopted
compressed sensing technique and Tai and Lin [27] took
advantage of the principal components analysis to generate the low-dimensional latent space. However, these dataindependent methods only take into account the label information.
The last is learned embedding which uses both feature
and label information. Hariharan et al. [13] proposed a
max-margin multi-label model to do correlated prediction
among labels. Zhang and Schneider [34] tried to find proper
multi-label output codes with the aid of canonical correlation analysis. Huang and Zhou [15] identified the local label
correlations by separating data objects into different groups.
Chen and Lin [8] extended the method [27] by integrating
feature information. Lin et al. [18] aimed to learn a lowdimensional latent space to represent the given data. Recall
that multi-label classification aims to learn a mapping from
a feature space to a label space, thus, both feature information and label information should be used to exploit the
label correlations. However, these existing methods may
be time-consuming [13, 15] or mostly depends on the predefined latent space size [34, 8, 18].
On the other hand, supervised learning methods train
classifiers based on sufficiently enough multi-labeled instances. However, it is very expensive to obtain multi-

Multi-label problems arise in various domains including
automatic multimedia data categorization, and have generated significant interest in computer vision and machine
learning community. However, existing methods do not adequately address two key challenges: exploiting correlations between labels and making up for the lack of labeled
data or even missing labels. In this paper, we proposed a
semi-supervised low-rank mapping (SLRM) model to handle these two challenges. SLRM model takes advantage of
the nuclear norm regularization on mapping to effectively
capture the label correlations. Meanwhile, it introduces
manifold regularizer on mapping to capture the intrinsic
structure among data, which provides a good way to reduce
the required labeled data with improving the classification
performance. Furthermore, we designed an efficient algorithm to solve SLRM model based on alternating direction
method of multipliers and thus it can efficiently deal with
large-scale datasets. Experiments on four real-world multimedia datasets demonstrate that the proposed method can
exploit the label correlations and obtain promising and better label prediction results than state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
With the rapid growth of online content such as images, videos, web pages, it is crucial to design a scalable
and effective classification system to automatically organize, store, and search the content. In conventional classification, each instance is assumed to belong to exactly one
class among a finite number of candidate classes. However, in modern applications, an instance can have multiple
labels. For example, an image can be annotated by many
conceptual tags in semantic scene classification. Multi-label
data have ubiquitously occurred in many application domains: multimedia information retrieval, tag recommendation, query categorization, gene function prediction, medical diagnosis, drug discovery and marketing. An important
and challenging research problem [10, 33] in multi-label
1

