Adaptive Eye-Camera Calibration for Head-Worn Devices
David Perra1 , Rohit Kumar Gupta2 , Jan-Micheal Frahm2
1
Google Inc.
2
The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
perra@google.com, {rkgupta,jmf}@cs.unc.edu

Abstract

Controlled Subimage
based on User’s Gaze

Camera

We present a novel, continuous, locally optimal calibration scheme for use with head-worn devices. Current calibration schemes solve for a globally optimal model of the
eye-device transformation by performing calibration on a
per-user or once-per-use basis. However, these calibration schemes are impractical for real-world applications
because they do not account for changes in calibration during the time of use. Our calibration scheme allows a headworn device to calculate a locally optimal eye-device transformation on demand by computing an optimal model from
a local window of previous frames. By leveraging naturally
occurring interest regions within the user’s environment,
our system can calibrate itself without the user’s active participation. Experimental results demonstrate that our proposed calibration scheme outperforms the existing state of
the art systems while being significantly less restrictive to
the user and the environment.

Full Image Plane

User Gaze
User’s Eye
Point of Regard

Wide-angle View
from Scenefacing Camera
User’s Gaze
User’s Eye

Subregion
Captured by
Scene-facing
Camera

Figure 1: A diagram of a photography scenario in which
the captured image’s focal point is controlled by the user’s
gaze.

1. Introduction
critical to select the correct sensor region based on the user’s
gaze at the time of capture. We propose a gaze tracking
system for head-worn devices using a user-facing camera
to extract the user’s gaze. In addition, the proposed system
can generally be used to determine the direction of user’s attention by estimating their 3D point of regard (PoR) in the
environment. The PoR can in turn be used for photography,
safety notifications, analyzing user’s social interaction, and
other aids to the human visual system. Our PoR estimation
technique is especially useful to a number of emerging research fields, including those focused upon human behavior
and social interaction; these fields are forced to choose between overly cumbersome gaze tracking hardware (which
may affect the subjects’ behaviors or interactions) or attempting gaze estimation from face pose alone, losing out
on gaze subtleties from eye-only gaze adjustments [18, 8].
Recent video-based eye tracking systems can be divided
into two groups: 1. Appearance-based methods use the eye

We are now at the verge of ubiquitously available
consumer-grade head-wearable devices, with Google Glass
serving as an early example. These devices enable new
ways of interacting with the environment but also present
challenges for meaningful interaction with the device. Currently, the most dominant mode of interaction with headworn devices is voice control, which allows for the triggering of preset tasks. However, this form of control is tedious
for applications such as photography (for example, taking
a controlled snapshot of a scene by zooming in on only a
particular part of the scene; see Figure 1 for an example of
a controlled photo). A natural alternative in controlling the
camera’s viewpoint is to allow the user’s gaze to guide the
photo-taking process. This becomes especially interesting
now that there are cameras available that allow full digital
zoom at the native sensor resolution by only selecting a part
of the sensor for the photo; such a camera is already found
on-board in the Nokia Lumia 1020. For these devices, it is
1

