Robust Camera Location Estimation by Convex Programming
Onur Özyeşil1 and Amit Singer1,2
1
Program in Applied and Computational Mathematics, Princeton University
2
Department of Mathematics, Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1000, USA
{oozyesil,amits}@math.princeton.edu

Abstract
3D structure recovery from a collection of 2D images
requires the estimation of the camera locations and orientations, i.e. the camera motion. For large, irregular collections of images, existing methods for the location estimation
part, which can be formulated as the inverse problem of
estimating n locations t1 , t2 , . . . , tn in R3 from noisy meat −t
surements of a subset of the pairwise directions ktii −tjj k , are
sensitive to outliers in direction measurements. In this paper, we firstly provide a complete characterization of wellposed instances of the location estimation problem, by presenting its relation to the existing theory of parallel rigidity.
For robust estimation of camera locations, we introduce a
two-step approach, comprised of a pairwise direction estimation method robust to outliers in point correspondences
between image pairs, and a convex program to maintain robustness to outlier directions. In the presence of partially
corrupted measurements, we empirically demonstrate that
our convex formulation can even recover the locations exactly. Lastly, we demonstrate the utility of our formulations
through experiments on Internet photo collections.

1. Introduction
Structure from motion (SfM) is the problem of recovering a 3D (stationary) structure by estimating the camera
motion corresponding to a collection of 2D images of the
same structure. Classically, SfM involves three steps: (1)
Estimation of point correspondences between pairs of images, and relative pose estimation of camera pairs based
on corresponding points (2) Estimation of camera motion,
i.e. global camera orientations and locations, from relative
poses (3) 3D structure recovery based on the estimated
motion by reprojection error minimization (e.g., using the
bundle adjustment algorithm of [33]). Although there exist accurate and efficient algorithms for the first and the
third steps, existing methods for camera motion estimation,
and specifically for the camera location estimation part, are

usually sensitive to noise. The camera location estimation
problem can be formulated as a specific case (for d = 3)
of the inverse problem of estimating n locations t1 , . . . , tn
in Rd from a subset of (potentially noisy) measurements of
the pairwise directions γij , given by
γij =

ti − tj
kti − tj k

(1)

(see Figure 1 for a noiseless instance of the problem). In
terms of this formulation, misidentified point correspondences may manifest themselves (see §3) as direction measurements with large errors (i.e., outlier directions), and
hence, may induce instability in location estimation.
Pairwise Directions

Locations

t1

γ13
γ12

γ24

γ12

γ15
γ25
γ36

γ46

γ45

t2

γ15
t5 γ
25
γ
γ45 t6 36
γ46

γ24

γ13

t3

t4

Figure 1. A (noiseless) instance of the location estimation problem
in R3 , with n = 6 locations and m = 8 pairwise directions.

Existing methods for SfM can roughly be classified into
two main categories; incremental approaches (e.g. [1, 6, 11,
16, 31, 32, 44]), that integrate images to the estimation process one by one (or in small groups) and global methods,
that aim to estimate the camera motion (and sometimes also
the 3D structure) jointly for all images. Incremental methods are prone to accumulation of estimation errors at each
step. On the other hand, for the global methods, since simultaneous estimation of motion and 3D structure is computationally expensive, a usual procedure is to estimate motion and structure separately. Given an accurate motion estimate, a single instance of reprojection error minimization
is usually enough to obtain high quality structure estimates.
Since orientation estimation is a relatively well-posed
problem, with several efficient and stable existing meth-

