DASC: Dense Adaptive Self-Correlation Descriptor for Multi-modal and
Multi-spectral Correspondence
∗

Seungryong Kim1 , Dongbo Min2,3 , Bumsub Ham4, , Seungchul Ryu1 , Minh N. Do5 , Kwanghoon Sohn1,
1
Yonsei University 2 Chungnam Nat. University 3 ADSC 4 Inria 5 UIUC
http://seungryong.github.io/DASC/

Abstract
Establishing dense visual correspondence between multiple images is a fundamental task in many applications of
computer vision and computational photography. Classical
approaches, which aim to estimate dense stereo and optical
ﬂow ﬁelds for images adjacent in viewpoint or in time, have
been dramatically advanced in recent studies. However,
ﬁnding reliable visual correspondence in multi-modal or
multi-spectral images still remains unsolved. In this paper,
we propose a novel dense matching descriptor, called dense
adaptive self-correlation (DASC), to effectively address this
kind of matching scenarios. Based on the observation that
a self-similarity existing within images is less sensitive to
modality variations, we deﬁne the descriptor with a series
of an adaptive self-correlation similarity for patches within
a local support window. To further improve the matching
quality and runtime efﬁciency, we propose a randomized
receptive ﬁeld pooling, in which a sampling pattern is optimized with a discriminative learning. Moreover, the computational redundancy that arises when computing densely
sampled descriptor over an entire image is dramatically reduced by applying fast edge-aware ﬁltering. Experiments
demonstrate the outstanding performance of the DASC descriptor in many cases of multi-modal and multi-spectral
correspondence.

1. Introduction
Recently, many computer vision and computational photography problems have been reformulated to overcome an
inherent limitation by leveraging multi-modal and multispectral images such as RGB and near-infrared (NIR) image pairs [6, 40], ﬂash and no-ﬂash images [27], color and
dark ﬂash images [21], blurred images [14, 23], and images
taken under different radiometric conditions [35].
∗ WILLOW project-team, Département d’Informatique de l’Ecole Normale Supérieure, ENS/Inria/CNRS UMR 8548.
† Corresponding author: khsohn@yonsei.ac.kr.

Figure 1. Some challenging multi-modal and multi-spectral images such as (from top to bottom) RGB-NIR, ﬂash-noﬂash images,
two images with different exposures, and blur-sharp images. The
images in the third column are the results obtained by warping images in the second column to images in the ﬁrst column with dense
correspondence maps estimated by using our DASC descriptor.

Estimating dense visual correspondence for given multispectral and multi-modal images is a key enabler for realizing such tasks. In general, the performance of correspondence estimation algorithms relies primarily on two components: appearance descriptor and optimization algorithm.
Traditional dense correspondence approaches for estimating depth [33] or optical ﬂow [8, 37] ﬁelds, in which input
images are acquired in a similar imaging condition, have
been dramatically advanced in recent studies. To deﬁne a
matching ﬁdelity term, they typically assume that multiple images share a similar visual pattern, e.g., color, gradient, and structural similarity. However, when it comes to
multi-modal and multi-spectral images, such properties do

†

