Efficient Sparse-to-Dense Optical Flow Estimation
using a Learned Basis and Layers
Jonas Wulff
Michael J. Black
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
{jonas.wulff,black}@tue.mpg.de

Abstract
We address the elusive goal of estimating optical flow
both accurately and efficiently by adopting a sparse-todense approach. Given a set of sparse matches, we regress
to dense optical flow using a learned set of full-frame basis flow fields. We learn the principal components of natural flow fields using flow computed from four Hollywood
movies. Optical flow fields are then compactly approximated as a weighted sum of the basis flow fields. Our
new PCA-Flow algorithm robustly estimates these weights
from sparse feature matches. The method runs in under
200ms/frame on the MPI-Sintel dataset using a single CPU
and is more accurate and significantly faster than popular
methods such as LDOF and Classic+NL. For some applications, however, the results are too smooth. Consequently,
we develop a novel sparse layered flow method in which
each layer is represented by PCA-Flow. Unlike existing layered methods, estimation is fast because it uses only sparse
matches. We combine information from different layers into
a dense flow field using an image-aware MRF. The resulting PCA-Layers method runs in 3.2s/frame, is significantly
more accurate than PCA-Flow, and achieves state-of-theart performance in occluded regions on MPI-Sintel.

Figure 1: Result overview. (a) Image from MPI-Sintel; (b)
Ground truth flow; (c) PCA-Flow; (d) PCA-Layers.

methods are often less accurate or require a GPU (or both).
To address both accuracy and speed we propose a new
sparse-to-dense approach that is based on sparse feature
matching followed by interpolation. Sparse features are efficient to compute robustly and can capture long-range motions. By interpolating between these sparse matches, dense
flow can be computed efficiently. However, due to outliers
in the sparse matches and uneven covering of the images,
generic interpolators do not work well. Instead, we learn
an interpolant from training optical flow fields via principal
component analysis (PCA).
The idea of learning linear models of flow is not new [7,
15], but previous work applied such models only in image
patches, not to full images. To train our PCA model we use
optical flow computed from 8 hours of video frames from
four commercial movies using an existing flow algorithm
(GPUflow [52]). To deal with noise in the training flow
we use a robust PCA method that scales well to our huge
training set [21].
Our method computes dense flow by estimating the location in the PCA subspace that best explains the sparse
matches (Fig. 1(c)). At first it is not immediately obvious that one can represent generic flow fields using a lowdimensional PCA basis constructed from computed flow;
we demonstrate that this indeed works.
This approach is very efficient. Our novel flow algorithm, called PCA-Flow, has a runtime of about 190 ms

1. Introduction
Recent progress in optical flow estimation has led to
increased accuracy, driven in part by benchmarks such as
Middlebury [3], MPI-Sintel [10], and KITTI [16]. In particular, recent methods use either sparse or dense matching
to capture long-range motions while exploiting traditional
variational techniques to obtain high accuracy [9, 24, 26,
28, 29, 50, 53]. Still other methods use layered models or
segmented regions to reason about occlusion relationships
and better estimate motion at boundaries and in unmatched
regions [24, 28, 43, 46]. In many applications, however,
speed is at least as important. Most accurate methods require several seconds to many minutes per frame. Efficient
1

