Low-level Vision by Consensus in a Spatial Hierarchy of Regions
Ayan Chakrabarti1 , Ying Xiong2 , Steven J. Gortler2 , Todd Zickler2
1
2
TTI-Chicago
Harvard University
ayanc@ttic.edu, yxiong@seas.harvard.edu, sjg@cs.harvard.edu, zickler@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract

span abrupt scene changes that violate the local model and
make estimates unreliable (e.g., Fig. 1 (a)).

We introduce a multi-scale framework for low-level vision, where the goal is estimating physical scene values
from image data—such as depth from stereo image pairs.
The framework uses a dense, overlapping set of image regions at multiple scales and a “local model,” such as a
slanted-plane model for stereo disparity, that is expected to
be valid piecewise across the visual field. Estimation is cast
as optimization over a dichotomous mixture of variables,
simultaneously determining which regions are inliers with
respect to the local model (binary variables) and the correct co-ordinates in the local model space for each inlying
region (continuous variables). When the regions are organized into a multi-scale hierarchy, optimization can occur
in an efficient and parallel architecture, where distributed
computational units iteratively perform calculations and
share information through sparse connections between parents and children. The framework performs well on a standard benchmark for binocular stereo, and it produces a distributional scene representation that is appropriate for combining with higher-level reasoning and other low-level cues.

We introduce a computational framework to address this
challenge. Called the consensus framework, we apply it to
the binocular stereo problem while also presenting it generally as a way to attack a variety of low-level tasks. The
framework explicitly considers a large set of dense, overlapping regions of many sizes that redundantly cover the image
plane (Fig. 1 (b)). It simultaneously determines which regions are inliers to the local model (binary variables) and,
for each inlying region, the correct coordinates in the local
model space for that region (continuous variables). Estimation is cast as optimizing an objective that requires each
inlying region to be supported by its local image data while
also having scene estimates that are consistent with its overlapping neighbor regions. The output of the framework—
the inlier statuses of all regions and the local estimates from
the inliers—offers a rich, multi-scale representation of the
physical scene. This includes spatial grouping information,
a global scene map, and a point-wise measure of confidence, all of which are desirable when seeking to combine
multiple low-level cues or integrate higher-level processes.

1. Introduction
Low-level vision is the estimation of depth, motion,
shape, and other physical scene properties from visual measurements. Since it is ill-posed, methods often employ a
local model that is expected to apply piecewise across the
scene, and that restricts the variation of scene values within
each applicable piece or region. Slanted planes for binocular disparity, affine optical flows, and families of smooth
shapes for surface normals are common examples. The restriction on scene variability in applicable regions allows
image cues to be aggregated spatially across each region,
thereby reducing the ambiguity that exists point-wise. The
fundamental challenge lies in identifying—automatically
from the image input—the sizes and shapes of the aggregation regions that are right for each part of a scene. Regions
that are too small do not sufficiently reduce the underlying
ambiguity, while those that are too big or the wrong shape

Compared to traditional approaches based on Markov
random fields (MRFs), the consensus framework reasons
in a much larger variable space, and more critically, with
orders of magnitude more links between variables. This is
because it enforces simultaneous consistency between the
thousands of regions that overlap any single pixel. Despite this complexity, two properties make estimation not
only feasible, but efficient. First, since the dense regionset embodies an over-complete scene representation—with
many more internal variables than values in the output scene
map—good solutions can often be reached by a simple
alternating algorithm similar to expectation-maximization.
Second, we show analytically that when the regions are organized hierarchically by scale (e.g. Fig. 1 (c)), each region
only needs to sum information from its parents and children
(Fig. 1 (d)). This leads to a significant reduction in computation because the hierarchical connections constitute only
a minuscule fraction of the total links that exist in the consensus objective.

