Texture Representations for Image and Video Synthesis
Georgios Georgiadis
UCLA Vision Lab
University of California
Los Angeles, CA 90095

Alessandro Chiuso
Dept. of Information Eng.
University of Padova
Padova 35131, Italy

Stefano Soatto
UCLA Vision Lab
University of California
Los Angeles, CA 90095

giorgos@ucla.edu

chiuso@dei.unipd.it

soatto@ucla.edu

Abstract
In texture synthesis and classification, algorithms require a small texture to be provided as an input, which is
assumed to be representative of a larger region to be resynthesized or categorized. We focus on how to characterize
such textures and automatically retrieve them. Most works
generate these small input textures manually by cropping,
which does not ensure maximal compression, nor that the
selection is the best representative of the original. We construct a new representation that compactly summarizes a
texture, while using less storage, that can be used for texture compression and synthesis. We also demonstrate how
the representation can be integrated in our proposed video
texture synthesis algorithm to generate novel instances of
textures and video hole-filling. Finally, we propose a novel
criterion that measures structural and statistical dissimilarity between textures.

Figure 1. Reconstructed frame in a video at 40% compression.
Left: Video Epitome [6], Right: Our approach. Below: Zoomedin view of the red box. Our method improves reconstruction of
both homogeneous and textured areas.

manually by cropping a larger one. Wei et. al. [37] propose an inverse texture synthesis algorithm, where given
an input texture I, a compaction is synthesized that allows
subsequent re-synthesis of a new instance ˆ
I. The method
achieves good results, but it is semi-automatic, since it relies on external information such as a control map (e.g. an
orientation field or other contextual information) to synthesize time-varying textures and on manual adjustment of the
scale of neighborhoods for sampling from the compaction.

1. Introduction
“Visual textures” are regions of images that exhibit some
form of spatial regularity. They include the so-called “regular” or “quasi-regular” textures (Fig. 2 top-left), “stochastic” textures (top-right), possibly deformed either in the
domain (bottom-left) or range (bottom-right). Analysis of
textures has been used for image and video representation
[41, 14], while synthesis has proven useful for image superresolution [11], hole-filling [9] and compression [35].
For such applications, large textures carry a high cost on
storage and computation. State-of-the-art texture descriptors such as [7, 31] are computationally prohibitive to use on
large textures. These issues are especially acute for video,
where the amount of data is significantly larger.
Typically, these descriptors as well as texture synthesis
algorithms assume that the size of the input texture is small,
and yet large enough to compute statistics that are representative of the entire texture domain. Few works in the
literature deal with how to infer automatically this smaller
texture from an image and even fewer from a video. In most
cases, it is assumed that the input texture is given, usually

We propose an alternative scheme, which avoids using
any external information by automatically inferring a compact time-varying texture representation. The algorithm
also automatically determines the scale of local neighborhoods, which is necessary for texture synthesis [9]. Since
our representation consists of samples from the input texture, for applications such as classification [7, 31], we are
able to avoid synthesis biases that affect other methods [37].
Our contributions are to (i) summarize an image/video
into a representation that requires significantly less storage
than the input, (ii) use our representation for synthesis using the texture optimization technique [19], (iii) extend this
framework to video using a causal scheme, similar to [9]
1

