The Application of Two-level Attention Models in Deep Convolutional Neural
Network for Fine-grained Image Classification
Tianjun Xiao1 Yichong Xu2 Kuiyuan Yang2 Jiaxing Zhang2 Yuxin Peng1∗ Zheng Zhang3
1
Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University
2
Microsoft Research, Beijing
3
New York University Shanghai
xiaotianjun@pku.edu.cn, xycking@163.com, kuyang@microsoft.com
jiaxz@microsoft.com, pengyuxin@pku.edu.cn, zz@nyu.edu

Abstract
Fine-grained classification is challenging because categories can only be discriminated by subtle and local differences. Variances in the pose, scale or rotation usually
make the problem more difficult. Most fine-grained classification systems follow the pipeline of finding foreground
object or object parts (where) to extract discriminative features (what).
In this paper, we propose to apply visual attention to finegrained classification task using deep neural network. Our
pipeline integrates three types of attention: the bottom-up
attention that propose candidate patches, the object-level
top-down attention that selects relevant patches to a certain
object, and the part-level top-down attention that localizes
discriminative parts. We combine these attentions to train
domain-specific deep nets, then use it to improve both the
what and where aspects. Importantly, we avoid using expensive annotations like bounding box or part information
from end-to-end. The weak supervision constraint makes
our work easier to generalize.
We have verified the effectiveness of the method on
the subsets of ILSVRC2012 dataset and CUB200 2011
dataset. Our pipeline delivered significant improvements
and achieved the best accuracy under the weakest supervision condition. The performance is competitive against
other methods that rely on additional annotations.

1. Introduction
Fine-grained classification is to recognize subordinatelevel categories under some basic-level category, e.g., classifying different bird types [22], dog breeds [11], flower
species [15], aircraft models [14] etc. This is an impor∗ Corresponding author.

Artic_Tern

Caspian_Tern

Common_Tern

Fosters_Tern

Figure 1. Illustration of the difficulty of fine-grained classification
: large intra-class variance and small inter-class variance.

tant problem with wide applications. Even in the ILSVRC2012 1K categories, there are 118 and 59 categories under the dog and bird class, respectively. Counter intuitively,
intra-class variance can be larger than inter-class, as shown
in Figure 1. Consequently, fine-grained classification are
technically challenging.
Specifically, the difficulty of fine-grained classification
comes from the fact that discriminative features are local-

