Efficient Minimal-Surface Regularization
of Perspective Depth Maps in Variational Stereo

1

Gottfried Graber1 Jonathan Balzer2,4 Stefano Soatto2 Thomas Pock1,3
Graz University of Technology 2 UCLA 3 AIT Austrian Institute of Technology 4 Vathos GmbH
{graber,pock}@icg.tugraz.at, {jbalzer,soatto}@ucla.edu

Abstract
We propose a method for dense three-dimensional surface reconstruction that leverages the strengths of shapebased approaches, by imposing regularization that respects
the geometry of the surface, and the strength of depthmap-based stereo, by avoiding costly computation of surface topology. The result is a near real-time variational reconstruction algorithm free of the staircasing artifacts that
affect depth-map and plane-sweeping approaches. This is
made possible by exploiting the gauge ambiguity to design
a novel representation of the regularizer that is linear in the
parameters and hence amenable to be optimized with stateof-the-art primal-dual numerical schemes.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing three-dimensional (3-d) scenes from
multiple images, including stereo or video, is intrinsically
ill-posed as there are infinitely many surfaces that are compatible with the images. The problem is usually cast as
an optimization problem within the calculus of variation,
whereby the choice of which solution to pick among the infinitely many possible is determined by a regularizer. This
is a functional that penalizes solutions that do not respect
prior assumptions, and plays a key role both in the quality of the reconstruction, as well as in the efficiency of the
numerical optimization scheme.
The most principled approaches to 3-d reconstruction
aim to infer a collection of (multiply-connected, piecewise
smooth) surfaces directly, represented intrinsically without
regards to the images [2, 10, 18, 28, 38, 21, 42], as evident
by the large body of literature on shape space and shape
optimization. In these methods, both the geometry and the
topology is then inferred to fit the available images. This
is desirable as one can enforce priors on the surfaces based
on physically meaningful regularizers. The disadvantage is
that inferring topology is difficult and requires computation
of visibility at each iteration of the algorithm, with obvious

(a) Ground truth

(b) TV regularization

(c) Our method

Figure 1. TV regularization tends to favor piecewise-constant
functions, which is detrimental in the case of depth maps that represent a 3-d surface. Our regularizer, while being defined on the
image, just as TV, respects the inner geometry of the 3-d surface.

repercussions on computational efficiency.
On the other hand, one could use the image plane to
parametrize charts on the scene, corresponding to depth
maps that associate a positive number (distance) to each
pixel [7, 11, 13, 14, 19, 32, 36, 37]. Such depth maps will
have to be combined in an additional fusion step to yield the
global surface. The advantage of using depth maps is that
they conveniently confine the data (images), the optimization variable (surfaces) and hence the objective function to
the same domain, the image plane of a reference view. This
makes computation efficient, and the method of choice for
real-time applications. Unfortunately, the image plane is not
the natural place to enforce regularization of the surface. In
the vicinity of depth discontinuities, caused by occlusions,
neighboring pixels do not necessarily correspond to points
which are close in 3-d space. Thus typical image-based
regularizers, such as total variation (TV), favor piecewise
fronto-parallel depth maps, resulting in staircasing artifacts
(Fig. 1(b)).
In this paper, we seek to combine the advantages of
shape space methods with those of range maps. The advantage of the former is the availability of surface-based,
physically plausible regularizers; the use of range maps allows us to avoid the inference of scene topology. To the
best of our knowledge, this has not been done in the literature on variational stereo and is made possible by a number
of technical contributions summarized in Sect. 1.1.
In addition to variational reconstruction algorithms de-

