Unsupervised Simultaneous Orthogonal Basis Clustering Feature Selection
Dongyoon Han and Junmo Kim
School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, South Korea
{dyhan, junmo.kim}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel unsupervised feature
selection method: Simultaneous Orthogonal basis Clustering Feature Selection (SOCFS). To perform feature selection on unlabeled data effectively, a regularized regressionbased formulation with a new type of target matrix is designed. The target matrix captures latent cluster centers of
the projected data points by performing orthogonal basis
clustering, and then guides the projection matrix to select
discriminative features. Unlike the recent unsupervised feature selection methods, SOCFS does not explicitly use the
pre-computed local structure information for data points
represented as additional terms of their objective functions,
but directly computes latent cluster information by the target matrix conducting orthogonal basis clustering in a single unified term of the proposed objective function. It turns
out that the proposed objective function can be minimized
by a simple optimization algorithm. Experimental results
demonstrate the effectiveness of SOCFS achieving the stateof-the-art results with diverse real world datasets.

1. Introduction
In recent years, high-dimensional features have been
widely used as inputs of several learning tasks. However, if
one uses these high-dimensional features directly, unimportant features to learning tasks lead to heavy computational
complexity and critical degradation of the performance of
the learning tasks. Most high-dimensional features contain
unimportant features that are largely categorized as 1) redundant features correlated to others or 2) noisy features.
To deal with this problem, it is natural to filter out those
unimportant features from the original features. Typically
two kind of methods (feature extraction and feature selection) have been developed. Unlike feature selection methods, feature extraction methods such as principal component analysis (PCA) and linear discriminant analysis (LDA)
change the feature space to construct renewed features, so
the values of each feature change. Therefore, feature selection has an advantage to select discriminative features while
preserving their values.

A number of feature selection methods have been proposed and classified as supervised and unsupervised feature selection methods. Supervised feature selection methods such as [6, 15, 24, 32, 21, 20] improve results of the
learning tasks by exploiting label information. However,
label information is usually expensive in practice, so unsupervised feature selection is of more practical importance. Many unsupervised feature selection methods such
as [13, 32, 21, 3, 30, 18, 23, 28] have been proposed to
deal with the unlabeled data. One type of approaches select
features corresponding to the criterions that are used in the
feature extraction methods. The simplest method so called
max variance is to select features by data variance criterion.
Later works [21, 28] apply trace ratio LDA criterion to their
formulations for feature selection.
Another type of approaches select features by making
use of local structure information of data points. Early
works [13, 32] empirically show that local structure information is quite helpful for feature selection. They first
construct nearest neighbor graph of data points to involve
local structure information and then feature selection step
follows. Later works [3, 30, 18, 23] also incorporate precomputed local structure information and conduct feature
selection. Recent works [18, 23] select features based on
regularized regression with pseudo-label indicators by nonlinear local structure learning methods such as [1, 11].
In this paper, we propose an unsupervised feature selection method so called Simultaneous Orthogonal basis
Clustering Feature Selection (SOCFS). SOCFS does not explicitly adopt pre-computed local structure information, but
concentrates on the latent cluster information. To this end, a
novel target matrix in the regularized regression-based formulation of SOCFS is also proposed to conduct orthogonal basis clustering directly on the projected data points to
estimate latent cluster centers. Since the target matrix is
put in a single unified term for regression of the proposed
objective function, feature selection and clustering are simultaneously performed. In this way, the projection matrix
for feature selection is more properly computed by the estimated latent cluster centers of the projected data points.
To the best of our knowledge, this formulation is the first

