Learning Similarity Metrics for Dynamic Scene Segmentation
Damien Teney1
Matthew Brown2
1
Carnegie Mellon University
dteney@andrew.cmu.edu

Dimitry Kit2
Peter Hall2
2
University of Bath

{m.brown,d.m.kit,maspmh}@bath.ac.uk

Abstract
This paper addresses the segmentation of videos with
arbitrary motion, including dynamic textures, using novel
motion features and a supervised learning approach. Dynamic textures are commonplace in natural scenes, and exhibit complex patterns of appearance and motion (e.g. water, smoke, swaying foliage). These are difficult for existing
segmentation algorithms, often violate the brightness constancy assumption needed for optical flow, and have complex segment characteristics beyond uniform appearance or
motion. Our solution uses custom spatiotemporal filters
that capture texture and motion cues, along with a novel
metric-learning framework that optimizes this representation for specific objects and scenes. This is used within
a hierarchical, graph-based segmentation setting, yielding
state-of-the-art results for dynamic texture segmentation.
We also demonstrate the applicability of our approach to
general object and motion segmentation, showing significant improvements over unsupervised segmentation and results comparable to the best task specific approaches.

1. Introduction
We study the segmentation of videos of arbitrary dynamic scenes, focussing on dynamic textures such as water,
fire, or swaying trees [5]. These phenomena are commonplace in videos of natural scenes, but are poorly represented
in general-purpose segmentation benchmarks [16, 40, 27],
which mainly involve rigid or smooth non-rigid motion.
Dynamic textures exhibit complex appearance and motion
patterns, that usually have semantics beyond a simple consistency metric. A sequence depicting trees, for example, may contain smaller and larger branches, some static
and others swaying in the wind, that would generally be
assigned separate segments by unsupervised segmentation
methods, while they ideally should all be part of one “tree”
dynamic texture. Such mid-level interpretations of a scene
are beyond the uniform priors of most “supervoxels” and
unsupervised video segmentation methods [43]. To overThis Work is supported by the EPSRC Grant EP/K02339X/1.

Input video

x1
x2

d(x1,x2)
Learned metric
between segments

Graph representation
of adjacent segments

Histograms of color
and motion cues
from spatiotemporal
filters

Figure 1. We extend the hierarchical graph-based segmentation
technique and apply it to dynamic scene segmentation by learning
distance metrics over motion and appearance features. Segments
are iteratively merged, spatially and temporally, to form larger and
larger segments. Merges occur between the most “similar” segments, as determined by our learned metric.

come these limitations, we present more appropriate features, together with a supervised algorithm to learn such information from annotated, ground truth segmentations.
Our contribution consists of two parts. First, we use the
responses to a bank of spatiotemporal filters to capture the
appearance and motion characteristics of dynamic textures.
Similarly to 2D filters that can capture structure in static images (e.g. edges), these 3D filters capture structure in the
video volume, such as moving patterns [11]. The filters
in the bank are tuned to various scales, orientations, and
speeds, and provide a rich set of features that characterize
image appearance and dynamics. Different dynamic textures often present different motion statistics. Water ripples
in a pond, for example, will exhibit more low-frequency
motion than ocean waves. These examples can be treated as
a single “water” class, or as seperate phenomena depending
on the labels in the training set, which justifies a learning
approach. Therefore and secondly, we show how to learn
a metric between descriptors made of histograms of color
and filter-based motion cues, that allows supervised video
segmentaton in a hierarchical, graph-based framework [18]
(Fig. 1). We use ground truth segmentations to generate
pairwise constraints between descriptors, and learn a metric that predicts whether segments should be merged or not

