A Fixed Viewpoint Approach for Dense Reconstruction of Transparent Objects
Kai Han1 , Kwan-Yee K. Wong1 , Miaomiao Liu2
1 The University of Hong Kong∗, Hong Kong,
2 NICTA† and CECS, ANU, Canberra
1 {khan,

kykwong}@cs.hku.hk, 2 miaomiao.liu@nicta.com.au

Abstract

Camera

This paper addresses the problem of reconstructing the
surface shape of transparent objects. The difﬁculty of this
problem originates from the viewpoint dependent appearance of a transparent object, which quickly makes reconstruction methods tailored for diffuse surfaces fail disgracefully. In this paper, we develop a ﬁxed viewpoint approach for dense surface reconstruction of transparent objects based on refraction of light. We introduce a simple
setup that allows us alter the incident light paths before
light rays enter the object, and develop a method for recovering the object surface based on reconstructing and triangulating such incident light paths. Our proposed approach
does not need to model the complex interactions of light as it
travels through the object, neither does it assume any parametric form for the shape of the object nor the exact number of refractions and reﬂections taken place along the light
paths. It can therefore handle transparent objects with a
complex shape and structure, with unknown and even inhomogeneous refractive index. Experimental results on both
synthetic and real data are presented which demonstrate the
feasibility and accuracy of our proposed approach.

Reference Plane Transparent Object

Tank

Figure 1. Real reconstruction setup and examples of transparent
objects.

renders reconstruction methods tailored for diffuse surfaces
useless. The literature is relatively sparse when it comes
to shape recovery of transparent objects, and most of the
existing methods are still highly theoretical. In fact, even
with restrictive assumptions and special hardware setups,
state-of-the-art methods can only handle transparent objects
with very simple shape. Meanwhile, it is not difﬁcult to see
that there exist many transparent objects in our world (e.g.,
liquids, glass, plastics, crystals and diamonds). Hence,
the study of 3D model reconstruction cannot be considered
completed without taking transparent objects into accounts.
As mentioned previously, the difﬁculty of reconstructing
a transparent object originates from its viewpoint dependent
appearance. A transparent object may alter a light path by
reﬂection, refraction, absorption and scattering at both its
exterior surface as well as its interior structure. A number
of existing work attempted to reconstruct a transparent object by exploiting specular highlights produced on the object surface [9, 10]. This approach considers only reﬂection
of light taken place at the object surface, and greatly simpliﬁes the problem by making it not necessary to consider
the complex interactions of light as it travels through the object. However, refraction of light is indeed an important and
unique characteristic of transparent objects. It provides in-

1. Introduction
Reconstructing a 3D model of an object from its 2D images has always been a hot topic in the ﬁeld of computer
vision. It has many important applications in robotics, augmented reality, video games, movie production, reverse engineering, etc. Despite the problem of 3D model reconstruction has virtually been solved for opaque objects with a
diffuse surface, reconstruction of transparent objects is still
very challenging and remains an open problem. The viewpoint dependent appearance of a transparent object quickly
∗ This project is supported by a grant from the Research Grant Council
of the Hong Kong (SAR), China, under the project HKU 718113E.
† NICTA is funded by the Australian Government as represented by the
Department of Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy and
the ARC through the ICT Centre of Excellence program.

1

