BOLD - Binary Online Learned Descriptor For Efficient Image Matching
Vassileios Balntas Lilian Tang Krystian Mikolajczyk
University of Surrey, UK
{v.balntas,h.tang,k.mikolajczyk}@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract
In this paper we propose a novel approach to generate
a binary descriptor optimized for each image patch independently. The approach is inspired by the linear discriminant embedding that simultaneously increases inter and decreases intra class distances. A set of discriminative and
uncorrelated binary tests is established from all possible
tests in an offline training process. The patch adapted descriptors are then efficiently built online from a subset of
tests which lead to lower intra class distances thus a more
robust descriptor. A patch descriptor consists of two binary
strings where one represents the results of the tests and the
other indicates the subset of the patch-related robust tests
that are used for calculating a masked Hamming distance.
Our experiments on three different benchmarks demonstrate
improvements in matching performance, and illustrate that
per-patch optimization outperforms global optimization.

query patch A

query patch B

Overview of the proposed BOLD descriptor
online creation of synthesised views

online creation of synthesised views

BOLDA

BOLDB

Figure 1. In contrast to typical approaches that use the same measurements for all patches, we adapt the descriptor online to each
patch. The blue line ends indicate the selected binary tests from
a common superset, based on the measurements from the synthesized views of each patch.

complexity issues, e.g. inefficient distance calculation and
matching. Thus in the case of image patches, discriminant
projections are learned globally and lead to a limited improvement. Local discriminant projections are expected to
give better results if adapted to each class independently.
In the context of binary descriptors, BRIEF was improved in [14] by selecting uncorrelated tests that maximize
the variance across training patches. Learning of discriminant and low dimensional spaces has also been applied to
binary descriptors. DBRIEF1 [17] is built by using the inter
to intra class distance objective adapted to a binary descriptor. A set of discriminative projections is computed and approximated with a set of predefined dictionaries in order to
generate a binary feature vector. The recently proposed BinBoost descriptor [16] applies boosting to learn a set of binary hash functions that achieve a performance comparable
to real-valued descriptors. Both DBRIEF and BinBoost are
not based on binary tests therefore the extraction process is
less efficient. A different research direction is to use coding
methods to make the descriptors more compact [4].
The various feature descriptors proposed in the literature
differ in design, theory and implementation, but a common
approach is the computation of the final feature vector from
a fixed set of measurements that are applied to all described
patches. It follows that the measurements are not varied
depending on the content of the patch. This is based on

1. Introduction
Significant progress has been made in creating new feature descriptors that are either based on floating point arithmetic, such as SIFT [9], SURF [1] and GLOH [11] or
on binary strings and hamming distances like BRIEF [3],
ORB [14] and BRISK [8].
Large datasets with correspondence ground truth enabled
learning methods to be used to improve the descriptor performance [19]. One such approach consists of optimally
learning descriptor parameters [20]. Another research direction is learning discriminative projections from high dimensional feature space to subspaces with better determinability. In [10, 2] the descriptor optimization is similar
to the LDA based projections, which simultaneously minimizes distances intra-class and maximizes them inter-class.
Similarly, the authors of [15] propose a convex optimization for descriptor learning. However, in all these methods,
the intra-class is formed by positive examples of correctly
matched patch pairs while in LDA by various instances of
the same image category / content. LDA projections cannot be learned for each patch independently due to practical
1

