Weakly Supervised Localization of Novel Objects Using Appearance Transfer
Mrigank Rochan
Department of Computer Science
University of Manitoba, Canada

Yang Wang
Department of Computer Science
University of Manitoba, Canada

mrochan@cs.umanitoba.ca

ywang@cs.umanitoba.ca

Abstract

Although it is difficult to collect training images annotated with object bounding boxes, it is usually much easier
to collect weakly labeled data, where labels are only given
at the image level. For example, many online data (Flickr
images, YouTube videos) might come with user-generated
tags describing the objects present in the images/videos. It
is also possible to collect weakly labeled images of an object class via image search. In this paper, our goal is to
develop techniques to localize the object in weakly labeled
data (see Fig. 1). Given a collection of images labeled with
an object category (e.g. “car”), our method will output the
bounding box of this object in each image. Our method can
also be applied in videos. In this case, we are given one
single video of the novel object. Our method will treat the
frames of the video as the image collection and localize the
object in each frame.

We consider the problem of localizing unseen objects in
weakly labeled image collections. Given a set of images annotated at the image level, our goal is to localize the object
in each image. The novelty of our proposed work is that,
in addition to building object appearance model from the
weakly labeled data, we also make use of existing detectors
of some other object classes (which we call “familiar objects”). We propose a method for transferring the appearance models of the familiar objects to the unseen object.
Our experimental results on both image and video datasets
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach.

1. Introduction

Another weakness of traditional approaches in visual
recognition is that even if we have appearance models for
1000 object classes, we have to start from scratch when
building the appearance model for the 1001-th object class.
This is somewhat unintuitive and unsatisfying – it should be
easier to build the appearance model for a new object class
if it is related to other known object categories.

How would one detect an object class, say “dog”, in images? The de facto answer in computer vision is to collect a
set of labeled training data (e.g. images with object bounding box annotations) for this object class and apply standard
supervised machine learning to learn the appearance model
for this object category. Then this appearance model can be
used to detect dogs in any image. The key of this standard
pipeline is that we need to have access to a large amount of
manually labeled training data. In the past few years, the
availability of large-scale annotated datasets (e.g. PASCAL
VOC [6] and ImageNet [25]) has been one of the driving
forces of much progress in visual recognition.
The most straightforward approach to create large
datasets is to gather images/videos online and ask people
to annotate them via crowd-sourcing. However, this is very
expensive and time-consuming. The PASCAL dataset [6]
has focused only on 20 common objects. ImageNet [25]
covers more object classes, but is still limited to the objects
defined in the WordNet hierarchy, and most of the images in
ImageNet are not annotated with object bounding boxes. It
is not clear how this straightforward approach would scale
up when we need to deal with a large number of concepts
emerging and changing over time, which is common for images/videos on the Internet.

Our work is motivated by the following observations.
1) Large datasets with bounding box annotations exist for
some object categories, e.g. the 20 objects in PASCAL [6]
and a subset of objects in ImageNet [25]. For these object
categories (we will call them “familiar objects”), we have
access to detectors with reasonably good performance. 2)
For most of other object categories (we call them “novel objects”), fully annotated data are scarce. But it is easy to collect weakly labeled images/videos for them. In this paper,
we use the term “novel objects” to denote objects for which
we do not have fully annotated data. It is different from the
“novel object” used in object discovery (e.g. [18]). 3) Recent work in text analysis has produced valuable resources
on word semantics. For example, a word is represented as a
fixed length vector (called “word embedding”) in [19]. The
embedding vectors of words are learned from large collections of text documents. Semantically related words (e.g.
1

