Understanding Classifier Errors by Examining Influential Neighbors
Mayank Kabra, Alice Robie, Kristin Branson
Janelia Research Campus of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute
Ashburn, VA, 20147, USA
{kabram,robiea,bransonk}@janelia.hhmi.org

Abstract

increase the training data set size or to examine the errors
and guess what types of training data or features might be
missing. This problem is growing in importance as systems allowing lay-users to train their own classifiers are
emerging [27, 19, 20]. Even for machine learning experts, it
is nearly impossible to understand, navigate, and visualize
large, high-dimensional data sets [16, 23, 8, 10].
Our proposed method to gain an understanding of a classifier’s errors for a given data set hinges on the insight that
its prediction on an example is not equally influenced by
all examples in the training set. This is obvious for classifiers such as nearest neighbor, but is also true for more
complex classifiers like boosting. But unlike nearest neighbor, which examples are the most influential for boosting
depends on the classification task. For example, the influence of a training example will not depend on features that
are not relevant in separating the two classes. We propose
that the influence of a training example x0 on a test example
x can be found by training two classifiers: one including
(x0 , +1) and the other including (x0 , −1). The training example that most changes the prediction for the given test
example is the most influential (Figure 1(a)).
Thus, to understand why a particular test example is mispredicted, the few training examples that are most influential can be selected for analysis. By viewing these examples,
the engineer can focus on and visualize the small portions
of the data space relevant to that error. This will allow the
engineer to better understand the cause of the failure. For
example, it is difficult to deduce why an object recognition
system might label ceiling fans as chairs (Figure 1(b)). But,
if we knew that the most influential examples in the training
set are of the chairs shown, then it is easy to realize that the
classifier was confused by the fan-shaped base of the chair.
However, for the majority of classifier families, finding
which training examples are most influential is computationally impractical because it requires training a new classifier for each training example. To make computation of
influence fast enough to be used in interactive, real-time
systems, we propose a novel dissimilarity metric that approximates influence. We borrow the idea of version space,

Modern supervised learning algorithms can learn very
accurate and complex discriminating functions. But when
these classifiers fail, this complexity can also be a drawback
because there is no easy, intuitive way to diagnose why they
are failing and remedy the problem. This important question has received little attention. To address this problem,
we propose a novel method to analyze and understand a
classifier’s errors. Our method centers around a measure
of how much influence a training example has on the classifier’s prediction for a test example. To understand why a
classifier is mispredicting the label of a given test example,
the user can find and review the most influential training
examples that caused this misprediction, allowing them to
focus their attention on relevant areas of the data space.
This will aid the user in determining if and how the training data is inconsistently labeled or lacking in diversity, or
if the feature representation is insufficient. As computing
the influence of each training example is computationally
impractical, we propose a novel distance metric to approximate influence for boosting classifiers that is fast enough
to be used interactively. We also show several novel use
paradigms of our distance metric. Through experiments, we
show that it can be used to find incorrectly or inconsistently
labeled training examples, to find specific areas of the data
space that need more training data, and to gain insight into
which features are missing from the current representation.

1. Introduction
Classifiers produced by modern machine learning algorithms such as boosting [14, 15] and support vector machines [6] are extremely complex, often with thousands
of variables. Developing systems that depend on these
opaque classifiers can be frustrating, because when a classifier makes mistakes, the engineer has little information as
to why the classifier made the mistakes and how to improve
its performance. Currently, the recourses available are to
1

