Latent Trees for Estimating Intensity of Facial Action Units
Sebastian Kaltwang
Imperial College London

Sinisa Todorovic
Oregon State University

Maja Pantic
Imperial College London

sk2608@imperial.ac.uk

sinisa@eecs.oregonstate.edu

m.pantic@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract

faked happiness or sarcasm are usually weaker in intensity
when observed in natural social settings.

This paper is about estimating intensity levels of Facial Action Units (FAUs) in videos as an important step toward interpreting facial expressions. As input features, we
use locations of facial landmark points detected in video
frames. To address uncertainty of input, we formulate a
generative latent tree (LT) model, its inference, and novel
algorithms for efficient learning of both LT parameters and
structure. Our structure learning iteratively builds LT by
adding either a new edge or a new hidden node to LT, starting from initially independent nodes of observable features.
A graph-edit operation that increases maximally the likelihood and minimally the model complexity is selected as
optimal in each iteration. For FAU intensity estimation,
we derive closed-form expressions of posterior marginals of
all variables in LT, and specify an efficient bottom-up/topdown inference. Our evaluation on the benchmark DISFA
and ShoulderPain datasets, in subject-independent setting,
demonstrate that we outperform the state of the art, even
under significant noise in facial landmarks. Effectiveness
of our structure learning is demonstrated by probabilistically sampling meaningful facial expressions from the LT.

In this paper, we address the problem of identifying intensity levels of Facial Action Units (FAUs) as an important
step toward interpreting facial expressions. Our research is
motivated by findings of componential facial emotion theory [20, 23], which suggests that in spontaneous expressions (and actions) only certain parts of faces are universally displayed, and thus could be more reliably used for
inferring facial expressions than entire faces. To this end,
we use the facial action coding system (FACS) [4] that defines 32 FAUs as atomic, spatially and temporally wellcontained facial movements, associated with five intensity
levels (A<B<C<D<E). Thus, given a video frame, our
goal is estimate active FAUs and score them with one of
the five intensity levels.
This problem is challenging. Spontaneous expressions
are generally characterized by subtle, minimal facial movements and large out-of-plane head movements [16]. Both
are very difficult to track, leading to higher error rates in
FAU inference. Also, certain FAU intensity levels could be
modulated by the social environment or inner human experiences (e.g., chronic vs. acute pain) [26]. This makes
subject-independent FAU intensity estimation difficult.

1. Introduction

1.1. Overview of Approach and Contributions

Analyzing spontaneous facial expressions in video is important for a wide range of applications in human-computer
and human-human interactions. This is because spontaneous expressions are an integral part of human communication, e.g., capable of conveying various attitudes and
emotions (e.g., spontaneous frowns), and revealing certain
thoughts (e.g., spontaneous eye squints and brow scowls)
[5]. While their detection in terms of presence or absence
in video has already gained traction in the literature (e.g.,
[27, 11]), there is relatively scant work on estimating their
intensities [21, 18, 22, 12]. Yet, the meaning and function of spontaneous facial expressions depends largely on
their intensity [9, 10, 17]. For example, smiles of enjoyment are typically full-blown smiles [7], whereas smiles of

To address the aforementioned challenges, we consider
a Bayesian generative framework. We formalize our problem as that of jointly predicting multiple FAU targets,
T = {x1 , ..., xT }, given a set of image features, F =
{xT +1 , ..., xT +F }. Every target xm ∈ T can be defined
as a vector of various attributes associated with mth FAU,
and in a special case for our problem as FAU intensities.
Image features xm ∈ F are defined as local descriptors of
the face, which can be appearance based (e.g., patches) or
locations of facial landmarks detected in a video frame.
We specify a graphical model for representing the joint
distribution of targets and features, p(T, F), and use the
Bayes’ rule to derive an elegant solution to FAU intensity
1

