FlowWeb: Joint Image Set Alignment by
Weaving Consistent, Pixel-wise Correspondences
Tinghui Zhou
UC Berkeley

Yong Jae Lee
UC Davis

Stella X. Yu
UC Berkeley/ICSI

Alexei A. Efros
UC Berkeley

Abstract
Given a set of poorly aligned images of the same visual concept without any annotations, we propose an algorithm to jointly bring them into pixel-wise correspondence
by estimating a FlowWeb representation of the image set.
FlowWeb is a fully-connected correspondence flow graph
with each node representing an image, and each edge representing the correspondence flow field between a pair of
images, i.e. a vector field indicating how each pixel in one
image can find a corresponding pixel in the other image.
Correspondence flow is related to optical flow but allows
for correspondences between visually dissimilar regions if
there is evidence they correspond transitively on the graph.
Our algorithm starts by initializing all edges of this complete graph with an off-the-shelf, pairwise flow method. We
then iteratively update the graph to force it to be more selfconsistent. Once the algorithm converges, dense, globallyconsistent correspondences can be read off the graph. Our
results suggest that FlowWeb improves alignment accuracy
over previous pairwise as well as joint alignment methods.

(a) Example pixel correspondence using SIFT Flow [21]

…	
  

…	
  
(b) Example pixel correspondence using our FlowWeb

Figure 1. Finding pixel-wise correspondences between images is
difficult even if they depict similar objects: (a) a typical correspondence error using a state-of-the-art pairwise flow estimation algorithm. (b) We propose computing correspondences jointly across
an image collection in a globally-consistent way.

1. Introduction
Consider a pair of chairs depicted in Fig. 1(a). While the
chairs might look similar, locally their features (like the seat
corner above) are very different in appearance, so standard
pairwise image matching approaches like SIFT Flow [25]
have trouble finding correct correspondences. The reason
we, human observers, have little trouble spotting visual correspondences between the features of these two chairs is
likely because we have been exposed to many hundreds of
chairs already, and are able to draw upon this knowledge
to bridge the appearance gap. In this paper, we propose to
“level the playing field” by starting with a set of images
and computing correspondences jointly over this set in a
globally-consistent way, as shown in Fig. 1(b).
Correspondence (also known as alignment or registration) is the task of establishing connections between similar
points/regions across different images, either sparsely (e.g.
SIFT keypoint matching), or densely at every pixel (e.g. optical flow). Correspondence can be defined either locally, as
a pairwise connection between two images, or globally, as

a joint label assignment across an image collection.
One can appreciate the power of joint correspondence
by considering faces, a domain where correspondences
are readily available, either via human annotation, or via
domain-specific detectors. Large-scale face datasets, meticulously annotated with globally-consistent keypoint labels
(“right mouth corner”, “left ear lower tip”, etc) were the catalyst for a plethora of methods in vision and graphics for the
representation, analysis, 3D modeling, synthesis, morphing,
browsing, etc. of human faces [8, 29, 19, 3, 20]. Of course,
faces are a special object class in many ways: they can generally be represented by a linear subspace, are relatively
easy to detect in the wild and relatively easy to annotate (i.e.
have well-defined keypoints). Nonetheless, we believe that
some of the same benefits of having large, jointly registered
image collections should generalize beyond faces and ap1

