Absolute Pose for Cameras Under Flat Refractive Interfaces
Sebastian Haner and Kalle Åström
Centre for Mathematical Sciences, Lund University, Sweden
{haner,kalle}@maths.lth.se

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of determining the absolute pose of a perspective camera observing a scene through
a known refractive plane, the flat boundary between transparent media with different refractive indices. Efficient minimal solvers are developed for the 2D, known orientation
and known rotation axis cases, and near-minimal solvers
for the general calibrated and unknown focal length cases.
We show that ambiguities in the equations of Snell’s law
give rise to a large number of false solutions, increasing
the complexity of the problem. Evaluation of the solvers
on both synthetic and real data show excellent numerical
performance, and the necessity of explicitly modelling refraction to obtain accurate pose estimates.

1. Introduction
Refractive structure-and-motion problems come in many
varieties, depending on what relationships between scene
structure, cameras and refractive planes are known. In many
applications, such as in underwater photography where the
camera views the world through a waterproof housing, the
relationship between the camera and the glass can be precalibrated and assumed known. The back-projections of image points through and past the refractive interface can then
be precomputed in the camera’s coordinate system, and the
whole assembly acts as an axial camera, as shown in [1].
Axial cameras are a special case of generalized cameras and
algorithms previously developed for these can be used. For
example, absolute pose for generalized cameras was solved
minimally in [15] using three points, and relative pose in
[16] using six points (as reported in [11], that algorithm degenerates for some axial camera configurations, but not in
this case). To our knowledge, optimal two-view triangulation under refraction has not been solved, but standard linear
methods are of course applicable when the back-projected
rays are known. These three components along with refractive bundle adjustment [9] are the building blocks of a
structure-and-motion system, and for the practically important case of known camera–refractive plane pose the prob-

lem can be considered more or less solved.
In [5] a theory is presented for the multiple-view geometry of cameras observing a scene through a common refractive interface. The existence of refractive projection, fundamental and homography matrices is shown and the relative
pose problem is solved under very specific conditions. In
[10] the relative translation problem is solved optimally under the L∞ -norm, given the camera orientations.
In this paper we consider the problem of determining absolute pose of a camera observing known scene structure
through a single known refractive planar interface. A more
general problem was solved by [1] in the context of calibration, where the relative poses of camera, scene structure
and refractive plane are all unknown, and indeed even the
ratio of refractive indices. However, the algorithm requires
at least eight point correspondences and has unnecessary
degrees of freedom if the relative pose between scene structure and refractive plane is in fact known. In [4] the absolute pose problem is solved minimally with two point correspondences given that the camera’s vertical direction is
known, as given by an accelerometer. However, it is also
assumed that the refractive plane is horizontal, significantly
simplifying the problem. We present a minimal solution
for the same case but with arbitrary refractive plane, and
analyze the closed-form solutions to the known-orientation
case. We also present a non-minimal algorithm for the general case using five points, and extend it to the case of unknown camera focal length using six points.

2. Snell’s Law
Refraction of light at an optical medium boundary is described by Snell’s law which states that
ρ1 sin θ1 = ρ2 sin θ2 ,

(1)

where ρ1,2 are the refractive indices of the two media and
θ1,2 the angles the impinging and refracted ray make with
the surface normal (see Figure 1). Furthermore, the impinging ray with direction vector ~u, the refracted ray ~v and the
plane normal ~n must all lie in the same plane. Using properties of the cross product, Snell’s law may then be expressed

