Transformation-Invariant Convolutional Jungles
Dmitry Laptev
ETH Zurich, Switzerland

Joachim M.Buhmann
ETH Zurich, Switzerland

dlaptev@inf.ethz.ch

jbuhmann@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Many Computer Vision problems arise from information processing of data sources with nuisance variances like
scale, orientation, contrast, perspective foreshortening or –
in medical imaging – staining and local warping. In most
cases these variances can be stated a priori and can be used
to improve the generalization of recognition algorithms.
We propose a novel supervised feature learning approach,
which efficiently extracts information from these constraints
to produce interpretable, transformation-invariant features.
The proposed method can incorporate a large class of transformations, e.g., shifts, rotations, change of scale, morphological operations, non-linear distortions, photometric
transformations, etc. These features boost the discrimination power of a novel image classification and segmentation
method, which we call Transformation-Invariant Convolutional Jungles (TICJ). We test the algorithm on two benchmarks in face recognition and medical imaging, where it
achieves state of the art results, while being computationally significantly more efficient than Deep Neural Networks.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

Figure 1. Example of transformations φ that are usually considered
in Computer Vision tasks applied to a handwritten digit ”5” from
MNIST dataset [16]. (a) shows the original image X, (b)–(h) show
different transformation results φ(X): rotation (b), shift (translation) (c), reflection (d), scaling (e), morphological operations (f),
non-linear distortions (g), brightness, contrast change (h).

include all of them. For example, rotation-invariance should
be used wisely for digit recognition task, since rotating the
digit ”6” by 180◦ could lead to its confusion with ”9”. However, smaller rotations of up to ±15◦ proved to significantly
improve accuracy in the MNIST classification benchmark
[6]. Scale-invariance can also harm classification performance if object size is at least somehow informative, for
example, in case of classifying healthy cells from cancer
cells [24].
Once a set of transformations for a given task is known
and fixed, there are three main ways to incorporate this
prior knowledge: (i) change the dataset itself, (ii) use
transformation-invariant features or (iii) modify the learning algorithm. Arguably the most popular approach is the
first one, which enlarges the original dataset by adding the
images that were transformed according to our prior beliefs.
This strategy allows the recognition algorithm to observe all
the instantiations of the data and, in case of flexible models
to adapt to all considered transformations.
Enlarging the dataset, however, implies also to significantly extend the training time and it requires extensive
computational resources. But very large data sets pose
only one of the problems: to cope with larger variations
in datasets, data analysts usually have to increase the number of parameters in modeling, requiring even more training
time, more memory, and posing the risk of over- or under-

1. Introduction
Human visual perception proves to be extremely stable
to a broad class of variations in scenes. If objects in images are rotated, or scaled, or even non-linearly distorted –
in most cases we still can recognise these objects. If we
are in advance aware of transformations that can occur in
a dataset, then this information can be used as prior to design a better recognition algorithm with higher generalization capacity and therefore, higher accuracy than agnostic
learners. Being capable of generalizing over different transformations is a very important property of any Machine
Learning approach, and especially of Computer Vision algorithms.
The set of transformations to be considered highly depends on the task that one has to solve. Some common
examples are presented in figure 1, but a possible transformation set is neither limited to these examples, nor needs to
1

