A Multi-Plane Block-Coordinate Frank-Wolfe Algorithm
for Training Structural SVMs with a Costly max-Oracle
Neel Shah, Vladimir Kolmogorov, Christoph H. Lampert
IST Austria
{neelshah,vnk,chl}@ist.ac.at

Abstract

training requires repeated runs of the structured prediction
step (the so called max-oracle) across the training set. Each
of these steps is an optimization problem itself, e.g. finding
the minimum energy labeling of a graph, and often computationally costly. In fact, the more challenging the problem
is, the more the max-oracle calls become a computational
bottleneck. This is also a major factor why SSVMs are typically only used for problems with small and medium-sized
training sets, not for large scale training as it is common
these days, for example, in object categorization [10].
In this work, we introduce a new variant of the FrankWolfe algorithm that is specifically designed for training SSVMs in situations where the calls to the maxoracle are the computational bottleneck. It extends the
recently proposed block-coordinate Frank-Wolfe (BCFW)
algorithm [20] by introducing a caching mechanism that
keeps the results of earlier oracle calls in memory. In each
step of the optimization, the method decides whether to call
the exact max-oracle, or to reuse one of the results from the
cache. The first option might allow the algorithm to make a
larger steps towards the optimum, but it is slow. The second
option will make smaller steps, but this might be justified,
since every step will be much faster. Overall, a trade-off between both options will be optimal, and a second contribution of the manuscript is a geometrically motivated criterion
for dynamically deciding at any time during the runtime of
the algorithm, which choice is more promising.
We report on experiments on four different datasets that
reflect a range of structured prediction scenarios: multiclass
classification, sequence labeling, figure-ground segmentation and semantic image segmentation.

Structural support vector machines (SSVMs) are
amongst the best performing methods for structured computer vision tasks, such as semantic image segmentation or
human pose estimation. Training SSVMs, however, is computationally costly, because it requires repeated calls to a
structured prediction subroutine (called max-oracle), which
has to solve an optimization problem itself, e.g. a graph cut.
In this work, we introduce a new algorithm for SSVM
training that is more efficient than earlier techniques when
the max-oracle is computationally expensive, as it is frequently the case in computer vision tasks. The main idea
is to (i) combine the recent stochastic Block-Coordinate
Frank-Wolfe algorithm with efficient hyperplane caching,
and (ii) use an automatic selection rule for deciding
whether to call the exact max-oracle or to rely on an approximate one based on the cached hyperplanes.
We show experimentally that this strategy leads to faster
convergence towards the optimum with respect to the number of required oracle calls, and that this also translates
into faster convergence with respect to the total runtime
when the max-oracle is slow compared to the other steps
of the algorithm. A C++ implementation is provided at
http://www.ist.ac.at/˜vnk.

1. Introduction
Many computer vision problems have a natural formulation as structured prediction tasks: given an input image
the goal is to predict a structured output object, for example a segmentation mask or a human pose. Structural support vector machines (SSVMs) [28, 30], are currently one
of the most popular methods for learning models that can
perform this task from training data. In contrast to ordinary
support vector machines (SVMs) [9], which only predict
single values, e.g. a class label, SSVMs are designed such
that, in principle, they can predict arbitrary structured objects. However, this flexibility comes at a cost: training an
SSVM requires solving a more difficult optimization problem than training an ordinary SVM. In particular, SSVM

2. Structural Support Vector Machines
The task of structured prediction is to predict structured
objects, y ∈ Y, for given inputs, x ∈ X . Structural
support vector machines (SSVMs) [28, 30] offer a principled way for learning a structured prediction function, h :
X → Y, from training data in a maximum margin framework. We parameterize h(x) = arg maxy∈Y hw, φ(x, y)i,
1

