Learning Descriptors for Object Recognition and 3D Pose Estimation
Paul Wohlhart and Vincent Lepetit
Institute for Computer Vision and Graphics, Graz University of Technology, Austria
{wohlhart,lepetit}@icg.tugraz.at

Abstract
Detecting poorly textured objects and estimating their
3D pose reliably is still a very challenging problem. We
introduce a simple but powerful approach to computing descriptors for object views that efficiently capture both the
object identity and 3D pose. By contrast with previous
manifold-based approaches, we can rely on the Euclidean
distance to evaluate the similarity between descriptors, and
therefore use scalable Nearest Neighbor search methods to
efficiently handle a large number of objects under a large
range of poses. To achieve this, we train a Convolutional
Neural Network to compute these descriptors by enforcing
simple similarity and dissimilarity constraints between the
descriptors. We show that our constraints nicely untangle
the images from different objects and different views into
clusters that are not only well-separated but also structured
as the corresponding sets of poses: The Euclidean distance
between descriptors is large when the descriptors are from
different objects, and directly related to the distance between the poses when the descriptors are from the same
object. These important properties allow us to outperform
state-of-the-art object views representations on challenging
RGB and RGB-D data.

1. Introduction
Impressive results have been achieved in 3D pose estimation of objects from images during the last decade. However, current approaches cannot scale to large-scale problems because they rely on one classifier per object, or multiclass classifiers such as Random Forests, whose complexity
grows with the number of objects. So far the only recognition approaches that have been demonstrated to work on
large scale problems are based on Nearest Neighbor (NN)
classification [23, 16, 8], because extremely efficient methods for NN search exist with an average complexity of
O(1) [24, 21]. Moreover, Nearest Neighbor (NN) classification also offers the possibility to trivially add new objects, or remove old ones, which is not directly possible with
neural networks, for example. However, to the best of our

knowledge, such an approach has not been applied to the
3D pose estimation problem, while it can potentially scale
to many objects seen under large ranges of poses. For example, [8] only focuses on object recognition without considering the 3D pose estimation problem.
For NN approaches to perform well, a compact and discriminative description vector is required. Such representations that can capture the appearance of an object under a
certain pose have already been proposed [7, 14], however
they have been handcrafted. Our approach is motivated by
the success of recent work on feature point descriptor learning [5, 35, 20], which shows that it is possible to learn compact descriptors that significantly outperform handcrafted
methods such as SIFT or SURF.
However, the problem we tackle here is more complex:
While feature point descriptors are used only to find the
points’ identities, we here want to find both the object’s
identity and its pose. We therefore seek to learn a descriptor with the two following properties: a) The Euclidean distance between descriptors from two different objects should
be large; b) The Euclidean distance between descriptors
from the same object should be representative of the similarity between their poses. This way, given a new object
view, we can recognize the object and get an estimate of its
pose by matching its descriptor against a database of registered descriptors. New objects can also be added and existing ones removed easily. To the best of our knowledge, our
method is the first one that learns to compute descriptors for
object views.
Our approach is related to manifold learning, but the key
advantage of learning a direct mapping to descriptors is that
we can use efficient and scalable Nearest Neighbor search
methods. This is not possible for previous methods relying
on geodesic distances on manifolds. Moreover, while previous approaches already considered similar properties to
a) and b), to the best of our knowledge, they never considered both simultaneously, while it is critical for efficiency.
Combining these two constraints in a principled way is far
from trivial, but we show it can be done by training a Convolutional Neural Network [18] using simple constraints to
compute the descriptors. As shown in Fig. 1, this results in

