Unsupervised Visual Alignment with Similarity Graphs
Fatemeh Shokrollahi Yancheshmeh, Ke Chen, and Joni-Kristian Kämäräinen
Department of Signal Processing, Tampere University of Technology, Finland
{fatemeh.shokrollahiyancheshmeh, ke.chen, joni.kamarainen}@tut.fi

Abstract
Alignment of semantically meaningful visual patterns, such
as object classes, is an important pre-processing step for
a number of applications such as object detection and image categorization. Considering the expensive manpower
spent on the annotation for supervised alignment methods,
unsupervised alignment techniques are more favorable especially for large-scale problems. Fine adjustment can be
effectively and efficiently achieved with image congealing
methods, but they require moderately good initialization
which is largely invalid in practice. Alignment of visual
class examples with large view point changes remains as an
open problem. Feature-based methods can solve the problem to some degree, but require manual selection of a good
seed image and omit the fact that examples of a semantic
class can be visually very different (e.g., Harley-Davidsons
and Scooters in “motorbikes”). In this work, we overcome
the aforementioned drawbacks by defining visual similarity
under the generalized assignment problem which is solved
by fast approximation and non-linear optimization. From
pair-wise image similarities we construct an image graph
which is used to step-wise align, “morph”, an image to another by graph traveling. We automatically find a suitable
seed by novel centrality measure which identifies “similarity hubs” in the graph. The proposed approach in the unsupervised manner outperforms the state-of-the-art methods
with classes from the popular benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Visual alignment of an image ensemble is to find the corresponding control points between them. This is an important
pre-processing step for a number of high-level computer vision applications such as object detection and categorization [1, 11, 15, 23, 37]. In those applications, it can be
made difficult due to the large pose variation of class examples in the images. The alignment remains hot yet challenging topic especially in large-scale visual recognition problems to i) avoid the manpower spent on annotating the control points or object landmarks in supervised object align-

Figure 1. The workflow of our visual alignment approach.

ment [46], ii) the lack of moderately good initial alignments
needed for image congealing algorithms [16], and iii) the
manual seed selection in the feature-based alignment [26].
The recent “big visual data” databases, such as ImageNet [38] and COCO [27], have made it possible to train
effective class detectors with minimal annotation, only class
labels, and avoid over-fitting despite the huge number of
model parameters [24]. It is still unclear whether this is
due to a few quantized poses of classes, but certain undesirable properties indicate that the problem is not completely solved [40]. Prior to the large datasets and deep
neural networks, the part-based methods requiring additional annotation of bounding boxes achieved state-of-theart [10, 11, 25]. Bounding boxes have their own drawbacks which the best part-based methods partly overcome

