Three Viewpoints Toward Exemplar SVM
Takumi Kobayashi
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology
Umezono 1-1-1, Tsukuba, Japan
takumi.kobayashi@aist.go.jp

Abstract
In contrast to category-level or cluster-level classifiers,
exemplar SVM [17] is successfully applied to classifying (or
detecting) a target object as well as transferring instancelevel annotations. The method, however, is formulated in a
highly biased classification problem where only one positive sample is contrasted with a substantial number of negative samples, which makes it difficult to properly determine
the regularization parameters balancing two types of costs
derived from positive and negative samples. In this paper,
we present two novel viewpoints toward exemplar SVM in
addition to the original definition. From these proposed
viewpoints, we can give light on an intrinsic structure of
exemplar SVM, reducing two parameters into only one as
well as providing clear intuition on the parameter, in order
to free us from exhaustive parameter tuning. We can also
clarify how the classifier geometrically works so as to produce homogeneous classification scores of multiple exemplar SVMs which are comparable to each other without calibration. In addition, we propose a novel feature transformation method based on those viewpoints which contributes
to general classification tasks. In the experiments on object
detection and image classification, the proposed methods
regarding exemplar SVM exhibit favorable performance.

1. Introduction
Classification plays a key role in various pattern recognition problems such as image recognition and object detection. In a real world, there are a lot of categories to be classified, and those multi-class problems are usually treated
by dividing multiple categories in a one-vs-rest manner [5].
Namely, a standard procedure for training multi-class classifiers is to discriminate a specific object category (car, bike,
etc.) from the other categories, resulting in class-specific
classifiers of which number is equal to that of categories
(Fig. 1a). This approach assumes that samples in a category
are well described by using a single parametric model, e.g.,
linear decision boundary, but it might be actually infeasible.

horse

horse

horse

others

others

others

(a) Category-level

(b) Cluster-level

(c) Instance-level

Figure 1. Classification levels. (a) Category-level classification is
commonly applied to deal with multi-class problems in a one-vsrest manner. (b) Cluster-level classifier captures more detailed distribution within the category, and (c) instance-level classification
is defined at the finest resolution of classification and provides correspondence to an exemplar.

To alleviate it, samples in a category are further divided into clusters [18] and then the above classification
procedure is applied to provide cluster-based representation
(Fig. 1b). Clustering metrics are, for example, based on object scale [4] and object view [11]. The clustering-based
methods contain a parameter regarding the number of clusters which is generally difficult to be properly determined;
a small number of clusters contain large variability within a
cluster. In a slightly different approach, poselet method [3]
which focuses on detecting people decomposes the category
in terms of parts, though requiring exhaustive human effort
for labeling parts.
Recently, such direction reaches an extreme classification problem, called exemplar SVM [17], in which each instance sample (exemplar) is discriminated from the other
samples; that is, a category is divided into samples at the
finest resolution (Fig. 1c). In contrast to clustering-based
methods, exemplar SVM is a non-parametric method since
the number of clusters corresponds to that of samples. The
method of exemplar SVM is advantageous in the following
two points.
First, exemplar SVM classifier provides correspondence
of an input sample to an exemplar, making it possible to directly transfer annotations of the exemplar to the input sample. In contrast, category-based methods can provide only
category representative information, usually class label, and

