First-Person Pose Recognition using Egocentric Workspaces
Grégory Rogez1,2 , James S. Supančič III1 , Deva Ramanan1
1
Dept of Computer Science, University of California, Irvine, CA, USA
2
Universidad de Zaragoza, Zaragoza, Spain
grogez@unizar.es

grogez,jsupanci,dramanan@ics.uci.edu

Abstract
We tackle the problem of estimating the 3D pose of an individual’s upper limbs (arms+hands) from a chest mounted
depth-camera. Importantly, we consider pose estimation
during everyday interactions with objects. Past work shows
that strong pose+viewpoint priors and depth-based features
are crucial for robust performance. In egocentric views,
hands and arms are observable within a well defined volume in front of the camera. We call this volume an egocentric workspace. A notable property is that hand appearance
correlates with workspace location. To exploit this correlation, we classify arm+hand configurations in a global egocentric coordinate frame, rather than a local scanning window. This greatly simplify the architecture and improves
performance. We propose an efficient pipeline which 1) generates synthetic workspace exemplars for training using a
virtual chest-mounted camera whose intrinsic parameters
match our physical camera, 2) computes perspective-aware
depth features on this entire volume and 3) recognizes discrete arm+hand pose classes through a sparse multi-class
SVM. We achieve state-of-the-art hand pose recognition
performance from egocentric RGB-D images in real-time.

Figure 1. Egocentric workspaces. We directly model the observable egocentric workspace in front of a human with a 3D volumetric descriptor, extracted from a 2.5D egocentric depth sensor. In this example, this volume is discretized into 4 × 3 × 4
bins. This feature can be used to accurately predict shoulder,
arm, hand poses, even when interacting with objects. We describe
models learned from synthetic examples of observable egocentric
workspaces obtained by placing a virtual Intel Creative camera on
the chest of an animated character.

1. Introduction
Understanding hand poses and hand-object manipulations from a wearable camera has potential applications
in assisted living [23], augmented reality [6] and life logging [19]. As opposed to hand-pose recognition from thirdperson views, egocentric views may be more difficult due
to additional occlusions (from manipulated objects, or selfocclusions of fingers by the palm) and the fact that hands
interact with the environment and often leave the field-ofview. The latter necessitates constant re-initialization, precluding the use of a large body of hand trackers which typically perform well given manual initialization.
Previous work for egocentric hand analysis tends to rely
on local 2D features, such as pixel-level skin classification
[17, 18] or gradient-based processing of depth maps with

scanning-window templates [25]. Our approach follows in
the tradition of [25], who argue that near-field depth measures obtained from a egocentric-depth sensor considerably
simplifies hand analysis. Interestingly, egocentric-depth is
not “cheating” in the sense that humans make use of stereoscopic depth cues for near-field manipulations [7]. We extend this observation by building an explicit 3D map of the
observable near-field workspace.
Contributions: In this work, we describe a new computational architecture that makes use of global egocentric
1

