Video Co-summarization: Video Summarization by Visual Co-occurrence
Wen-Sheng Chu1 Yale Song2 Alejandro Jaimes2
1
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University 2 Yahoo Labs, New York

Abstract
We present video co-summarization, a novel perspective
to video summarization that exploits visual co-occurrence
across multiple videos. Motivated by the observation that
important visual concepts tend to appear repeatedly across
videos of the same topic, we propose to summarize a video
by finding shots that co-occur most frequently across videos
collected using a topic keyword. The main technical challenge is dealing with the sparsity of co-occurring patterns,
out of hundreds to possibly thousands of irrelevant shots in
videos being considered. To deal with this challenge, we developed a Maximal Biclique Finding (MBF) algorithm that
is optimized to find sparsely co-occurring patterns, discarding less co-occurring patterns even if they are dominant in
one video. Our algorithm is parallelizable with closed-form
updates, thus can easily scale up to handle a large number of videos simultaneously. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on motion capture and self-compiled
YouTube datasets. Our results suggest that summaries generated by visual co-occurrence tend to match more closely
with human generated summaries, when compared to several popular unsupervised techniques.

1. Introduction
The amount of online videos has been growing at an exponential rate; the need for easier video browsing has increased considerably. With the goal of providing an efficient way to overview the large collection of videos, video
summarization has attracted intensive attention over the past
decade [27, 34]. Several approaches have been proposed
to summarize videos by leveraging domain-specific knowledge [11, 23, 32] or training a supervised model with a labeled database [21, 31, 33]. However, it still remains as a
challenge to formulate the right model able to deal with the
large diversity of video content without human supervision.
We present a novel perspective to video summarization,
termed as video co-summarization. We observe that, given a
collection of videos sharing the same topic (e.g., videos retrieved using a query term), important visual concepts tend
to appear repeatedly across the videos; the frequency of visual co-occurrence can thus serve as a proxy to measure

Input Query: surfing
Input
Video

Relevant videos
Video 1

Video N

Video
Summary

Figure 1. An illustration of video co-summarization as identifying visually most similar events shared across N videos. Different colors and shapes indicate relevant events discovered by
our algorithm: surfing (red circles), sunset (green rectangles), and
palm tree (blue hexagons), as shown in the selected video frames.
Dashed lines represent correspondence between shots.

the shot importance. Our goal is, therefore, to summarize
a video by including shots that co-occur most frequently
across videos of the same topic. Fig. 1 illustrates our main
idea: Given an input video belonging to a query surfing,
we identify visually co-occurring shots, e.g., surfing, sunset, and palm tree, across additional videos retrieved using
the same query. In this way, video co-summarization can
identify important shots without assuming domain-specific
knowledge or training a supervised model with labeled examples; this makes our approach particularly suitable for
dealing with the content diversity in online videos.
Our work builds upon the idea of unsupervised commonality analysis, which has been successfully applied to image
co-segmentation [4, 6], image/video co-localization [17],
temporal commonality discovery [7], and object discovery [35] with different techniques. Unlike the previous
tasks, however, video co-summarization has an additional
challenge of dealing with the sparsity of co-occurring patterns: A set of videos can have hundreds to thousands of
shots; often there are only a few common shots that appear

