Building a bird recognition app and large scale dataset with citizen scientists:
The fine print in fine-grained dataset collection
Grant Van Horn1
Steve Branson1
Ryan Farrell2
3
4
Jessie Barry
Panos Ipeirotis
Pietro Perona1
1
Caltech 2 BYU 3 Cornell Lab of Ornithology 4 NYU

Abstract

Scott Haber3
Serge Belongie5
5
Cornell Tech

human labor required. As we increase the number of classes
of interest, classes become more fine-grained and difficult
to distinguish for the average person (and the average annotator), more ambiguous, and less likely to obey an assumption of mutual exclusion. The annotation process becomes
more challenging, requiring an increasing amount of skill
and knowledge. Dataset quality appears to be at direct odds
with dataset size.
In this paper, we introduce tools and methodologies for
constructing large, high quality computer vision datasets,
based on tapping into an alternate pool of crowd annotators – citizen scientists. Citizen scientists are nonprofessional scientists or enthusiasts in a particular domain such as
birds, insects, plants, airplanes, shoes, or architecture. Citizen scientists contribute annotations with the understanding
that their expertise and passion in a domain of interest can
help build tools that will be of service to a community of
peers. Unlike workers on Mechanical Turk, citizen scientists are unpaid. Despite this, they produce higher quality
annotations due to their greater expertise and the absence of
spammers. Additionally, citizen scientists can help define
and organically grow the set of classes and its taxonomic

We introduce tools and methodologies to collect high
quality, large scale fine-grained computer vision datasets
using citizen scientists – crowd annotators who are passionate and knowledgeable about specific domains such as birds
or airplanes. We worked with citizen scientists and domain
experts to collect NABirds, a new high quality dataset containing 48,562 images of North American birds with 555
categories, part annotations and bounding boxes. We find
that citizen scientists are significantly more accurate than
Mechanical Turkers at zero cost. We worked with bird experts to measure the quality of popular datasets like CUB200-2011 and ImageNet and found class label error rates
of at least 4%. Nevertheless, we found that learning algorithms are surprisingly robust to annotation errors and this
level of training data corruption can lead to an acceptably
small increase in test error if the training set has sufficient
size. At the same time, we found that an expert-curated high
quality test set like NABirds is necessary to accurately measure the performance of fine-grained computer vision systems. We used NABirds to train a publicly available bird
recognition service deployed on the web site of the Cornell
Lab of Ornithology.1

1. Introduction
Computer vision systems – catalyzed by the availability of new, larger scale datasets like ImageNet [6] – have
recently obtained remarkable performance on object recognition [17, 32] and detection [10]. Computer vision has entered an era of big data, where the ability to collect larger
datasets – larger in terms of the number of classes, the number of images per class, and the level of annotation per image – appears to be paramount for continuing performance
improvement and expanding the set of solvable applications.
Unfortunately, expanding datasets in this fashion introduces new challenges beyond just increasing the amount of

Figure 1: Merlin Photo ID: a publicly available tool for bird
species classification built with the help of citizen scientists. The
user uploaded a picture of a bird, and server-side computer vision
algorithms identified it as an immature Cooper’s Hawk.

1 merlin.allaboutbirds.org

1

