Towards 3D Object Detection with Bimodal Deep Boltzmann Machines over
RGBD Imagery
Wei Liu, Rongrong Ji, Shaozi Li
Dep. of Cognitive Science, School of Info. Science and Eng., Xiamen University, China
Fujian Key Lab for Brain-Like Intelligent Systems
{rrji, szlig}@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract

[1, 4, 5]. Subsequently, semantic labels of individual superverxels are inferred using either discriminative [1, 4] or
generative [6, 7] schemes, which are followed by a joint
optimization among labels of spatially nearby supervexels using models such as Conditional Random Field (CRF)
[1, 4] or Markov Random Filed (MRF) [5, 8].
In this paper, we focus on object detection in RGBD
point clouds, which retains as an open problem in the stateof-the-art semantic parsing algorithms of 3D point clouds
[6, 7, 9, 10]. Among various designs, detection based labeling has attracted ever increasing research interest [6, 7].
In such a case, detector templates are trained from labeled
positive and negative examples for each class labeled offline. However, the detector accuracy heavily depends on
the sufficiency of training labels [6, 7], which in turn is
very difficult to ensure comparing to the 2D case.
To the best of our knowledge, the existing labels available for RGBD images are mostly hundreds to thousands, for instance, NYU [11], RMRC [10], and SUN3D [12],
which is of scales less comparing to endeavors on the image domain like ImageNet [13], LabelMe [14], and Tiny
Images [15]. On one hand, as at its earliest stage, it retains a far long way to accumulate sufficient labels from the
research community. On the other hand, it is much more
difficult to label the RGBD regions or cubics comparing
to the 2D case, which typically needs interactive rotation
and scaling of the RGBD data rendered in a graphical interface. Furthermore, after transferring the labels into the 3D
domain, robust detection algorithms are highly required to
handle such a “domain shift”.
Therefore, one natural thought is to “transfer” the labels
obtained from the 2D domain into the RGBD case to benefit the detector training. The extensive benchmarking works done in 2D domain have accumulated unthinkably rich
amount of labels about the objects, containing rich their 2D
appearances like shape, texture, and color etc. In the computer vision community, it has led to a decade-long effort
in building large-scale labeling datasets, which has shown
large benefits for 2D image segmentation, labeling, classi-

Nowadays, detecting objects in 3D scenes like point
clouds has become an emerging challenge with various applications. However, it retains as an open problem due to
the deficiency of labeling 3D training data. To deploy an
accurate detection algorithm typically resorts to investigating both RGB and depth modalities, which have distinct statistics while correlated with each other. Previous research
mainly focus on detecting objects using only one modality,
which ignores exploiting the cross-modality cues. In this
work, we propose a cross-modality deep learning framework based on deep Boltzmann Machines for 3D Scenes object detection. In particular, we demonstrate that by learning cross-modality feature from RGBD data, it is possible to
capture their joint information to reinforce detector trainings in individual modalities. In particular, we slide a 3D
detection window in the 3D point cloud to match the exemplar shape, which the lack of training data in 3D domain is
conquered via (1) We collect 3D CAD models and 2D positive samples from Internet. (2) adopt pretrained R-CNNs
[2] to extract raw feature from both RGB and Depth domains. Experiments on RMRC dataset demonstrate that the
bimodal based deep feature learning framework helps 3D
scene object detection.

1. Introduction
Coming with the popularities of depth sensors like
Kinect, nowadays have witnessed an explosive growth of
RGB-Depth (RGBD) data to be processed and analyzed,
with extensive applications in robotic navigation, pilotless
automobile, gaming and entertainments etc. In the core of
such applications lies the problem of RGBD scene parsing, i.e., inferring labels of individual verxels to parse their
semantic structure. The parsing follows a similar procedure as what has been done in 2D images. In a typically
setting, verxels are first over-segmented into superverxels
1

