Adaptive As-Natural-As-Possible Image Stitching
Chung-Ching Lin, Sharathchandra U. Pankanti,
Karthikeyan Natesan Ramamurthy, and Aleksandr Y. Aravkin
IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center, 1101 Kitchawan Road, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598
{cclin,sharath,knatesa,saravkin}@us.ibm.com

Abstract
The goal of image stitching is to create natural-looking
mosaics free of artifacts that may occur due to relative
camera motion, illumination changes, and optical aberrations. In this paper, we propose a novel stitching method,
that uses a smooth stitching field over the entire target image, while accounting for all the local transformation variations. Computing the warp is fully automated and uses
a combination of local homography and global similarity transformations, both of which are estimated with respect to the target. We mitigate the perspective distortion
in the non-overlapping regions by linearizing the homography and slowly changing it to the global similarity. The
proposed method is easily generalized to multiple images,
and allows one to automatically obtain the best perspective in the panorama. It is also more robust to parameter
selection, and hence more automated compared with stateof-the-art methods. The benefits of the proposed approach
are demonstrated using a variety of challenging cases.

1. Introduction
Algorithms for aligning and stitching images into seamless photo-mosaics are among the oldest and most widely
used in computer vision [11]. The holy grail of image stitching is to seamlessly blend overlapping images, even in the
presence of parallax, lens distortion, and scene illumination, to provide a mosaic without any artifacts that looks
as natural as possible. Evidently, there is some subjectivity
in interpreting how natural a panorama or a mosaic looks.
Furthermore, the stitching techniques must be able to extrapolate well to the regions of the panorama where there is
information only from a single image.
Early methods focused on obtaining global 2D transformations to align one image with the other [11]. However,
assuming a single global transformation such as a homography, will be incorrect except under special conditions, and
this will lead to misalignments and ghosting effects. Arguably, most of the problems in 2D image stitching happen

because it is impossible to estimate the stitching field accurately due to the complex interaction between the 3D scene
and the camera parameters, both of which are unavailable.
However, several assumptions can be posed on the stitching
field during image alignment [12, 9, 4, 2] and tolerance to
parallax can also be imposed [13].
We propose a new method that incorporates several techniques to make the panorama look more natural. To mitigate perspective distortion that occurs in As-Projective-AsPossible (APAP) [12] stitching, we linearize the homography in the regions that do not overlap with any other image.
We then automatically estimate a global similarity transform using a subset of corresponding points in the overlapping regions. Finally, we interpolate smoothly between
the homography and the global similarity in the overlapping regions, and similarly extrapolate using the linearized
homography (affine) and the global similarity transform
in the non-overlapping regions. The smooth combination
of two stitching fields (homography/linearized homography
and global similarity) help us achieve: (a) a fully continuous and smooth stitching field with no bending artifacts, (b)
improved perspective in the non-overlapping regions using
a global similarity transform, (c) full benefits of the stateof-the-art alignment accuracy offered by APAP.

2. Related Work
A description of fundamental concepts in image stitching and the many associated transformations is available in
[11]. Some special cases where cylindrical and spherical
image stitching algorithms can be used are also discussed.
For example, the cylindrical model can be used when the
camera is known to be level and rotating around its vertical axis. Parallax error could be minimized with this assumption, but ghosting occurs when it is violated. A simple extension for computing a single global homography is
introduced in [7] by separating a single scene into a distant
plane and a ground plane. A weight map is used to smoothly
combine two homographic transformations over the target
image, but this technique is limited to scenes without local
perspective variation.

