Bayesian Adaptive Matrix Factorization with Automatic Model Selection
Peixian Chen

Naiyan Wang

Nevin L. Zhang

Dit-Yan Yeung

pchenac@cse.ust.hk

winsty@gmail.com

lzhang@cse.ust.hk

dyyeung@cse.ust.hk

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Abstract
Low-rank matrix factorization has long been recognized
as a fundamental problem in many computer vision applications. Nevertheless, the reliability of existing matrix factorization methods is often hard to guarantee due to challenges brought by such model selection issues as selecting the noise model and determining the model capacity.
We address these two issues simultaneously in this paper
by proposing a robust non-parametric Bayesian adaptive
matrix factorization (AMF) model. AMF proposes a new
noise model built on the Dirichlet process Gaussian mixture model (DP-GMM) by taking advantage of its high flexibility on component number selection and capability of fitting a wide range of unknown noise. AMF also imposes
an automatic relevance determination (ARD) prior on the
low-rank factor matrices so that the rank can be determined
automatically without the need for enforcing any hard constraint. An efficient variational method is then devised for
model inference. We compare AMF with state-of-the-art
matrix factorization methods based on data sets ranging
from synthetic data to real-world application data. From
the results, AMF consistently achieves better or comparable performance.

1. Introduction
Matrix factorization is a crucial component in many
computer vision applications, such as face recognition [35],
motion segmentation [7], and structure from motion
(SfM) [27]. Briefly speaking, it approximates a given data
matrix by the product of a basis matrix and a coefficient matrix under some criteria. If the underlying rank of the two
factor matrices is lower than that of the original data matrix, matrix factorization is an effective way to reveal the
low-dimensional structure of the data.
The success of matrix factorization depends very much
on proper model selection. Two model selection problems
are involved. The first one is selection of the noise model
which affects how well each entry of the matrix can be represented by the model, and the second one is the selection

Figure 1. A face shadow removal example demonstrating the effect
of some model selection issues. The original image is shown in
(a) and the recovery results of different models are shown in (b)(e). In the results, the first row shows the recovered images and
the second row shows the corresponding noise distributions of the
matrices.

of the capacity of the two factor matrices related to the expressive power of the model. In Fig. 1, we empirically show
the effect of these two problems in a face shadow removal
application. As we can see, the noise model indeed affects
the performance greatly while the rank controls the degree
of abstraction.
For the first model selection problem, various attempts
have been made to find a better description for the noise underlying the data, ranging from the traditional `2 norm, the
robust `1 norm [5] to non-convex norms [30]. These methods often make overly strong assumptions about the noise
distribution which unfortunately do not hold in many real
applications. Recently, Meng and De la Torre proposed to
use a Gaussian mixture model (GMM) to fit the noise [18],
and further extended it into a full Bayesian model [32].
Although it is more flexible than the methods above, the
number of Gaussian components in the GMM still has to
be specified in advance. This is a real limitation since the
number of Gaussians weighs heavily in the generalizability
of a GMM noise model. In this paper we propose to use a
Dirichlet process Gaussian mixture model (DP-GMM) [22]
as the noise model. On one hand, we can take advantage of
the fact that GMM is a universal approximator for any continuous distribution [17] and thus able to fit various types
of noise. On the other hand, we can infer the number of
Gaussian components needed from data, instead of doing
heuristic pruning or trying ungrounded guesses.
For the second problem, one method is to limit the rank

