Bayesian Inference for Neighborhood Filters with Application in Denoising
Chao-Tsung Huang
National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan
chaotsung@ee.nthu.edu.tw

kl−ik2

Abstract

exp(− 2σ2 2 ). The former adapts to pixel similarity for
d
edge preservation, which is controlled by range variance
σr2 . And the latter provides a spatial smoothing window.
If the spatial weights are all equal, it will degenerate to the
Yaroslavsky filter. On the other hand, it will evolve to the
NLM if wl,i is defined by patch similarity:
P
k yl+b − yi+b k22
), B = |B|, (2)
wl,i = exp(− b∈B
2Bσr2

Range-weighted neighborhood filters are useful and
popular for their edge-preserving property and simplicity,
but they are originally proposed as intuitive tools. Previous
works needed to connect them to other tools or models for
indirect property reasoning or parameter estimation. In this
paper, we introduce a unified empirical Bayesian framework to do both directly. A neighborhood noise model is
proposed to reason and infer the Yaroslavsky, bilateral, and
modified non-local means filters. An EM+ algorithm is devised to estimate the essential parameter, range variance,
via the model fitting to empirical distributions. Finally, we
apply this framework to color-image denoising. Experimental results show that the proposed model fits noisy images
well and the range variance is estimated successfully. The
image quality can also be improved by a proposed recursive
fitting and filtering scheme.

where {yi+b |b ∈ B} forms the patch at position i.
Filtering based on range-weighted similarity is effective but
lacks of theoretical basis. For understanding its mathematical properties, several previous works studied their connections to other classical methods, such as mean shift [1],
anisotropic diffusion [3] and Bayesian approach [8, 16], and
thus found improvements on the neighborhood filters. However, these connections were unable to provide further information to infer the range variance σr2 directly from the
observed data.
In contrast, without reasoning the properties statistical techniques have been adopted to estimate the parameters indirectly using the basic observation model

1. Introduction
Range-weighted formulation has been widely used to
provide edge-preserved denoising since the introduction
of local neighborhood filtering, especially the Yaroslavsky
[28] and bilateral [23] filters. Many variations were also
proposed for different applications, such as the trilateral filter for high contrast images[6] and the cross bilateral filter
for fusing image pairs [20]. The reader is referred to [17]
for more applications. The non-local means (NLM) [2] was
further proposed for a non-local neighborhood and got fruitful patch-based extensions on denoising.
The intuitive idea behind is to assign filter coefficients based
on similarity, e.g. the bilateral filter is given by
P
i∈Λl wl,i dl,i · yi
ẑl = P
(1)
i∈Λl wl,i dl,i

y = z + n,

(3)

where n is additive Gaussian noise. The χ2 test was used
to choose the parameters for the NLM filter in [11]. The
Stein’s unbiased risk estimate (SURE) [22] can provide unbiased estimation of the mean squared error (MSE) from
noisy and filtered images. Thus many parameter combinations can be tested, and the one giving the smallest estimated MSE can be selected. Though accurate, the complexity is quite high because each combination needs to filter the
whole image separately.
Contribution. In this paper, we build a unified empirical
Bayesian framework to both infer the neighborhood filters
and estimate their range variance. We first introduce a novel
neighborhood noise model. It reasons the range-weighted
formulation using maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimation via a soft-edge prior and infers the filters using maximum likelihood (ML) estimation on different likelihood

where y and ẑ are the observed and filtered signals respectively, and Λl represents the neighborhood at position l. The adaptive kernel consists of one range-weighted
ky −y k2
wl,i = exp(− l2σ2i 2 ) and one distance-weighted dl,i =
r

1

