Hierarchical Sparse Coding With Geometric Prior For Visual Geo-location
Raghuraman Gopalan
AT&T Labs-Research
Dept. of Video and Multimedia Technologies Research, Middletown NJ 07748 USA
raghuram@research.att.com

Abstract

coupled with big data to show that it is indeed plausible to
estimate where an image was captured. There have been
many other efforts focusing on learning efficient feature
representations and location matching strategies using diverse set of techniques. For instance, [26] pursued a generative model based on epitomic image analysis to capture appearance and geometric structure of an environment
while allowing for variations due to motion, occlusion and
non-Lambertian effects. [20] combined 2D appearance constraints with 3D geometric relationships using iconic scene
graphs. Faster retrieval methods were pursued by [28] using vocabulary trees and by [21] using prioritized feature
matching. Ideas pertaining to structure from motion were
used by [15] to generate synthetic views from 3D point
clouds to assist image-based geo-location. Location search
using hybrid image-keyword technique was explored by
[35], while the contextual information conveyed by people
and events on locations for personal photo collections was
analyzed by [22].

We address the problem of estimating location information of an image using principles from automated representation learning. We pursue a hierarchical sparse coding approach that learns features useful in discriminating
images across locations, by initializing it with a geometric
prior corresponding to transformations between image appearance space and their corresponding location grouping
space using the notion of parallel transport on manifolds.
We then extend this approach to account for the availability of heterogeneous data modalities such as geo-tags and
videos pertaining to different locations, and also study a
relatively under-addressed problem of transferring knowledge available from certain locations to infer the grouping
of data from novel locations. We evaluate our approach on
several standard datasets such as im2gps, San Francisco
and MediaEval2010, and obtain state-of-the-art results.

More recently, several discriminative learning strategies
that could handle larger data scale were proposed. [6] represented the structure of the training location database as
a graph and proposed a method for selecting a set of subgraphs and learning a local discriminative distance function
for each of them. [12] trained per-location classifiers using support vector machines (SVM) for each location, by
handling the mismatch in the number of positive and negative class samples using non-parametric statistics. [4] pursued random forest-based codebook learning on the feature
descriptors obtained using structure from motion computations on image collections. Manifold modeling of generative and discriminative appearance information was studied
by [11], by transferring such information across locations
using geodesic paths. Purely geometric correspondencefree geo-localization was performed by [2] using 3D pointray features extracted from the digital elevation maps of
urban environments, and [19] worked with human annotated line segments of ground view images to perform location matching of planar structures under projective uncertainty. There have also been studies based on repetitive

1. Introduction
Inferring which location co-ordinates an image corresponds to is a challenging problem in visual recognition,
which has applications in areas such as surveillance, geomapping, landform modeling among others. It differs from
other recognition problems pertaining to, say objects, scene,
and faces, in that it is not enough to model visual appearance alone since two images that have similar appearance
can correspond to different locations, and two images having dissimilar appearance can come from neighboring locations. While initial efforts investigating this problem began
atleast two decades ago [24, 25], substantial progress was
seen only in the last decade due to the availability of large
quantity of data and the related progress in data-driven techniques [29, 14].
We now present a broad overview of methodologies that
have been proposed in the literature for this problem. One
of the prominent efforts is the im2gps method [13] that
brought the location recognition problem to the mainstream
vision community, by exploring different visual features
1

