Computationally Bounded Retrieval
Mohammad Rastegari1 , Cem Keskin2 , Pushmeet Kohli2 , Shahram Izadi2
1
University of Maryland, 2 Microsoft Research
mrastega@cs.umd.edu, cemke,pkohli,shahrami@microsoft.com

Abstract
The increase in size of large image databases makes the
problem of efficient retrieval extremely challenging. This is
especially true in the case of high dimensional data where
even operations like hashing become expensive because of
costly projection operators. Unlike most hashing methods that sacrifice accuracy for speed, we propose a novel
method that improves the speed of high dimensional image
retrieval by several orders of magnitude without any significant drop in performance. To do this, we propose to learn
computationally bounded sparse projections for the encoding step. To further increase the accuracy of the method,
we add an orthogonality constraint on projections to reduce
bit correlation. We then introduce an iterative scheme that
jointly optimizes this objective, which helps us obtain fast
and efficient projections. We demonstrate this technique on
large retrieval databases, specifically ImageNET, GIST1M
and SUN-attribute for the task of nearest neighbor retrieval,
and show that our method achieves a speed-up of up to a
factor of 100 over state-of-the-art methods, while having
on-par and in some cases even better accuracy.

0.3

AUC

0.25

SBE-opt-0.1
SBE-opt-0.01
SBE-opt-0.001
k d-tree

0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
10 -2

10 0

10 2

Retrieval Time (second)
Figure 1: Comparison of the accuracy (area-under-thecurve) and computational cost of the proposed algorithm
(SBE) with the kd-tree method for different sparsity values. The curves correspond to increasing code lengths for
SBE and decreasing bucket size for kd-tree. Our method
achieves the same accuracy as a kd-tree while being 100
times faster.

1. Introduction
Many computer vision problems can be formulated as a
nearest neighbor search in some large dataset. When the
data involved is high dimensional, doing this search efficiently becomes crucial but also extremely challenging.
This is especially the case for the task of content based image retrieval, where efficiency is a requirement due to the
high dimensionality of the data and the increase in size and
availability of these databases.
The most common retrieval approaches are tree based
and hashing based methods. In tree based approaches, the
search space is embedded into a tree structure. At query
time, the tree is traversed until a leaf node is reached, which
points to a set of images that are similar to the query image. Then a final search is conducted over this set of images to find the nearest neighbor. Decision trees [17] and
kd-trees[13, 12] are two such methods. When the number
of dimensions grows, these conventional approaches often
become less efficient, since the time or space requirements

of these approaches often grows exponentially with the dimensionality.
Hashing based methods, on the other hand, reduce the
number of dimensions involved with projections. This in
turn removes the exponential dependence on dimensionality that trees suffer from. For instance, Locality Sensitive
Hashing (LSH) uses random projections for the encoding
step [2]. The images are indexed by hash tables, and at test
time the query is encoded into an index that points to these
hash tables. Typically the encoding step is the bottleneck in
these image retrieval methods.
In this paper, we focus primarily on image retrieval using
binary codes [26]. In this approach, each image is encoded
into a binary code such that the nearest neighbors in the
corresponding Hamming space remain the same as the actual nearest neighbors in the original feature space. These
binary codes can be used as hash keys to construct a hash
1

