A Fast Algorithm for Elastic Shape Distances between Closed Planar Curves
Günay Doğan1,2 Javier Bernal2 Charles R. Hagwood2
1
Theiss Research 2 National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
{gunay.dogan,javier.bernal,charles.hagwood}@nist.gov

Abstract
Effective computational tools for shape analysis are
needed in many areas of science and engineering. We address this and propose a new fast iterative algorithm to compute the elastic geodesic distance between shapes of closed
planar curves. The original algorithm for this has cubic
time complexity with respect to the number of nodes per
curve. Hence it is not suitable for large shape data sets. We
aim for large-scale shape analysis and thus propose an iterative algorithm based on the original one but with quadratic
time complexity. In practice, we observe subquadratic, almost linear running times, and that our algorithm scales
very well with large numbers of nodes. The key to our algorithm is the decoupling of the optimization for the starting
point and rotation from that of the reparametrization, and
the development of fast dynamic programming and iterative
nonlinear constrained optimization algorithms that work in
tandem to compute optimal reparametrizations fast.

1. Introduction
A major challenge of modern data sets is not only their
sheer sizes, but that their elements may represent complex geometric structures and objects, e.g., proteins, cells,
mechanical parts, facial surfaces, and other morphologies.
Typically, one wants to cluster, classify or compare elements of such data sets, but performing such analyses requires defining a proper topological space where these entities reside. However, for data sets of complex elements, the
proper space may not be linear thus making it impossible to
use algorithmic tools designed for Euclidean spaces. This
can be the case for so-called shape spaces. In the particular
case where elements of data sets represent shapes of objects,
shape spaces have been proposed as an appropriate framework [4, 5, 8, 9, 13, 18, 14, 22]. Vaguely, shape is the aspect
of an object where location, rotation and scale information
have been removed. In this paper, we focus on work by
Srivastava et al. [19] on the computation of the elastic shape
geodesic distance between closed planar curves. Their work
considers curves as points in an infinite-dimensional Rie-

mannian manifold which allows for the computation of the
geodesic distance between them (see Section 2). From
this distance a flexible and intuitive geodesic distance measure between curve shapes is obtained, invariant to translation, scaling, rotation and reparametrization. However, it
is computationally expensive. The original algorithm proposed in [19] using dynamic programming (DP) runs in
O(N 3 ) time, N the number of nodes per curve. This can
be prohibitively expensive for many practical applications.
In many computer vision applications, such as biometrics,
shape retrieval, and in many science and engineering applications, practitioners work with hundreds, sometimes thousands of nodes per curve, and the shape distance algorithm
may have to be run many times on pairs from large curve
data sets. To enable such large-scale shape analyses, fast
computation of the geodesic distance between two curve
shapes is crucial. Accordingly, the goal of this paper is to
develop a fast algorithm to compute shape distances based
on that of Srivastava et al. [19] but considerably cheaper.
We propose a new fast iterative algorithm to compute the
elastic geodesic distance between shapes of closed planar
curves. The asymptotic time complexity of our algorithm is
roughly O(N 2 ). However, in our experiments, we have observed a linear trend with running times depending on the
type of curve data. Mathematically, the distance computation is formulated as a global minimization over triplets
of possible starting points (on the curve), rotations and
reparametrizations [19]. It is very difficult to find a globally optimum triplet for this problem, and we are not aware
of any solutions that guarantee it. However, we have found
that our algorithm produces strong minima and frequently
global minima. Moreover, when the starting point (or seed)
and rotation are fixed and known, it computes a globally optimal reparametrization, just like the DP algorithm in [19],
but much faster. For this, we developed fast DP and iterative nonlinear constrained optimization algorithms that we
describe in Section 4. The resulting reparametrization algorithm is plugged into another procedure of outer iterations
that computes the optimal starting point and rotation separately (see Algorithm 2 below). The overall computational
cost of our algorithm is O(ǫN 2 + K(N 2 + kN )), K the

