Learning a Sequential Search for Landmarks
Saurabh Singh, Derek Hoiem, David Forsyth
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
http://vision.cs.uiuc.edu/projects/lssland/
{ss1, dhoiem, daf}@illinois.edu

Abstract

Steps%

Steps%
3

3

lwri%

We propose a general method to find landmarks in images of objects using both appearance and spatial context.
This method is applied without changes to two problems:
parsing human body layouts, and finding landmarks in images of birds. Our method learns a sequential search for
localizing landmarks, iteratively detecting new landmarks
given the appearance and contextual information from the
already detected ones. The choice of landmark to be added
is opportunistic and depends on the image; for example,
in one image a head-shoulder group might be expanded
to a head-shoulder-hip group but in a different image to
a head-shoulder-elbow group. The choice of initial landmark is similarly image dependent. Groups are scored using a learned function, which is used to expand them greedily. Our scoring function is learned from data labelled with
landmarks but without any labeling of a detection order.
Our method represents a novel spatial model for the kinematics of groups of landmarks, and displays strong performance on two different model problems.

1

lelb%

2

1

2

lsho%

1
2
3

2
1
3

Figure 1. Our method learns to find landmarks sequentially in an
image dependent order. It uses the already detected landmarks to
provide the context needed for detecting the next landmark. We
show a visualization of the implicit spatial model learned by our
method for the case of three landmarks in two different images.
Each column corresponds to a step of our method and displays the
scores for every location in the image, for each remaining landmark, as a heat map. In bottom-right we show the inferred locations numbered by the step in which they were detected. Note that
the landmarks are detected in a different order in the two images.
The peaks, marked with a black cross, shift to the correct locations
as steps progress; e.g., peak for lelb in left image shifts to the correct location in step 2 after lsho is detected in step 1. Similarly,
peak for lwri shifts in step 3 once lelb is detected.

1. Introduction
Identifying sets of landmarks, such as joints on the human body or parts of a car, is a major problem in computer
vision. Many parts, such as a wrist or car door handle, are
difficult to find on their own, so the key research problem
is modeling the relations among the appearances and positions of landmarks. Relations among landmarks may be
very complicated; for example, human bodies are posed and
appareled in structured but complex ways, so that the position and appearance of a wrist depends on the positions of
shoulders, elbows, hips, presence of long sleeves, and so on.
To make learning and inference tractable, existing approaches are forced to use at least some of a menu of assumptions: that each landmark can be identified relatively
easily; that appearance and spatial terms factorize; that
spatial relations fit a convenient model; that discriminative methods can satisfactorily handle relational information

without expressing it explicitly; or that intractable inference
problems can be dealt with approximately in a satisfactory
way. The result is a surprisingly small list of strategies for
finding landmarks (§1.1).
We offer a novel, alternative strategy for finding landmarks. Instead of fixing a model structure and then dealing
with an intractable inference, we treat the inference as a sequential search procedure and learn parameters such that the
search remains tractable. In every step of the search a landmark is detected and our model uses the detected landmarks
1

