Beyond Gaussian Pyramid: Multi-skip Feature Stacking for Action Recognition
Zhenzhong Lan, Ming Lin, Xuanchong Li, Alexander G. Hauptmann, Bhiksha Raj
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University
lanzhzh, minglin, xcli, alex, bhiksha@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Most state-of-the-art action feature extractors involve
differential operators, which act as highpass filters and tend
to attenuate low frequency action information. This attenuation introduces bias to the resulting features and generates ill-conditioned feature matrices. The Gaussian Pyramid has been used as a feature enhancing technique that encodes scale-invariant characteristics into the feature space
in an attempt to deal with this attenuation. However, at the
core of the Gaussian Pyramid is a convolutional smoothing operation, which makes it incapable of generating new
features at coarse scales. In order to address this problem, we propose a novel feature enhancing technique called
Multi-skIp Feature Stacking (MIFS), which stacks features
extracted using a family of differential filters parameterized with multiple time skips and encodes shift-invariance
into the frequency space. MIFS compensates for information lost from using differential operators by recapturing
information at coarse scales. This recaptured information
allows us to match actions at different speeds and ranges
of motion. We prove that MIFS enhances the learnability
of differential-based features exponentially. The resulting
feature matrices from MIFS have much smaller conditional
numbers and variances than those from conventional methods. Experimental results show significantly improved performance on challenging action recognition and event detection tasks. Specifically, our method exceeds the stateof-the-arts on Hollywood2, UCF101 and UCF50 datasets
and is comparable to state-of-the-arts on HMDB51 and
Olympics Sports datasets. MIFS can also be used as a
speedup strategy for feature extraction with minimal or no
accuracy cost.

(a) Kids Running

(b) Olympics Running

(c) Action signal S

(d) ∆S

Figure 1: Simplified action signals (1c) from ”running” actions (1a,1b) show dramatically difference among subjects
and scenes. With such dramatic differences among action
signals, a differential operator with single scale is incapable
of covering a full range of action frequency and tend to lose
low frequency information (the red and cyan signals) .

tions, or visual features, are of utmost importance for a
vision system, not only because they are the chief reasons
for tremendous progress in the field, but also because they
lead to a deeper understanding of the information processing in the human vision system. In fact, most of the qualitative improvements to visual analysis can be attributed to
the introduction of improved representations, from SIFT
[15] to Deep Convolutional Neural Networks [29], STIP
[12] to Dense Trajectory [38] . A common characteristic
of these several generations of visual features is that they
all, in some way, benefit from the idea of multi-scale representation, which is generally viewed as an indiscriminately
applicable tool that reliably yields an improvement in performance when applied to almost all feature extractors.
At the core of image multi-scale representation is the re-

1. Introduction
We consider the problem of enhancing video representations for action recognition, which becomes increasingly
important for both analyzing human activity itself and as a
component for more complex event analysis. As pointed
out by Marr [16] and Lindeberg [14], visual representa1

