An Active Search Strategy for Efficient Object Class Detection
Abel Gonzalez-Garcia

Alexander Vezhnevets

Vittorio Ferrari

a.gonzalez-garcia@sms.ed.ac.uk

avezhnev@inf.ed.ac.uk

vferrari@staffmail.ed.ac.uk

University of Edinburgh

Abstract
Object class detectors typically apply a window classifier to all the windows in a large set, either in a sliding window manner or using object proposals. In this paper, we
develop an active search strategy that sequentially chooses
the next window to evaluate based on all the information
gathered before. This results in a substantial reduction in
the number of classifier evaluations and in a more elegant
approach in general. Our search strategy is guided by two
forces. First, we exploit context as the statistical relation
between the appearance of a window and its location relative to the object, as observed in the training set. This
enables to jump across distant regions in the image (e.g.
observing a sky region suggests that cars might be far below) and is done efficiently in a Random Forest framework.
Second, we exploit the score of the classifier to attract the
search to promising areas surrounding a highly scored window, and to keep away from areas near low scored ones.
Our search strategy can be applied on top of any classifier
as it treats it as a black-box. In experiments with R-CNN
on the challenging SUN2012 dataset, our method matches
the detection accuracy of evaluating all windows independently, while evaluating 9× fewer windows.

1. Introduction
Given an image, the goal of object class detection is to
place a bounding-box around every instance of a given object class. Modern object detectors [8, 10, 19, 22, 26, 35,
49, 53] partition the image into a set of windows and then
score each window with a classifier to determine whether it
contains an instance of the object class. The detector finally
outputs the windows with the locally highest scores.
In the classical sliding window approach [10, 19, 26, 35],
the window set is very large, containing hundred of thousands of windows on a regular grid at multiple scales.
This approach is prohibitively expensive for slow, powerful window classifiers which are state-of-the-art nowadays [8, 15, 22, 49, 53] such as Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) [22]. For this reason, these detectors are

Figure 1: Example of a car search using our method.

based instead on object proposal generators [2, 36, 49],
which provide a smaller set of a few thousand windows
likely to cover all objects. Hence, this reduces the number
of window classifier evaluations required. However, in both
approaches the window classifier evaluates all windows in
the set, effectively assuming that they are independent.
In this work, we propose an active search strategy that
sequentially chooses the next window to evaluate based on
previously observed windows, rather than going through the
whole window set in an arbitrary order. Observing a window not only provides information about the presence of the
object in that particular window, but also about its surroundings and even distant areas of the image. Our search method
extracts this information and integrates it into the search,
effectively guiding future observations to interesting areas,
likely to contain objects. Thereby, our method explores the
window space in an intelligent fashion, where future observations depend on all the information gathered so far.
This results in a more natural and elegant way of searching, avoiding wasteful computation in uninteresting areas
and focusing on the promising ones. As a consequence, our
method is able to find the objects while evaluating much
fewer windows, typically only a few hundreds (sec. 7.1).
We use two guiding forces in our method: context and
window classifier score. Context exploits the statistical relation between the appearance and location of a window and
its location relative to the objects, as observed in the train-

