More About VLAD: A Leap from Euclidean to Riemannian Manifolds
Masoud Faraki
Mehrtash T. Harandi
Fatih Porikli
College of Engineering and Computer Science, Australian National University, Australia
NICTA∗, Canberra Research Laboratory, Australia
{masoud.faraki,mehrtash.harandi,fatih.porikli}@nicta.com.au

Abstract
This paper takes a step forward in image and video
coding by extending the well-known Vector of Locally Aggregated Descriptors (VLAD) onto an extensive space of
curved Riemannian manifolds. We provide a comprehensive mathematical framework that formulates the aggregation problem of such manifold data into an elegant solution. In particular, we consider structured descriptors from
visual data, namely Region Covariance Descriptors and
linear subspaces that reside on the manifold of Symmetric Positive Definite matrices and the Grassmannian manifolds, respectively. Through rigorous experimental validation, we demonstrate the superior performance of this novel
Riemannian VLAD descriptor on several visual classification tasks including video-based face recognition, dynamic
scene recognition, and head pose classification.

1. Introduction
This paper extends the Vector of Locally Aggregated Descriptors (VLAD) [27] to general class of curved Riemannian manifolds, hence adding a novel dimension to the applicability of VLAD in tackling fundamental recognition
problems in computer vision.
Our motivation stems from the fact that, in Rn , coding local image or video descriptors using VLAD has been
shown to be exceptionally successful in addressing a variety
of challenging problems, such as image retrieval [27, 17],
texture classification [9], and scene recognition [17]. The
advantage of VLAD can be even more appreciated by noting that its high discriminatory power is achieved using
rudimentary vector subtraction and addition operations, a
negligible computational cost compared to more involved
approaches like deep convolutional networks.
To put the discussion into perspective, describing images or videos by local descriptors is preferable to holis∗ NICTA is funded by the Australian Government through the Department of Communications, as well as the Australian Research Council
through the ICT Centre of Excellence program.

tic representations when, for instance, the recognition problem pertains large intra-class variations, articulated shapes,
self-occlusions, and changing backgrounds, to name a few.
However, almost all previous studies [27, 41, 50, 17, 9]
that extracted local descriptors in the form of vectors disregarded the underlying intrinsic manifold structures, probably because proven and general techniques to aggregate
non-vectorized structures are scarce.
On a related note, structured representations such as Region Covariance Descriptors (RCovD) and linear subspaces
have been shown to provide robust and efficient representations for a wide range of tasks [22, 11, 51, 12, 46, 48, 49].
Therefore, a curious mind might inquire
• can we extract structured descriptors from visual data
and then aggregate them in a fashion similar to VLAD
to obtain more discriminating representations?
• is there any mathematical framework that helps us formulate the aggregation problem into an elegant yet
general and accurate solution?
This paper provides answers to the aforementioned questions by introducing the Riemannian version of the conventional VLAD, called R-VLAD, a new coding approach that
enables fusing local descriptors on curved spaces.
More specifically, we present a universal framework for
constructing a rich representation out of local image or
video descriptors where each local descriptor is indeed a
point on a Riemannian manifold. The conventional VLAD
algorithm can hence be considered as a special case of our
Riemannian formulation when the manifold is chosen to be
the Euclidean space.
We then turn our attention to two widely utilized Riemannian manifolds in vision, namely the manifold of Symmetric Positive Definite matrices (SPD) and the manifold
of linear subspaces, known as the Grassmannian manifold.
To this end, we develop the sister family of R-VLAD by exploiting other forms of metrics defined on SPD matrices and
Grassmannian manifolds. In particular, we make use of the
Stein [43] and Jeffrey [52] divergences on SPD matrices and

