Best-Buddies Similarity for Robust Template Matching
Tali Dekel∗1

Shaul Oron∗2
1

Michael Rubinstein†3
2

MIT CSAIL

{talidek,billf}@mit.edu

Shai Avidan2
3

Tel Aviv University

{shauloro,avidan}@eng.tau.ac.il

Abstract
We propose a novel method for template matching in unconstrained environments. Its essence is the Best-Buddies
Similarity (BBS), a useful, robust, and parameter-free similarity measure between two sets of points. BBS is based on
counting the number of Best-Buddies Pairs (BBPs)—pairs
of points in source and target sets, where each point is the
nearest neighbor of the other. BBS has several key features
that make it robust against complex geometric deformations
and high levels of outliers, such as those arising from background clutter and occlusions. We study these properties,
provide a statistical analysis that justifies them, and demonstrate the consistent success of BBS on a challenging realworld dataset.

1. Introduction
Finding a template patch in a target image is a core component in a variety of computer vision applications such as
object detection, tracking, image stitching and 3D reconstruction. In many real-world scenarios, the template—a
bounding box containing a region of interest in the source
image —undergoes complex deformations in the target image: the background can change and the object may undergo nonrigid deformations and partial occlusions.
Template matching methods have been used with great
success over the years but they still suffer from a number
of drawbacks. Typically, all pixels (or features) within the
template and a candidate window in the target image are
taken into account when measuring their similarity. This
is undesirable in some cases, for example, when the background behind the object of interest changes between the
template and the target image (see Fig. 1). In such cases, the
dissimilarities between pixels from different backgrounds
may be arbitrary, and accounting for them may lead to false
detections of the template (see Fig. 1(b)).
In addition, many template matching methods assume
∗ The first two authors contributed equally to this work
† Part of this work was done while the author was at Microsoft Research

William T. Freeman1
Google Research
mrub@google.com

(a)

(b)
BBS
SSD
SAD
NCC
HM
EMD
BDS

(c)

Figure 1. Best-Buddies Similarity (BBS) for Template Matching: (a), The template, marked in green, contains an object of
interest against a background. (b), The object in the target image
undergoes complex deformation (background clutter and large geometric deformation); the detection results using different similarity measures are marked on the image (see legend); our result is
marked in blue. (c), The Best-Buddies Pairs (BBPs) between the
template and the detected region are mostly found the object of
interest and not on the background; each BBP is connected by a
line and marked in a unique color.

a specific parametric deformation model between the template and the target image (e.g., rigid, affine transformation,
etc.). This limits the type of scenes that can be handled, and
may require estimating a large number of parameters when
complex deformations are considered.
In this paper, we propose a new method to address these
problems, and show that it can be applied successfully to
template matching in the wild. Specifically, we introduce
a novel similarity measure termed Best-Buddies Similarity
(BBS), analyze its key features, and perform extensive evaluation of its performance compared to a number of commonly used alternatives on a challenging data set.
BBS measures the similarity between two sets of points
in Rd . A key feature of this measure is that it relies only on
a subset (usually small) of pairs of points – the Best-Buddies
Pairs (BBPs). A pair of points is considered a BBP if each
point is the nearest neighbor of the other in the corresponding point set. BBS is then taken to be the fraction of BBP
out of all the points in the set.

