Data-Driven 3D Voxel Patterns for Object Category Recognition
Yu Xiang1,2 , Wongun Choi3 , Yuanqing Lin3 , and Silvio Savarese1
1
Stanford University, 2 University of Michigan at Ann Arbor, 3 NEC Laboratories America, Inc.
yuxiang@umich.edu, {wongun, ylin}@nec-labs.com, ssilvio@stanford.edu

Abstract
Despite the great progress achieved in recognizing objects as 2D bounding boxes in images, it is still very challenging to detect occluded objects and estimate the 3D
properties of multiple objects from a single image. In this
paper, we propose a novel object representation, 3D Voxel
Pattern (3DVP), that jointly encodes the key properties of
objects including appearance, 3D shape, viewpoint, occlusion and truncation. We discover 3DVPs in a data-driven
way, and train a bank of specialized detectors for a dictionary of 3DVPs. The 3DVP detectors are capable of detecting objects with specific visibility patterns and transferring
the meta-data from the 3DVPs to the detected objects, such
as 2D segmentation mask, 3D pose as well as occlusion or
truncation boundaries. The transferred meta-data allows
us to infer the occlusion relationship among objects, which
in turn provides improved object recognition results. Experiments are conducted on the KITTI detection benchmark
[17] and the outdoor-scene dataset [41]. We improve stateof-the-art results on car detection and pose estimation with
notable margins (6% in difficult data of KITTI). We also
verify the ability of our method in accurately segmenting
objects from the background and localizing them in 3D.

1. Introduction
One of the major paradigms in modern object recognition consists of characterizing images with a list of 2D
bounding boxes which correspond to the location and scale
of the objects in the image. Recent methods have demonstrated that this task can be solved with a good degree of
accuracy even when a large number of object categories is
considered [10, 22, 18]. However, in many applications –
autonomous driving is a notable example – recognizing objects as just 2D bounding boxes is not sufficient. In these
applications, estimating the 3D object pose or figuring out
the depth ordering of the objects from the observer is as
important as (or even more important than) identifying the
2D locations of the objects. Moreover, in these scenarios,
nuisances such as occlusions or truncation become domi-

2D recognition
3D localization

3D voxel patterns

Figure 1. By introducing the 3D voxel patterns, our recognition
framework is able to not only detect objects in images, but also
segment the detected objects from the background, estimate the
3D poses and 3D shapes, localize them in the 3D space, and even
infer the occlusion relationship among them. Green, red and cyan
voxels are visible, occluded and truncated respectively.

nant, and often one needs to recognize objects even when
only a small portion of their surface is visible. The recently
proposed KITTI benchmark [17] have been instrumental in
highlighting the fact that object detection and 3D pose estimation tasks become extremely difficult when objects such
as cars, bikes or trucks are to be recognized in the wild –
that is within complex and cluttered urban scenes. Consider
Fig. 1-top for instance, where cars occupy just a small portion of the image and most of them are heavily occluded by
other cars. Except for a few exceptions [30, 24], most of
the recent object detection methods have hard time in parsing out the correct configuration of objects from this kind
of imagery.
In this paper, we present a novel recognition pipeline
that addresses the key challenges above: i) it goes beyond
2D bounding box detection and is capable of estimating 3D
properties of multiple detected objects such as 3D pose as
well as their depth ordering from the observer; ii) it is designed to handle situations where objects are severely occluded by other objects or truncated because of a limited
field of view; iii) it is capable of accurately estimating the

