Descriptor Free Visual Indoor Localization with Line Segments∗
Branislav Micusik
AIT Austrian Institute of Technology

Horst Wildenauer
Zeno Track GmbH, Austria

branislav.micusik@ait.ac.at

horst.wildenauer@zenotrack.com

Abstract
We present a novel view on the indoor visual localization problem, where we avoid the use of interest points and
associated descriptors, which are the basic building blocks
of most standard methods. Instead, localization is cast as
an alignment problem of the edges of the query image to a
3D model consisting of line segments. The proposed strategy is effective in low-textured indoor environments and in
very wide baseline setups as it overcomes the dependency
of image descriptors on textures, as well as their limited invariance to view point changes. The basic features of our
method, which are prevalent indoors, are line segments. As
we will show, they allow for defining an efficient Chamfer distance-based aligning cost, computed through integral
contour images, incorporated into a first-best-search strategy. Experiments confirm the effectiveness of the method in
terms of both, accuracy and computational complexity.

↔

query image

l

l

database image

l

standard matching

proposed matching

Figure 1. Top row: Two images in correspondence, however, difficult to be matched and localized in 3D by standard approaches
based on point features and their local descriptors. Bottom left:
Standard matching with descriptors. Three corresponding patch
pairs, however, due to very different appearance with unmatchable
descriptors. Bottom right: Proposed line segment alignment-based
matching. Line segments in red are those detected in the query, in
blue those projected from the 3D model, and in yellow those which
are mutually matched.

1. Introduction
The visual localization problem stands for estimation of
the 3D location of a query image in a given 3D model
from visual information only. In recent years the localization problem has been attracting ever-increasing attention in
the computer vision community. Yet, most of the proposed
methods assume that the 3D model consists of a sparse set
of 3D points associated with their image descriptors. On
the algorithmic level, the localization problem is mostly a
matching challenge, i.e. given 2D point features with their
descriptors extracted from a query image, searching for tentative 2D-3D correspondences such that re-sectioning PnP
algorithms can be applied.
Standard matching procedures based on comparison of
image descriptors across images have a known bottleneck.
The problem is rooted in the limited descriptor invariance to
certain 3D transformations. Most descriptors are invariant
to affine transformations and assume planarity of the sup-

porting image regions from which they are computed. In
practice, these relaxations were shown to be feasible and
many successful techniques solving the localization problem on large city scale have emerged [18].
Most of the techniques are employed on outdoor scenery,
but application in indoor scenarios typically results in a significant performance drop. The reason is that indoor scenes
often exhibit a lot of windows, wiry structures, reflections
and repetitions, as well as limited texture, see Fig. 1. All
this causes standard procedures based on image descriptors
to poorly perform indoors.
In this paper, we introduce a novel proof-of-concept approach to the indoor localization problem. Aside from ubiquitous interest point + descriptor methods and representing
scenes by 3D point clouds, we build a 3D model consisting

∗ This research received funding from the Austrian Research Promotion
Agencys (FFG) projets LOLOG 840168, LARAH 4586620, and PAMON
835916.

1

