Semi-supervised Learning with Explicit Relationship Regularization
Kwang In Kim
Lancaster University

James Tompkin
Harvard SEAS

Abstract
In many learning tasks, the structure of the target space of a
function holds rich information about the relationships between
evaluations of functions on different data points. Existing approaches attempt to exploit this relationship information implicitly
by enforcing smoothness on function evaluations only. However,
what happens if we explicitly regularize the relationships between
function evaluations? Inspired by homophily, we regularize based
on a smooth relationship function, either defined from the data
or with labels. In experiments, we demonstrate that this significantly improves the performance of state-of-the-art algorithms in
semi-supervised classification and in spectral data embedding for
constrained clustering and dimensionality reduction.

1. Introduction
Regularization attempts to prevent overfitting in ill-posed
problems. It is commonly applied in semi-supervised learning
tasks: Given a sparse labeling on u data points with s labels
{(xi, yi)}si=1, our goal is to learn a function f which maps
from an input space M to a target space N. The lack of labels
is compensated for by exploiting unlabeled data points to
provide additional information, e.g., on the geometry of and/or
probability distribution on M, from which the data are generated.
Regularization tries to measure and limit the complexity of
proposed f solutions by preferring smaller training errors and
placing restrictions on smoothness. This established approach
helps solve a variety of learning problems, such as image and
shape classification, tracking, and retrieval (e.g., [21, 19, 5, 17]).
The target space N has a structure which may be defined implicitly or, in some applications, explicitly through pair-wise similarity or dissimilarity potentials. However, current regularization
methods operate only on the function itself, and do not explicitly
consider the potentially rich informative structure of N as something which can be used for regularization. Regularizing the structure — or the relationships — is inspired by homophily, which is
actively used to predict relationships within social networks [13, 1,
9]: individuals with similar mutual friends, or local structure, are
more likely to influence one another, e.g., if two individuals A and
B are friends then they tend to have mutual friends, and if A has an
enemy C, then B is also likely to be an enemy of C. We demonstrate that a priori knowledge of the smoothness of a relationship
between entities can be exploited in inference on the entity itself.

Hanspeter Pfister
Harvard SEAS

Christian Theobalt
MPI for Informatics

x5

, f 3)
k ( f1

k2( f1, f5, f6)

x6

x3

x1
k( f

x2

1, f
4)

x4

Figure 1. If two data points x1 and x2 are close on the domain M
of f, then conventional regularizers enforce that the corresponding
function values f1 and f2 in co-domain N of f are similar (fi ≡f(xi )).
We assume that relationships between pairs of function evaluations fi
and fj are represented by smooth functions k(fi ,fj ), e.g., a similarity
measure. Our regularizer explicitly enforces that k(f1 ,fj ) and k(f2 ,fj )
are similar for any j. For instance, if k(f1 ,f3 ) is large as f1 and f3 are
similar, but k(f1 ,f4 ) is small as f1 and f4 are dissimilar (solid arrows),
then our algorithm enforces that k(f2 ,f3 ) and k(f2 ,f4 ) are large and
small, respectively (dotted arrows), as x1 and x2 are close in M. The
same principle applies to high-order relationships: if k2 (f1 , f5 , f6 )
represents a ternary relationship, e.g., a third-order correlation, the
similarity of k2 (f1 ,f5 ,f6 ) and k2 (f2 ,f5 ,f6 ) is enforced.

One example that benefits from this principle occurs when relationship labels are provided. In semi-supervised or constrained
spectral clustering [12, 14, 18], the labels are provided not on
the underlying cluster assignment function f but on the binary
relationships k between the function evaluations, as must-link or
cannot-link labels. These are exploited by applying conventional
regularization on f with the condition that the constraints are
satisfied. However, in this case, the relationship itself can also
be a natural object to regularize (Fig. 1). Applying homophily,
if (x1,x3) must link, i.e., if they belong to the same cluster, then a
relationship function k on N is defined such that k(f(x1),f(x3))
is positive. For point x2, which is close to x1 in M, we expect
the relationship function k(f(x2),f(x3)) to be positive also.
In general, the relationship itself is not formally defined or
observed; however, in many applications, certain relationships
are manifested through a smooth function, where the number of
arguments corresponds to the relationship degree, e.g., a distance
metric is a function of two arguments. k can be defined either
directly from the data or from labels; either way, once the relationship is defined, regularization is independent of the existence
of labels and therefore applies generally to any learning problem.

