Bilinear Heterogeneous Information Machine for RGB-D Action Recognition
Yu Kong1 and Yun Fu1,2
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
2
College of Computer and Information Science.
Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA
{yukong,yunfu}@ece.neu.edu

Abstract

Data'
compression'

This paper proposes a novel approach to action recognition from RGB-D cameras, in which depth features and
RGB visual features are jointly used. Rich heterogeneous
RGB and depth data are effectively compressed and projected to a learned shared space, in order to reduce noise
and capture useful information for recognition. Knowledge
from various sources can then be shared with others in the
learned space to learn cross-modal features. This guides
the discovery of valuable information for recognition. To
capture complex spatiotemporal structural relationships in
visual and depth features, we represent both RGB and depth
data in a matrix form. We formulate the recognition task
as a low-rank bilinear model composed of row and column
parameter matrices. The rank of the model parameter is
minimized to build a low-rank classifier, which is beneficial for improving the generalization power. The proposed
method is extensively evaluated on two public RGB-D action datasets, and achieves state-of-the-art results. It also
shows promising results if RGB or depth data are missing
in training or testing procedure.

Shared'feature'space'

Ac4on'
recogni4on'

Figure 1. Our method projects and compresses both RGB visual
features and depth features to a learned shared feature space. Classification boundaries are learned in the shared space for action
recognition. This process iterates until convergence.

and thus would fail if depth data are unavailable or missing
in RGB-D cameras. In addition, depth data are noisy due
to spatiotemporal discontinuous regions. This hinders the
application of feature extraction methods such as surface
normal [25, 13] and spatiotemporal interest points [23, 5]
in these regions. If the discontinuous regions unfortunately
appear in the body parts that were supposed to provide discriminative cues, such as arms or legs, the recognition performance will be undoubtedly degraded in case of having
depth information as a single cue.
RGB data and depth data can be complementary to each
other if one of them is missing. Implicit correlations between them can be learned to handle the case that one of
them is unavailable. Moreover, RGB data are robust with no
discontinuities. Numerous feature descriptors (e.g. gradient
and optical flow) can be extracted from RGB data, providing abundant and robust features for recognition tasks.
Furthermore, human bodies consist of multiple structural
objects, and thus motions of human body parts are highly
correlated. Existing work for action recognition from depth
sequences [25, 13] attempted to capture spatiotemporal correlation information of body part movements by aggregating features from neighborhoods. However, this information would unfortunately collapse as co-occurrence features

1. Introduction
Action recognition from RGB-D cameras has been receiving increasing interests in the computer vision community due to the recent advance of easy-to-use and low-cost
depth sensors such as Kinect sensors [16]. In addition to
RGB visual data captured by conventional RGB cameras,
depth data are provided in RGB-D cameras, encoding rich
3D structural information of the entire scene. Previous work
[16, 13, 21, 5] showed that effective usage of 3D structural information facilitates recognition tasks as it simplifies
intra-class motion variations and removes cluttered background noise.
Despite its effectiveness, those methods are only applicable when depth data are available. Methods developed
in [25, 13, 23, 5] are particularly designed for depth data,
1

