Fast 2D Border Ownership Assignment
Ching L. Teo

Cornelia Fermüller

Yiannis Aloimonos

cteo@cs.umd.edu

fer@umiacs.umd.edu

yiannis@cs.umd.edu

Computer Vision Lab, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA

Abstract
A method for efficient border ownership assignment in
2D images is proposed. Leveraging on recent advances using Structured Random Forests (SRF) for boundary detection [8], we impose a novel border ownership structure that
detects both boundaries and border ownership at the same
time. Key to this work are features that predict ownership
cues from 2D images. To this end, we use several different
local cues: shape, spectral properties of boundary patches,
and semi-global grouping cues that are indicative of perceived depth. For shape, we use HoG-like descriptors that
encode local curvature (convexity and concavity). For spectral properties, such as extremal edges [28], we first learn
an orthonormal basis spanned by the top K eigenvectors
via PCA over common types of contour tokens [23]. For
grouping, we introduce a novel mid-level descriptor that
captures patterns near edges and indicates ownership information of the boundary. Experimental results over a subset
of the Berkeley Segmentation Dataset (BSDS) [24] and the
NYU Depth V2 [34] dataset show that our method’s performance exceeds current state-of-the-art multi-stage approaches that use more complex features.

Figure 1. Example results of predicted boundaries (blue) and their
ownership (red: foreground, yellow: background) from real-world
images: BSDS (above) and NYU Depth V2 (below). Best viewed
in digital copy.

boundary indication; it also encodes information about the
relative depth about the edge’s two adjacent regions, and to
which of the regions the edge belongs to. It has been shown
that image cues, such as the convexity of the edge [19], the
edge junctions, contrast, or the gradient in the intensity and
the texture carry this information [28]. In this paper, we
focus on detecting classes of bottom-up cues that indicate
border ownership, i.e. the information on which side of
a boundary belongs to the foreground/object or the background, from 2D images. Determining border ownership is
important from a computer vision perspective since it can be
regarded as a preprocessing step for foreground-background
segmentation [32], and is also closely related to selective
attention [4]. From a biological viewpoint, neurophysiological findings from the visual cortex of macaque monkeys
together with psychophysical experiments also suggest that
the human visual cortex has specialized cells that perform
some form of ownership prediction [36]. These mechanisms have been found in cortical areas V2 and V4 of monkeys [38], and they may be receiving feedback from higher
cortical regions [4].

1. Introduction
Look at the two images in Fig. 1 with highlighted boundaries on the right. These are regions in the image where
objects meet with one another or with the background. Humans are able to interpret complex scenes such as these and
predict their approximate depth orderings with relative ease
by integrating both bottom-up and top-down cues. In recent
years, so-called boundary detectors have become very popular tools. These detectors use local cues, such as brightness, color, texture, gradients and simple features [24] in
image patches to distinguish edge points likely at boundaries of surfaces from others. More recent approaches also
include globalization processes using long-range relations
of image points [2]. However, the image structure in the regions next to an occlusion edge can be used for more than
1

