Predicting Eye Fixations using Convolutional Neural Networks
Nian Liu1, Junwei Han1*, Dingwen Zhang1, Shifeng Wen1 and Tianming Liu2
1
Northwestern Polytechnical University, P.R. China
2
University of Georgia, USA
{liunian228,junweihan2010,zhangdingwen2006yyy, wenshifeng90}@gmail.com
tliu@cs.uga.edu

Abstract
It is believed that eye movements in free-viewing of
natural scenes are directed by both bottom-up visual
saliency and top-down visual factors. In this paper, we
propose a novel computational framework to
simultaneously learn these two types of visual features from
raw image data using a multiresolution convolutional
neural network (Mr-CNN) for predicting eye fixations. The
Mr-CNN is directly trained from image regions centered on
fixation and non-fixation locations over multiple
resolutions, using raw image pixels as inputs and eye
fixation attributes as labels. Diverse top-down visual
features can be learned in higher layers. Meanwhile
bottom-up visual saliency can also be inferred via
combining information over multiple resolutions. Finally,
optimal integration of bottom-up and top-down cues can be
learned in the last logistic regression layer to predict eye
fixations. The proposed approach achieves state-of-the-art
results over four publically available benchmark datasets,
demonstrating the superiority of our work.

1. Introduction
When viewing visual scenes, human∗ visual system has
the ability to selectively locate eye fixations on some
informative contents. In computer science field, researchers
normally develop computational visual saliency models to
quantitatively predict human eye attended locations using
computer vision techniques. In recent years, a large number
of computational models [1-7] and applications [8-10] have
been proposed.
Inspired by the biological evidence that locations
distinctive from their surroundings are more likely to attract
our attention, most traditional approaches typically cope
with the problem of saliency modeling by three steps in
sequence: early feature extraction, feature contrast
inference, and contrast integration. For early feature
extraction, Itti et al. [1] proposed three low-level features
∗

Corresponding author.

including intensity, color, and orientation. Judd et al. [2]
considered more early features, for example, subbands of
the steerable pyramid, 3D color histograms and color
probabilities based features. These works rely on
hand-crafted features. To acquire powerful hand-crafted
features, sufficient and proper domain-specific knowledge
is generally required. Nevertheless, a thorough
understanding of human visual attention mechanisms has
not been achieved yet. Meanwhile, the hand-crafted
features may be not universally appropriate for different
types of images. Although some machine learning methods
have been involved in some models, e.g. ICA [11] and
sparse coding [4, 12, 13], it’s still very hard for these
models to mine high-level information and latent patterns
of complex images due to the limited representational
capability of their shallow architectures.
In saliency models, contrast computation over early
features is another key procedure. Itti et al. [1] designed the
"center-surround difference" operator across multiple
scales to calculate contrast. Later on, a lot of works
followed Itti’s idea to compute contrast from different
views via using a variety of mathematical tools, for
example, using information theories [12], frequency
spectrum [14-17], sparse coding [13, 39] or autoencoder
[40]. From these previous works, we can see that most of
them resort to human-designed mechanisms to calculate
contrast, which would be insufficient to handle large-scale
data with complex distributions.
The last step for saliency modeling is to integrate
various contrast features to yield saliency maps. Itti et al.
[1] linearly fused three contrast maps using fixed weights.
Zhao and Koch [18] learned the optimal weights associated
with various contrasts using a least square technique upon a
set of eye tracking data. Judd et al. [2] learned a linear SVM
to fuse bottom-up features. Similarly, Borji [3] explored the
linear regression model and AdaBoost classifier for
optimized feature fusion.
Although most previous works mainly concentrate on
contrast-based bottom-up saliency, it is believed that at
early stage of free viewing, eye movements are mainly
directed by bottom-up visual saliency and later on, by
high-level factors (e.g., objects [19, 20], actions [21], and
events) [22, 23]. Thus it is inevitable to combine bottom-up
saliency information and top-down factors to build a

