Classifier Learning with Hidden Information
Ziheng Wang
Qiang Ji
ECSE, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY
wangz10@rpi.edu

Abstract

jiq@rpi.edu

X: RGB image

Traditional data-driven classifier learning approaches
become limited when the training data is inadequate either
in quantity or quality. To address this issue, in this paper we
propose to combine hidden information and data to enhance
classifier learning. Hidden information represents information that is only available during training but not available
during testing. It often exists in many applications yet has
not been thoroughly exploited, and existing methods to utilize hidden information are still limited. To this end, we
propose two general approaches to exploit different types of
hidden information to improve different classifiers. We also
extend the proposed methods to deal with incomplete hidden information. Experimental results on different applications demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed methods
for exploiting hidden information and their superior performance to existing methods.

X: image

H: joint positions

H: textual description

X: face image

X: blurred image

H: facial actions
Raise Cheek

Yes

Raise Brow

No

Tighten Lid

No

Raise Upper Lip

Yes

Lips Apart

Yes

H: original image

A brown cat lies
under a tap and
stares at something
curiously

Figure 1: Examples of hidden information in different applications. X stands for primary measurement, H stands for hidden
information.

and human action labels, the learner may also obtain depth
information and human joint positions about each human
action instance. Both object attributes and joint positions
could be obtained offline for training data yet are very expensive to obtain for all the testing instances. The question
is if we can effectively exploit such information that is available only during training to help improve the classification
performance. In this paper we denote such information as
hidden information and study how to combine hidden information and data to learn a better classifier. We call the new
learning problem learning with hidden information.
With hidden information, we expect that a better classifier can be learned during training. The idea of learning
with hidden information is also appealing because of its resemblance to human learning. A student may get various
learning aids such as computer softwares in school. Yet they
have to solve problems on their own without these learning
aids latter on. These learning aids help improve students’
learning.
However, learning with hidden information is challenging since hidden information is not available during testing
and cannot be combined together with input features to predict the class label. Therefore hidden information has to be
automatically and effectively encoded into the structure or
parameters of the classifier during training. In this paper we
focus on using hidden information to obtain better estimate
of classifier parameters.

1. Introduction
A wide variety of computer vision problems can be formulated as a classification problem. Over the past decades,
classifier learning methods have been mostly data-driven.
The classifier is learned purely from a set of training instances (x1 , y1 ), · · · , (xn , yn ). Despite the substantial successes they have achieved for solving classification problems, data-driven approaches become very brittle and prone
to overfitting when the training data is inadequate in either
quantity or quality, which is unfortunately often the case in
many real-world applications.
A natural solution to alleviate the limitations of datadriven approaches is incorporating additional prior information. In particular, there often exists a type of information
which is available during training but not available during
testing. It can be qualities, properties and context of the
training instances, and can be found in a wide variety of
applications. For example, in object recognition, besides
the image features and object labels, during training, the
learner may also have access to object attributes which describe high-level properties of the objects in each image. In
human action recognition, besides the RGB video features
1

