Combining Local Appearance and Holistic View: Dual-Source Deep Neural
Networks for Human Pose Estimation
Xiaochuan Fan, Kang Zheng, Yuewei Lin, Song Wang
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 29208, USA

{fan23,zheng37,lin59}@email.sc.edu, songwang@cec.sc.edu

Abstract
We propose a new learning-based method for estimating 2D human pose from a single image, using Dual-Source
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (DS-CNN). Recently,
many methods have been developed to estimate human pose
by using pose priors that are estimated from physiologically inspired graphical models or learned from a holistic perspective. In this paper, we propose to integrate both
the local (body) part appearance and the holistic view of
each local part for more accurate human pose estimation.
Specifically, the proposed DS-CNN takes a set of image
patches (category-independent object proposals for training and multi-scale sliding windows for testing) as the input
and then learns the appearance of each local part by considering their holistic views in the full body. Using DS-CNN,
we achieve both joint detection, which determines whether
an image patch contains a body joint, and joint localization,
which finds the exact location of the joint in the image patch.
Finally, we develop an algorithm to combine these joint detection/localization results from all the image patches for
estimating the human pose. The experimental results show
the effectiveness of the proposed method by comparing to
the state-of-the-art human-pose estimation methods based
on pose priors that are estimated from physiologically inspired graphical models or learned from a holistic perspective.

1. Introduction
By accurately locating the important body joints from
2D images, human pose estimation plays an essential role
in computer vision. It has wide applications in intelligent
surveillance, video-based action recognition, and humancomputer interaction. However, human pose estimation
from an 2D image is a well known challenging problem –
too many degrees of freedom are introduced by the large
variability of the human pose, different visual appearance
of the human body and joints, different angles of camera

Figure 1. An illustration of the proposed method based on DSCNN. (a) Input image and generated image patches. (b) DS-CNN
input on an image patch (containing a local part – ankle). (c) DSCNN input on full body and holistic view of the local part in the
full body. (d) DS-CNN for learning. (e) DS-CNN output on joint
detection. (f) DS-CNN output on joint localization.

view, and possible occlusions of body parts and joints.
Most of the previous works on human pose estimation
are based on the two-layer part-based model [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15]. The first layer focuses on local (body) part appearance and the second layer imposes the
contextual relations between local parts. One popular partbased approach is pictorial structures [1], which capture the
pairwise geometric relations between adjacent parts using
a tree model. However, these pose estimation methods using part-based models are usually sensitive to noise and the
graphical model lacks expressiveness to model complex human poses [12]. Furthermore, most of these methods search
for each local part independently and the local appearance
may not be sufficiently discriminative for identifying each
local part reliably.
Recently, deep neural network architectures, specifically
deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs), have shown
outstanding performance in many computer vision tasks.
Due to CNNs’ large learning capacity and robustness to
variations, there is a natural rise in the interest to directly
learn high-level representations of human poses without using hand-crafted low-level features and even graphical mod-

