Clique-graph Matching by Preserving Global & Local Structure
Wei-Zhi Nie† , An-An Liu†∗ , Zan Gao‡ , Yu-Ting Su†
† School of Electronics Information Engineering, Tianjin University, China
‡ School of Computer & Communication Engineering, Tianjin University of Technology, China
*Corresponding author:

Abstract

anan0422@gmail.com

Previous literatures on this task mainly focus on nodeto-node mapping by leveraging the first & second order attributes [8, 16, 12, 11]. Since this node-wise mapping can
not well preserve both global and local structure in the feature subspaces, many researchers have been involved into
designing the high order attributes for the formulation of
the objective function [4, 20]. Consequently, this task can
be naturally generalized into the problem of hyper-graph
matching [10]. However, hyper-graph matching usually
faces several non-trivial problems. On one hand, it is not
easy and intuitive to define scale-invariant similarity measure between two hyper-edges. On the other hand, it is
mathematically difficult to impose the mapping constraints
on the objective function to induce the stable solution. Furthermore, the node order on each hyper-edge is usually ignored [10], which might lead to the variation of the similarity between pairwise hyper-edges and further directly have
negative influence on the robustness of graph matching.

This paper originally proposes the clique-graph and further presents a clique-graph matching method by preserving global and local structures. Especially, we formulate
the objective function of clique-graph matching with respective to two latent variables, the clique information in
the original graph and the pairwise clique correspondence
constrained by the one-to-one matching. Since the objective
function is not jointly convex to both latent variables, we
decompose it into two consecutive steps for optimization:
1) clique-to-clique similarity measure by preserving local
unary and pairwise correspondences; 2) graph-to-graph
similarity measure by preserving global clique-to-clique
correspondence. Extensive experiments on the synthetic
data and real images show that the proposed method can
outperform representative methods especially when both
noise and outliers exist.

In this paper, we originally propose the clique-graph and
further propose the method for clique-graph matching by
preserving global and local structure. Different from the
classic graph or hyper-graph, we replace individual node
(the basic unit in the graph/hyper-graph) by one clique,
which consists of K nearest neighbors in the specific feature subspace and can convey the local structural attributes
in the star model. For clique-graph matching, we formulate the objective function with respective to two latent variables, the clique information in individual clique-graph and
the clique correspondence between pairwise clique-graphs.
Since the objective function is not jointly convex to both
parameters, we further decompose it into two consecutive
steps. First, the local graph matching with unary and pairwise correspondences is implemented to align both cliques
from two clique-graphs. In this way, we can discover the
correspondences of nodes and edges in both cliques and further compute the clique-wise similarity. Second, the cliquegraph matching can be realized by clique-to-clique matching only with the unary attribute since the clique-wise similarity already conveys local structure.

1. Introduction
Graph matching is very essential in the fields of computer vision and pattern recognition. It has been widely
used in many applications such as 3D image retrieval[13],
object recognition[1, 6], biomedical identification[5], multiple object tracking[14], etc. Given two sets of feature
points lying in different subspaces, each set can be considered as one graph, which consists of two important components, nodes and edges, respectively representing feature
points and the relations between pariwise feature points.
Graph matching aims to discover each feature point’s counterpart in the other subspace while well preserving both
global relations with the other nodes in the same graph
(global structure) and the local relations with the neighbor
nodes (local structure). Although much work has been done
for this task, it is still challenging due to the difficulty in
discriminative visual feature representation, precise salient
point localization, deformation of the correlation between
pairwise points due to the viewpoint change, affine transformation, etc.

The main contributions of the proposed method are sum1

