Improving Object Proposals with Multi-Thresholding Straddling Expansion
Xiaozhi Chen Huimin Ma Xiang Wang Zhichen Zhao
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
{chenxz12,wangxiang14,zhaozc14}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, mhmpub@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

bounding box proposals, which is particularly useful for
class-specific object detection. We propose an effective approach to improve the quality of object proposals.
Our work is motivated by the following problems. First,
most models [3, 7, 24] that directly generate bounding
box proposals suffer from strong localization bias, which
means they can hardly achieve high recall consistently
across various intersection over union (IoU) thresholds.
Second, diversification strategies required by most models [6, 8, 15, 18, 19, 20] are commonly computationally
expensive. To achieve high accuracy, many models have
to utilize multiple segmentations to diversify object proposals, at the cost of much more computations. Our solution
for these issues is based on two main contributions:
• A measurement for localization bias, which enlightens
a direction to improving the quality of object proposals
(Sect. 3.1).
• A box refinement method, namely Multi-Thresholding
Straddling Expansion (MTSE), which effectively
reduces localization bias via fast diversification
(Sect. 3.2).
Figure 1 illustrates the overall pipeline of our method.
Our key idea is to utilize superpixels straddling to refine
bounding boxes. Given an image and a set of initial bounding boxes, we first align bounding boxes with potential
boundaries preserved by superpixels. Then we perform
multi-thresholding expansion guided by superpixels straddling for each bounding box. Such a simple procedure benefits object proposals from numerous aspects: 1) significant
reduction in localization bias, 2) fast diversification effect
requiring only one segmentation, and 3) seamless integration into any existing model to improve their accuracy with
little computation overhead.
We evaluate our method on PASCAL VOC2007. Experiments show that our method effectively improve existing models by a large margin. In particular, when using
2000 proposals, we achieve the highest recall at intersection over union threshold of 0.5 and 0.8 with 94.2% and
63.8%, respectively. In addition, the proposed MTSE takes
only 0.15s, thus bringing little computational overhead to
existing models. (Sect. 4).

Recent advances in object detection have exploited object proposals to speed up object searching. However, many
of existing object proposal generators have strong localization bias or require computationally expensive diversification strategies. In this paper, we present an effective
approach to address these issues. We first propose a simple and useful localization bias measure, called superpixel
tightness. Based on the characteristics of superpixel tightness distribution, we propose an effective method, namely
multi-thresholding straddling expansion (MTSE) to reduce
localization bias via fast diversification. Our method is essentially a box refinement process, which is intuitive and
beneficial, but seldom exploited before. The greatest benefit
of our method is that it can be integrated into any existing model to achieve consistently high recall across various
intersection over union thresholds. Experiments on PASCAL VOC dataset demonstrates that our approach improves
numerous existing models significantly with little computational overhead.

1. Introduction
In recent years, object proposal generation [3, 4, 6, 7,
8, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 24] has become a promising
technique for many vision recognition tasks, especially for
class-specific object detection. Instead of handling with
tremendous amount of bounding boxes in sliding windows
fashion, object proposal generation selects much fewer candidate bounding boxes (typically from hundreds to a few
thousands per image) that cover most of the objects in the
image. This technique benefits object detection from two
aspects: speeding up the computation by reducing the candidate bounding boxes and improving the detection accuracy by allowing the usage of more sophisticated learning
machinery. Recent detection models using object proposals [12, 22] have shown superior performance over sliding
window based methods [10].
Object proposals are represented in the form of segment
or bounding box. In this paper, we focus on generating
1

