Joint Vanishing Point Extraction and Tracking
Till Kroeger1
Dengxin Dai1
Luc Van Gool1,2
1
Computer Vision Laboratory, D-ITET, ETH Zurich
2
VISICS, ESAT/PSI, KU Leuven
{kroegert, dai, vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
We present a novel vanishing point (VP) detection and
tracking algorithm for calibrated monocular image sequences. Previous VP detection and tracking methods usually assume known camera poses for all frames or detect
and track separately. We advance the state-of-the-art by
combining VP extraction on a Gaussian sphere with recent advances in multi-target tracking on probabilistic occupancy fields. The solution is obtained by solving a Linear
Program (LP). This enables the joint detection and tracking of multiple VPs over sequences. Unlike existing works
we do not need known camera poses, and at the same time
avoid detecting and tracking in separate steps. We also propose an extension to enforce VP orthogonality. We augment
an existing video dataset consisting of 48 monocular videos
with multiple annotated VPs in 14448 frames for evaluation. Although the method is designed for unknown camera
poses, it is also helpful in scenarios with known poses, since
a multi-frame approach in VP detection helps to regularize
in frames with weak VP line support.

Figure 1: Tracked vanishing directions are shown together with
associated imaged line segments in three frames of a sequence.
This and the subsequent figures are best viewed in color.

ally, when this is needed, the camera pose is assumed to be
known for every frame [1, 13], thereby rendering the VP
association across images simple, or separate steps for VP
detection and tracking (particle filters [23, 25], greedy assignment [11]) are used. Since pose knowledge can only
be obtained through expensive odometry or external motion measurements, it will often not be available. Separate
VP detection and tracking often results in missed detections
or loss and re-initialization of VP tracks due to weak line
support in some frames. Even in the case of known poses,
joint detection over multiple frames benefits from integrating image evidence of many frames. Joint reasoning over
sequences is particularly useful if long-term VP identities
are required, and re-initializations are expensive.
To the best of our knowledge, no method exists that
jointly extracts multiple VPs in all frames of a video with
unknown camera motion. Our contributions are twofold:
1. Method. We propose the first algorithm for the joint
VP extraction over all images of a sequence with unknown
camera poses. We borrow from recent advances in multitarget tracking [6, 35] and model the problem as a variant
of a network-flow tracking problem. We compute line segments in each frame and discretize the set of possible VPs
on a probabilistic spherical occupancy grid. Line-VP association probabilities and VP transition probabilities are
converted into an acyclic graph for joint VP extraction and
tracking. VPs are extracted by Linear Programming (LP).
2. Dataset. As the field lacks a dataset for the evaluation

1. Introduction
A vanishing point (VP) is the point of convergence of a
set of parallel lines in the imaged scene under a projective
transformation. Man-made structures often consist of geometric primitives, such as multiple sets of parallel or orthogonal planes and lines in the scene. Because of this, the detection of projected VPs in images provides strong cues for
the extraction of knowledge about the unknown 3D world
structure. VPs can often be further constrained to mutual
orthogonality, due to the preference of right angles in manmade structures. Detected VPs have been used as a lowlevel input to many higher-level computer vision tasks, such
as 3D reconstruction [9, 14], autonomous navigation [23],
camera calibration [12, 33] and pose estimation [15, 22].
Many applications, which take video sequences or unordered image sets as input, require VP estimates in every frame and VP identities across views or frames. Usu1

