JOTS: Joint Online Tracking and Segmentation
Longyin Wen1 , Dawei Du2 , Zhen Lei1∗, Stan Z. Li1 , Ming-Hsuan Yang3
1
NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, CHN.
2
SCCE, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, CHN.
3
School of Engineering, University of California at Merced, USA.
1

{lywen,zlei,szli}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, 2 dawei.du@vipl.ict.ac.cn, 3 mhyang@ucmerced.edu

Abstract
We present a novel Joint Online Tracking and Segmentation (JOTS) algorithm which integrates the multi-part
tracking and segmentation into a unified energy optimization framework to handle the video segmentation task. The
multi-part segmentation is posed as a pixel-level label assignment task with regularization according to the estimated part models, and tracking is formulated as estimating the part models based on the pixel labels, which in
turn is used to refine the model. The multi-part tracking
and segmentation are carried out iteratively to minimize the
proposed objective function by a RANSAC-style approach.
Extensive experiments on the SegTrack and SegTrack v2
databases demonstrate that the proposed algorithm performs favorably against the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in video segmentation aim to extract
target objects from the background with accurate boundaries using mainly offline approaches [24, 13, 21, 16, 26,
19, 27, 20]. Despite much demonstrated success, existing
methods are less effective for applications that entail online processing. Examples abound, including video surveillance, action recognition and human-computer interaction,
to name a few. Recently, some online video segmentation
methods are proposed, e.g., [7] and SPT [18]. The global
object appearance modeling without strong local constraints
in [7] and the target-independent proposals generation step
in SPT [18] may cause inaccurate segmentation results, especially in the scene with complex background or large motions.
Image segmentation aims to partition pixels based on
certain characteristics (e.g., color, intensity, or texture) in
the spatial domain, while tracking intends to partition pixels
based on the consistence properties in the temporal domain.
Clearly each task facilitates the other especially for online
∗ Corresponding author.

video segmentation, and both modules should be considered in the same framework. Thus, in this work, we propose a Joint Online Tracking and Segmentation (JOTS) algorithm, which formulates the video segmentation task as
the online multi-part tracking and segmentation in a unified energy function. The online multi-part tracking provides effective sequential motion and structure constraints
for segmentation, while the multi-part segmentation generates accurate local appearance and location information to
facilitate tracking. The tracking and segmentation stages
are optimized iteratively by a RANSAC-style approach to
validate the results generated by each module for accurate
performance. The main steps of the proposed algorithm are
shown in Figure 1. As an example in Figure 1(c), the target multi-part model learned in the first two iterations fail to
fit the current pixels well (center locations of some models
are not located at the centroids of the pixels with the same
label). As the multi-part models fit pixels better through
tracking, the labeling error decreases. Meanwhile, more accurate multi-part tracking is achieved as the labeling error
decreases.
The contributions of this work are summarized as follows. First, a novel joint online tracking and segmentation
algorithm is proposed for online video segmentation, where
the multi-part tracking and segmentation are integrated in a
unified energy objective function to achieve better performance. Second, the minimization of the proposed energy
function is effectively solved by a RANSAC-style approach
with the α-expansion algorithm. Third, extensive experiments on two benchmark datasets, i.e., SegTrack and SegTrack v2, against the state-of-the-art methods are carried
out to demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

2. Related Work and Problem Context
Segmentation. Video segmentation has attracted much attention due to its importance in vision problems. Numerous
algorithms have been proposed to address this problem using both past and future frames of an image sequence with
batch processing [24, 13, 21, 16, 26, 19, 27, 20]. While

