Spherical Embedding of Inlier Silhouette Dissimilarities
Etai Littwin, Hadar Averbuch-Elor, Daniel Cohen-Or
Tel-Aviv University
Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a spherical embedding technique to position a given set of silhouettes of an object
as observed from a set of cameras arbitrarily positioned
around the object. Our technique estimates dissimilarities
among the silhouettes and embeds them directly in the rotation space SO(3). The embedding is obtained by an optimization scheme applied over the rotations represented with
exponential maps. Since the measure for inter-silhouette
dissimilarities contains many outliers, our key idea is to
perform the embedding by only using a subset of the estimated dissimilarities. We present a technique that carefully
screens for inlier-distances, and the pairwise scaled dissimilarities are embedded in a spherical space, diffeomorphic
to SO(3). We show that our method outperforms spherical
MDS embedding, demonstrate its performance on various
multi-view sets, and highlight its robustness to outliers.

1 Introduction
We consider the following problem: given a set of silhouettes of an object as observed from a set of cameras and an
estimated dissimilarity measure among them, we would like
to approximate their relative rotations and position them
on a sphere (see the illustration in Figure 1c). Similar to
previous works (e.g., [17, 8, 13]), we assume that the object silhouettes are the only visual cues provided, and thus
traditional structure from motion (SfM) techniques based
on common feature correspondence cannot be applied successfully. However, we do not intend to calibrate the cameras from the given silhouettes. The dissimilarity measure
among the silhouettes is invariant to scaling and translation and thus we are only interested in the relative rotation
among the cameras. Hence, we embed the object’s silhouettes in SO(3). Once they are embedded onto the 3D rotation space, the camera positions can be easily approximated
over a sphere.
The problem we address is particularly challenging since
the similarity estimates are generally unreliable, and directly applying a multi-dimensional scaling (MDS) embed-

ding introduces a significant distortion. Hence, a robust
technique is sought, that may ignore portions of the input
data. Our technique finds and considers inlier dissimilarities and ignores outlier ones, and then embeds only a subset
of the views (see the illustration in Figure 1). The measure that we employ to estimate the dissimilarities between
silhouettes, just like most similarity measures, tends to be
more reliable for more similar shapes, and completely unreliable for more dissimilar ones. This may suggest that by
simply ignoring large dissimilarity measures, a robust embedding can possibly be obtained. However, as we shall
show, such a simple approach is not robust enough as some
short distance estimates are also erroneous and distort the
embedding on the sphere.
The technique that we present is more involved. It carefully
defines a graph, that may not necessarily contain all the input silhouettes, nor all their pairwise dissimilarities. The
graph is defined by a union of small sub-sampled matrices,
each of which is verified to have a plausible embedding in
SO(3). The graph of inlier dissimilarities, as a whole, is
then embedded into the space of rotations by an optimization that associates relative rotations with the views so that
they agree with the dissimilarities defined by the edges of
the graph. Our embedding technique employs exponential maps and solves the embedding in the rotation space
SO(3), without introducing large dissimilarities to complete
the affinity matrix. Our contribution is twofold: First, we
present a spherical embedding technique based on exponential maps, and show that it outperforms spherical MDS. Second, we develop an inlier screening technique, and show its
robustness to erroneous silhouette dissimilarities.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Related works
are briefly reviewed in Section 2. We present an overview of
our method in Section 3. In Section 4, we review the topology of the SO(3) group and the exponential maps which
we apply in our spherical embedding. We introduce our
exponential maps embedding, inlier screening techniques,
and dissimilarity measure in Sections 5, 6, and 7, respectively. We then show some results and an evaluation of our
technique in Section 8 and conclude with a discussion of
limitations and future work in Section 9.

