Video Event Recognition with Deep Hierarchical Context Model
Xiaoyang Wang and Qiang Ji
Dept. of ECSE, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, USA
{wangx16,jiq}@rpi.edu

Abstract

Dynamic Cueing

Scene Priming

Prior Level
Context

Video event recognition still faces great challenges due
to large intra-class variation and low image resolution, in
particular for surveillance videos. To mitigate these challenges and to improve the event recognition performance,
various context information from the feature level, the semantic level, as well as the prior level is utilized. Different
from most existing context approaches that utilize context in
one of the three levels through shallow models like support
vector machines, or probabilistic models like BN and MRF,
we propose a deep hierarchical context model that simultaneously learns and integrates context at all three levels, and
holistically utilizes the integrated contexts for event recognition. We first introduce two types of context features describing the event neighborhood, and then utilize the proposed deep model to learn the middle level representations and combine the bottom feature level, middle semantic
level and top prior level contexts together for event recognition. The experiments on state of art surveillance video
event benchmarks including VIRAT 1.0 Ground Dataset, VIRAT 2.0 Ground Dataset, and the UT-Interaction Dataset
demonstrate that the proposed model is quite effective in
utilizing the context information for event recognition. It
outperforms the existing context approaches that also utilize multiple level contexts on these event benchmarks.

Event
Interaction

Person Rep.

Event Feature

Vehicle Rep.

Appearance
Context Feature

Interaction
Context Feature

Semantic
Level
Context

Feature Level
Context

Figure 1. Illustration of our approach for learning and integrating
feature level, semantic level and prior level contexts. In the figure,
“Person Rep.” and “Vehicle Rep.” represent the learned middle
level representations for person and vehicle respectively.

event recognition turns the focus to context. Context can be
regarded as information that is not directly related to event
recognition task, but it can be utilized to improve the traditional data-driven and target-centered event recognition. As
summarized in [35] recently, existing context approaches
generally utilize contexts from feature level [32, 40], semantic level [3, 36], or prior level [28, 33, 34] of the recognition system. From these three levels, context can provide
information on the circumstance and environment within
which the event occurs, and hence can support the event
recognition. Since there is little work in combining different contexts from multiple levels, the work in [35] studies to
simultaneously integrate the three levels of context through
a Bayesian network (BN) based hierarchical model.
However, the existing context approaches for event
recognition either utilize context directly as feature inputs [32] to classifiers like support vector machines, or incorporate context through traditional probabilistic graphical
models like BN [3, 35], Markov random field (MRF) [36],
or latent topic model [12]. There is little work studying utilizing probabilistic deep models like deep Boltzmann machines (DBMs) [24] to capture contexts for event recognition. Furthermore, the probabilistic deep models have

1. Introduction
Video event recognition aims to recognize the spatiotemporal visual patterns of events from videos. In recent
years, event recognition has attracted growing interest from
both academia and industry [29, 15]. However, recognizing events in surveillance videos is still quite challenging, largely due to the tremendous intra-class variations of
events caused by visual appearance differences, target motion variations, viewpoint change and temporal variability.
Moreover, the low image resolution, object occlusion, and
illumination change in surveillance videos further aggregate
the event recognition challenges.
To mitigate these challenges, various work [40, 35] in
1

