Scalable Structure from Motion for Densely Sampled Videos
B. Resch1,2

H. P. A. Lensch2,3
1
Disney Research Zurich

O. Wang1
M. Pollefeys3
A. Sorkine-Hornung1
2
3
Tübingen University
ETH Zurich

Abstract

cation domains, it is often much simpler and more practical
to capture video instead of photographs to ensure a sufficiently broad as well as dense coverage of a scene. At the
same time, video resolution and frame rate are constantly
increasing. Mobile cameras such as the iPhone can record
more than 120 frames per second, yielding thousands of images in just a few seconds of capture. Older approaches
based on feature tracking as well as modern sparse feature
point and SLAM-based approaches do not scale well to such
densely-sampled data, both due to numerical inaccuracies
arising from small baselines, and computational tractability
associated with the sheer quantity of pixels.
But while densely sampled, high quality video data
presents many challenges, it also provides opportunities.
For instance, recent approaches have demonstrated how
spatiotemporal coherence can be exploited in the context
of 3D reconstruction [15, 33]. The key insight in this paper
is that such data also enables novel, more efficient strategies
for achieving globally consistent geometric calibrations.
Contributions. The main technical contributions that
we propose are: a modification to KLT that allows for drift
free tracking over thousands of frames, a robust selection
of confident frames, a novel interleaved window bundle adjustment (BA) that makes optimizing large windows more
efficient, uniform image coverage based point subsampling,
robust frame-to-structure verification to obtain global, wide
baseline anchors between camera poses, and the utilization of an efficient linear camera post estimation (LCPE)
method that integrates information from both BA windows
and global anchors in a unified way.
As opposed to prior work, our approach does not rely
on analytical, fixed input size n-Point methods, which we
observed to be not good enough due the fact that they use
less data than BA, and therefore yield less precise results for
the small baselines of densely sampled video input. Moreover, we combine results from piecewise camera track reconstruction, loop closing, and linking between different
camera tracks into a single nonlinear optimization procedure. This allows different camera tracks to help each other
to get a good initialization for global optimization.
When all of the contributions are combined, our method
is able to obtain a globally consistent extrinsic camera cali-

Videos consisting of thousands of high resolution frames
are challenging for existing structure from motion (SfM)
and simultaneous-localization and mapping (SLAM) techniques. We present a new approach for simultaneously computing extrinsic camera poses and 3D scene structure that
is capable of handling such large volumes of image data.
The key insight behind this paper is to effectively exploit coherence in densely sampled video input. Our technical contributions include robust tracking and selection of confident
video frames, a novel window bundle adjustment, frame-tostructure verification for globally consistent reconstructions
with multi-loop closing, and utilizing efficient global linear
camera pose estimation in order to link both consecutive
and distant bundle adjustment windows. To our knowledge
we describe the first system that is capable of handling high
resolution, high frame-rate video data with close to realtime performance. In addition, our approach can robustly
integrate data from different video sequences, allowing multiple video streams to be simultaneously calibrated in an
efficient and globally optimal way. We demonstrate high
quality alignment on large scale challenging datasets, e.g.,
2-20 megapixel resolution at frame rates of 25-120 Hz with
thousands of frames.

1. Introduction
Structure from Motion (SfM), i.e., reconstructing camera parameters and sparse scene structure from images, has
a long history in computer vision. Early approaches concentrated on reconstruction from videos based on feature
tracking techniques (see, e.g., [12, 27] for an overview).
With the advent of robust feature descriptors like SIFT,
SURF or ORB (see, e.g., the survey [29]), larger view differences could be matched, and SfM techniques were successfully extended to very large scale, unstructured sets of
images [5,26]. Coupled with the availability of online photo
collections, these approaches have become very popular,
enabling a wide range of novel applications such as 3D reconstruction from thousands of photographs [6, 34].
However, for individual users, and in personalized appli1

