3D Scanning Deformable Objects with a Single RGBD Sensor
Mingsong Dou∗1 , Jonathan Taylor2 , Henry Fuchs1 , Andrew Fitzgibbon2 and Shahram Izadi2
1

Department of Computer Science, UNC-Chapel Hill
2
Microsoft Research

Abstract
We present a 3D scanning system for deformable objects that uses only a single Kinect sensor. Our work allows considerable amount of nonrigid deformations during
scanning, and achieves high quality results without heavily
constraining user or camera motion. We do not rely on any
prior shape knowledge, enabling general object scanning
with freeform deformations. To deal with the drift problem
when nonrigidly aligning the input sequence, we automatically detect loop closures, distribute the alignment error
over the loop, and finally use a bundle adjustment algorithm
to optimize for the latent 3D shape and nonrigid deformation parameters simultaneously. We demonstrate high quality scanning results in some challenging sequences, comparing with state of art nonrigid techniques, as well as
ground truth data.

Figure 1. A mother holds an energetic baby while rotating in front
of a Kinect camera. Our system registers scans with large deformations into a unified surface model.

a template prior or for acquiring initial partial scans.
Our work uses a Kinect sensor which gives a partial
noisy scan of an object at each frame. Our goal is to combine all these scans into a complete high quality model
(Fig. 1). Even for rigid alignment, the problem of drift
occurs when aligning a sequence of partial scans consecutively, where the alignment error accumulates quickly and
the scan does not close seamlessly. Drift is more serious
in the case of nonrigid alignment (Fig. 2(c)). KinectFusion
alleviates some level of drift by aligning the current frame
with the fused model instead of the previous frame [14].
Many follow-up systems based on KinectFusion have
specifically looked at scanning humans (e.g., for 3D printing or generating avatars) where the user rotates in front
of the Kinect while maintaining a roughly rigid pose,
e.g., [24, 11, 18, 27, 7]. This highlights the fundamental
issue when scanning living things – they ultimately move.
To make this problem more tractable, some systems
make strong assumptions about the nonrigid object being
a human, using either parametric models [24, 7] or limiting
the user to certain poses such as a ‘T’ shape [3]. We wish to
avoid such scene assumptions. Li et al. [11] adapt a more
general nonrigid registration framework which can support
a wider range of poses, clothing or even multiple users. This
system demonstrates compelling results but relies on a very
specific type of user interaction: the user moves in roughly
45 degree increments, in front of Kinect, and at each step

1. Introduction
With the availability of commodity depth cameras, 3D
scanning has become mainstream, with applications for 3D
printing, CAD, measurement and gaming. However, many
existing 3D scanning systems (e.g. [14, 9]) use rigid alignment algorithms and thus require the object or scene being
scanned to remain static. In many scenarios such as reconstructing humans, particularly children, and animals, or inhand scanning of soft and deformable objects, for instance
toys, nonrigid movement is inevitable.
Recent work on nonrigid scanning are constrained by
one or more of the following: 1) they rely on specific user
motion (e.g. [24, 11, 18]); 2) require multiple cameras
(e.g. [5]); 3) capture a static pre-scan as template prior (e.g.
[29]); or align partial static scans nonrigidly (e.g. [11]).
To address these issues we present a new 3D scanning
system for arbitrary scenes, based on a single sensor, which
allows for large deformations during acquisition. Further,
our system avoids the need for any static capture, either as
∗ Most work is conducted at Microsoft Research

1

