Fusion Moves for Correlation Clustering
Thorsten Beier

Fred A. Hamprecht

thorsten.beier@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de

fred.hamprecht@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de

Jörg H. Kappes
kappes@math.uni-heidelberg.de

Abstract

to yield state-of-the-art results on the Berkeley Segmentation Database [3, 23, 35, 2].
While it has a clear mathematical formulation and nice
properties, correlation clustering suffers from NP-hardness.
Consequently, partition problems on large scale data, e.g.
huge volume images in computational neuroscience [4] or
social networks [25], are not tractable because reasonable
solutions cannot be computed in acceptable time.

Correlation clustering, or multicut partitioning, is
widely used in image segmentation for partitioning an undirected graph or image with positive and negative edge
weights such that the sum of cut edge weights is minimized.
Due to its NP-hardness, exact solvers do not scale and approximative solvers often give unsatisfactory results.
We investigate scalable methods for correlation clustering. To this end we define fusion moves for the correlation
clustering problem. Our algorithm iteratively fuses the current and a proposed partitioning which monotonously improves the partitioning and maintains a valid partitioning
at all times. Furthermore, it scales to larger datasets, gives
near optimal solutions, and at the same time shows a good
anytime performance.

Contribution. In this work we present novel approaches
that are designed for large scale correlation clustering problems. First, we define a novel energy based agglomerative clustering algorithm that monotonically increases the
energy. With this at hand we show how to improve the
anytime performance of Cut, Clue & Cut [9]. Second,
we improve the anytime performance of polyhedral multicut methods [21] by more efficient separation procedures.
Third, we introduce cluster-fusion moves, which extend the
original fusion moves [24] used in supervised segmentation to the unsupervised case and give a polyhedral interpretation of this algorithm. Finally, we propose two versatile proposal generators, and evaluate the proposed methods on existing and new benchmark problems. Experiments
show that we can improve the computation time by one to
two magnitudes without worsening the segmentation quality significantly.

1. Introduction
Correlation clustering [8], also known as the multicut
problem [12] is a basic primitive in computer vision [3, 4,
35, 2] and data mining [5, 31, 10, 11]. See Sec. 2 for its
formal definition of clustering the nodes of a graph.
Its merit is, firstly, that it accommodates both positive
(attractive) and negative (repulsive) edge weights. This allows doing justice to evidence in the data that two nodes or
pixels do not wish or do wish to end up in the same cluster or segment, respectively. Secondly, it does not require a
specification of the number of clusters beforehand.
In signed social networks, where positive and negative
edges encode friend and foe relationships, respectively, correlation clustering is a natural way to detect communities [10, 11]. Correlation clustering can also be used to cluster query refinements in web search [31]. Because social
and web-related networks are often huge, heuristic methods, e.g. the PIVOT-algorithm [1], are popular [11].
In computer vision applications, unsupervised image segmentation algorithms often start with an oversegmentation into superpixels (superregions), which are
then clustered into “perceptually meaningful” regions by
correlation clustering. Such an approach has been shown

Related Work. A natural approach is to solve the integer
linear program (ILP) directly 2. To this end, efficient separation procedures have been found [20, 21] that allow to
iteratively augment the set of constraints until a valid partitioning is found. Alternatively, it is possible to relax the
integrality constraints of the ILP formulation [21]. Such an
outer relaxation can be iteratively tightened. However, intermediate solutions are fractional and therefore rounding
is required to obtain a valid partitioning. For the latter approach column generating methods exist, which work best
on planar graphs [35].
Another line of work uses move making algorithms to
optimize correlation clustering [22, 7, 9]. Starting with an
initial segmentation, auxiliary max-cut problems are (approximately) solved, such that the segmentation is strictly
1

