Beyond the shortest path : Unsupervised Domain Adaptation by Sampling
Subspaces along the Spline Flow

Rui Caseiro, João F. Henriques, Pedro Martins, and Jorge Batista
Institute of Systems and Robotics - University of Coimbra, Portugal
{ruicaseiro, henriques, pedromartins, batista}@isr.uc.pt

Abstract

tation of classifiers to handle mismatches between the underlying distribution of the training and testing data (also
known as source and target domains respectively).
Applications in computer vision often involve the study
of real world problems where this scenario arises naturally
(e.g. object/face/location recognition [3, 4, 26, 17, 13],
object detection [25, 27], image segmentation [5, 6], discriminative face alignment [32]). The training and testing
data can be acquired using sensors with different characteristics (e.g. image resolution or quality), under diverse
lighting conditions (e.g. indoor controlled illumination vs
outdoor environments) or from different camera viewpoints
(e.g. same object in different poses).
For example, recently several important applications using domain adaptation were presented: Hoffman et al.
[27] proposed a novel framework for large scale detection
through adaptation (LSDA). They created a fast and effective large scale detection network by combining adaptation
techniques with deep convolutional models. Fernando et
al. [13] showed that using domain adaptation techniques
is possible to deal with the image variability induced by
large time lags. They presented a framework to automatically associate ancient pictures to modern ones, e.g. location recognition and interactive location retrieval. Ho et
al. [26] demonstrated that using domain adaptation techniques is feasible to recognize faces in scenarios where images corresponding to the source and the target domain are
acquired under varying degree of factors such as illumination, expression, blur and alignment. Finally, Gopalan et al.
[17] presented a top-down approach through adaptation for
estimating geographic location from images. They obtain
competitive results for this challenging task compared with
some landarmark papers in the field, e.g. [23].

Recently, a particular paradigm [18] in the domain
adaptation field has received considerable attention by introducing novel and important insights to the problem. In
this case, the source and target domains are represented
in the form of subspaces, which are treated as points on
the Grassmann manifold. The geodesic curve between them
is sampled to obtain intermediate points. Then a classifier
is learnt using the projections of the data onto these subspaces. Despite its relevance and popularity, this paradigm
[18] contains some limitations. Firstly, in real-world applications, that simple curve (i.e. shortest path) does not
provide the necessary flexibility to model the domain shift
between the training and testing data sets. Secondly, by using the geodesic curve, we are restricted to only one source
domain, which does not allow to take fully advantage of the
multiple datasets that are available nowadays. It is then,
natural to ask whether this popular concept could be extended to deal with more complex curves and to integrate
multi-sources domains. This is a hard problem considering the Riemannian structure of the space, but we propose
a mathematically well-founded idea that enables us to solve
it. We exploit the geometric insight of rolling maps [30] to
compute a spline curve on the Grassmann manifold. The
benefits of the proposed idea are demonstrated through several empirical studies on standard datasets. This novel
concept allows to explicitly integrate multi-source domains
while the previous one [18] uses the mean of all sources.
This enables to model better the domain shift and take fully
advantage of the training datasets.

1. Introduction

This work was supported by the Portuguese Science Foundation
(FCT) under the project Differential Geometry for Computer Vision Pattern Recognition (PTDC/EEA-CRO/122812/2010) and through the grants
SFRH/BD74152/2010 (Rui Caseiro), SFRH/BD75459/2010 (João F. Henriques), SFRH/BPD/90200/2012 (Pedro Martins).

In the past few years there has been a growing interest
on the study and development of techniques, (e.g. domain
adaptation, transfer learning [19, 34]) that enable the adap1

