Recurrent Convolutional Neural Network for Object Recognition
Ming Liang
Xiaolin Hu
State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Technology and Systems
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology (TNList)
Department of Computer Science and Technology
Center for Brain-Inspired Computing Research (CBICR)
Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
liangm07@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, xlhu@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
In recent years, the convolutional neural network (CNN)
has achieved great success in many computer vision tasks.
Partially inspired by neuroscience, CNN shares many properties with the visual system of the brain. A prominent difference is that CNN is typically a feed-forward architecture
while in the visual system recurrent connections are abundant. Inspired by this fact, we propose a recurrent CNN
(RCNN) for object recognition by incorporating recurrent
connections into each convolutional layer. Though the input is static, the activities of RCNN units evolve over time
so that the activity of each unit is modulated by the activities of its neighboring units. This property enhances
the ability of the model to integrate the context information, which is important for object recognition. Like other
recurrent neural networks, unfolding the RCNN through
time can result in an arbitrarily deep network with a fixed
number of parameters. Furthermore, the unfolded network
has multiple paths, which can facilitate the learning process. The model is tested on four benchmark object recognition datasets: CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, MNIST and SVHN.
With fewer trainable parameters, RCNN outperforms the
state-of-the-art models on all of these datasets. Increasing the number of parameters leads to even better performance. These results demonstrate the advantage of the recurrent structure over purely feed-forward structure for object recognition.

1. Introduction
The past few years have witnessed the bloom of convolutional neural network (CNN) in computer vision. Over
many benchmark datasets CNN has substantially advanced
the state-of-the-art accuracies of object recognition [26, 50,
33, 5, 43]. For example, after training on 1.2 million im-

ages from ImageNet [8], CNN [26] has achieved better performance than handcraft features by a significant margin in
classifying objects into 1000 categories. Furthermore, the
pretrained CNN features on this dataset have been transfered to other datasets to achieve remarkable results [5, 43].
CNN is a type of artificial neural network, which originates from neuroscience dating back to the proposal of the
first artificial neuron in 1943 [34]. In fact, CNN, as well
as other hierarchical models including Neocognitron [13]
and HMAX [38], is closely related to Hubel and Wiesel’s
findings about simple cells and complex cells in the primary visual cortex (V1)[23, 22]. All of these models have
purely feed-forward architectures, which can be viewed as
crude approximations of the biological neural network in
the brain. Anatomical evidences have shown that recurrent
connections ubiquitously exist in the neocortex, and recurrent synapses typically outnumber feed-forward and topdown (or feedback) synapses [6]. Due to the presence of
recurrent and top-down synapses, object recognition is actually a dynamic process though the input is static. Specific
functions of these synapses remain unclear, but it is generally believed that recurrent synapses play an important role
in context modulation. The processing of visual signals is
strongly modulated by their context [1]. Normally we do
not perceive this effect without attention, but the effect gets
prominent in perceptual illusions, e.g., the famous Fraser
spiral illusion [12]. Context modulation is also observed
in the responses of individual neurons in the visual system.
For instance, the response properties of V1 neurons can be
altered in many ways by changing the context around their
classical receptive fields (RFs) [42]. This phenomenon is
suggested to be induced by recurrent synapses in V1 [7, 54].
The context is important for object recognition (Figure
1). A feed-forward model can only capture the context (e.g.,
the face in Figure 1) in higher layers where units have larger
RFs, but this information cannot modulate the activities of
units in lower layers responsible for recognizing smaller ob-

