Video Anomaly Detection and Localization Using Hierarchical Feature
Representation and Gaussian Process Regression
Kai-Wen Cheng and Yie-Tarng Chen and Wen-Hsien Fang
Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering
National Taiwan University of Science and Technology, Taipei, Taiwan, R.O.C.
Email:{D10102101, ytchen, whf}@mail.ntust.edu.tw

Abstract
This paper presents a hierarchical framework for detecting local and global anomalies via hierarchical feature
representation and Gaussian process regression. While local anomaly is typically detected as a 3D pattern matching problem, we are more interested in global anomaly that
involves multiple normal events interacting in an unusual
manner such as car accident. To simultaneously detect local and global anomalies, we formulate the extraction of
normal interactions from training video as the problem of
efficiently finding the frequent geometric relations of the
nearby sparse spatio-temporal interest points. A codebook
of interaction templates is then constructed and modeled using Gaussian process regression. A novel inference method
for computing the likelihood of an observed interaction is
also proposed. As such, our model is robust to slight topological deformations and can handle the noise and data unbalance problems in the training data. Simulations show
that our system outperforms the main state-of-the-art methods on this topic and achieves at least 80% detection rates
based on three challenging datasets.

1. Introduction
Visual analysis of suspicious events is a topic of great
importance in video surveillance. A critical issue in
anomaly analysis is to effectively represent an event to allow for a robust discrimination. Trajectory representation
[11] is ubiquitous but unreliable in crowded scenes. Alternatively, local statistics of low-level observations are utilized in [1, 19]. These methods typically begin with extracting local spatio-temporal descriptors densely or in a
sparse manner via interest point detection. To handle the
inter- and intra-classes variations in normal events, mixture
of models [14] or the bag-of-words techniques [15, 23] are
performed. However, the geometric relations between local
patterns have not been considered.

Figure 1: Complex interaction modeling: (a) Input videos
are represented by a sparse set of interest points. (b) Incidents with similar spatio-temporal relationships of interest
points are merged altogether to form deformable interaction
templates. (c) Gaussian process regression is used to model
each templates. The likelihood of being part of a specific
interaction is indicated from low (red) to high (blue). Unlikely locations are invisible for better visualization.
Similar to [6], video event anomalies can be classified as
local and global anomalies. A local anomaly is defined as an
event that is different from its spatio-temporal neighboring
events; whereas, a global anomaly is defined as multiple
events that globally interact in an unusual manner, even if
any individual local event can be normal. Most research
on anomaly detection like [1, 14, 19] have focused more
on detecting local anomalies such as objects with strange
appearance or speed, but less on global anomaly. Global
anomalies are common phenomenon in many scenarios like
traffic surveillance. The methods in [3, 18] were devised
to model the spatio-temporal relationships of dense features
with heavy load in space and time, and did not work that
well for modeling sparse features.
As video events can be discriminated from their geometric relations of spatio-temporal interest points (STIPs) in
Fig. 1, this paper proposes a unified framework, shown in

