Layered RGBD Scene Flow Estimation
Deqing Sun1
Erik B. Sudderth2
Hanspeter Pfister1
1
Harvard University 2 Brown University

(a) First RGB image

(b) First depth

(c) Segmentation

(d) 2D motion

Figure 1. Our layered approach can handle multiple moving objects and reliably estimate their motion in occlusion regions. Our key
observation is that depth provides the depth ordering information, thereby solving a computational bottleneck for previous RGB layered
methods (please see Figure 6 for our detected occlusions and the estimated motion by the recent semi-rigid scene flow (SRSF) method [27]).

Abstract
As consumer depth sensors become widely available, estimating scene flow from RGBD sequences has received increasing attention. Although the depth information allows
the recovery of 3D motion from a single view, it poses new
challenges. In particular, depth boundaries are not wellaligned with RGB image edges and therefore not reliable
cues to localize 2D motion boundaries. In addition, methods that extend the 2D optical flow formulation to 3D still
produce large errors in occlusion regions. To better use
depth for occlusion reasoning, we propose a layered RGBD
scene flow method that jointly solves for the scene segmentation and the motion. Our key observation is that the noisy
depth is sufficient to decide the depth ordering of layers,
thereby avoiding a computational bottleneck for RGB layered methods. Furthermore, the depth enables us to estimate a per-layer 3D rigid motion to constrain the motion
of each layer. Experimental results on both the Middlebury
and real-world sequences demonstrate the effectiveness of
the layered approach for RGBD scene flow estimation.

1. Introduction
Estimating the 3D motion of a dynamic scene is a fundamental challenge in computer vision and has many applications. This so-called scene flow estimation problem [42]
usually requires multiple, calibrated RGB cameras to jointly
solve for stereo and motion. As consumer depth sensors become widely adopted, e.g. Microsoft Kinect, the depth in-

formation has brought breakthroughs to several vision tasks,
such as pose estimation [31], intrinsic image decomposition [6], and object detection [34]. The idea of leveraging
depth cues to allow monocular scene flow estimation has
also received increasing attention.
Although single-view depth cues give information about
3D motion, the noise in these depth estimates poses new
challenges for RGBD scene flow estimation. As shown in
Figure 2, depth boundaries are not well-aligned with RGB
image edges, and thus we cannot accurately localize 2D motion boundaries using depth. Furthermore, depth is missing
around occlusion and disocclusion regions. Occlusions are
a major source of errors for both the 2D optical flow formulation and its 3D extension to RGBD data.
Layered models are a promising approach to model occlusions in RGB image sequences [44]. We can decompose a scene into moving layers ordered in depth. Occlusions become a signal produced by the motion of foreground layers. Recent RGB layered methods [40, 41] have
obtained promising results in the presence of occlusions, but
are computationally expensive. One bottleneck is to infer
the depth ordering of layers, which often requires searching
over a combinatorial space (K! possibilities for K layers).
We propose using the depth information from RGBD
data to solve the depth ordering problem for layered models.
Our work is based on a surprisingly simple observation that
depth determines depth ordering, as shown in Figure 1. The
depth further allows us to estimate the 3D rotation and translation for each moving layer. The resultant 3D rigid motion

