Discrete Optimization of Ray Potentials for Semantic 3D Reconstruction
Nikolay Savinov1 , L’ubor Ladický1 , Christian Häne and Marc Pollefeys
ETH Zürich, Switzerland
{nikolay.savinov,lubor.ladicky,christian.haene,marc.pollefeys}@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Dense semantic 3D reconstruction is typically formulated as a discrete or continuous problem over label assignments in a voxel grid, combining semantic and depth likelihoods in a Markov Random Field framework. The depth
and semantic information is incorporated as a unary potential, smoothed by a pairwise regularizer. However, modelling likelihoods as a unary potential does not model the
problem correctly leading to various undesirable visibility
artifacts.
We propose to formulate an optimization problem that directly optimizes the reprojection error of the 3D model with
respect to the image estimates, which corresponds to the optimization over rays, where the cost function depends on the
semantic class and depth of the first occupied voxel along
the ray. The 2-label formulation is made feasible by transforming it into a graph-representable form under QPBO relaxation, solvable using graph cut. The multi-label problem is solved by applying α-expansion using the same relaxation in each expansion move. Our method was indeed
shown to be feasible in practice, running comparably fast
to the competing methods, while not suffering from ray potential approximation artifacts.

1. Introduction
In this paper we are studying the problem of jointly inferring dense 3D geometry and semantic labels from multiple
images, formulated as an optimization over rays. The problem of dense 3D reconstruction from images and semantic
segmentation is up to date still a hard problem. A particularly powerful approach to the problem of dense 3D reconstruction from images is to pose it as a volumetric labeling
problem. The volume is segmented into occupied and free
space (the inside and the outside of an object) and the surface is extracted as the boundary in between. Traditionally,
the data costs are extracted from the input images either directly by computing matching scores per voxel or by first
1 The authors assert equal contribution and joint first authorship

computing depth maps and deriving a per pixel unary potential based on the depth maps. In both cases after the
image data has been converted to a per voxel unary term the
input images are discarded. Unary terms, approximately
modelling the likelihood the depth for a given pixel agrees
with the estimate, typically encourage voxels in an interval just before the matched 3D point to take the free-space
label and voxels in an interval right after the matched 3D
point to take the foreground label. However, this assumption does not hold in general. The interval right behind the
corner of an object does not necessarily have to belong to
foreground. Failures due to this problem lead to blowing up
corners, roofs of buildings or thin objects. The problem can
be partly fixed by decreasing the length of an interval, however, in that case in presence of noise the matched neighbouring points start to compete against each other. Another
problem of unary approximation is that the unary potential
does not model, whether the voxel is visible. If there is a
hole in the wall and a matched object behind, there is no
penalty associated with a data term for closing the hole,
which might get filled in by regularization. This problem
can also be partially resolved by penalizing foreground for
all pixels in front of the matched voxel, however such solution is not robust to outliers. The standard approach is also
not suitable for incorporating multiple candidate matches
along the viewing ray in the optimization together.
We propose to formulate an optimization problem which
measures the data fidelity directly in image space while still
having all the benefits of a volumetric representation. The
main idea is to use a volumetric representation, but describe
the data cost as a potential over rays. Traversing along a
ray from the camera center we observe free space until we
first hit an occupied voxel of a certain semantic class and
we cannot assume anything about the unobserved space behind. The potential we introduce correctly assigns for each
ray the cost, based on the depth and semantic class of the
first occupied voxel along the ray. The key to make such
a formulation feasible is the transformation of the potential
into a graph-representable form under QPBO relaxation [2],
solvable using graphcut-based methods. Our proposed optimization method can be directly used also for multi-label

