Pushing the Frontiers of Unconstrained Face Detection and Recognition: IARPA
Janus Benchmark A ⇤
Brendan F. Klare†

Ben Klein†

Kristen Allen†

Emma Taborsky†
Austin Blanton†
Jordan Cheney†
Patrick Grother‡
Alan Mah§
Anil K. Jain¶

Abstract

1. Introduction
The development of accurate and scalable unconstrained
face recognition algorithms is a long term goal of the biometrics and computer vision communities. The term “unconstrained” implies a system can perform successful identifications regardless of face image capture presentation (illumination, sensor, compression) or subject conditions (facial pose, expression, occlusion). While automatic, as well
as human, face identification in certain scenarios may forever be elusive, such as when a face is heavily occluded [9]
or captured at very low resolutions, there still remains a
large gap between automated systems and human performance on familiar faces [15]. In order to close this gap,
large annotated sets of imagery are needed that are representative of the end goals of unconstrained face recognition. This will help continue to push the frontiers of unconstrained face detection and recognition, which are the
primary goals of the IARPA Janus program [1].

Rapid progress in unconstrained face recognition has resulted in a saturation in recognition accuracy for current
benchmark datasets. While important for early progress,
a chief limitation in most benchmark datasets is the use
of a commodity face detector to select face imagery. The
implication of this strategy is restricted variations in face
pose and other confounding factors. This paper introduces
the IARPA Janus Benchmark A (IJB-A), a publicly available media in the wild dataset containing 500 subjects with
manually localized face images. Key features of the IJB-A
dataset are: (i) full pose variation, (ii) joint use for face
recognition and face detection benchmarking, (iii) a mix of
images and videos, (iv) wider geographic variation of subjects, (v) protocols supporting both open-set identification
(1:N search) and verification (1:1 comparison), (vi) an optional protocol that allows modeling of gallery subjects, and
(vii) ground truth eye and nose locations. The dataset has
been developed using 1,501,267 million crowd sourced annotations. Baseline accuracies for both face detection and
face recognition from commercial and open source algorithms demonstrate the challenge offered by this new unconstrained benchmark.

1.1. Unconstrained Imagery
A key step towards advancing unconstrained face recognition was the release of the “Labeled Faces in the Wild
(LFW)” dataset in 2007 [6]. This dataset contains still images of subjects captured in non-controlled, or “wild”, settings, downloaded from the web. Early recognition rates
on this dataset were quite low. With an unprecedented lack
of constraint on face image capture at that time, LFW was
dubbed by many as the first unconstrained face recognition dataset. Since the inception of LFW, many similar
datasets have been released, including but not limited to
PubFig [11], and YouTube Faces (YTF) [19].
The release of LFW spurred significant activity by researchers in academia, major face recognition vendors, and
software technology companies. As a result, performance
has begun to saturate on LFW, YTW, and other unconstrained datasets [17]. At the same time, unconstrained face
recognition is hardly considered a solved problem, as supported by poor performance of state of the art face recognition algorithms on surveillance videos. This is partially
attributed to protocols that do not capture requirements of

* This research is based upon work supported by the Ofﬁce of the Director of
National Intelligence (ODNI) and the Intelligence Advanced Research Projects
Activity (IARPA). The views and conclusions contained herein are those of the
authors and should not be interpreted as necessarily representing the ofﬁcial policies
or endorsements, either expressed or implied, of ODNI, IARPA, or the U.S.
Government. The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute
reprints for Governmental purposes notwithstanding any copyright annotation
thereon.
† B. Klare, B. Klein, E. Taborsky, A. Blanton, J. Cheney and K. Allen are with
Noblis, Falls Church, VA, U.S.A.
‡ P. Grother is with the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST),
Gaithersburg, MD, U.S.A.
§ A. Mah is a consultant, Washington, DC, U.S.A.
¶ A. Jain is with Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, U.S.A.

1

