Shape Driven Kernel Adaptation in
Convolutional Neural Network for Robust Facial Trait Recognition
Shaoxin Li1,3 , Junliang Xing2,3 , Zhiheng Niu3 , Shiguang Shan1 , Shuicheng Yan3
Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, 100190, China
2
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, CAS, Beijing, 100190, China
3
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore
1

Abstract
One key challenge of facial trait recognition is the large
non-rigid appearance variations due to some irrelevant real world factors, such as viewpoint and expression changes.
In this paper, we explore how the shape information, i.e. facial landmark positions, can be explicitly deployed into the
popular Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) architecture
to disentangle such irrelevant non-rigid appearance variations. First, instead of using ﬁxed kernels, we propose a kernel adaptation method to dynamically determine the convolutional kernels according to the spatial distribution of facial landmarks, which helps learning more robust features.
Second, motivated by the intuition that different local facial regions may demand different adaptation functions, we
further propose a tree-structured convolutional architecture
to hierarchically fuse multiple local adaptive CNN subnetworks. Comprehensive experiments on WebFace, Morph II
and MultiPIE databases well validate the effectiveness of
the proposed kernel adaptation method and tree-structured
convolutional architecture for facial trait recognition tasks,
including identity, age and gender recognition. For all the
tasks, the proposed architecture consistently achieves the
state-of-the-art performances.

1. Introduction
In the last decade, great progress has been made in developing deep neural network for various computer vision
tasks [11, 31]. Among them, Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) [16] has achieved exciting performance on
digit recognition [13, 5], trafﬁc sign recognition [27, 5], object recognition [5, 15, 24, 31] and scene labeling [6].
Despite the great success, CNN based methods learn discriminant features mainly from texture information which
may change signiﬁcantly in real world conditions due to illumination and viewpoints variations. Although the deep

CNN model is proven to be very powerful in handling these
complex real world factors in image processing [35, 31],
additional information that provide more direct and easier
way for parsing these mixed factors may further improve
the disentangling capability. Shape information, i.e. the
conﬁguration of sub-level components, is one of such additional information. As indicated in [25], for humans, both
texture and shape information play very important roles in
interpreting face images. Because shape information not
only provides easier way to disentangle viewpoints and expression variation but also directly holds discriminant power for estimating facial traits, such as gender, age and identity. It is thus expected that artiﬁcial neural network, e.g.
neurobiologically motivated CNN, can also beneﬁt from additional shape information for robust facial trait recognition. However, up to now, there are only a few works on
exploring the shape information for CNN. One previous attempt [21] integrated the shape information (i.e. sub-level
components conﬁguration) as a regularization in the feature
learning procedure for pedestrian detection. Some other
works [29, 36] used shape information obtained from poselet or landmark detection results to extract better aligned
image patches for robust feature learning.
In this paper, we also propose to exploit the potential
of facial shape information, i.e. a set of facial landmarks, to help CNN based methods learning more powerful and
robust face representation. The basic idea is using different convolutional kernel according to the shape information,
i.e. distribution of face landmarks, in order that the learned
features would become more invariant to appearance variations caused by different viewpoints or expressions. One
intuitive example of this idea is shown in Fig. 1. Another potential of this kernel adaptation is that the additional
discriminant information contained in the shape may also
be directly coded into the learned feature. Speciﬁcally, we
propose a shape driven kernel adaptation for CNN and use
automatically adapted kernels to more efﬁciently disentan-

