FPA-CS: Focal Plane Array-based Compressive Imaging in Short-wave Infrared
Huaijin Chen† , M. Salman Asif† , Aswin C. Sankaranarayanan‡ , Ashok Veeraraghavan†
†
ECE Department, Rice University, Houston, TX
‡
ECE Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA

Abstract

64 x 64
SWIR
sensor array

Cameras for imaging in short and mid-wave infrared
spectra are significantly more expensive than their counterparts in visible imaging. As a result, high-resolution imaging in those spectrum remains beyond the reach of most consumers. Over the last decade, compressive sensing (CS) has
emerged as a potential means to realize inexpensive shortwave infrared cameras. One approach for doing this is the
single-pixel camera (SPC) where a single detector acquires
coded measurements of a high-resolution image. A computational reconstruction algorithm is then used to recover the
image from these coded measurements. Unfortunately, the
measurement rate of a SPC is insufficient to enable imaging
at high spatial and temporal resolutions.
We present a focal plane array-based compressive sensing (FPA-CS) architecture that achieves high spatial and
temporal resolutions. The idea is to use an array of SPCs
that sense in parallel to increase the measurement rate, and
consequently, the achievable spatio-temporal resolution of
the camera. We develop a proof-of-concept prototype in the
short-wave infrared using a sensor with 64× 64 pixels; the
prototype provides a 4096× increase in the measurement
rate compared to the SPC and achieves a megapixel resolution at video rate using CS techniques.

scene
(as seen in a visible camera)

compressive low-res
frames from 64x64
sensor

DMD

Total variation-based
reconstruction
reconstructed SWIR
megapixel image

Figure 1. Focal plane array-based compressive sensing (FPA-CS)
camera with a 64 × 64 SWIR sensor array is equivalent to 4096
single pixel cameras (SPCs) operating in parallel. This results in
vastly superior spatio-temporal resolutions against what is achievable using the SPC or a traditional camera.

frared (SWIR) penetrates fog and smog; this enables imaging through scattering media. The night-glow of the sky
naturally provides SWIR illumination which enables SWIR
sensors to passively image even in the dark. SWIR imaging
also enables a wide variety of biomedical applications [30].
Yet, SWIR imaging requires sensors made of exotic materials such as indium gallium arsenide (InGaAs), which are orders of magnitude more expensive than silicon. As a consequence, the cost of a megapixel sensor in the SWIR regime
is still greater than tens of thousands dollars. Hence, despite
their immense potential, high-resolution SWIR cameras are
beyond the reach of engineers and scientists in application
domains that could most benefit from its use.
In this paper, we leverage the theory and practice of
compressive sensing (CS) [4, 7], to enable high-resolution
SWIR imaging from low-resolution sensor arrays. CS relies on the ability to obtain arbitrary linear measurements
of the scene; this requires a fundamental redesign of the architecture used to image the scene. The single-pixel camera
(SPC) is an example of such an architecture [8]. The SPC
uses a digital micro-mirror device (DMD) as a spatial light
modulator and acquires coded measurements of an image
onto a single photo-detector. We can build an SWIR SPC
by employing a photo-detector sensitive to SWIR along
with the appropriate choice of optical accessories. The pro-

1. Introduction
The cost of a high-resolution sensors in the visible spectrum has fallen dramatically over the last decade. For example, a cellphone camera module boasting a sensor with
several megapixels costs little more than a few dollars.This
trend is fueled by the fact that silicon is sensitive to the visible region of the electromagnetic spectrum and hence, the
scaling trends and advances made in silicon-based semiconductor fabrication directly benefit visible imaging technologies. Unfortunately, these scaling trends do not extend to
imaging beyond the visible spectrum.
Motivation. In many application domains, imaging beyond the visible spectrum provides significant benefits over
traditional visible sensors [12]. For example, short-wave in1

