Category-Specific Object Reconstruction from a Single Image
Abhishek Kar∗ , Shubham Tulsiani∗ , João Carreira and Jitendra Malik
University of California, Berkeley - Berkeley, CA 94720
{akar,shubhtuls,carreira,malik}@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Object reconstruction from a single image – in the wild – is
a problem where we can make progress and get meaningful
results today. This is the main message of this paper, which
introduces an automated pipeline with pixels as inputs
and 3D surfaces of various rigid categories as outputs in
images of realistic scenes. At the core of our approach
are deformable 3D models that can be learned from 2D
annotations available in existing object detection datasets,
that can be driven by noisy automatic object segmentations
and which we complement with a bottom-up module for
recovering high-frequency shape details. We perform a
comprehensive quantitative analysis and ablation study
of our approach using the recently introduced PASCAL
3D+ dataset and show very encouraging automatic
reconstructions on PASCAL VOC.

1. Introduction
Consider the car in Figure 1. As humans, not only can
we infer at a glance that the image contains a car, we also
construct a rich internal representation of it such as its location and 3D pose. Moreover, we have a guess of its 3D
shape, even though we might never have have seen this particular car. We can do this because we don’t experience the
image of this car tabula rasa, but in the context of our “remembrance of things past”. Previously seen cars enable us
to develop a notion of the 3D shape of cars, which we can
project to this particular instance. We also specialize our
representation to this particular instance (e.g. any custom
decorations it might have), signalling that both top-down
and bottom-up cues influence our percept [26].
A key component in such a process would be a mechanism to build 3D shape models from past visual experiences. We have developed an algorithm that can build
category-specific shape models from just images with 2D
annotations (segmentation masks and a small set of keypoints) present in modern computer vision datasets (e.g.
* Authors contributed equally

Figure 1: Automatic object reconstruction from a single image obtained by our system. Our method leverages estimated instance segmentations and predicted viewpoints to
generate a full 3D mesh and high frequency 2.5D depth
maps.

PASCAL VOC [15]). These models are then used to guide
the top down 3D shape reconstruction of novel 2D car images. We complement our top-down shape inference algorithm with a bottom-up module that further refines our
shape estimate for a particular instance. Finally, building upon the rapid recent progress in recognition modules [2, 11, 17, 20, 34] (object detection, segmentation and
pose estimation), we demonstrate that our learnt models are
robust when applied “in the wild” enabling fully automatic
reconstructions with just images as inputs.
The recent method of Vicente et al. [36] reconstructs 3D
models from similar annotations as we do but it has a different focus: it aims to reconstruct a fully annotated image
set while making strong assumptions about the quality of
the segmentations it fits to and is hence inappropriate for
reconstruction in an unconstrained setting. Our approach
can work in such settings, partly because it uses explicit
3D shape models. Our work also has connections to that
of Kemelmacher-Shlizerman et al. [23, 32] which aims to
learn morphable models for faces from 2D images, but we
focus on richer shapes in unconstrained settings, at the expense of lower resolution reconstructions.
In the history of computer vision, model-based object

