Supervised Discrete Hashing
Fumin Shen∗
Chunhua Shen†
Wei Liu
Heng Tao Shen‡

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
IBM Research
†
‡
University of Adelaide; and Australian Centre for Robotic Vision
The University of Queensland
∗

Abstract
Recently, learning based hashing techniques have attracted broad research interests because they can support
efﬁcient storage and retrieval for high-dimensional data
such as images, videos, documents, etc. However, a major difﬁculty of learning to hash lies in handling the discrete constraints imposed on the pursued hash codes, which
typically makes hash optimizations very challenging (NPhard in general). In this work, we propose a new supervised hashing framework, where the learning objective is
to generate the optimal binary hash codes for linear classiﬁcation. By introducing an auxiliary variable, we reformulate the objective such that it can be solved substantially
efﬁciently by employing a regularization algorithm. One
of the key steps in this algorithm is to solve a regularization sub-problem associated with the NP-hard binary optimization. We show that the sub-problem admits an analytical solution via cyclic coordinate descent. As such, a
high-quality discrete solution can eventually be obtained in
an efﬁcient computing manner, therefore enabling to tackle massive datasets. We evaluate the proposed approach,
dubbed Supervised Discrete Hashing (SDH), on four large
image datasets and demonstrate its superiority to the stateof-the-art hashing methods in large-scale image retrieval.

1. Introduction
Hashing has attracted considerable attention of researchers in computer vision, machine learning, information retrieval and related areas [8,10,16,20,21,31,34,38,40].
Hashing techniques encode documents, images, videos or
other sorts of data by a set of short binary codes, while preserving the similarity of the original data. With the binary
codes, the task of nearest neighbour search can be easily
conducted on large-scale dataset, due to the high efﬁciency
of pairwise comparison with the Hamming distance.
Among various hashing techniques, Locality-Sensitive
Hashing (LSH) [8] is one of the most popular dataindependent methods, which generates hash functions by
random projections. In addition to traditional Euclidean dis-

tance, LSH has been generalized to accommodate other distance and similarity measures such as p-norm distance [4],
Mahalanobis metric [15], and kernel similarity [14, 27]. A
disadvantage of the LSH family is that LSH usually needs
long bit length (≥ 1000) to achieve both high precision and
recall. This leads to a huge storage overhead and thus limits
the sale at which an LSH algorithm may be applied.
Recently, learning-based data-dependent hashing methods have become increasingly popular because of the beneﬁt that learned compact binary codes can effectively and
highly efﬁciently index and organize massive data. Instead of constructing hash functions randomly like LSH,
data-dependent hashing methods aim to generate short hash
codes (typically ≤ 200) using available training data. Various hashing algorithms have been proposed in the literature, of which a large category focuses on linear hashing
algorithms which learn a set of hyperplanes as linear hash
functions. The representative algorithms in this category include unsupervised PCA Hashing [34], Iterative Quantization (ITQ) [10], Isotropic Hashing [12], etc., and supervised
Minimal Loss Hashing (MLH) [24, 25], Semi-Supervised
Hashing (SSH) [34], LDA Hashing [2], Ranking-Based Supervised Hashing [35], FastHash [17], etc. A bilinear form
of hash functions were introduced by [9, 22].
As an extension of linear hash functions, a variety of
algorithms have been proposed to generate nonlinear hash
functions in a kernel space, including Binary Reconstructive Embedding (BRE) [13], Random Maximum Margin
Hashing (RMMH) [11], Kernel-Based Supervised Hashing
(KSH) [20], the kernel variant of ITQ [10], etc. In parallel,
harnessing nonlinear manifold structures has been shown
effective in producing compact neighborhood-preserving
hash codes. The early algorithm in this fashion is Spectral
Hashing (SH) [37, 38], which produces hash codes through
solving a continuously relaxed mathematical program similar to Laplacian Eigenmaps [1]. More recently, Anchor
Graph Hashing (AGH) [19, 21] leveraged anchor graphs
for solving the eigenfunctions of the resulting graph Laplacians, making hash code training and out-of-sample extension to novel data both tractable and efﬁcient for large-scale
datasets. Shen et al. [29, 30] proposed a general Inductive

