On the Relationship between Visual Attributes and Convolutional Networks

1

Victor Escorcia1,2 , Juan Carlos Niebles2 , Bernard Ghanem1
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Saudi Arabia
2
Universidad del Norte, Colombia

Abstract

Cat
Dog

One of the cornerstone principles of deep models is
their abstraction capacity, i.e. their ability to learn abstract concepts from ‘simpler’ ones. Through extensive experiments, we characterize the nature of the relationship
between abstract concepts (specifically objects in images)
learned by popular and high performing convolutional networks (conv-nets) and established mid-level representations
used in computer vision (specifically semantic visual attributes). We focus on attributes due to their impact on
several applications, such as object description, retrieval
and mining, and active (and zero-shot) learning. Among the
findings we uncover, we show empirical evidence of the existence of Attribute Centric Nodes (ACNs) within a conv-net,
which is trained to recognize objects (not attributes) in images. These special conv-net nodes (1) collectively encode
information pertinent to visual attribute representation and
discrimination, (2) are unevenly and sparsely distribution
across all layers of the conv-net, and (3) play an important
role in conv-net based object recognition.

Ant
Rose
Input

Layer 1

Layer 2

Layer 3

Layer 4

Layer 5

Output

Furry
Andrew Ng

Figure 1. Given the versatility and excellent performance of convnets on various visual recognition tasks, it is plausible that midlevel representations such as visual attributes are encoded by the
network’s activations. The location and sparsity of this encoding,
as well as, the general properties of the relationship between attributes and pre-trained conv-nets are the focus of this work. (All
the figures are best viewed in color)

interpret. Despite their excellent recognition performance,
understanding and interpreting the inner workings of convnets remains mostly elusive to the community. It is this
lack of deep understanding that is currently motivating researchers to look under the hood and comprehend how and
why these deep networks work so well in practice.

1. Introduction

In very recent work [1, 23], the activations of a conv-net
are put in the lime light and many interesting observations
are made. For example, using a deconv-net, these activations can be visually analyzed now and different parts of the
conv-net can be probed to measure their impact on overall
recognition. Analysing the properties of these activations
has shed light on better and more efficient strategies to pretrain, fine-tune, and design a conv-net. Inspired by these
observations, this paper takes another step in a similar direction, namely understanding how the inner workings of a
conv-net that is trained for a high-level recognition task (object recognition) relate to intuitive and conventional midlevel representations in computer vision literature.

The seminal work of Krizhevsky et al. [9] that trained a
large conv-net for image-level object recognition on the ImageNet challenge is considered a major stepping stone for
subsequent work in conv-net based visual recognition. Such
a network is able to automatically learn a hierarchy of nonlinear features that richly describe image content as well as
discriminate between object classes. Indeed, the excellent
performance of such a network on this large-scale recognition task raises the question of whether intuitive and handcrafted features such as SIFT and HOG can be replaced by
conv-net features. In fact, recent work [2, 18] has shown
that features extracted from a conv-net trained on ImageNet
are general purpose (or black-box) enough to achieve stateof-the-art results in various other recognition tasks, including scene, fine-grained, and even action recognition. However, unlike hand-crafted features, those learned by a convnet are usually not visually intuitive and straightforward to

Despite the insights of recent work, it is still unclear
how visual content is represented within the activations of a
conv-net. Simply put, a conv-net trained to classify objects
in images can be viewed as a deep learning machine that
1

