Deep Filter Banks for Texture Recognition and Segmentation
Mircea Cimpoi
University of Oxford

Subhransu Maji
University of Massachusetts, Amherst

Andrea Vedaldi
University of Oxford

mircea@robots.ox.ac.uk

smaji@cs.umass.edu

vedaldi@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Research in texture recognition often concentrates on the
problem of material recognition in uncluttered conditions,
an assumption rarely met by applications. In this work we
conduct a first study of material and describable texture attributes recognition in clutter, using a new dataset derived
from the OpenSurface texture repository. Motivated by the
challenge posed by this problem, we propose a new texture
descriptor, FV-CNN, obtained by Fisher Vector pooling of a
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) filter bank. FV-CNN
substantially improves the state-of-the-art in texture, material and scene recognition. Our approach achieves 79.8%
accuracy on Flickr material dataset and 81% accuracy on
MIT indoor scenes, providing absolute gains of more than
10% over existing approaches. FV-CNN easily transfers
across domains without requiring feature adaptation as for
methods that build on the fully-connected layers of CNNs.
Furthermore, FV-CNN can seamlessly incorporate multiscale information and describe regions of arbitrary shapes
and sizes. Our approach is particularly suited at localizing “stuff” categories and obtains state-of-the-art results
on MSRC segmentation dataset, as well as promising results
on recognizing materials and surface attributes in clutter on
the OpenSurfaces dataset.

banded

blotchy

chequered

grid

marbled

paisley

paisley

wrinkled

brick

ceramic

carpet

fabric

Figure 1. Texture recognition in clutter. Example of top retrieved texture segments by attributes (top two rows) and materials
(bottom) in the OpenSurfaces dataset.

assumption that textures fill images. Thus, they are not necessarily representative of the significantly harder problem
of recognising materials in natural images, where textures
appear in clutter. Building on a recent dataset collected by
the computer graphics community, the first contribution of
this paper is a large-scale analysis of material and perceptual texture attribute recognition and segmentation in clutter (Fig. 1 and Sect. 2).
Motivated by the challenge posed by recognising texture
in clutter, we develop a new texture descriptor. In the simplest terms a texture is characterized by the arrangement of
local patterns, as captured in early works [26, 41] by the
distribution of local “filter bank” responses. These filter
banks were designed to capture edges, spots and bars at
different scales and orientations. Typical combinations of
the filter responses, identified by vector quantisation, were
used as the computational basis of the “textons” proposed
by Julesz [22]. Texton distributions were the early versions
of “bag-of-words” representations, a dominant approach in
recognition in the early 2000s, since then improved by new
pooling schemes such as soft-assignment [27, 42, 48] and
Fisher Vectors (FVs) [32]. Until recently, FV with SIFT
features [28] as a local representation was the state-of-theart method for recognition, not only for textures, but for
objects and scenes too.
Later, however, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)

1. Introduction
Texture is ubiquitous and provides useful cues of material properties of objects and their identity, especially when
shape is not useful. Hence, a significant amount of effort in
the computer vision community has gone into recognizing
texture via tasks such as texture perception [1, 2, 12, 13]
and description [7, 11], material recognition [26, 36, 37],
segmentation [20, 29], and even synthesis [9, 43].
Perhaps the most studied task in texture understanding
is the one of material recognition, as captured in benchmarks such as CuRET [8], KTH-TIPS [5], and, more recently, FMD [38]. However, while at least the FMD dataset
contains images collected from the Internet, vividly dubbed
“images in the wild”, all these datasets make the simplifying
1

