3D Shape Estimation from 2D Landmarks: A Convex Relaxation Approach
Xiaowei Zhou† , Spyridon Leonardos† , Xiaoyan Hu‡† , Kostas Daniilidis†
†
‡
University of Pennsylvania
Beijing Normal University
{xiaowz,spyridon,kostas}@cis.upenn.edu

huxy@bnu.edu.cn

Abstract

is assumed to be a linear combination of predefined basis
shapes. For estimation, the 3D shape model is fitted to the
landmarks annotated or detected in images. In this way, the
problem turns into a 3D-to-2D shape fitting problem, where
the shape parameters (weights of the linear combination)
and the pose parameters (viewpoint) have to be estimated
simultaneously.
While this approach has achieved promising results in
various applications, the model inference is still a challenging problem, since the subproblems of shape and pose estimation are coupled: the pose needs to be known to deform
the 3D model to match 2D landmarks, while the exact 3D
model is required to estimate the pose. The joint estimation
of shape and pose parameters usually results in a nonconvex optimization problem, and the orthogonality constraint
on the pose parameters makes the problem more complicated. The previous methods often adopted an alternating
scheme to alternately update the shape and pose parameters
until convergence. Therefore, the algorithms were sensitive
to initialization and may get stuck at locally-optimal solutions. As mentioned in many works, e.g., [32],[22], most of
the failed cases were attributed to bad initialization. Some
heuristics have been used to relieve this issue, such as trying multiple initializations [35] or using a viewpoint-aware
detector for pose initialization [45]. But there is still no
guarantee for global optimality.
In this paper, we propose a convex relaxation approach
to addressing the aforementioned issue:

We investigate the problem of estimating the 3D shape
of an object, given a set of 2D landmarks in a single image.
To alleviate the reconstruction ambiguity, a widely-used approach is to confine the unknown 3D shape within a shape
space built upon existing shapes. While this approach has
proven to be successful in various applications, a challenging issue remains, i.e., the joint estimation of shape parameters and camera-pose parameters requires to solve a nonconvex optimization problem. The existing methods often
adopt an alternating minimization scheme to locally update
the parameters, and consequently the solution is sensitive
to initialization. In this paper, we propose a convex formulation to address this problem and develop an efficient algorithm to solve the proposed convex program. We demonstrate the exact recovery property of the proposed method,
its merits compared to alternative methods, and the applicability in human pose and car shape estimation.

1. Introduction
Recognizing 3D objects from 2D images is a central
problem in computer vision. In recent years, there has been
an emerging trend towards analyzing 3D geometry of objects including shapes and poses instead of merely providing bounding boxes [37, 25, 4, 28, 36, 33]. The 3D geometric reasoning can not only provide richer information about
the scene for subsequent high-level tasks, but also improve
the performance of object detection. [20, 31, 3, 34].
Estimating the 3D geometry of an object from a single
view is an ill-posed problem. But it is a possible task for
a human observer, since human can leverage visual memory of object shapes. Inspired by this idea, more and more
efforts have been made towards 3D model-based analysis
leveraging the increasing availability of online 3D model
databases. To address intra-class variability or nonrigid
deformation, many recent works, e.g., [22],[32],[45],[35],
have adopted a shape-space approach originated from the
“active shape model” [14], where each shape is defined by
a set of ordered landmarks and the shape to be estimated

1. We use an augmented shape-space model, where a
shape is represented as a linear combination of rotatable basis shapes. This model can give a linear representation of both intrinsic shape deformation and extrinsic viewpoint changes.
2. We use the convex relaxation of the orthogonality constraint to convert the entire problem into a spectralnorm regularized linear inverse problem, which is a
convex program.
3. We develop an efficient algorithm to globally solve the
proposed convex program.
1

