Shape-from-Template in Flatland
Mathias GALLARDO

Daniel PIZARRO

Adrien BARTOLI

Toby COLLINS

ALCoV-ISIT, UMR6284 CNRS / Université d’Auvergne, Clermont-Ferrand
Corresponding author: Mathias Gallardo (Mathias.Gallardo@gmail.com)

Abstract
Shape-from-Template (SfT) is the problem of inferring
the shape of a deformable object as observed in an image
using a shape template. We call 2DSfT the ‘usual’ instance
of SfT where the shape is a surface embedded in 3D and
the image a 2D projection. We introduce 1DSfT, a novel
instance of SfT where the shape is a curve embedded in
2D and the image a 1D projection. We focus on isometric deformations, for which 2DSfT is a well-posed problem, and admits an analytical local solution which may be
used to initialize nonconvex refinement. Through a complete
theoretical study of 1DSfT with perspective projection, we
show that it is related to 2DSfT, but may have very different
properties: (i) 1DSfT cannot be exactly solved locally and
(ii) 1DSfT cannot be solved uniquely, as it has a discrete
amount of at least two solutions. We then propose two convex initialization algorithms, a local analytical one based
on infinitesimal planarity and a global one based on inextensibility. We show how nonconvex refinement can be implemented where, contrarily to current 2DSfT methods, one
may enforce isometry exactly using a novel angle-based parameterization. Finally, our method is tested with simulated
and real data.

1. Introduction
The 1886 novella Flatland [4] describes a 2D world
where inhabitants are portrayed by polygons. In Flatland,
the social status of a person is determined by its polygon’s
regularity and number of sides. At the time Flatland was
created, a very refined skill was the “Art of Sight Recognition”. It was practiced by the highest classes to recognize the social class of others. Colors were forbidden since
lower classes could have used them to impersonate noble
Polygons. We think that the situation in Flatland has now
evolved. Social differences fadded away, as the ancient “Art
of Sight Recognition” has been popularized via the use of
color and perspective perception. However, the following
question has been left unanswered: can a Flatlander recover

a curve from its 1D projection matched to a 1D template?
We name this problem 1D Shape-from-Template (SfT), as
it resembles a problem known as SfT in Mankind’s literature, which we here dub 2DSfT for the sake of clarity.
2DSfT involves a 2D image of a 2D surface embedded in
3D, and whose shape is to be reconstructed. The problem
involves data constraints provided by the image and a prior
on the surface’s deformation. The most studied deformation prior is isometry [6, 14, 8], but other models such as
conformity [6] and linear elasticity [12] were also studied.
Isometric deformations work well for some thin materials
such as cloth and paper. Importantly, isometric 2DSfT is a
well-posed problem [6].
We introduce 1DSfT and focus on the isometric deformation prior. For 1DSfT this means that the length between
any two points of the curve to be reconstructed has been
preserved by the deformation. We assume that the 1D template was matched to the 1D image, and that this is conveyed by a smooth 1D warp function, or just warp. This is
the analogous of the 2D keypoint matches or 2D warp used
in 2DSfT [5]. Whether in 1D or 2D, the isometric deformation is not a convex constraint. Existing 2DSfT methods fall
in three categories: (i) local analytical solutions, (ii) convex
relaxations and (iii) nonconvex refinements. An initial solution obtained by a method in (i) or (ii) is usually used to
initialize a method in (iii). In (i) the depth and surface’s
normal are inferred, independently for each surface point,
from the warp and its first-order derivatives. In (ii) isometry is relaxed to inextensibility, which is an upper bound
on the local surface’s extension, and is a convex constraint.
In (iii) a given solution is refined iteratively by minimizing
a weighted combination of the reprojection error and the
deformation’s un-isometricity. At first sight, it seems that
1DSfT can be directly solved by the literature’s results in
2DSfT. It may even look like 1DSfT is an easier problem
for one dimension was dropped compared to 2DSfT. While
this is true in some respects, this is not in others, as a deeper
investigation of the problem reveals. Making a long story
short, category (i) breaks down in 1DSfT, category (ii) is
applicable about similarly, and category (iii) may be imple-

