Rent3D: Floor-Plan Priors for Monocular Layout Estimation
Chenxi Liu1 ⇤ Alexander G. Schwing 2,⇤

Kaustav Kundu2

State Key Lab. on Intelligent Technology and Systems
Tsinghua Nat. Lab. for Inf. Science and Tech. (TNList)
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University

1

Raquel Urtasun2

Sanja Fidler2

Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto

2

chenxi liu@live.cn, {aschwing, kkundu, urtasun, fidler}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
The goal of this paper is to enable a 3D “virtual-tour” of
an apartment given a small set of monocular images of different rooms, as well as a 2D floor plan. We frame the problem as inference in a Markov Random Field which reasons
about the layout of each room and its relative pose (3D rotation and translation) within the full apartment. This gives
us accurate camera pose in the apartment for each image.
What sets us apart from past work in layout estimation is the
use of floor plans as a source of prior knowledge, as well
as localization of each image within a bigger space (apartment). In particular, we exploit the floor plan to impose aspect ratio constraints across the layouts of different rooms,
as well as to extract semantic information, e.g., the location
of windows which are marked in floor plans. We show that
this information can significantly help in resolving the challenging room-apartment alignment problem. We also derive
an efficient exact inference algorithm which takes only a few
ms per apartment. This is due to the fact that we exploit integral geometry as well as our new bounds on the aspect ratio of rooms which allow us to carve the space, significantly
reducing the number of physically possible configurations.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on a new
dataset which contains over 200 apartments.

Figure 1. Our approach reconstructs rental apartments from a set
of monocular images and a floor plan.

many cases also a floor plan which gives the potential tenants an idea about how the space is organized.
Given a rental ad that contains a few images and a floor
plan of the apartment, our goal is to reconstruct the apartment in 3D. That is, given only monocular images of different rooms, we want to enable a “virtual-tour” allowing
the potential tenant to virtually explore the apartment without having to physically visit the site. This adds another
dimension to apartment rental sites, and is particularly convenient for cold cities like Toronto or Chicago where apartment search in the winter is particularly unpleasant.
Inferring 3D information from a single monocular image
has been one of the holy grails of computer vision since its
beginnings [15]. The problem itself is ill-posed, however,
prior knowledge about the type of scene as well as scene
semantics can help resolve some of the ambiguities [11].
By assuming that rooms conform to Manhattan world, impressive results have been achieved for the problem of room
layout estimation [8, 22]. Estimating the layout means determining the 3D cuboid that defines the room, i.e., inferring the accurate positions of the front wall towards which
the camera is facing. This is a very challenging and exciting
problem that received a lot of attention in the past years.

1. Introduction
How many times have you switched apartments/houses
in the past few years? According to the U.S. Census Bureau, out of a population of 307,243,000 people, 35,918,000
Americans moved between 2012 and 2013. That is 11.69%
of the US population. On an average day, Craigslist, a popular classified advertisement website, has 90,000 rental posts
only for New Your City, with any bigger city exceeding
10,000 ads on any given day. Each ad typically has a few
images showing different rooms in the apartment, and in
⇤ Denotes equal contribution

1

