Revisiting Kernelized Locality-Sensitive Hashing
for Improved Large-Scale Image Retrieval
Ke Jiang, Qichao Que, Brian Kulis
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
The Ohio State University
{jiangk, que, kulis}@cse.ohio-state.edu

Abstract

8, 24, 16, 1]. Unfortunately, in some cases, image comparison criteria are based on functions other than the simple
Euclidean distance between corresponding image feature
vectors, which makes LSH inapplicable in several settings.
Some foundational work has been done to extend LSH to
kernels satisfying particular conditions, such as hashing for
shift-invariant kernels in [21] based on random Fourier features [22]. More generally, Kulis and Grauman [12] proposed a technique called kernelized LSH (KLSH) for approximate nearest neighbor searches with arbitrary kernels,
thus extending LSH to situations where only kernel function
evaluations are possible. The main idea behind KLSH is to
approximate the necessary Gaussian random projections in
the kernel space using an appropriate random combination
of items from the database, based on an application of the
central limit theorem.
Since its publication, KLSH has been used extensively in
the computer vision community, and related hashing methods have been built from the KLSH foundations [19, 8,
24, 16]; however, KLSH still suffers from some important drawbacks. First, while Kulis and Grauman show that
the central limit theorem ensures that the approximate random projections constructed become true Gaussian random
projections as the number of sampled database items gets
larger, no bounds are explicitly given to clarify the tradeoff
between accuracy and runtime. Even worse, the approach
that KLSH uses–that of applying a random projection with a
N (0, I) vector–is conceptually inappropriate in an infinitedimensional kernel space since, as we will discuss later, no
such canonical Gaussian distribution even exists.
In this paper, we present a simple yet powerful reinterpretation of KLSH, which we describe in Section 3. This
new perspective gracefully resolves the “infinite Gaussian”
issue and provides us with the first explicit performance
bounds to clearly demonstrate tradeoffs between runtime
and retrieval accuracy. Crucially, this tradeoff also reveals
two potential techniques which boost the empirical performance of vanilla KLSH. In particular, we show how to modify KLSH to obtain improvements in recall performance of

We present a simple but powerful reinterpretation of kernelized locality-sensitive hashing (KLSH), a general and
popular method developed in the vision community for performing approximate nearest-neighbor searches in an arbitrary reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS). Our new
perspective is based on viewing the steps of the KLSH algorithm in an appropriately projected space, and has several
key theoretical and practical benefits. First, it eliminates
the problematic conceptual difficulties that are present in
the existing motivation of KLSH. Second, it yields the first
formal retrieval performance bounds for KLSH. Third, our
analysis reveals two techniques for boosting the empirical
performance of KLSH. We evaluate these extensions on several large-scale benchmark image retrieval data sets, and
show that our analysis leads to improved recall performance of at least 12%, and sometimes much higher, over
the standard KLSH method.

1. Introduction
Similarity search (or nearest neighbor (NN) search) for
large databases plays a critical role in a number of important vision applications including content-based image and
video retrieval. Usually, the data are represented in a highdimensional feature space, and the number of objects in the
database can scale to the billions in modern applications.
As such, fast indexing and search is a vital component to
many large-scale retrieval systems.
A key theoretical and practical breakthrough for the similarity search problem was the development of localitysensitive hashing (LSH) [7, 3, 2], which relies on Gaussian
random projections for Euclidean distance and can provably
retrieve approximate nearest neighbors in time that grows
sublinearly in the number of database items. In the vision community, LSH has long been employed as one of
the core methods for large-scale retrieval [10, 21, 12, 19,
1

