A Novel Locally Linear KNN Model for Visual Recognition
Qingfeng Liu, Chengjun Liu
New Jersey Institute of Technology
Newark, NJ, USA
ql69, cliu@njit.edu

Abstract

and classification. Many variants [11], [34], [37] are further proposed to incorporate discriminative information for
learning the discriminative dictionary and the sparse representation. For most methods, representation and classification are developed independently, which violates the need
that the representation methods should serve and facilitate
the subsequent classification methods for visual recognition. In addition, these methods bring other issues such as
classifier restriction, computational complexity etc..
In order to address these issues, we propose a novel locally linear k nearest neighbors (LLKNN) model for robust
visual recognition. The proposed method first learns a new
representation for every test sample as a linear combination of all the training samples based on the criteria of reconstruction, locality, and sparsity. The new representation
vector, which possesses the grouping effect of the nearest
neighbors, is then provided as the input of a locally linear
KNN model based classifier (LLKNNC) and a locally linear
nearest mean classifier (LLNMC), respectively. The power
of the proposed LLKNNC is guaranteed by establishing its
connection to the Bayes decision rule for minimum error in
the view of kernel density estimation. The shifted power
transformation and a coefficients cut-off method are further
applied for robustness and reliability.
The effectiveness of the proposed method is assessed on
five representative data sets. In particular, for face recognition, the AR face database [17] is used; for scene recognition, the 15 scenes dataset [13] and the MIT-67 indoor
scenes dataset [21] are applied; for object recognition, the
Caltech 256 dataset [10] is utilized; and for action recognition, the UCF50 dataset [22] is used. The experimental
results show the feasibility of the proposed method.
The system architecture is illustrated in figure 1. The
pattern vector is first preprocessed by the the shifted power
transformation. Then the dimension reduction method is
applied. The proposed LLKNN model further derives a new
representation vector v. Finally, the LLKNNC and the LLNMC are applied for classification.
The main contributions of the paper are as follows:

This paper presents a novel locally linear KNN model
with the goal of not only developing efficient representation and classification methods, but also establishing a relation between them so as to approximate some classification rules, e.g. the Bayes decision rule. Towards that end,
first, the proposed model represents the test sample as a linear combination of all the training samples and derives a
new representation by learning the coefficients considering
the reconstruction, locality and sparsity constraints. The
theoretical analysis shows that the new representation has
the grouping effect of the nearest neighbors, which is able
to approximate the “ideal representation”. And then the locally linear KNN model based classifier (LLKNNC), which
shows its connection to the Bayes decision rule for minimum error in the view of kernel density estimation, is proposed for classification. Besides, the locally linear nearest
mean classifier (LLNMC), whose relation to the LLKNNC is
just like the nearest mean classifier to the KNN classifier, is
also derived. Furthermore, to provide reliable kernel density estimation, the shifted power transformation and the coefficients cut-off method are applied to improve the performance of the proposed method. The effectiveness of the proposed model is evaluated on several visual recognition tasks
such as face recognition, scene recognition, object recognition and action recognition. The experimental results show
that the proposed model is effective and outperforms some
other representative popular methods.

1. Introduction
Visual recognition such as face recognition, object
recognition, scene recognition and action recognition has
received much attention over the past few decades. Many
methods are developed and one of the most successful and
well-studied method is the subspace method, whether the
linear subspace [2], [27] or the non-linear ones [16], [35].
Recently, the sparse representation based method [31] is
proposed to address the problem of robust representation

• First, we propose a novel locally linear KNN
1

