Learning Deep Representations for Ground-to-Aerial Geolocalization
Tsung-Yi Lin†

Yin Cui†

tl483@cornell.edu

yc984@cornell.edu
†

Cornell Tech

Serge Belongie†

James Hays§

sjb344@cornell.edu

hays@cs.brown.edu

§

Brown University

Query&Image&

Abstract
The recent availability of geo-tagged images and rich
geospatial data has inspired a number of algorithms for
image based geolocalization. Most approaches predict the
location of a query image by matching to ground-level images with known locations (e.g., street-view data). However,
most of the Earth does not have ground-level reference photos available. Fortunately, more complete coverage is provided by oblique aerial or “bird’s eye” imagery. In this
work, we localize a ground-level query image by matching
it to a reference database of aerial imagery. We use publicly available data to build a dataset of 78K aligned crossview image pairs. The primary challenge for this task is
that traditional computer vision approaches cannot handle
the wide baseline and appearance variation of these crossview pairs. We use our dataset to learn a feature representation in which matching views are near one another and
mismatched views are far apart. Our proposed approach,
Where-CNN, is inspired by deep learning success in face
verification and achieves significant improvements over traditional hand-crafted features and existing deep features
learned from other large-scale databases. We show the effectiveness of Where-CNN in finding matches between street
view and aerial view imagery and demonstrate the ability of
our learned features to generalize to novel locations.

Matching&Database&

Figure 1: Given a query street-view image, this paper aims
to find where it was taken by matching it to a city-scale
aerial view image database.
more, the photos may have been captured at different times
with different lighting, weather, and season. The main purpose of this paper is to investigate the feasibility of ground
to aerial matching in light of these challenges.
In this paper, we frame photo geolocalization as an identity verification task where only one correct location exists
in a city-scale region. This is analogous to the well-studied
face verification [18] task in which algorithms must decide
whether a pair of input photos depict the same individual.
Recent methods achieved high performances by extracting
hand-crafted features at aligned fiducial points [5, 6, 8].
While these approaches are fairly specific to the face domain, DeepFace [25] instead achieved impressive accuracy
by learning a deep feature representation on aligned face
images with massive additional training data. Inspired by
the success of DeepFace, we first create a large-scale dataset
that contains cross-view images aligned by publicly available coarse depth estimates on ground images. Then, a
low dimensional feature representation is learned by a deep
“Siamese network” [10] with the objective that the crossview image pairs of the same location will be close while
pairs of different locations or views will be far away.
The contributions of this paper are three-fold: (1) our
method can localize a photo without using ground-level
reference imagery by matching to aerial imagery. (2) We
present a novel method to create a large-scale cross-view
training dataset from public data sources. (3) We examine
traditional computer vision features and several recent deep

1. Introduction
Consider the photo on the left side of Fig. 1. How can we
estimate where it was taken? Most existing methods predict
image location via matching to other ground-level photos
with known locations, but what if that data isn’t available?
In this work, we present a method to match ground level
queries to aerial imagery. The right side of Fig. 1 shows one
such aerial image out of thousands in our database. Matching across these disparate visual domains is difficult for two
main reasons. Geometrically, the wide baseline induces a
large amount of occlusion in each view (e.g., we only see
building roofs in aerial views, and occlusions by trees and
street parking are common in street-level views). Further1

