Mapping Visual Features to Semantic Profiles for Retrieval in Medical Imaging
Johannes Hofmanninger, Georg Langs∗
Department of Biomedical Imaging and Image-guided Therapy
Computational Imaging Research Lab, Medical University of Vienna, Austria
johannes.hofmanninger@meduniwien.ac.at, www.cir.meduniwien.ac.at

Abstract

a

Content based image retrieval is highly relevant in medical imaging, since it makes vast amounts of imaging data
accessible for comparison during diagnosis. Finding image similarity measures that reflect diagnostically relevant
relationships is challenging, since the overall appearance
variability is high compared to often subtle signatures of
diseases. To learn models that capture the relationship between semantic clinical information and image elements at
scale, we have to rely on data generated during clinical routine (images and radiology reports), since expert annotation
is prohibitively costly. Here we show that re-mapping visual features extracted from medical imaging data based on
weak labels that can be found in corresponding radiology
reports creates descriptions of local image content capturing clinically relevant information. We show that these semantic profiles enable higher recall and precision during
retrieval compared to visual features, and that we can even
map semantic terms describing clinical findings from radiology reports to localized image volume areas.

b

c

d

1. Introduction
Radiologists have to identify subtle local patterns or findings in medical imaging data relevant for diagnosis or the
evaluation of treatment outcome. Retrieving and comparing
similar cases is critical during this process. However, the
variability of visual appearance in these data is high compared to often subtle features that are informative regarding
disease differentiation. This causes content based image retrieval quality to suffer. At the same time, approaches that
rely on large numbers of annotated ground truth examples
are infeasible in the clinical context due to high costs of expert annotation. Instead, methods have to be able to learn
information that is generated during clinical routine: images, and radiology reports.

e

Figure 1: In medical imaging (a) only a small part of the
information captured by visual features relates to relevant
clinical information such as diseased tissue types (b). However, this information is typically only available as sets of
reported observations on the image level. Here, we demonstrate how to link visual features to semantic labels (c), in
order to improve retrieval (d) and map these labels back to
image regions (e).

In this paper we propose a method that re-maps purely
visual features to features that link appearance to weak semantic information that may be extracted from radiology reports describing diagnostically relevant findings in the im-

∗ This work was partially supported by the EU (FP7-ICT-20095/257528, KHRESMOI and FP7-ICT-2009-5/318068, VISCERAL), FWF
(P 22578-B19, PULMARCH)

1

