Supervised Descriptor Learning for Multi-Output Regression
Xiantong Zhen
University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada

Zhijie Wang
GE Healthcare, London, ON, Canada

xzhen7@uwo.ca

zhijie@ualberta.ca

Mengyang Yu
Northumbria University, Newcastle, United Kingdom

Shuo Li
GE Healthcare, London, ON, Canada

mengyang.yu@northumbria.ac.uk

shuo.li@ge.com

Abstract

ous multivariate targets rather than discrete class labels [4].
However, multi-output regression has recently emerged and
extensively studied for many computer vision tasks, e.g.,
head pose estimation [15], human body pose estimation
[29] and viewpoint estimation [28]. Moreover, many researchers have found their applications, e.g., camera relocalization [24, 13] and cardiac volume estimation [1, 38],
can be elaborately solved by transferring the original problem into a multi-output regression task, which not only substantially outperforms conventional approaches but also offers a more compact and exquisite mathematical formulation to circumvent the difficulty in conventional approaches,
e.g., the inverse problems [13].

Descriptor learning has recently drawn increasing attention in computer vision, Existing algorithms are mainly developed for classification rather than for regression which
however has recently emerged as a powerful tool to solve a
broad range of problems, e.g., head pose estimation. In this
paper, we propose a novel supervised descriptor learning
(SDL) algorithm to establish a discriminative and compact
feature representation for multi-output regression. By formulating as generalized low-rank approximations of matrices with a supervised manifold regularization (SMR), the
SDL removes irrelevant and redundant information from
raw features by transforming into a low-dimensional space
under the supervision of multivariate targets. The obtained
discriminative while compact descriptor largely reduces the
variability and ambiguity in multi-output regression, and
therefore enables more accurate and efficient multivariate
estimation. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed SDL algorithm on a representative multi-output regression task: head pose estimation using the benchmark
Pointing’04 dataset. Experimental results show that the
SDL can achieve high pose estimation accuracy and significantly outperforms state-of-the-art algorithms by an error reduction up to 27.5% . The proposed SDL algorithm
provides a general descriptor learning framework in a supervised way for multi-output regression which can largely
boost the performance of existing multi-output regression
tasks.

Great challenges in multi-output regression arise from
the complex relationship between the high-dimensional input feature descriptors and multivariate targets. Images with
the same targets often exhibit great variability due to illumination changes, geometrical complexity and inter-subject
variations. Meanwhile, images with different targets can also share very similar appearance which causes large ambiguity. The variability and ambiguity pose great challenges
in multi-output regression tasks and designing discriminative feature descriptors to reduce the variability and ambiguity becomes the bottleneck for accurate and efficient
multivariate estimation [9]. Handcrafted descriptors, e.g.,
HOG, are mainly used and can obtain good results in many
multi-output regression tasks [14, 15]. However, the guidance of observed regression targets that represent high-level
concepts in the input data [15] is completely ignored, which
leads to indiscriminate and lengthy representations. Incorporating the supervision of targets into descriptor learning
to achieve discriminative feature representations is imperative and highly desired for more accurate and efficient multivariate estimation, which has not been addressed.

1. Introduction
Descriptor learning, which is also known as feature representation learning, has recently become attractive in visual recognition [33, 25, 37]. Most of existing algorithms are specifically developed for classification tasks while
not directly applicable to regression due to the continu-

In this paper, we propose a novel supervised descriptor learning (SDL) algorithm for multi-output regression
to achieve more accurate and efficient multivariate estima1

