Robust Saliency Detection via Regularized Random Walks Ranking
Changyang Li1, Yuchen Yuan1, Weidong Cai1, Yong Xia2, and David Dagan Feng1
1
The University of Sydney 2Northwestern Polytechnical University

Abstract
In the field of saliency detection, many graph-based
algorithms heavily depend on the accuracy of the
pre-processed superpixel segmentation, which leads to
significant sacrifice of detail information from the input
image. In this paper, we propose a novel bottom-up
saliency detection approach that takes advantage of both
region-based features and image details. To provide more
accurate saliency estimations, we first optimize the image
boundary selection by the proposed erroneous boundary
removal. By taking the image details and region-based
estimations into account, we then propose the regularized
random walks ranking to formulate pixel-wised saliency
maps from the superpixel-based background and
foreground saliency estimations. Experiment results on
two public datasets indicate the significantly improved
accuracy and robustness of the proposed algorithm in
comparison with 12 state-of-the-art saliency detection
approaches.

1. Introduction
Human saliency is usually referred as local contrast
[17], which typically originates from contrasts between an
item and its surroundings, such as differences in color,
texture, shape, etc. This mechanism measures intrinsically
salient stimuli to the vision system that primarily attracts
human attention in the early stage of visual exposure to an
input image [16]. Intermediate and higher visual processes
may automatically judge the importance of different regions of the image, and conduct detailed processes only on
the “salient objects” that mostly related to the current
tasks, while neglecting the remaining “background” regions [5]. The detection of such salient objects in the image is of significant importance, as it directs the limited
computational resources to faster solutions in the subsequent image processing and analysis [6].
In computer vision, salient object detection algorithms
can be categorized into bottom-up approaches [1, 6, 8, 11,
13, 17, 20, 27], and top-down approaches [4, 7, 9, 28].
The bottom-up strategy of saliency detection is
pre-attentive and data-driven [27]. It is usually fast to ex-

ecute and easy to adapt to various cases compared to
top-down approaches, and therefore has been widely applied. As a pioneer, Itti et al. [17] introduce a conceptually
computational model for visual attention detection based
on multiple biological feature maps generated by mimicking human visual cortex neurons. Achanta et al. [1] propose a frequency-tuned approach, which results in a saliency map from color differences of the entire image directly. In [6], Cheng et al. present the histogram-based
contrast (HC), which exploits the pixel-wise color separation to produce saliency maps, and the region-based contrast (RC), which is an improvement of HC that takes spatial distances into account at the cost of reduced computational efficiency. To overcome the limitations of color
contrast, Fu et al. [8] illustrate the workflow of a combined color contrast and color distribution saliency detection algorithm, together with a refinement process to suppress noise and artifacts.
Recently, more graph-based approaches have been proposed. Harel et al. [13] offer the graph based visual saliency (GBVS), a graph-based bottom-up saliency model
with dissimilarity measurements to extract saliency information. In the work of Gopalakrishnan et al. [11], the
random walks model has been exploited in an automatic
salient-region-extraction method to effectively detect the
rough location of the most salient object in an image. The
method established by Mai et al. [20] formulates saliency
by pixel-wise aggregation, conditional random field (CRF)
aggregation and image-dependent aggregation. Jiang et al.
[19] introduce the discriminative regional feature integration (DRFI), which integrates regional contrast, property
and backgroundness descriptor together to formulate the
master saliency map. And based on graph-based manifold
ranking (MR), the work of Yang et al. [27] utilizes the
four boundaries of the input image as background prior to
extract foreground queries for the final saliency map.
The results in [27] demonstrate that the MR algorithm
outperforms most of the state-of-the-art saliency detection
methods and is more computationally efficient. However,
there are flaws that hinder it from full performance. Firstly,
the four boundaries used as background queries in MR
may be implausible for the background saliency detection.
In other words, one or more boundaries may be adjacent
to the foreground object and undesirable results may

