The Treasure beneath Convolutional Layers: Cross-convolutional-layer Pooling
for Image Classification
Lingqiao Liu1∗, Chunhua Shen1,2∗, Anton van den Hengel1,2∗
The University of Adelaide, Australia1 The Australian Centre for Robotic Vision2
e-mail: Lingqiao.Liu@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
A number of recent studies have shown that a Deep Convolutional Neural Network (DCNN) pretrained on a large
dataset can be adopted as a universal image descriptor, and
that doing so leads to impressive performance at a range of
image classification tasks. Most of these studies, if not all,
adopt activations of the fully-connected layer of a DCNN
as the image or region representation and it is believed that
convolutional layer activations are less discriminative.
This paper, however, advocates that if used appropriately, convolutional layer activations constitute a powerful image representation. This is achieved by adopting a new technique proposed in this paper called crossconvolutional-layer pooling. More specifically, it extracts
subarrays of feature maps of one convolutional layer as local features, and pools the extracted features with the guidance of the feature maps of the successive convolutional
layer. Compared with existing methods that apply DCNNs
in the similar local feature setting, the proposed method
avoids the input image style mismatching issue which is
usually encountered when applying fully connected layer
activations to describe local regions. Also, the proposed
method is easier to implement since it is codebook free
and does not have any tuning parameters. By applying
our method to four popular visual classification tasks, it is
demonstrated that the proposed method can achieve comparable or in some cases significantly better performance than
existing fully-connected layer based image representations.

1. Introduction
Recently, Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (DCNNs) have attracted a lot of attention in visual recognition,
largely due to their performance [1]. It has been discovered that the activation of a DCNN pretrained on a large
∗ This work was in part funded by the Data to Decisions Cooperative Research Centre, Australia, and Australian Research Council grants
FT120100969 and LP130100156.

dataset, such as ImageNet [2], can be employed as a universal image representation, and applying this representation
to many visual classification problems delivers impressive
performance [3, 4]. This discovery quickly sparked significant interest, and inspired a number of extensions, including
[5, 6]. A fundamental issue with this kinds of methods is
how to generate an image representation from a pretrained
DCNN. Most current solutions, if not all, take activations
of the fully connected layer as the image representation. In
contrast, activations of convolutional layers are rarely used
and some studies [7, 8] have reported that directly using
convolutional layer activations as image features produces
inferior performance.
In this paper, however, we advocate that convolutional
layer activations form a powerful image representation if
they are used appropriately. We propose a new method
called cross-convolutional layer pooling (or cross layer
pooling for short) to derive discriminative features from
from convolutional layers. This new technique relies on two
crucial components: (1) we utilize convolutional layer activations in a ‘local feature’ setting in which subarrays of
convolutional layer activations are extracted as region descriptors. (2) we pool extracted local features by using activations from two successive convolutional layers.
The first component is motivated by recent work [5, 6, 9]
which has shown that DCNN activations are not translation
invariant and that it is beneficial to extract fully connected
layer activations from a DCNN to describe local regions and
create the image representation by pooling multiple regional
DCNN activations. Our method steps further to use subarrays of convolutional layer activations, that is, parts of CNN
convolutional activations as regional descriptors. Compared
with previous work [5, 6], our method avoids the image
style mismatching issue which is commonly encountered
in existing methods. More specifically, existing methods
[5, 6, 9] essentially apply a network trained for representing an image to represent a local region. Thus, the image
styles at the test stage do not match those of the training
stage. This mismatching may degrade the discriminative
power of DCNN activations. In contrast, our method uses

