Mirror, mirror on the wall, tell me, is the error small?
Heng Yang and Ioannis Patras
Queen Mary University of London
{heng.yang, I.Patras}@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract
Do object part localization methods produce bilaterally
symmetric results on mirror images? Surprisingly not, even
though state of the art methods augment the training set
with mirrored images. In this paper we take a closer look
into this issue. We first introduce the concept of mirrorability as the ability of a model to produce symmetric results in
mirrored images and introduce a corresponding measure,
namely the mirror error that is defined as the difference between the detection result on an image and the mirror of the
detection result on its mirror image. We evaluate the mirrorability of several state of the art algorithms in two of the
most intensively studied problems, namely human pose estimation and face alignment. Our experiments lead to several interesting findings: 1) Most of state of the art methods
struggle to preserve the mirror symmetry, despite the fact
that they do have very similar overall performance on the
original and mirror images; 2) the low mirrorability is not
caused by training or testing sample bias - all algorithms
are trained on both the original images and their mirrored
versions; 3) the mirror error is strongly correlated to the
localization/alignment error (with correlation coefficients
around 0.7). Since the mirror error is calculated without
knowledge of the ground truth, we show two interesting applications - in the first it is used to guide the selection of
difficult samples and in the second to give feedback in a
popular Cascaded Pose Regression method for face alignment.

(a) Mirror error 0.2.

(b) Mirror error 0.02.

(c) Mirror error 0.6.

(d) Mirror error 0.02.

Figure 1: Example pairs of localization results on original
(left) and mirror (right) images. First row: Human Pose
Estimation [27], second row: Face Alignment by RCPR [4].
The first column (a and c) shows large mirror error and the
second (b and d) small mirror error. Can we evaluate the
performance without knowing the ground truth?
eral methods have reported close-to-human performance.
This includes localization of objects in images (e.g. pedestrian or face detection) or fine-grained localization of object
parts (e.g. face parts localization, body parts localization,
bird parts localization). Most of those methods augment
the training set by mirroring the positive training samples.
However, are these models able to give symmetric results
on a mirror image during testing?
In order to answer this question we first introduce the
concept of mirrorability, i.e., the ability of an algorithm to
give on a mirror image bilaterally symmetric results, and a
quantitative measure called the mirror error. The latter is
defined as the difference between the detection result on an
image and the mirror of detection result on its mirror image. We evaluate the mirrorability of several state of the
art algorithms in two representative problems (face alignment and human pose estimation) on several datasets. One

1. Introduction
The evolution of mirror (bilateral) symmetry has profoundly impacted animal evolution [7]. As a consequence,
the overwhelming majority of modern animals (>99%), including humans, exhibit mirror symmetry. As shown in
Fig. 1, the mirror of an image depicting such objects shows
a meaningful version of the same objects. Taking face images as a concrete example, a mirrored version of a face
image is perceived as the same face. In recent year, object
(parts) localization has made significant progress and sev1

