Correlation Filters with Limited Boundaries
Hamed Kiani Galoogahi
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
Genova, Italy

Terence Sim
National University of Singapore
Singapore

Simon Lucey
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, USA

hamed.kiani@iit.it

tsim@comp.nus.edu.sg

slucey@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Correlation filters take advantage of specific properties in the Fourier domain allowing them to be estimated
efficiently: O(N D log D) in the frequency domain, versus O(D3 + N D2 ) spatially where D is signal length,
and N is the number of signals. Recent extensions to correlation filters, such as MOSSE, have reignited interest of
their use in the vision community due to their robustness
and attractive computational properties. In this paper we
demonstrate, however, that this computational efficiency
1
comes at a cost. Specifically, we demonstrate that only D
proportion of shifted examples are unaffected by boundary
effects which has a dramatic effect on detection/tracking
performance. In this paper, we propose a novel approach
to correlation filter estimation that: (i) takes advantage of
inherent computational redundancies in the frequency domain, (ii) dramatically reduces boundary effects, and (iii)
is able to implicitly exploit all possible patches densely extracted from training examples during learning process. Impressive object tracking and detection results are presented
in terms of both accuracy and computational efficiency.

1. Introduction
Correlation between two signals is a standard approach
to feature detection/matching. Correlation touches nearly
every facet of computer vision from pattern detection to object tracking. Correlation is rarely performed naively in the
spatial domain. Instead, the fast Fourier transform (FFT)
affords the efficient application of correlating a desired template/filter with a signal.
Correlation filters, developed initially in the seminal
work of Hester and Casasent [15], are a method for learning
a template/filter in the frequency domain that rose to some
prominence in the 80s and 90s. Although many variants
have been proposed [15, 18, 20, 19], the approach’s central
tenet is to learn a filter, that when correlated with a set of
training signals, gives a desired response, e.g. Figure 1 (b).
Like correlation, one of the central advantages of the ap-

(a)



(c)

(b)



(d)

Figure 1. (a) Defines the example of fixed spatial support within
the image from which the peak correlation output should occur.
(b) The desired output response, based on (a), of the correlation
filter when applied to the entire image. (c) A subset of patch examples used in a canonical correlation filter where green denotes
a non-zero correlation output, and red denotes a zero correlation
output in direct accordance with (b). (d) A subset of patch examples used in our proposed correlation filter. Note that our proposed approach uses all possible patches stemming from different
parts of the image, whereas the canonical correlation filter simply
employs circular shifted versions of the same single patch. The
central dilemma in this paper is how to perform (d) efficiently in
the Fourier domain. The two last patches of (d) show that D−1
T
patches near the image border are affected by circular shift in our
method which can be greatly diminished by choosing D << T ,
where D and T indicate the length of the vectorized face patch in
(a) and the whole image in (a), respectively.

proach is that it attempts to learn the filter in the frequency
domain due to the efficiency of correlation in that domain.
Interest in correlation filters has been reignited in the vision world through the recent work of Bolme et al. [5] on
Minimum Output Sum of Squared Error (MOSSE) correlation filters for object detection and tracking. Bolme et al.’s
work was able to circumvent some of the classical problems

