Recovering Inner Slices of Translucent Objects by Multi-frequency Illumination
Kenichiro Tanaka1,2
Yasuhiro Mukaigawa2
Hiroyuki Kubo2
Yasuyuki Matsushita1,3
Yasushi Yagi1
1
2
Osaka University
Nara Institute of Science and Technology 3 Microsoft Research Asia
http://www.am.sanken.osaka-u.ac.jp/˜tanaka/projects/multi-freq.html

Abstract

nique [5], and sharper results can be obtained differently
from infrared reflectography [9].
Our method exploits the fact that the spread of light
due to scattering has dependency on the depth of inner
layer where light rays are emitted. By modeling the light
spreads as depth-dependent point spread functions (PSFs)
and utilizing their depth-dependent low-pass characteristics, we develop a method for recovering inner layer appearances from a set of images taken under a variant of
high-frequency illumination [26]. Specifically, our method
uses a spatial pattern projection with varying the pattern
pitch – we call this multi-frequency illumination. Our multifrequency illumination method allows us to separate direct
(high-frequency) and global (low-frequency) components
as in [26], yet at various frequency levels that define highand low-frequencies. Our method uses the direct component observations for recovering the appearance of inner
slices, which are related to the direct components via depthdependent PSFs.
The key contributions of this paper are twofold. First,
we describe the relationship between depth inside a translucent object and its PSF by a physically motivated scattering
model. Second, using the relationship, we develop a method
for recovering the appearance of inner slices using varying
pitch pattern projection. We implement a coaxial projectorcamera setup for measuring real-world objects, and show
the recovery results using oil painting, mural, and paper
scenes.

This paper describes a method for recovering appearance of inner slices of translucent objects. The outer appearance of translucent objects is a summation of the appearance of slices at all depths, where each slice is blurred
by depth-dependent point spread functions (PSFs). By exploiting the difference of low-pass characteristics of depthdependent PSFs, we develop a multi-frequency illumination
method for obtaining the appearance of individual inner
slices using a coaxial projector-camera setup. Specifically,
by measuring the target object with varying the spatial frequency of checker patterns emitted from a projector, our
method recovers inner slices via a simple linear solution
method. We quantitatively evaluate accuracy of the proposed method by simulations and show qualitative recovery
results using real-world scenes.

1. Introduction
Translucent objects have complex appearance. It is a superposition of light rays emitted from inner slices at every
depths, blurred by subsurface scattering. Because seeing internal appearance of objects is of broad interest in medical
and art analyses and industry inspection, various imaging
techniques have been developed in the past. In particular,
since the translucency effect becomes significant for many
materials in near infrared (NIR) wavelengths, infrared photography is used as one of common techniques for achieving
this goal. For example, it is used for observing inner layers
of oil paintings that tell us the drawing technique, growth,
history, and/or authenticity of old age painters.
One of the major challenges in observing inner layers
of translucent objects is to separate inner appearances with
properly dealing with scattering. To overcome this problem,
we develop a multi-frequency illumination method, which
can recover sharp appearance of inner slices at a desired
depth with explicitly removing scattering blur. Compared
with conventional techniques that aim at a similar goal, our
method is faster and safer than the X-ray fluorescence tech-

2. Related work
As our work aims to recover slices from superposed observation, layer decomposition techniques [29, 27, 19] from
super-imposed images are related. These methods are designed for scenes with semi-transparent layers that do not
exhibit multiple scattering; thus, the image formation model
is represented by simple alpha blending. Our method is
designed for translucent scenes where significant multiple
scattering is observed.
Our work is related to descattering methods in computational photography in that our goal is to recover sharp slices
1

