Simplified Mirror-Based Camera Pose Computation via Rotation Averaging
Gucan Long∗1 , Laurent Kneip2 , Xin Li1 , Xiaohu Zhang1 , and Qifeng Yu1
1

College of Aerospace Science and Engineering
National University of Defense Technology, P.R. China
2
Research School of Engineering, Australian National University

Abstract
We propose a novel approach to compute the camera
pose with respect to a reference object given only mirrored
views. The latter originate from a planar mirror at different unknown poses. This problem is highly relevant in several extrinsic camera calibration scenarios, where the camera cannot see the reference object directly. In contrast to
numerous existing methods, our approach does not employ
the fixed axis rotation constraint, but represents a more elegant formulation as a rotation averaging problem. Our
theoretical contribution extends the applicability of rotation averaging to a more general case, and enables mirrorbased pose estimation in closed-form under the chordal L2metric, or in an outlier-robust way by employing iterative
L1-norm averaging. We demonstrate the advantages of our
approach on both synthetic and real data, and show how
the method can be applied to calibrate the non-overlapping
pair of cameras of a common smart phone.

1. Introduction
The present paper discusses the calibration of extrinsic camera parameters, meaning a Euclidean transformation
that defines the camera position and orientation with respect
to another frame. For instance, in virtual reality we ought to
know the transformation between a camera and a reference
frame, thus enabling virtual objects to be added onto real
scene video. While this can be recovered by well-known
relative or absolute pose computation algorithms, there remain several important applications where the pose computation can no longer rely on basic geometric constraints:
• A camera that is custom-mounted in the front or back
of a car. The corresponding calibration task is commonly denoted eye-body calibration. Despite the fact
∗ gucan.long@nudt.edu.cn

Figure 1. Extrinsic calibration of a smart phone’s camera-pair: The
green rectangle contains a mirrored scene captured by the smart
phone’s front camera. As can be observed in the right figure, both
front and back camera can see the chessboard only via mirror reflections. Mirror based pose estimation consists of finding both
cameras’ absolute pose with respect to the target object given only
(at least 3) mirrored views of the object (i.e. the mirror’s position is
changed and unknown). By combining the absolute poses, we can
then easily retrieve the relative pose between the non-overlapping
pair of cameras.

that a 3D model of the vehicle might be readily available, it is not visible inside the camera’s field of view,
thus blocking a calibration based on object pose estimation. The problem is typically solved by computing the egomotion of the camera and aligning it with
dynamic sensor information, for instance given by an
odometer or an inertial measurement unit.
• Multiple cameras pointing into different directions
such that their fields of view are no longer overlapping. Deriving the relative pose from the absolute
poses with respect to a commonly observed calibration target hence becomes impossible. The problem
of calibrating non-overlapping cameras is often approached by again computing the trajectory of each
camera under motion, and then aligning the trajectories
by solving the so-called hand-eye calibration problem.

