A Large-Scale Car Dataset for Fine-Grained Categorization and Verification
Linjie Yang1
Ping Luo1,2
Chen Change Loy1,2
Xiaoou Tang1,2
1
Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Shenzhen Key Lab of CVPR, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, China
{yl012,pluo,ccloy,xtang}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
This paper aims to highlight vision related tasks centered
around “car”, which has been largely neglected by vision
community in comparison to other objects. We show that
there are still many interesting car-related problems and applications, which are not yet well explored and researched.
To facilitate future car-related research, in this paper we
present our on-going effort in collecting a large-scale
dataset, “CompCars”, that covers not only different car
views, but also their different internal and external parts,
and rich attributes. Importantly, the dataset is constructed
with a cross-modality nature, containing a surveillancenature set and a web-nature set. We further demonstrate a
few important applications exploiting the dataset, namely
car model classification, car model verification, and attribute prediction. We also discuss specific challenges of
the car-related problems and other potential applications
that worth further investigations. The latest dataset can be
downloaded at http://mmlab.ie.cuhk.edu.hk/
datasets/comp_cars/index.html

150

200

250

300

350

km/h

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. (a) Can you predict the maximum speed of a car with
only a photo? Get some cues from the examples. (b) The two
SUV models are very similar in their side views, but are rather
different in the front views. (c) The evolution of the headlights of
two car models from 2006 to 2014 (left to right).

1. Introduction
Cars represent a revolution in mobility and convenience,
bringing us the flexibility of moving from place to place.
The societal benefits (and cost) are far-reaching. Cars are
now indispensable from our modern life as a vehicle for
transportation. In many places, the car is also viewed as a
tool to help project someone’s economic status, or reflects
our economic stratification. In addition, the car has evolved
into a subject of interest amongst many car enthusiasts in
the world. In general, the demand on car has shifted over
the years to cover not only practicality and reliability, but
also high comfort and design. The enormous number of
car designs and car model makes car a rich object class,
which can potentially foster more sophisticated and robust
computer vision models and algorithms.
Cars present several unique properties that other objects

cannot offer, which provides more challenges and facilitates
a range of novel research topics in object categorization.
Specifically, cars own large quantity of models that most
other categories do not have, enabling a more challenging
fine-grained task. In addition, cars yield large appearance
differences in their unconstrained poses, which demands
viewpoint-aware analyses and algorithms (see Fig. 1(b)).
Importantly, a unique hierarchy is presented for the car
category, which is three levels from top to bottom: make,
model, and released year. This structure indicates a
direction to address the fine-grained task in a hierarchical
way, which is only discussed by limited literature [16].
Apart from the categorization task, cars reveal a number
1

