Becoming the Expert - Interactive Multi-Class Machine Teaching
Edward Johns

Oisin Mac Aodha
Gabriel J. Brostow
University College London
http://visual.cs.ucl.ac.uk/pubs/interactiveMachineTeaching

Abstract

1 Teaching Image

Compared to machines, humans are extremely good at
classifying images into categories, especially when they
possess prior knowledge of the categories at hand. If this
prior information is not available, supervision in the form
of teaching images is required. To learn categories more
quickly, people should see important and representative images first, followed by less important images later – or not at
all. However, image-importance is individual-specific, i.e.
a teaching image is important to a student if it changes their
overall ability to discriminate between classes. Further, students keep learning, so while image-importance depends on
their current knowledge, it also varies with time.
In this work we propose an Interactive Machine Teaching algorithm that enables a computer to teach challenging visual concepts to a human. Our adaptive algorithm
chooses, online, which labeled images from a teaching set
should be shown to the student as they learn. We show that a
teaching strategy that probabilistically models the student’s
ability and progress, based on their correct and incorrect
answers, produces better ‘experts’. We present results using real human participants across several varied and challenging real-world datasets.

2 Student's Estimate

CAT

3 Class Label

Figure 1: In Interactive Machine Teaching the computer
teaches the human learner, one image at a time. It begins by showing them an image from the larger labeled
image dataset while concealing the true class label. The
learner/student responds with their estimate of the image’s
class. The teacher then updates their model of the student,
and finally reveals the correct answer to them. This process
is repeated with further images until teaching ends.

which they can generalize, either from everyday life or from
specialized training. For many problems, highly specialized, domain specific knowledge, acquired through extensive training, is needed before someone can differentiate
between potentially multiple, highly self-similar object categories.
Designing the set of teaching images or ‘teaching set’ to
show the annotators is challenging, because each annotator
will have a different degree of expertise. While it is possible
to model the uncertainty and noise generated from groups of
annotators to improve their collective performance [34, 40,
27], these approaches tend to downweight votes from weak
annotators by learning to trust the experts. In this paper, we
pose the question - how does one become an expert? We
posit that a human’s discriminative ability for a given visual
classification task can be improved by better modeling the
teaching process required to make them experts.
The family of methods referred to as Machine Teaching offers a general solution to the problem of teaching humans [43, 18, 42, 39, 33]. Machine Teaching is not the same
as Active Learning [38]. In Active Learning, the computer’s
goal is to learn more accurate models given the smallest
amount of supervision. This is achieved by carefully selecting only the most informative datapoints to be labeled by

1. Introduction
Large, manually annotated image datasets have contributed to recent performance increases in core computer
vision problems such as object detection and classification [16, 37, 25]. In cases where the visual categories of interest are generic everyday objects, annotation can be completed by crowd sourcing labels from the internet using services such as Mechanical Turk [1]. A typical image labeling
task begins with a set of instructions to the annotator, showing them example images from the classes of interest. The
annotator is then asked to assign class labels to new images
where the ground truth is unknown.
But what happens if the annotator is unsure? This is
a real problem when annotators are incorrectly assumed
to have prior knowledge of the classes of interest from
1

