Good Features to Track for Visual SLAM
Guangcong Zhang
School of ECE, Georgia Tech.

Patricio A. Vela
School of ECE, Georgia Tech.

zhanggc@gatech.edu

pvela@gatech.edu

Abstract
Not all measured features in SLAM/SfM contribute to
accurate localization during the estimation process, thus
it is sensible to utilize only those that do. This paper describes a method for selecting a subset of features that are
of high utility for localization in the SLAM/SfM estimation process. It is derived by examining the observability
of SLAM and, being complimentary to the estimation process, it easily integrates into existing SLAM systems. The
measure of estimation utility is formulated with temporal
and instantaneous observability indices. Efficient computation strategies for the observability indices are described
based on incremental singular value decomposition (SVD)
and greedy selection for the temporal and instantaneous
observability indices, respectively. The greedy selection
is near-optimal since the observability index is (approximately) submodular. The proposed method improves localization and data association. Controlled synthetic experiments with ground truth demonstrate the improved localization accuracy, and real-time SLAM experiments demonstrate the improved data association.

Figure 1. The proposed method selects the measurements (highlighted in yellow) which provide the most value to the SLAM estimation, by considering observability scores. In the example the
camera is mostly rotating w.r.t. the optical axis.

features. [5] propose to exploit the co-visibility of features by cameras to select the best subset of points, but this
method is developed for Bundle Adjustment and requires
the complete structure of features-camera graph as a priori
knowledge. For SLAM, information gain has been a popular criterion for such a selection [9, 6, 17, 20]. The rationale
behind information gain is that selecting the features which
maximize the information gain in estimation will maximize
the uncertainty reduction for both the camera pose and landmark positions. Nevertheless, low uncertainty in estimation
is not equivalent to high accuracy. For instance, if drift exists in the estimate, the converged estimates with lowest uncertainty still suffer from the drift. Rather, the accuracy of
the converged SLAM estimate is determined by the operator mapping the projective space of image observations to
the space of camera motion and feature 3D positions, and
its temporal dynamics, as indicated in the right block in
Fig. 2. Intuition then indicates that the better conditioned
this operator is, the more tolerant the output space is to the
perturbations in the input space. This operator encodes the
camera motion across frames due to temporal coupling of
SLAM estimates.
To exploit nature of SEh3i SLAM operator to feature
ranking, we study the SLAM problem using system theory to define the observability scores for feature selection. System theory, especially observability theory, have
been seen in robotics literature, but mostly restricted to 1D
SLAM [14] or 2D(planar motion) SLAM [1, 24, 28] rather
than monocular camera SLAM on SEh3i. Moreover, ob-

1. Introduction
A fact in visual SLAM/SfM is that not all of the features being tracked contribute to accurate estimation of the
camera poses and the map. Finding the features that provide the best values for estimation is important when SLAM
is to be used for practical purposes. It is equally important when considering visual SLAM systems developed for
large-scale/dense reconstruction with massive data processing needs [27, 8, 12, 19, 29].
Conventionally, a fully data-driven and randomized process like RANSAC is used to select the valuable features
by retrieving the inlier set [11]. Various approaches [33, 7]
were later proposed to improve the computational efficiency
and robustness of RANSAC in visual SLAM. These methods are data-driven and make no use of structural information of the relative motion. Recent research efforts have
sought more systematic criterion for selecting the valuable
1

