Photometric Refinement of Depth Maps for Multi-albedo Objects
Avishek Chatterjee
Venu Madhav Govindu
Indian Institute of Science
Bengaluru 560012, India
avishek|venu@ee.iisc.ernet.in

Abstract

literature to our specific context of fusing depth and
radiometric estimates of normals [23, 9, 18, 10, 5]. These
methods can broadly be classified into two categories:
shape-from-shading approaches that use only one intensity
image [23, 9, 5] and photometric stereo methods that rely
on observations under varying lighting conditions [18, 10].
While acquiring a single image is simpler and faster, shapefrom-shading suffers from intrinsic ambiguities including
multiple solutions even for known lighting [3, 8] and is
generally restricted to objects of constant albedo. Often it
is difficult to distinguish between changes in albedo from
changes in the surface normal using only a single image.
While the methods in [23, 5] segment observed images
into regions of constant albedo, this is very restrictive
since many objects have continuously varying albedo or
have small regions with a different albedo that makes the
segmentation task difficult or impossible.

In this paper, we propose a novel uncalibrated photometric method for refining depth maps of multi-albedo objects
obtained from consumer depth cameras like Kinect. Existing uncalibrated photometric methods either assume that
the object has constant albedo or rely on segmenting images
into constant albedo regions. The method of this paper does
not require the constant albedo assumption and we believe
it is the first work of its kind to handle objects with arbitrary
albedo under uncalibrated illumination. We first robustly
estimate a rank 3 approximation of the observed brightness matrix using an iterative reweighting method. Subsequently, we factorize this rank reduced brightness matrix
into the corresponding lighting, albedo and surface normal
components. The proposed factorization is shown to be convergent. We experimentally demonstrate the value of our
approach by presenting highly accurate three-dimensional
reconstructions of a wide variety of objects. Additionally,
since any photometric method requires a radiometric calibration of the camera used, we also present a direct radiometric calibration technique for the infra-red camera of the
structured-light stereo depth scanner. Unlike existing methods, this calibration technique does not depend on a known
calibration object or on the properties of the scene illumination used.

By using multiple images acquired under different lighting conditions, photometric stereo can overcome the ambiguities suffered by shape-from-shading. In this paper, we
propose a novel photometric method for recovering the surface normals of multi-albedo objects that are then fused
with the depth estimates from Kinect to result in a depth
refinement method that accurately recovers the 3D object
shape. In our work, we use the infra-red (henceforth IR)
camera of Kinect for radiometric measurements as was
done in [5, 10]. While [18, 10] also use the principles
of photometric stereo for normal estimation, their methods
make the restrictive assumption that the objects have a single albedo. While the normal estimation step of [10] is independent of albedo, their lighting estimation step assumes
constant albedo. Thus, for multi-albedo objects the normal
estimates and final refined depth estimates are poor. [18]
uses the uncalibrated photometric stereo method proposed
in [11]. While solving the linear ambiguity in the factorization of observed radiometric brightness, [18] uses a constant
albedo assumption. In contrast, in our approach detailed in
Section 3.2 we make no such restrictive assumption. While
solving for the linear ambiguity of factorization of bright-

1. Introduction
Depth maps from structured-light stereo depth cameras
like Kinect suffer from very high noise and poor resolution.
As a result, fine-scale (high frequency) structural details
of an object are not captured by such depth cameras. The
requisite high frequency details can be obtained through
methods that make radiometric measurements such as
shape-from-shading [14, 25, 7] or photometric stereo [21],
which can then be fused with the low quality depth maps to
obtain high quality shape estimates. Since the literature on
shape-from-shading and photometric stereo is enormous,
in the following we restrict our discussion of the relevant
1

