Multi-Manifold Deep Metric Learning for Image Set Classification
Jiwen Lu1 , Gang Wang1,2 , Weihong Deng3 , Pierre Moulin1,4 , and Jie Zhou5
1
Advanced Digital Sciences Center, Singapore
2
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
School of ICE, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
4
Department of ECE, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA
5
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
jiwen.lu@adsc.com.sg; wanggang@ntu.edu.sg; whdeng@bupt.edu.cn;
moulin@ifp.uiuc.edu; jzhou@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a multi-manifold deep metric learning (MMDML) method for image set classification,
which aims to recognize an object of interest from a set of
image instances captured from varying viewpoints or under
varying illuminations. Motivated by the fact that manifold
can be effectively used to model the nonlinearity of samples in each image set and deep learning has demonstrated
superb capability to model the nonlinearity of samples, we
propose a MMDML method to learn multiple sets of nonlinear transformations, one set for each object class, to nonlinearly map multiple sets of image instances into a shared
feature subspace, under which the manifold margin of different class is maximized, so that both discriminative and
class-specific information can be exploited, simultaneously. Our method achieves the state-of-the-art performance
on five widely used datasets.

1. Introduction
Image set classification has been an important problem
in computer vision in recent years [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10,
11, 13, 15, 16, 18, 22, 24, 26, 27, 28, 29, 34, 35, 36, 37,
38, 39, 40], especially when more and more data are easily accessible and multiple images of the same object are
easily captured nowadays. There are many practical applications for image set classification such as visual surveillance, multi-view camera network analysis, and personal album organization. Generally, image set classification aims
to recognize an object of interest from a set of image instances captured from varying viewpoints or under varying
illuminations, which is different from the conventional image classification where each training and testing example
is a single still image. Compared to a single image, an im-

Figure 1. The basic idea of our proposed image set classification
approach. For each image set, we model it as a manifold and pass
it into multiple layers of deep neural networks to nonlinearly map
each manifold into another feature space. Specifically, the deep
network is class-specific so that different classes have different parameters in their networks. In the top layer of these networks,
the maximal manifold margin criterion is used to learn the parameters of these manifold. In the testing stage, we apply these classspecific deep networks to compute the similarity between the testing image set and all training classes and the smallest distance is
used for classification.

age set offers us more useful information to describe objects
of interest. However, it is also more challenging to exploit
1

