A Convex Optimization Approach to Robust Fundamental Matrix
Estimation ∗
Y. Cheng

J. A. Lopez
O. Camps
M. Sznaier
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115

{cheng.yong,lopez.jo}@husky.neu.edu, {camps,msznaier}@coe.neu.edu

Abstract

stem from the need to impose that the resulting matrix
must be rank deficient, and from the presence of
outliers, which if not properly handled can substantially
skew the estimate.
Existing methods fall roughly into one of two classes,
depending on how they tackle the non-convex rank2 constraint. The first type of methods uses a twostep approach, for instance, methods based on the wellknown eight-point algorithm and its various extensions
[12, 6, 3], that starts by finding a (sub)optimal estimate
without taking into account the rank constraint and then
refines the result by reducing its smallest singular value
to 0. However, in [13] it has been shown that ignoring
the rank constraint can degrade the accuracy in terms of
the covariance matrix of the first-order variation of the
solution. On the other hand, the second type of methods considers the rank constraint explicitly. In [16] a
Levenberg-Marquard (LM) approach is proposed to optimize the singular value decomposition (SVD) of the
fundamental matrix. In [20] and [1] the rank constraint
is imposed by setting its determinant to 0, leading to
a 3rd-order polynomial constraint. Alternatively, in [2]
and [21] the estimation problem is reduced to one or several constrained polynomial optimization problems by
imposing the constraint that the null space of the solution must contain a non-zero vector. The resulting optimization problems are solved by resorting to various
optimization techniques, such as brand-and-bound approaches [20, 21] or moments based convex relaxations
[2, 1].
Although the above methods perform well under the
assumption of small, suitably distributed (for instance
Gaussian) measurement noise, their performance substantially degrade in the presence of even a few outliers
(i.e., point mismatches). Thus, a large number of robust methods have been developed to explicitly take into
account the presence of outliers. These include random-

This paper considers the problem of estimating the
fundamental matrix from corrupted point correspondences. A general nonconvex framework is proposed
that explicitly takes into account the rank-2 constraint
on the fundamental matrix and the presence of noise and
outliers. The main result of the paper shows that this
non-convex problem can be solved by solving a sequence
of convex semi-definite programs, obtained by exploiting a combination of polynomial optimization tools and
rank minimization techniques. Further, the algorithm
can be easily extended to handle the case where only
some of the correspondences are labeled, and, to exploit
co-ocurrence information, if available. Consistent experiments show that the proposed method works well,
even in scenarios characterized by a very high percentage of outliers.

1. Introduction
The fundamental matrix provides a scene–
independent algebraic representation of the epipolar
geometry of a stereo camera system, that depends only
on the cameras’ intrinsic parameters and relative pose
[6]. Given the key role that this matrix plays in a large
number of problems in computer vision applications,
such as stereo camera calibration, 3D reconstruction,
etc., the problem of estimating it from experimental data
(typically consisting of point correspondences from two
images) has been the subject of a large research effort.
In general, existing techniques reduce the problem to
a constrained optimization, where the main difficulties
∗ This work was supported in part by NSF grants IIS–1318145
and ECCS–1404163; AFOSR grant FA9550-12-1-0271, and the
Alert DHS Center of Excellence under Award Number 2008-ST-061ED0001.

1

