Beyond Principal Components: Deep Boltzmann Machines for Face Modeling
Chi Nhan Duong 1 , Khoa Luu 2 , Kha Gia Quach 1 , Tien D. Bui 1
1
Concordia University, Computer Science and Software Engineering, Montréal, Québec, Canada
2
Carnegie Mellon University, CyLab Biometrics Center, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
1

{c duon, k q, bui}@encs.concordia.ca, 2 kluu@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
The “interpretation through synthesis”, i.e. Active Appearance Models (AAMs) method, has received considerable attention over the past decades. It aims at “explaining” face images by synthesizing them via a parameterized model of appearance. It is quite challenging due to
appearance variations of human face images, e.g. facial
poses, occlusions, lighting, low resolution, etc. Since these
variations are mostly non-linear, it is impossible to represent them in a linear model, such as Principal Component
Analysis (PCA). This paper presents a novel Deep Appearance Models (DAMs) approach, an efficient replacement
for AAMs, to accurately capture both shape and texture of
face images under large variations. In this approach, three
crucial components represented in hierarchical layers are
modeled using the Deep Boltzmann Machines (DBM) to robustly capture the variations of facial shapes and appearances. DAMs are therefore superior to AAMs in inferring a
representation for new face images under various challenging conditions. In addition, DAMs have ability to generate
a compact set of parameters in higher level representation
that can be used for classification, e.g. face recognition and
facial age estimation. The proposed approach is evaluated
in facial image reconstruction, facial super-resolution on
two databases, i.e. LFPW and Helen. It is also evaluated
on FG-NET database for the problem of age estimation.

Figure 1. A comparison of facial interpretation in real world images between our DAMs approach and the AAMs. The first row:
original images; The second row: shape free images; The third
row: facial interpretation using PCA-based AAMs; The fourth
row: facial interpretation using our proposed DAMs approach.

Active Appearance Models (AAMs), one of the most
successful face interpretation methods, were first introduced by Cootes et al. in 1998 [4]. Since then, there
have been numerous improvements and adaptations based
on the original approach [2, 5, 11, 15]. However, Gross
et al. [8] showed that AAMs perform well in personspecific cases rather than generic ones. In these AAMs
approaches, the capability of facial generalization and reconstruction are highly dependent on the characteristics of
training databases. This is because at the heart of AAMs,
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is used to provide a
subspace to model variations in training data. The limitation of PCA to generalize to illumination and poses, particularly for faces, is very well known. This is the reason why
AAMs have difficulties in generalizing to new faces under
these challenging conditions. On the other hand, the variations in data are not only large but also non-linear. For example, the variations in different facial expressions or poses
are non-linear. It apparently violates the linear assumptions
of PCA-based models. Thus, single PCA model is unable
to interpret the facial variations well.
Recently, Deep Boltzmann Machines (DBM) [19] have

1. Introduction
The “interpretation through synthesis” approach has become one of the most successful and popular face modeling
approaches over the last two decades. Given a new face image, the purpose is to “describe” that image by generating a
new synthesized image that is similar to it as much as possible. This aim can be achieved by an optimization process
on the appearance parameters of the model based apriori on
constrained solutions. Therefore, a subspace model to be
suitable and practical must also provide a basis for a broad
range of variations that are usually unseen.
1

