Model Recommendation: Generating Object Detectors from Few Samples
Yu-Xiong Wang and Martial Hebert
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
{yuxiongw, hebert}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we explore an approach to generating detectors that is radically different from the conventional way
of learning a detector from a large corpus of annotated positive and negative data samples. Instead, we assume that
we have evaluated “off-line” a large library of detectors
against a large set of detection tasks. Given a new target task, we evaluate a subset of the models on few samples from the new task and we use the matrix of modelstasks ratings to predict the performance of all the models
in the library on the new task, enabling us to select a good
set of detectors for the new task. This approach has three
key advantages of great interest in practice: 1) generating
a large collection of expressive models in an unsupervised
manner is possible; 2) a far smaller set of annotated samples is needed compared to that required for training from
scratch; and 3) recommending models is a very fast operation compared to the notoriously expensive training procedures of modern detectors. (1) will make the models informative across different categories; (2) will dramatically
reduce the need for manually annotating vast datasets for
training detectors; and (3) will enable rapid generation of
new detectors.

1. Motivation
Essentially, all models are wrong, but some are useful.
— George E. P. Box; Norman R. Draper, 1987 [6]

Over the past few decades, there has been much progress
in designing effective object detectors, especially when
enough data are available [14, 33, 36, 56, 37, 15, 48].
For example, flagship techniques such as Deformable Part
Models (DPMs) [14] via sliding-window fashion are best
suitable for semi-rigid objects, while Exemplar-SVMs [33]
with simple linear SVMs are highly category and instance
specific; the recent top performing detection systems instead favor bottom-up region proposals [52, 10, 15] which
tend to perform well for non-rigid objects. Along with
these, more powerful appearance models, feature learn-

-­‐-­‐-­‐-­‐-­‐-­‐-­‐-­‐-­‐-­‐-­‐-­‐-­‐-­‐-­‐-­‐	
  	
  VS	
  	
  -­‐-­‐-­‐-­‐-­‐-­‐-­‐-­‐-­‐-­‐-­‐-­‐-­‐-­‐-­‐-­‐	
  
Store	
  Tasks	
  

Input	
  Tasks	
  
Ra#ngs(AP)	
  
Probe	
  Ra#ngs	
  

NA	
  
0.6	
  
0.01	
  

Predicted	
  Ra#ngs	
  
Model	
  Library	
  	
  
(Detectors)	
  
Unsupervised	
  Hyper-­‐Training	
  Phase	
  

NA	
  
NA	
  
0.5	
  

Training	
  Phase	
  

Figure 1. During unsupervised hyper-training phase, a large library of object detectors informative across categories is generated. Their ratings on different detection tasks are recorded to
form a ratings store. For a new target task or category and using ratings of a small probe set of detectors on its input task with
limited samples, recommendations are made by collaborative filtering. A usable object detector for this new task is thus rapidly
generated as single or ensemble of the recommended models.

ing mechanisms beyond standard hand-engineered features
such as R-CNN [15] and GoogLeNet [48] are emerging.
All of these modern detectors have in common the same
supervised training framework in which a large annotated
dataset is required and in which training from scratch is
restarted for a new task, e.g., a new category. In practice,
however, it might be difficult to produce enough data for a
new task. Moreover, in many applications it is desirable to
rapidly train a new detector for a new task, something that
is typically not possible in any of these current approaches
which require expensive training iterations. Thus, our objective is to quickly generate good models for a detection
task given a small number of labeled samples.
Our approach is based on the informal intuition that,
given a very large set of models, it is likely that some of
the models would have good performance on a new detection task, as stated in the infinite monkey theorem [1]. More
formally, inspired by this intuition, we explore a new approach, which is based on the observation that, while it may

