Towards Force Sensing from Vision:
Observing Hand-Object Interactions to Infer Manipulation Forces
Tu-Hoa Pham1,2
Abderrahmane Kheddar1,2
Ammar Qammaz3
Antonis A. Argyros3,4
1
2
CNRS-AIST Joint Robotics Laboratory, Japan
CNRS-UM LIRMM, IDH, France
3
4
Institute of Computer Science, FORTH, Greece
Computer Science Department, University of Crete

Abstract
We present a novel, non-intrusive approach for estimating contact forces during hand-object interactions relying
solely on visual input provided by a single RGB-D camera.
We consider a manipulated object with known geometrical
and physical properties. First, we rely on model-based visual tracking to estimate the object’s pose together with that
of the hand manipulating it throughout the motion. Following this, we compute the object’s first and second order
kinematics using a new class of numerical differentiation
operators. The estimated kinematics is then instantly fed
into a second-order cone program that returns a minimal
force distribution explaining the observed motion. However,
humans typically apply more forces than mechanically required when manipulating objects. Thus, we complete our
estimation method by learning these excessive forces and
their distribution among the fingers in contact. We provide
a full validity analysis of the proposed method by evaluating
it based on ground truth data from additional sensors such
as accelerometers, gyroscopes and pressure sensors. Experimental results show that force sensing from vision (FSV) is
indeed feasible.

1. Introduction
Reliably capturing and reproducing human haptic interaction with surrounding objects by means of a cheap
and simple set-up (e.g., a single RGB-D camera) would
open considerable possibilities in computer vision, robotics,
graphics, and rehabilitation. Computer vision research has
resulted in several successful methods for capturing motion
information. A challenging question is: to what extent can
vision also capture haptic interaction? The latter is key for
learning and understanding tasks, such as holding an object,
pushing a chair or table, as well as enabling its reproduction
from either virtual characters or physical (e.g., robotic) embodiments.
Contact forces are usually measured by means of hap-

Figure 1: Using a single RGB-D camera, we track markerless hand-object manipulation tasks and estimate with high
accuracy contact forces that are applied by human grasping
throughout the motion.

tic technologies such as force transducers. The main drawback of such technologies is that they are obtrusive. Computer vision techniques would therefore be an ideal alternative to circumvent this issue. Yet, is it possible to estimate
forces from visual observation? There is evidence that haptic perception can be induced through illusion and substitution dominated by vision, e.g. [24]. We aim at exploring
computer vision to infer the forces exerted by humans on
surrounding objects. In particular, we consider hand-object
grasping and manipulation. The problem is extremely complex. Indeed, establishing that a hand-object contact has occurred is difficult because of occlusions and tracking inaccuracies. Nevertheless, the detection of events like an object
being lifted or discontinuities in body motion may provide
useful hints towards disambiguating discrete events. Additionally, even if contact positions can be determined efficiently, the estimation of the applied forces is still challenging because of the inherent multiplicity of solutions.
We demonstrate that, by solely using computer vision, it
is possible to compute interaction forces occurring in handobject manipulation scenarios where object properties such
as shape, contact friction, mass and inertia are known, along
with human hand geometry. First, we monitor both the hand

