Saliency-Aware Geodesic Video Object Segmentation
Wenguan Wang 1 , Jianbing Shen∗ 1 , Fatih Porikli 2
1

Beijing Lab of Intelligent Information Technology, School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, China
2
Research School of Engineering, Australian National University, and NICTA Australia

Abstract
We introduce an unsupervised, geodesic distance based,
salient video object segmentation method. Unlike traditional methods, our method incorporates saliency as prior for object via the computation of robust geodesic measurement. We consider two discriminative visual features:
spatial edges and temporal motion boundaries as indicators of foreground object locations. We first generate framewise spatiotemporal saliency maps using geodesic distance
from these indicators. Building on the observation that foreground areas are surrounded by the regions with high spatiotemporal edge values, geodesic distance provides an
initial estimation for foreground and background. Then,
high-quality saliency results are produced via the geodesic
distances to background regions in the subsequent frames.
Through the resulting saliency maps, we build global appearance models for foreground and background. By imposing motion continuity, we establish a dynamic location
model for each frame. Finally, the spatiotemporal saliency maps, appearance models and dynamic location models
are combined into an energy minimization framework to attain both spatially and temporally coherent object segmentation. Extensive quantitative and qualitative experiments
on benchmark video dataset demonstrate the superiority of
the proposed method over the state-of-the-art algorithms.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised video object segmentation methods aim at
automatically extracting the object from the whole video.
∗ Corresponding author: Jianbing Shen (shenjianbing@bit.edu.cn).
This work was supported in part by the National Basic Research Program of China (973 Program) (No. 2013CB328805), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61272359), the Australian Research
Council’s Discovery Projects funding scheme (project DP150104645), and
the Program for New Century Excellent Talents in University (NCET-110789). Specialized Fund for Joint Building Program of Beijing Municipal
Education Commission.

Such segmentation has shown to benefit many specific visual tasks and applications, such as video summarization,
compression and human-computer interaction to name a
few. Appearance information and motion cues are usually employed by video segmentation approaches. Some
works in [6, 17, 12] analyzed point trajectories in order to
take advantage of motion information available in multiple
frames. Brox et al. [6] offered a framework for trajectorybased video segmentation through building affinity matrix
between pairs of trajectories. Lezama et al. [17] grouped
pixels with coherent motion computed via long-range motion vectors from the past and future frames. Another approach by Fragkiadaki et al. [12] detected discontinuities
of embedding density between spatial-neighboring trajectories. As the work [15] pointed out, these trajectory-based
techniques suffer from the challenges associated with tracking (drift, occlusion and initialization) and clustering (model selection and computational complexity) and lack of prior
information for a successful object segmentation. Some efforts [5, 26, 30] presented efficient optimization frameworks
for bottom-up final segmentation employing both appearance and motion cues.
Recently, several methods [15, 19, 32] explored the notion of what a foreground object should look like in video
data. These approaches generate considerable object proposals [11, 8] in every frame and transform the task of video
object segmentation into an object region selection problem. In this selection process, both motion and appearance
information are combined to measure the objectness of a
proposal. More specifically, a clustering process was introduced for finding objects by Lee et al. [15], a constrained
maximum weight cliques technique to model the selection
process was proposed by Ma and Latecki [19], and a layered directed acyclic graph based framework was presented
by Zhang et al. [32]. However, these proposal based techniques have high computational complexity, and their dependency on the large number of proposals leads to much
difficulty and complexity of the selection process.
Our goal is to segment the foreground objects from the

