Geodesic Exponential Kernels: When Curvature and Linearity Conflict
Aasa Feragen
DIKU, University of Copenhagen
Denmark

François Lauze
DIKU, University of Copenhagen
Denmark

Søren Hauberg
DTU Compute
Denmark

aasa@diku.dk

francois@diku.dk

sohau@dtu.dk

Abstract

Kernel
Gaussian (q = 2)
Laplacian (q = 1)
Geodesic exp. (q > 2)

We consider kernel methods on general geodesic metric
spaces and provide both negative and positive results. First
we show that the common Gaussian kernel can only be generalized to a positive definite kernel on a geodesic metric
space if the space is flat. As a result, for data on a Riemannian manifold, the geodesic Gaussian kernel is only positive definite if the Riemannian manifold is Euclidean. This
implies that any attempt to design geodesic Gaussian kernels on curved Riemannian manifolds is futile. However,
we show that for spaces with conditionally negative definite distances the geodesic Laplacian kernel can be generalized while retaining positive definiteness. This implies
that geodesic Laplacian kernels can be generalized to some
curved spaces, including spheres and hyperbolic spaces.
Our theoretical results are verified empirically.

Table 1. Overview of results: For a geodesic metric, when is the
geodesic exponential kernel (1) positive definite for all λ > 0?

While this idea has an appealing similarity to familiar Euclidean kernel methods, we show that it is highly limited if
the metric space is curved.
Positive definiteness of a kernel k is critical for the use
of kernel methods such as support vector machines or kernel PCA, as it ensures the existence of a reproducing kernel
Hilbert space where these methods act [54]. In this paper,
we analyze exponential kernels on geodesic metric spaces
and show the following results, summarized in Table 1.
• The geodesic Gaussian kernel is positive definite (PD)
for all λ > 0 only if the underlying metric space is
flat (Theorem 1). In particular, when the metric space
is a Riemannian manifold, the geodesic Gaussian kernel is PD for all λ > 0 if and only if the manifold
is Euclidean (Theorem 2). This negative result implies
that Gaussian kernels cannot be generalized to any nontrivial Riemannian manifolds of interest.
• The geodesic Laplacian kernel is PD if and only if the
metric is conditionally negative definite (Theorem 4).
This condition is not generally true for metric spaces,
but it holds for a number of spaces of interest. In particular, the geodesic Laplacian kernel is PD on spheres,
hyperbolic spaces, and Euclidean spaces (Table 2).
• For any Riemannian manifold (M, g), the kernel (1)
will never be PD for all λ > 0 if q > 2 (Theorem 3).

1. Introduction
Standard statistics and machine learning tools require input data residing in a Euclidean space. However, many
types of data are more faithfully represented in general nonlinear metric spaces (e.g. Riemannian manifolds). This is,
for instance, the case when analyzing shapes [10, 16, 26, 33,
41, 56, 58, 66], DTI images [25, 46, 49, 64], motion models [14,61], symmetric positive definite matrices [12,50,62],
illumination-invariance [13], human poses [32, 47], tree
structured data [20, 22, 23], metrics [28, 31], probability distributions [2]; for general manifold learning metrics [60] or
in general for data invariant to a group action [42]. The
underlying metric space captures domain specific knowledge, e.g. non-linear constraints, which is available a priori.
The intrinsic geodesic metric encodes this knowledge, often
leading to improved statistical models.
A seemingly straightforward approach to statistics in
metric spaces is to use kernel methods [54], designing kernels k(x, y) which only rely on geodesic distances d(x, y)
between observations [15]:
k(x, y) = exp (−λ(d(x, y))q ) ,

λ, q > 0.

Extends to general
Metric spaces
Riemannian manifolds
No (only if flat)
No (only if Euclidean)
Yes, iff metric is CND
Yes, iff metric is CND
Not known
No

Generalization of geodesic kernels to metric spaces is
motivated by the general lack of powerful machine learning
techniques in these spaces. In that regard, our first results
are disappointing as they imply that generalizing Gaussian
kernels to metric spaces is not a viable direction forward. Intuitively, this is not surprising as kernel methods embed the
data in a linear space, which cannot be expected to capture
the curvature of a general metric space. Our second result is
therefore a positive surprise: it allows the Laplacian kernel
to be applied in some metric spaces, although this has strong
implications for their geometric properties. This gives hope

(1)

For q = 2 this gives a geodesic generalization of the Gaussian kernel, and q = 1 gives the geodesic Laplacian kernel.
1

