A Weighted Sparse Coding Framework for Saliency Detection

Nianyi Li

Bilin Sun

Jingyi Yu

University of Delaware, Newark, DE, USA. {nianyi,sunbilin,yu}@eecis.udel.edu

Abstract
There is an emerging interest on using high-dimensional
datasets beyond 2D images in saliency detection. Examples
include 3D data based on stereo matching and Kinect sensors and more recently 4D light field data. However, these
techniques adopt very different solution frameworks, in both
type of features and procedures on using them. In this paper,
we present a unified saliency detection framework for handling heterogenous types of input data. Our approach builds dictionaries using data-specific features. Specifically, we
first select a group of potential foreground superpixels to
build a primitive saliency dictionary. We then prune the outliers in the dictionary and test on the remaining superpixels
to iteratively refine the dictionary. Comprehensive experiments show that our approach universally outperforms the
state-of-the-art solution on all 2D, 3D and 4D data.

Image(stack)

Ground Truth

DSR

Ours

Figure 1. Our method vs. the latest feature-matrix-based DSR algorithm [17] on different data inputs. From top to bottom: we
show results on 2D images, 3D stereo data, and 4D light field data.

Second, human uses two eyes to infer scene depth, e.g., via stereo, for more reliable saliency detection whereas most
existing approaches assume that the depth information is
largely unknown.
Recently there has been an emerging interest on emulating these the properties of human eyes. For example,
light field saliency uses the Lytro camera as the acquisition apparatus and then synthesize a focal stack via light
field rendering [15]. The focusness cues are then extracted from the focal stack and integrated with color, location,
and contrast cues. Preliminary results seem promising although the image resolution is generally low due to tradeoff
between spatial-angular sampling. Several schemes have
been proposed to incorporate stereo vision. Niu et al.[20]
employed the disparity maps to better extract better foreground/background separations. Lang et al.[14] used the
Kinect sensor to acquire scene depth and integrate the results with regular 2D saliency via a Gaussian mixture model. Despite their effectiveness, saliency detection algorithms based on 2D, 3D and 4D data have adopted completely different frameworks. In particular, the features used for distinguishing saliency candidates and more importantly the
procedures for utilizing them differ significantly.

1. Introduction
Human visual system can rapidly identify salient objects that mostly attract attention in a 3D scene. In computer vision, the similar task of visual saliency aims to detect
salient regions from 2D, 3D, and most recently 4D imagery
data. Robust saliency detection algorithms can benefit numerous vision and graphics tasks, ranging from automatic
image cropping[26], to image thumbnailing[27], and to image/video compressing[4] and retargeting[25]. At the core
of the problem is to develop an effective feature contrast
measure to separate salient objects from the background and
tremendous efforts have been focused on extract color, texture, depth, and focusness cues from 2D images.
Existing 2D saliency algorithms, however, are inherently different from how human visual system detects saliency. Human eyes have two unique properties that are largely
missing in existing 2D saliency solutions. First, human eye
can conduct dynamic refocusing that enables rapid sweeping over different depth layers. Hence, for humans, the
input is a focal stack instead of a single, fixed-focus or
all-focus image as has been used in traditional approaches.
1

