Holistic 3D Scene Understanding from a Single Geo-tagged Image
Shenlong Wang, Sanja Fidler and Raquel Urtasun
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
{slwang, fidler, urtasun}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract

can be used to help resolve some of the inherent ambiguities. Furthermore, knowing the 3D structure of the world
should simplify recognition. Recently, holistic approaches
that jointly reason about both reconstruction and recognition tasks have been proposed [27, 19, 39, 16], resulting in
impressive performance gains over techniques that tackle a
single task.
Here we argue that there is much more prior information
that one could use and is freely available. We live in an era
where technology and social networks are part of our everyday’s life. A single monocular image is thus no longer
our only source of information, a whole cyber world sits behind it. In this paper we make use of geotagged images, and
propose priors derived from map data which contains information about the scene, such as the geolocation and rough
shape of roads, buildings and trees. Towards this goal, we
make use of OpenStreetMaps (OSM) which is freely available. OSM is an open-source crowd-sourcing project which
collects GPS trajectories of the users from their daily driving routines. Since its beginning in 2004, OSM now has
more than one million contributors from around the globe.
The road coverage is 50% of all the roads in the world. With
a simple download click, the full world sits in our laptop.
In this paper we propose a holistic conditional random
field (CRF) that reasons jointly about 3D object detection,
pose estimation, semantic segmentation as well as depth
reconstruction from a single image. Our approach takes
advantage of large-scale crowd-sourced maps to generate
dense geographic, geometric and semantic priors by rendering the 3D world. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our
approach on the challenging KITTI dataset [13], and show
significant improvements over the baselines in all tasks.

In this paper we are interested in exploiting geographic
priors to help outdoor scene understanding. Towards this
goal we propose a holistic approach that reasons jointly
about 3D object detection, pose estimation, semantic segmentation as well as depth reconstruction from a single image. Our approach takes advantage of large-scale crowdsourced maps to generate dense geographic, geometric and
semantic priors by rendering the 3D world. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our holistic model on the challenging KITTI dataset [13], and show significant improvements over the baselines in all metrics and tasks.

1. Introduction
Inferring 3D semantic and geometric information from
a single monocular image has been one of the holy grails
of computer vision since the beginning [15]. In the nineties,
most approaches to recover geometry were so-called Shapefrom-X, where local surface orientations were inferred by
exploiting texture [2], shading [33], defocus [23], and contours/silhouettes [5]. Later, learning based methods took
over [36, 20, 29] inferring depth from local patches. The
Manhattan world assumption was also exploited to estimate
the layout of indoor scenes [18, 38], producing impressive
reconstructions in this relatively limited setting.
A variety of approaches have been proposed to infer 3D
objects from a single monocular image. The most common
approach has been to employ a bank of 2D detectors, each
trained for a specific viewpoint [37, 42, 8, 14]. Methods
enabling continuous pose representation also emerged, typically yielding 3D bounding boxes around objects [19, 9, 30]
or even polygonal 3D shapes [44]. Since 3D inference typically relies on lifting the 2D detections to the metric world
by imposing real-physical object dimensions, having accurate localization is of crucial importance.
Holistic approaches aim at reasoning jointly about multiple related tasks. 3D reconstruction is ill-posed, however, knowledge about the objects and the scene semantics

2. Related Work
Contextual models in computer vision: Contextual
models have been used to improve scene understanding
tasks, including object detection [46, 28, 32], semantic segmentation [26, 28, 27] and 3D reconstruction [27, 18]. Geometric context [21, 6] aims at capturing coarse 3D geometric structure of the scene in the form of surface orientations
1

