Web-Scale Training for Face Identification
Yaniv Taigman, Ming Yang, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato
Facebook AI Research
Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA

Lior Wolf
Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv, Israel

{yaniv, mingyang, ranzato}@fb.com

wolf@cs.tau.ac.il

Abstract

only demonstrated for carefully registered face images that
did not exhibit much variability, a set up commonly referred
to as constrained conditions. Current state-of-the-art methods for unconstrained face recognition and verification (the
task of predicting whether two face images belong to the
same person or not) [22, 2, 18] employ a similar protocol:
they use a fairly large collection of images to learn a robust representation or metric, and then they perform transfer learning to predict the identity or the similarity between
two face images. These methods are trained on hundreds
of thousands or a few million images and recognize up to
a few thousand different subjects. This is orders of magnitude larger than what was ever attempted in the past, yet
two or three orders of magnitude smaller than the actual
datasets available today. Our starting point is the DeepFace
architecture [22], which is based on recent advances in deep
learning. Our contribution is not only to redefine the state
of the art on a public benchmark using an improved system,
but also: (i) we study the role of the bottleneck as a transfer learning regularizer and (ii) we propose a new way to
utilize large datasets by replacing the standard random sub
sampling procedure with a bootstrapping procedure; (iii) we
discover a three-way link between the representation norm,
the image quality, and the classification confidence.

Scaling machine learning methods to very large datasets
has attracted considerable attention in recent years, thanks
to easy access to ubiquitous sensing and data from the
web. We study face recognition and show that three distinct properties have surprising effects on the transferability of deep convolutional networks (CNN): (1) The bottleneck of the network serves as an important transfer learning regularizer, and (2) in contrast to the common wisdom,
performance saturation may exist in CNN’s (as the number
of training samples grows); we propose a solution for alleviating this by replacing the naive random subsampling
of the training set with a bootstrapping process. Moreover, (3) we find a link between the representation norm
and the ability to discriminate in a target domain, which
sheds lights on how such networks represent faces. Based
on these discoveries, we are able to improve face recognition accuracy on the widely used LFW benchmark, both
in the verification (1:1) and identification (1:N) protocols,
and directly compare, for the first time, with the state of the
art Commercially-Off-The-Shelf system and show a sizable
leap in performance.

1. Introduction
Face identification is a recognition task of great practical interest for which (i) much larger labeled datasets exist, containing billions of images; (ii) the number of classes
can reach tens of millions or more; and (iii) complex features are necessary in order to encode subtle differences
between subjects, while maintaining invariance to factors
such as pose, illumination, and aging. Performance improvements in recent years have been staggering, and automatic recognition systems cope much better today with
the challenges of the field than they did just a few years
ago. These challenges are well documented and include
changing illumination, pose and facial expression of the
subject, occlusion, variability of facial features due to aging, and more. In the past, impressive performance was

These discoveries lead to an improvement in verification performance on a widely used benchmark dataset, the
LFW dataset [10]. We then turn our attention to the 1:N
identification problem, in which the image is identified out
of a gallery of N persons. While the usage of verification
datasets has advanced the field of computer vision greatly,
the 1:N scenario is much more directly related to face identification applications. For instance, vendor tests, e.g., [7],
focus on 1:N protocols. As a result, the research community was unable to directly compare academic contributions
to the most prominent commercial systems. By making use
of a recently proposed 1:N benchmark built on top of the
LFW images [1], we are able to perform this comparison
for the first time.
1

