Similarity Learning on an Explicit Polynomial Kernel Feature Map for Person
Re-Identification
Dapeng Chen † , Zejian Yuan † , Gang Hua‡ , Nanning Zheng† , Jingdong Wang §
†
‡
§
Xi’an Jiaotong University
Stevens Institute of Technology
Microsoft Research
Abstract

learn a similarity function to suppress inter-camera variations, which our work belongs to.
In this paper, we learn a similarity function over a pairwise feature formed by concatenating the patch descriptors
of a probe image and a gallery image, with the goal maximizing the difference between the similarity score between
an image A and an image B about the same person and that
between the image A and any image C about a different person. We follow the learning-to-rank methodology and
adopt the triplet loss function.
Our key contributions to the person re-identification
problem lie in three aspects. First, we explore the secondpolynomial kernel but adopt an explicit feature map instead
of the kernel value, to formulate a linear similarity function.
The benefit is the ability of characterizing the similarities of
all pairs of patches between two images, called soft-patchmatching instead of only keeping the best matched patch in
one image for each patch in the other image as done in patch
matching [38, 37].
Second, we introduce a latent similarity function, a mixture of linear similarity functions, which is capable of mining various soft-patch-matching patterns. Last, we introduce two regularizers: a subset of the weights in the similarity function forms a negative semi-definite matrix, motivated by the connection between the explicit polynomial
kernel feature map and the Mahalanobis distance, and a sparsity constraint for the weights, which makes each component in the mixture of similarity functions aligned with a
common function to avoid over-fitting.

In this paper, we address the person re-identification
problem, discovering the correct matches for a probe person image from a set of gallery person images. We follow the learning-to-rank methodology and learn a similarity function to maximize the difference between the similarity
scores of matched and unmatched images for a same person. We introduce at least three contributions to person
re-identification. First, we present an explicit polynomial kernel feature map, which is capable of characterizing
the similarity information of all pairs of patches between two images, called soft-patch-matching, instead of greedily
keeping only the best matched patch, and thus more robust.
Second, we introduce a mixture of linear similarity functions that is able to discover different soft-patch-matching
patterns. Last, we introduce a negative semi-definite regularization over a subset of the weights in the similarity function, which is motivated by the connection between explicit
polynomial kernel feature map and the Mahalanobis distance, as well as the sparsity constraint over the parameters
to avoid over-fitting. Experimental results over three public
benchmarks demonstrate the superiority of our approach. 1

1. Introduction
Person re-identification refers to a task of associating the
person through different camera views located at different
physical sites. In the real case that the camera views are
significantly disjoint making the temporal transition time
between cameras vary greatly, the temporal information is
not enough to approach the problem. Thus a lot of efforts [2, 5, 14, 37] have been devoted to investigating the solutions through appearance information.
Existing works tackle this problem from two paths. The
first one is to design a visual descriptor to handle intercamera differences in lighting conditions, changes in object orientation and object pose. The second path is to

2. Related Works
The pipeline of a person re-identification system often
consists of two main steps: (1) extracting features from images; (2) measuring the similarity between images. Some
works emphasized on feature design [34, 9, 2, 24, 5], and
some other works focused on similarity function learning [12, 31, 14, 28, 17, 20, 29, 28, 21, 26, 3, 40].
In the feature extraction step, methods that focus on feature design often try to tackle the person re-identification
problem by seeking a very stable and distinctive feature
representation. For example, Ma et al. [24] present the

1 This work was done when Dapeng Chen was an intern at Microsoft
Research.

1

