Basis Mapping Based Boosting for Object Detection
Haoyu Ren, Ze-Nian Li
Vision and Media Lab
School of Computing Science
Simon Fraser University
Vancouver, BC, Canada
{hra15, li}@sfu.ca

Abstract

nant orientation templates to learn a binary mask that allows
to remove background clutter and include relevant context
information. Dollar et al. [11] exploit the correlation of
neighboring detection windows in boosted classifier and use
fast feature pyramids on pedestrian detection [10].

We propose a novel mapping method to improve the training accuracy and efficiency of boosted classifiers for object
detection. The key step of the proposed method is a nonlinear mapping on original samples by referring to the basis
samples before feeding into the weak classifiers, where the
basis samples correspond to the hard samples in the current training stage. We show that the basis mapping based
weak classifier is an approximation of kernel weak classifiers while keeping the same computation cost as linear
weak classifiers. As a result, boosting with such weak classifiers is more effective. In this paper, two different nonlinear mappings are shown to work well. We adopt the
LogitBoost algorithm to train the weak classifiers based on
the Histogram of Oriented Gradient descriptor (HOG). Experimental results show that the proposed approach significantly improves the detection accuracy and training efficiency of the boosted classifier. It also achieves high performance on public datasets for both pedestrian detection
and general object detection tasks.

Boosting family algorithms achieve considerable performance for some object detection tasks. However, since the
boosting procedure focuses on the hard samples gradually,
it gets more and more difficult to find the weak classifiers
that can efficiently improve the classification power of the
strong classifier. For those more complicated objects such
as the multi-view and multi-pose pedestrian, the problem
becomes much more serious that in later training rounds
the current classification task might be beyond the ability of
the weak classifier [34]. As a result, the training may converge very slowly or can not converge at all. In this paper,
we propose a novel basis mapping approach in the boosting framework to solve the above problem. The basis mapping maps the original samples into a constrained region referring to the current hard-to-classify samples (namely basis sample) in each boosting round, which makes positive
patterns with less inner-class variation and easier to be discriminated from negative patterns. As a result, boosting on
such mapped region is much more effective than that on the
original sample space. In addition, we show that the weak
classifier based on basis mapping is an approximation of
using kernel methods, while keeping the computation cost
same as the linear methods, so that both the detection accuracy and the training efficiency of the boosted classifier will
be improved. In our case, the mapping is realized by the
proposed Histogram Intersection Mapping (HIM) and the
CHi-square Mapping (CHM). The LogitBoost algorithm is
adopted to train the cascade classifier with the mapped HOG
descriptor. Several experiments on public datasets are used
to evaluate our method. The results show that our method
improves both the accuracy and the training efficiency of the
boosted classifier. It also achieves comparable performance
with the commonly-used approaches in both pedestrian and

1. Introduction
Object detection of a special class is a fundamental problem
of computer vision. One of the major challenges in this field
is that the object appearances may vary greatly due to many
factors, such as different illuminations, view points, poses,
etc. This has motivated inventions of various approaches.
Among them, a widely used paradigm is to train a classifier
on local features [17][30] or descriptors [5][23] using algorithms of boosting family. For example, Viola et al. [30]
build an efficient face detector using AdaBoost based on
Haar-like feature. Zhang et al. [36] propose an improved
version of Haar feature based on up-right human body and
further select them to construct a cascade pedestrian detector. Cabrera et al. [25] investigate the use of boosted domi1

