Second-Order Constrained Parametric Proposals and Sequential Search-Based
Structured Prediction for Semantic Segmentation in RGB-D Images

1

Dan Banica1 , Cristian Sminchisescu2,1
Institute of Mathematics of the Romanian Academy, 2 Lund University
dan.banica@imar.ro, cristian.sminchisescu@math.lth.se

Abstract

human-computer interaction and scene understanding for
large-scale indexing. For intensity images, significant
progress has been achieved recently through work performed in association with the VOC Semantic Segmentation challenges[11], where high performing methods for
boundary detection[36, 31], feature description and nonlinear feature maps[4, 39, 37, 46, 33, 6], image segmentation [1, 5, 10, 32] as well as optimization and contextual reasoning [27, 38, 25, 15, 23, 7, 47] have been developed. Recently the use of deep feature extraction learning frameworks, trained on large-scale databases like Imagenet, has been shown to be effective not only for image
classification [26], but also for semantic segmentation[14],
where in conjunction with figure-ground proposal generation methods[5], impressive results have been achieved (the
effectiveness of such regions descriptors will be analyzed in
our proposed RGB-D framework, as well).
The scientific problem of three dimensional scene understanding from images, both quantitative[49, 12] and
qualitative[21, 41], has a long standing research tradition
in computer vision. Some of the more recent work has focused on the analysis of cluttered indoor scenes [22, 29, 16,
17, 20]. In this setup [29, 20] analyze the geometry of the
rooms including surfaces and objects, whereas [17] reason
about object functionality from the standpoint of a human
user of the environment.
The existence of affordable and increasingly miniaturized time of flight and infra-red sensors like Kinect opens
the possibility that RGB-D sensors will be embedded in
any device, mobile or not in the near future. This creates
scientific and technological opportunities for exploiting the
RGB-D information for scene understanding and semantic
segmentation, with potentially high gains in tasks that have
been traditionally considered very challenging when performed based on intensity images alone. Range data has
been extensively studied in the past, not only at the level
of adapted descriptors like spin images[24] and 3D shape
contexts[13] but also for shape modeling using, e.g., deformable superquadrics[30].
Besides the recent success for real-time human pose

We focus on the problem of semantic segmentation based
on RGB-D data, with emphasis on analyzing cluttered indoor scenes containing many visual categories and instances. Our approach is based on a parametric figureground intensity and depth-constrained proposal process
that generates spatial layout hypotheses at multiple locations and scales in the image followed by a sequential inference algorithm that produces a complete scene estimate.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows: (1) a generalization of parametric max flow figure-ground proposal
methodology to take advantage of intensity and depth information, in order to systematically and efficiently generate the breakpoints of an underlying spatial model in
polynomial time, (2) new region description methods based
on second-order pooling over multiple features constructed
using both intensity and depth channels, (3) a principled
search-based structured prediction inference and learning
process that resolves conflicts in overlapping spatial partitions and selects regions sequentially towards complete
scene estimates, and (4) extensive evaluation of the impact
of depth, as well as the effectiveness of a large number of
descriptors, both pre-designed and automatically obtained
using deep learning, in a difficult RGB-D semantic segmentation problem with 92 classes. We report state of the art
results in the challenging NYU Depth Dataset V2 [44], extended for the RMRC 2013 and RMRC 2014 Indoor Segmentation Challenges, where currently the proposed model
ranks first. Moreover, we show that by combining secondorder and deep learning features, over 15% relative accuracy improvements can be additionally achieved. In a
scene classification benchmark, our methodology further
improves the state of the art by 24%.

1. Introduction and Related Work
The problem of semantic segmentation in monocular
images is of central importance in areas like robotics,
1

