Depth from Focus with Your Mobile Phone
Supasorn Suwajanakorn1,3 , Carlos Hernandez2 and Steven M. Seitz1,2
1

University of Washington

Figure 1. We compute depth and all-in-focus images from the focal
stack that mobile phones capture each time you take a photo.

Abstract
While prior depth from focus and defocus techniques operated on laboratory scenes, we introduce the first depth
from focus (DfF) method capable of handling images from
mobile phones and other hand-held cameras. Achieving this
goal requires solving a novel uncalibrated DfF problem and
aligning the frames to account for scene parallax. Our approach is demonstrated on a range of challenging cases and
produces high quality results.

1. Introduction
Every time you take a photo with your mobile phone,
your camera rapidly sweeps the focal plane through the
scene to find the best auto-focus setting. The resulting set
of images, called a focal stack, could in principle be used
3 This research was done while the first author was an intern at Google.

2

Google Inc.

to compute scene depth, yielding a depth map for every
photo you take. While depth-from-focus (DfF) techniques
have been studied for a couple decades, they have been relegated to laboratory scenes; no one has ever demonstrated
an approach that works on standard mobile phones, or other
hand-held consumer cameras. This paper presents the first
successful demonstration of this capability, which we call
hand-held DfF.
Hand-held DfF is challenging for two reasons. First,
while almost all DfF methods require calibrated capture,
supporting commodity mobile phones requires working in
an uncalibrated setting. We must solve for the focal settings
as part of the estimation process. Second, capturing a focal
sweep with a hand-held camera inevitably produces motion
parallax. The parallax is significant, as the camera motion
is typically on the order of the aperture size (which is very
small on a cell phone). I.e., the parallax is often larger than
the defocus effect (bokeh radius). Almost all previous DfF
methods used special optics (e.g., [28]) to avoid motion, or
employed simple global transformations to align images.
Only [24] attempts to handle dynamic scenes, which can
exhibit parallax, but requires a calibrated camera in the lab.
By exploiting a densely-sampled focal stack, we propose a
simpler alignment technique based on flow concatenation,
and are the first to demonstrate uncalibrated DfF on handheld devices.
We address the hand-held DfF problem in two steps: 1)
focal stack alignment, and 2) auto calibration and depth recovery. The first step takes as input a focal sweep from
a moving camera, and produces as output a stabilized sequence resembling a constant-magnification, parallax-free
sequence taken from a telecentric camera [28]. Because defocus effects violate the brightness constancy assumption,
the alignment problem is especially challenging, and we introduce an optical flow concatenation approach with special
handling of highlight (bokeh) regions to achieve high quality results.
In the second step, given an aligned focal stack, we aim
to recover the scene depth as well as aperture size, focal
length of the camera, and focal distances of each frame up to

