Flying Objects Detection from a Single Moving Camera
Artem Rozantseva
Vincent Lepetit a ,b
Pascal Fuaa
a
Computer Vision Laboratory, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
b
Institute for Computer Graphics and Vision, Graz University of Technology
{artem.rozantsev, pascal.fua}@epfl.ch, lepetit@icg.tugraz.at

Abstract
We propose an approach to detect flying objects such as
UAVs and aircrafts when they occupy a small portion of the
field of view, possibly moving against complex backgrounds,
and are filmed by a camera that itself moves.
Solving such a difficult problem requires combining both
appearance and motion cues. To this end we propose a
regression-based approach to motion stabilization of local
image patches that allows us to achieve effective classification on spatio-temporal image cubes and outperform stateof-the-art techniques.
As the problem is relatively new, we collected two challenging datasets for UAVs and Aircrafts, which can be
used as benchmarks for flying objects detection and visionguided collision avoidance.

1. Introduction
We are headed for a world in which the skies are occupied not only by birds and planes but also by unmanned
drones ranging from relatively large Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) to much smaller consumer ones. Some of
these will be instrumented and able to communicate with
each other to avoid collisions but not all. Therefore, the
ability to use inexpensive and light sensors such as cameras
for collision-avoidance purposes will become increasingly
important.
This problem has been tackled successfully in the automotive world and there are now commercial products [11,
18] designed to sense and avoid both pedestrians and other
cars. In the world of flying machines most of the progress is
achieved in the accurate position estimation and navigation
from single or multiple cameras [4, 16, 17, 10, 27, 15, 9],
while not so much is done in the field of visual-guided collision avoidance [29]. On the other hand, it is not possible
to simply extend the algorithms used for pedestrian and automobile detection to the world of aircrafts and drones, as
flying object detection poses some unique challenges:

Figure 1: Detecting a small drone against a complex moving
background. (Left) It is almost invisible to the human eye
and hard to detect from a single image. (Right) Yet, our
algorithm can find it by using motion clues.

• The environment is fully 3D dimensional, which
makes the motions more complex.
• Flying objects have very diverse shapes and can be
seen against either the ground or the sky, which produces complex and changing backgrounds, as shown
in Fig. 1.
• Given the speeds involved, potentially dangerous objects must be detected when they are still far away,
which means they may still be very small in the images.
As a result, motion cues become crucial for detection. However, they are difficult to exploit when the images are acquired by a moving camera and feature backgrounds that
are difficult to stabilize because they are non-planar and fast
changing. Furthermore, since there can be other moving objects in the scene, for example, the person in Fig. 1, motion
by itself is not enough and appearance must also be taken
into account. In these situations, state-of-the-art techniques
that rely on either image flow or background stabilization
lose much of their effectiveness.
In this paper, we detect whether an object of interest
is present and constitutes a danger by classifying 3D descriptors computed from spatio-temporal image cubes. We
will refer to them as st-cubes. These st-cubes are formed
by stacking motion-stabilized image windows over several
consecutive frames, which gives more information than us-

