Hypercolumns for Object Segmentation and Fine-grained Localization
Bharath Hariharan
University of California
Berkeley

Pablo Arbeláez
Universidad de los Andes
Colombia

Ross Girshick
Microsoft Research
Redmond

bharath2@eecs.berkeley.edu

pa.arbelaez@uniandes.edu.co

rbg@microsoft.com

Jitendra Malik
University of California
Berkeley
malik@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Recognition algorithms based on convolutional networks
(CNNs) typically use the output of the last layer as a feature representation. However, the information in this layer
may be too coarse spatially to allow precise localization.
On the contrary, earlier layers may be precise in localization but will not capture semantics. To get the best of both
worlds, we define the hypercolumn at a pixel as the vector
of activations of all CNN units above that pixel. Using hypercolumns as pixel descriptors, we show results on three
fine-grained localization tasks: simultaneous detection and
segmentation [22], where we improve state-of-the-art from
49.7 mean APr [22] to 60.0, keypoint localization, where
we get a 3.3 point boost over [20], and part labeling, where
we show a 6.6 point gain over a strong baseline.

1. Introduction
Features based on convolutional networks (CNNs) [29]
have now led to the best results on a range of vision tasks:
image classification [28, 36], object segmentation and detection [18, 22], action classification [35], pose estimation [37] and fine-grained category recognition [44, 6]. We
have thus moved from the era of HOG and SIFT to the era
of convolutional network features. Therefore, understanding these features and how best to exploit them is of wide
applicability.
Typically, recognition algorithms use the output of the
last layer of the CNN. This makes sense when the task is
assigning category labels to images or bounding boxes: the
last layer is the most sensitive to category-level semantic
information and the most invariant to “nuisance” variables
such as pose, illumination, articulation, precise location and
so on. However, when the task we are interested in is finer-

grained, such as one of segmenting the detected object or
estimating its pose, these nuisance variables are precisely
what we are interested in. For such applications, the top
layer is thus not the optimal representation.
The information that is generalized over in the top layer
is present in intermediate layers, but intermediate layers are
also much less sensitive to semantics. For instance, bar detectors in early layers might localize bars precisely, but cannot discriminate between bars that are horse legs and bars
that are tree trunks. This observation suggests that reasoning at multiple levels of abstraction and scale is necessary,
mirroring other problems in computer vision where reasoning across multiple levels has proven beneficial. For example, in optical flow, coarse levels of the image pyramid are
good for correspondence, but finer levels are needed for accurate measurement, and a multiscale strategy is used to get
the best of both worlds [7].
In this paper, we think of the layers of a convolutional
network as a non-linear counterpart of the image pyramids
used in optical flow and other vision tasks. Our hypothesis is that the information of interest is distributed over
all levels of the CNN and should be exploited in this way.
We define the “hypercolumn” at a given input location as
the outputs of all units above that location at all layers of
the CNN, stacked into one vector. (Because adjacent layers are strongly correlated, in practice we need not consider
all layers but can simply sample a few.) Figure 1 shows a
visualization of the idea. We borrow the term “hypercolumn” from neuroscience, where it is used to describe a set
of V1 neurons sensitive to edges at multiple orientations and
multiple frequencies arranged in a columnar structure [24].
However, our hypercolumn includes not just edge detectors
but also more semantic units and is thus a more general notion.
We show the utility of the hypercolumn representation

