HC-Search for Structured Prediction in Computer Vision
Michael Lam, Janardhan Rao Doppa† , Sinisa Todorovic, and Thomas G. Dietterich
Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR
{lamm,sinisa,tgd}@eecs.oregonstate.edu

† Washington State University, Pullman, WA
jana@eecs.wsu.edu

Abstract

[6], Swendsen-Wang (SW) cut [4], Variational inference
[49], Quadratic Programming (QP) [33, 19], Message passing [24], a hybrid of Linear programming (LP) and QP [25],
and search-based methods [15, 11, 23, 32, 36]. Instead of
training a single global energy function and then solving a
global optimization problem, as is done in these approaches,
HC-Search decomposes the problem into three steps: (Step
1) Find an initial complete solution, (Step 2) Explore a
search tree of alternative candidate solutions rooted at the
initial solution, and (Step 3) Score each of these candidates
to select the best one. Any existing method can do Step 1.
Step 2 is guided by a learned heuristic function H, and Step
3 is performed by a learned cost (energy) function C.

The mainstream approach to structured prediction problems in computer vision is to learn an energy function such
that the solution minimizes that function. At prediction time,
this approach must solve an often-challenging optimization
problem. Search-based methods provide an alternative that
has the potential to achieve higher performance. These
methods learn to control a search procedure that constructs
and evaluates candidate solutions. The recently-developed
HC-Search method has been shown to achieve state-of-theart results in natural language processing, but mixed success when applied to vision problems. This paper studies whether HC-Search can achieve similarly competitive
performance on basic vision tasks such as object detection,
scene labeling, and monocular depth estimation, where the
leading paradigm is energy minimization. To this end, we
introduce a search operator suited to the vision domain that
improves a candidate solution by probabilistically sampling
likely object configurations in the scene from the hierarchical Berkeley segmentation. We complement this search
operator by applying the DAGGER algorithm to robustly
train the search heuristic so it learns from its previous mistakes. Our evaluation shows that these improvements reduce the branching factor and search depth, and thus give a
significant performance boost. Our state-of-the-art results
on scene labeling and depth estimation suggest that HCSearch provides a suitable tool for learning and inference
in vision.

Doppa et al.
[7] claim several advantages for
HC-Search. First, in the standard approaches a global
energy function must be trained to “defend against” the
exponentially-large set of all possible wrong answers to
the problem. This is expensive both computationally and
in terms of sample complexity. It can require highly expressive representations (e.g., higher-order potentials). In
contrast, the heuristic function H only needs to correctly
rank the successors of each state that is expanded during the
heuristic search in Step 2, and the cost function C only needs
to correctly find the best of these in Step 3. These are much
easier learning problems, and hence, simpler potential functions can be applied. Second, for making predictions there
is no need to solve a global optimization problem at prediction time. In effect, the system learns not only how to score
candidate solutions but also how to find good candidates—
it learns to do inference more efficiently. Third, HC-Search
can be applied to non-decomposable loss functions. This
is another consequence of using a search space formulation instead of a global optimization approach. Finally,
HC-Search provides a clean engineering methodology for
determining which components of the system would most
benefit from additional engineering effort.

1. Introduction
This paper explores whether HC-Search [7] can be effective in computer vision problems; it has already shown the
state-of-the-art performance on structured prediction problems in natural language processing. A number of tractable
heuristic methods for structured prediction have been used
in vision, including Dual Decomposition [26], Graph-Cuts

Many computer vision problems can be formulated as
structured prediction [40, 14, 26, 22, 2, 28, 48, 10, 41, 50,
1

