Reliable Patch Trackers: Robust Visual Tracking by Exploiting Reliable Patches
Yang Li and Jianke Zhu
College of Computer Science
Zhejiang University, China

Steven C.H. Hoi
School of Information System
Singapore Management University

{liyang89, jkzhu}@zju.edu.cn

chhoi@smu.edu.sg

Abstract
Most modern trackers typically employ a bounding box
given in the first frame to track visual objects, where their
tracking results are often sensitive to the initialization. In
this paper, we propose a new tracking method, Reliable
Patch Trackers (RPT), which attempts to identify and exploit
the reliable patches that can be tracked effectively through
the whole tracking process. Specifically, we present a tracking reliability metric to measure how reliably a patch can
be tracked, where a probability model is proposed to estimate the distribution of reliable patches under a sequential
Monte Carlo framework. As the reliable patches distributed
over the image, we exploit the motion trajectories to distinguish them from the background. Therefore, the visual
object can be defined as the clustering of homo-trajectory
patches, where a Hough voting-like scheme is employed to
estimate the target state. Encouraging experimental results
on a large set of sequences showed that the proposed approach is very effective and in comparison to the state-ofthe-art trackers. The full source code of our implementation
will be publicly available.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. The tracking confidence map of the next frame when the
tracker was initialized at different positions with a fixed bounding
box. The trackability varies largely in the image.

Visual object tracking is a fundamental research topic
in computer vision, which enjoys a wide range of applications, including video surveillance, robotics, driverless car,
etc. Despite having achieved promising progress over the
past decade, it remains very challenging for designing an
all-situation-handled tracker that can handle various critical situations, such as illumination changes, geometric deformations, fast motions, partial occlusion, and background
clutters, etc.
Structural representation has recently been studied actively in tracking community, which has been shown as
an effective approach to enhancing the robustness. Typically, a grid-like structure [41, 17, 12], typically a bounding
box, is employed to represent the target object for tracking.
Since most of the tracked target is not strictly a rectangular shape, the bounding box representation often inevitably

incorporates background information into the model, and
thus could degrade the overall performance of the tracker.
Therefore, the grid-like structure is not the optimal way to
represent real objects that are of non-rectangular shape.
To account for the object shape in tracking tasks,
segmentation-based approaches [22, 27] have been explored
to build accurate representations for model-free targets. Although video segmentation [10] has found some promising
progress for object tracking, it is often very computationally intensive to generate object proposals and link them
across frames. Moreover, it is also quite challenging for
the segmentation-based method to deal with cluttered background and occlusions, which often lead to unstable results.
Another family of tracking approaches that are naturally
1

