Learning Lightness from Human Judgement on Relative Reflectance
Takuya Narihira
UC Berkeley / ICSI / Sony Corp.

Michael Maire
TTI Chicago

Stella X. Yu
UC Berkeley / ICSI

takuya.narihira@berkeley.edu

mmaire@ttic.edu

stellayu@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We develop a new approach to inferring lightness, the
perceived reflectance of surfaces, from a single image.
Classic methods view this problem from the perspective of
intrinsic image decomposition, where an image is separated
into reflectance and shading components. Rather than reason about reflectance and shading together, we learn to directly predict lightness differences between pixels.
Large-scale training from human judgement data on relative reflectance, and patch representations built using deep
networks, provide the foundation for our model. Benchmarked on the Intrinsic Images in the Wild dataset [4], our
local lightness model achieves on-par performance with the
state-of-the-art global lightness model, which incorporates
multiple shading/reflectance priors and simultaneous reasoning between pairs of pixels in a dense conditional random field formulation.

1. Introduction
Human vision is remarkable at decoding the physical reflectance of an object despite variations of illumination cast
upon it. This subjective constancy of lightness, which refers
to the perceived reflectance, turns out to be hard to achieve
computationally based entirely on the objective intensity of
light recorded in an image [1, 25, 5, 13, 20, 11].
Figure 1 illustrates complicated ranking relationships between intensity and lightness on pairs of pixels [25]:
• Different intensity → same lightness: Letter S at circled locations 1 and 2 is seen to be the same white
paint whether it is on the shaded face of the box; likewise the unevenly lit background gray at locations 3
and 4 is never mistaken for different paint colors.
• Positive intensity differences → negative lightness differences: The black clothes at location 5 are always
correctly seen to be darker despite receiving in fact
more light than the background gray at location 6.
• Same intensity → different lightness: Locations 2 and

intensity: I1 > I2 = I3 > I4 = I5 > I6
lightness: L1 = L2 > L3 = L4 = I6 > L5
Figure 1. Intensity vs lightness. The subjective experience of
lightness has a non-trivial relationship with the objective intensity
of light in an image. This image features a 3D box whose top and
front surfaces have identical text and background paint colors. Six
pixels are labeled, and marked with their intensity values between
0 and 1. Their lightness, i.e. perceived reflectance, is ordered very
differently from their measured intensity. Source: [25].

3, 4 and 5, are of the same level of luminance but easily
seen as painted with different shades of grays.
Conventional lightness modeling aims to recover the
physical reflectance by teasing apart the confounded factors
of illumination and reflectance from the image intensity, in
the so-called intrinsic image decomposition [3] framework.
The basic idea is that, while the intensity at the pixels
themselves is a poor indicator of lightness, their neighboring pixels often have enough variations for revealing the
underlying illumination and reflectance, each of which has
distinctive characteristics in the set of natural images [1].
The lightness results from identifying and discounting the
factor of illumination from the intensity.
Specifically, the intrinsic image model assumes that the
image intensity I is the product of reflectance image R and
shading image S, and lightness L is simply the solution of
R attempted by the visual system given its knowledge about

