From Image-level to Pixel-level Labeling with Convolutional Networks
Pedro O. Pinheiro1,2
Ronan Collobert1,3,†
1
Idiap Research Institute, Martigny, Switzerland
2
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland
3
Facebook AI Research, Menlo Park, CA, USA
pedro@opinheiro.com

ronan@collobert.com

Abstract

Train

Car

CNN

Cat

We are interested in inferring object segmentation by
leveraging only object class information, and by considering only minimal priors on the object segmentation task.
This problem could be viewed as a kind of weakly supervised segmentation task, and naturally fits the Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) framework: every training image is
known to have (or not) at least one pixel corresponding to
the image class label, and the segmentation task can be
rewritten as inferring the pixels belonging to the class of
the object (given one image, and its object class). We propose a Convolutional Neural Network-based model, which
is constrained during training to put more weight on pixels which are important for classifying the image. We show
that at test time, the model has learned to discriminate the
right pixels well enough, such that it performs very well on
an existing segmentation benchmark, by adding only few
smoothing priors. Our system is trained using a subset of
the Imagenet dataset and the segmentation experiments are
performed on the challenging Pascal VOC dataset (with no
fine-tuning of the model on Pascal VOC). Our model beats
the state of the art results in weakly supervised object segmentation task by a large margin. We also compare the performance of our model with state of the art fully-supervised
segmentation approaches.

Dog

Boat

2.Compute
CNN features
aggreg

3. Aggregation
Layer

Bird

1. Weakly Annotated
Imagenet set

4. Image-level training

CNN + priors

1. Test Image

2. Pixel-level labeling

Figure 1: A schematic illustration of our method. Top:
(1) The model is trained using weakly annotated data (only
image-level class information) from Imagenet. (2) The
CNN generates feature planes. (3) These planes pass
through an aggregation layer to constrain the model to put
more weight on the right pixels. (4) The system is trained
by classifying the correct image-level label. Bottom: During test time, the aggregation layer is removed and the CNN
densely classifies every pixel of the image (considering only
few segmentation priors).
have to cope with these variations, while being limited in
the amount of available training data. Increasing computing
power, and recent releases of reasonably large segmentation
datasets such as Pascal VOC [7] have nevertheless made the
segmentation task a reality.
We rely on Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
[13], an important class of algorithms which have been
shown to be state-of-the-art on large object recognition
tasks [12, 24], as well as on fully supervised segmentation task [8]. One advantage of CNNs is that they learn
sufficiently general features, and therefore they can excel

1. Introduction
Object segmentation is a computer vision tasks which
consists in assigning an object class to sets of pixels in an
image. This task is extremely challenging, as each object
in the world generates an infinite number of images with
variations in position, pose, lightning, texture, geometrical
form and background. Natural image segmentation systems
† All research was conducted at the Idiap Research Institute, before
Ronan Collobert joined Facebook AI Research.

1

