Video Summarization by Learning Submodular Mixtures of Objectives
Michael Gygli1
1

Helmut Grabner1

Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich, Switzerland

2

Luc Van Gool1,2
PSI - VISICS, K.U. Leuven, Belgium

{gygli, grabner, vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract

Learning

We present a novel method for summarizing raw, casually captured videos. The objective is to create a short summary that still conveys the story. It should thus be both,
interesting and representative for the input video. Previous
methods often used simplified assumptions and only optimized for one of these goals. Alternatively, they used handdefined objectives that were optimized sequentially by making consecutive hard decisions. This limits their use to a
particular setting. Instead, we introduce a new method that
(i) uses a supervised approach in order to learn the importance of global characteristics of a summary and (ii)
jointly optimizes for multiple objectives and thus creates
summaries that posses multiple properties of a good summary. Experiments on two challenging and very diverse
datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our method, where
we outperform or match current state-of-the-art.

Input Videos

User Summaries

Structured Learning
Inference

Learnt
Summarization
Objective

Input Video

Automatic Summary

Figure 1: Overview. Our method consists of two parts: A supervised
learning stage (training) and inference (testing). Given pairs of videos and
their user created summaries as training examples, we learn a combined
objective. Then, when given a new video as input, our method creates
summaries that are both interesting and representative.

least two objectives [35]. Firstly, it should contain the most
interesting parts of a video e.g. in a base jumping video one
doesn’t want to miss highlights such as the start or landing.
Secondly, the summary should be representative in keeping
the diversity of the original, while removing redundancy.
Many recent methods predict a score per segment and
ignore the structure of the video [33, 9, 29], and therefore have difficulties to jointly optimize both objectives.
Methods that go in this direction typically cluster the video
into events and select the most important segment(s) per
event [15, 11], following a kind of successive optimization of the objectives. Others optimize diversity only locally using a Markov assumption [6]. Instead, our method
optimizes for multiple objectives globally, avoiding hard
decisions early on. Rather than using supervision only
for some components [15] or making simplifying assumptions [33, 9, 29], our method learns the importance of summarization objectives directly from reference summaries
created by human annotators, as depicted in Fig. 1. Using
supervision for the task of video summarization is crucial,
since it is extremely complex and highly task-dependent –
summaries from surveillance or live-logging data are expected to meet different criteria than summaries of short
clips obtained by a mobile phone. Our approach is able to
automatically adapt to the type of video and the desired output. It is therefore much more general and can be applied in

1. Introduction
With the success of mobile phones, activity cameras,
Google Glass, etc. video recording devices have become
omnipresent. As a consequence, vast amounts of videos are
recorded every day to capture special moments or log daily
activities. At the same time, with video capture becoming
so easy and cheap, and with the strongly egocentric viewpoints that the devices often induce, videos are recorded casually. As in digital photography, many users follow a capture first, filter later mentality, where little thought is spent
on timing, cutting, content and view selection. As a result,
such casual videos are too long, shaky, redundant and lowpaced to watch in their entirety. Therefore, reducing videos
to their gist and removing bad parts is of increasing importance. As a result, video summarization, which automates
this process, has gained a lot of attention in the last few
years [33, 9, 29, 15, 11, 24, 1, 12, 39].
Automatically creating skims is challenging, as even a
strongly shortened version should still convey the story of
the initial video. A good summary must comply with at
1

