Small Instance Detection by Integer Programming on Object Density Maps
Zheng Ma
Lei Yu
Antoni B. Chan
Department of Computer Science
City University of Hong Kong
{zhengma2-c,leiyu6-c}@my.cityu.edu.hk, abchan@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
We propose a novel object detection framework for
partially-occluded small instances, such as pedestrians in
low resolution surveillance video, cells under a microscope,
flocks of small animals (e.g. birds, fishes), or even tiny insects like honeybees and flies. These scenarios are very
challenging for traditional detectors, which are typically
trained on individual instances. In our approach, we first
estimate the object density map of the input image, and then
divide it into local regions. For each region, a sliding window (ROI) is passed over the density map to calculate the
instance count within each ROI. 2D integer programming is
used to recover the locations of object instances from the set
of ROI counts, and the global count estimate of the density
map is used as a constraint to regularize the detection performance. Finally, the bounding box for each instance is estimated using the local density map. Compared with current
small-instance detection methods, our proposed approach
achieves state-of-the-art performance on several challenging datasets including fluorescence microscopy cell images,
UCSD pedestrians, small animals and insects.

1. Introduction
Usually, in the computer vision community, object detection and counting are two related but also different research topics. The objective of object detection is to localize individual instances and find their bounding boxes,
while object counting aims to estimate the total number
of instances. Typically, detection approaches [1, 2] train
a sliding window detector for an individual object using a
supervised learning algorithm with labeled input images of
positive and negative samples. However, such detection approaches tend to be less accurate when objects are overlapping. On the other hand, counting methods [3, 4] tend to do
better at estimating the total number of objects in such scenarios, as they model groups of objects locally in a segment
[4], or globally in the whole image [3]. However, the output
of counting methods is only the number of objects in the

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Figure 1. Examples of small object detection: a) synthetic cells; b)
pedestrians; c) fish; d) seagulls; e) honeybees; f) flies. Objects are
only ∼10-30 pixels tall in the image.

image or segment, leaving the locations of each individual
object unknown.
In many real world applications, accurate total counts
and locations of objects are equally important. The total
number of objects in a region of interest (ROI) can only
show a macro-level description of the crowd, which omits
the micro-level information for each instance. Usually, the
objects are not distributed evenly in an ROI, and the locations of each instance may provide more information for
further object behavior analysis. For example, in scenarios
such as a crowded street, cells under a microscope, flocks
of migrating birds or fishes, and insects moving together,
the total count can show a global trend for the whole scene,
while the locations of each instance indicate the grouping

