Picture: A Probabilistic Programming Language for Scene Perception
Tejas D Kulkarni
MIT

Pushmeet Kohli
Microsoft Research

Joshua B Tenenbaum
MIT

Vikash Mansinghka
MIT

tejask@mit.edu

pkohli@microsoft.com

jbt@mit.edu

vkm@mit.edu

Abstract

ibly [11, 12, 51, 7, 19, 29, 31, 16, 21], but have been less
widely embraced for two main reasons: Inference typically
depends on slower forms of approximate inference, and
both model-building and inference can involve considerable
problem-specific engineering to obtain robust and reliable
results. These factors make it difficult to develop simple
variations on state-of-the-art models, to thoroughly explore
the many possible combinations of modeling, representation,
and inference strategies, or to richly integrate complementary discriminative and generative modeling approaches to
the same problem. More generally, to handle increasingly
realistic scenes, generative approaches will have to scale not
just with respect to data size but also with respect to model
and scene complexity. This scaling will arguably require
general-purpose frameworks to compose, extend and automatically perform inference in complex structured generative
models – tools that for the most part do not yet exist.

Recent progress on probabilistic modeling and statistical learning, coupled with the availability of large training
datasets, has led to remarkable progress in computer vision.
Generative probabilistic models, or “analysis-by-synthesis”
approaches, can capture rich scene structure but have been
less widely applied than their discriminative counterparts, as
they often require considerable problem-specific engineering
in modeling and inference, and inference is typically seen
as requiring slow, hypothesize-and-test Monte Carlo methods. Here we present Picture, a probabilistic programming
language for scene understanding that allows researchers
to express complex generative vision models, while automatically solving them using fast general-purpose inference
machinery. Picture provides a stochastic scene language that
can express generative models for arbitrary 2D/3D scenes,
as well as a hierarchy of representation layers for comparing scene hypotheses with observed images by matching not
simply pixels, but also more abstract features (e.g., contours,
deep neural network activations). Inference can flexibly
integrate advanced Monte Carlo strategies with fast bottomup data-driven methods. Thus both representations and
inference strategies can build directly on progress in discriminatively trained systems to make generative vision more
robust and efficient. We use Picture to write programs for
3D face analysis, 3D human pose estimation, and 3D object
reconstruction – each competitive with specially engineered
baselines.

Here we present Picture, a probabilistic programming
language that aims to provide a common representation language and inference engine suitable for a broad class of
generative scene perception problems. We see probabilistic
programming as key to realizing the promise of “vision as
inverse graphics”. Generative models can be represented
via stochastic code that samples hypothesized scenes and
generates images given those scenes. Rich deterministic and
stochastic data structures can express complex 3D scenes
that are difficult to manually specify. Multiple representation
and inference strategies are specifically designed to address
the main perceived limitations of generative approaches to
vision. Instead of requiring photo-realistic generative models with pixel-level matching to images, we can compare
hypothesized scenes to observations using a hierarchy of
more abstract image representations such as contours, discriminatively trained part-based skeletons, or deep neural
network features. Available Markov Chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) inference algorithms include not only traditional
Metropolis-Hastings, but also more advanced techniques for
inference in high-dimensional continuous spaces, such as elliptical slice sampling, and Hamiltonian Monte Carlo which
can exploit the gradients of automatically differentiable renderers. These top-down inference approaches are integrated
with bottom-up and automatically constructed data-driven

1. Introduction
Probabilistic scene understanding systems aim to produce high-probability descriptions of scenes conditioned on
observed images or videos, typically either via discriminatively trained models or generative models in an “analysis
by synthesis” framework. Discriminative approaches lend
themselves to fast, bottom-up inference methods and relatively knowledge-free, data-intensive training regimes, and
have been remarkably successful on many recognition problems [9, 23, 26, 30]. Generative approaches hold out the
promise of analyzing complex scenes more richly and flex1

