Material Classification with Thermal Imagery
Philip Saponaro, Scott Sorensen, Abhishek Kolagunda, and Chandra Kambhamettu
Video/Image Modeling and Synthesis (VIMS) Lab,
Dept. of Computer and Information Science, University of Delaware
Newark, Delaware
{saponaro,sorensen,abhi,chandrak}@udel.edu

Abstract

ness of emitting thermal radiation compared to a black body
source at the same temperature. Metals have very low emissivity and high reflectance, while woods have high emissivity. Thus many metals appear mirrorlike in the LWIR imagery.
When water comes into contact with an object, the permeation behavior changes based on the material. For example, in wood the water follows along the grain of the wood
and is jagged in appearance, while in metals the water stays
above the surface and hardly moves if the surface is flat,
and in paper materials, the water spreads radially. We use
the permeation behavior as a cue for classification. We construct a 3D model of the water permeation pattern for each
class of material. Each frame of a video sequence of the
water permeation is treated as a 2D slice of a 3D model.
This model generalizes features of the permeation pattern
such as rate of permeation and shape characteristics. Another cue we use is the thermal heating and cooling cycle.
We show that different materials heat and cool at different
rates when placed under a heating lamp. The materials we
used for classification are shown in Figure 1.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives previous works for material classification. Section 3 details our
method of feature extraction and model learning. Section
4 shows the data we collected and discusses the results of
our classifier. Section 5 concludes the paper and discusses
future work.

Material classification is an important area of research
in computer vision. Typical algorithms use color and texture information for classification, but there are problems
due to varying lighting conditions and diversity of colors in
a single material class. In this work we study the use of long
wave infrared (i.e. thermal) imagery for material classification. Thermal imagery has the benefit of relative invariance
to color changes, invariance to lighting conditions, and can
even work in the dark. We collect a database of 21 different material classes with both color and thermal imagery.
We develop a set of features that describe water permeation
and heating/cooling properties, and test several variations
on these methods to obtain our final classifier. The results
show that the proposed method outperforms typical color
and texture features, and when combined with color information, the results are improved further.

1. Introduction
Automatically classifying materials impacts real world
applications such as recycling [9], mineralogy, and robotics
[11]. Computer vision methods typically use standard RGB
camera imagery and rely on texture and lighting cues to distinguish the different materials. Appearance based classification is challenging due to the variety of colors and illuminations. Objects of different materials that have the
same color intensity response can be almost impossible to
distinguish. In this work we consider the electromagnetic
spectrum between 8-14m with a long wave infrared (LWIR)
camera, i.e. a thermal camera. We study thermal properties
and how water permeates through different materials.
LWIR cameras detect infrared radiation, which is emitted by all objects above absolute zero according to Plancks
black body radiation law [17]. The LWIR camera sees not
only the emitted thermal radiation of a source object, but
also reflected and transmitted thermal radiation. Emissivity is a property of a material which governs the effective-

2. Background and Related Works
Many previous works consider material classification
with a standard RGB camera. Color and texture information were extracted in [7]. [8] uses a Bidirectional Reflectance Distribution Function (BRDF) as a feature for perpixel classification. [13] uses a Bidirectional Texture Function (BTF). Both use coded light illumination in an LED
dome. Light polarization was used in [4, 21]. BRDF slices
were used in [20]. Visible spectral reflectance (400-720nm)
was used in [10]. In most of these works, the lighting was
very controlled to give cues for the classification. In our
1

