Blind Optical Aberration Correction by Exploring
Geometric and Visual Priors
Tao Yue1
Jinli Suo1
Jue Wang2
Xun Cao3
Qionghai Dai1
1
2
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
Adobe Research
3
School of Electronic Science and Engineering, Nanjing University

Abstract

have also proposed various complex hardware solutions for
compensating optical aberration [1, 9, 10, 15, 17, 18], but the
requirement of using special devices limits their application
range, especially for consumer applications.
Given the limitations of hardware solutions, computationally removing optical aberration has attracted strong
interests and has been exensively studied in the past
decade [3–5, 12, 13]. However, most of existing aberration correction methods [3, 5, 12] are non-blind, i.e. the
Point Spread Functions (PSFs) of the aberration need to be
calibrated beforehand. Kee et al. [5] propose a parameterized model to describe the nonuniform PSFs of a zoom lens
at different focal lengths, so that only several calibration
measurements are required to be taken. Schuler et al. [12]
calibrate the nonuniform aberration PSFs using a grid of
point light sources and apply the Efficient Filter Flow (EFF)
method to perform efficient non-stationary deconvolution.
Heide et al. [3] propose to reconstruct high quality images
from aberration corrupted inputs captured by simple lenses,
with the PSFs calibrated from the degenerated images of
several random patterns. Instead of a fully pre-calibration
of the PSFs, Shih et al. [14] only measure the PSF at a
single depth, and then simulate the lens and trace the light
rays to derive the whole PSF map computationally. The
main advantage of these non-blind methods is that once the
camera is well calibrated, the model can be applied to any
input image given the optical aberrations are scene independent [20]. However the required calibration procedures
usually demand expertise and special devices, thus largely
limit their practical applications.
For blind aberration removal, Joshi et al. [4] propose
a PSF estimation method by predicting sharp edges from
blurry ones. Rahbar and Faez [11] use the Zernike model to
describe the optical aberration and estimate the Zernike coefficients using Polyspectral analysis. However, they only
deal with a single channel in this work and can not handle chromatic aberration. Recently, Schuler et al. [13] propose an orthonormal Efficient Filter Flow (EFF) basis based
method which is built upon a series of assumptions. This

Optical aberration widely exists in optical imaging systems, especially in consumer-level cameras. In contrast
to previous solutions using hardware compensation or precalibration, we propose a computational approach for blind
aberration removal from a single image, by exploring various geometric and visual priors. The global rotational symmetry allows us to transform the non-uniform degeneration
into several uniform ones by the proposed radial splitting
and warping technique. Locally, two types of symmetry
constraints, i.e. central symmetry and reflection symmetry
are defined as geometric priors in central and surrounding regions, respectively. Furthermore, by investigating the
visual artifacts of aberration degenerated images captured
by consumer-level cameras, the non-uniform distribution of
sharpness across color channels and the image lattice is
exploited as visual priors, resulting in a novel strategy to
utilize the guidance from the sharpest channel and local image regions to improve the overall performance and robustness. Extensive evaluation on both real and synthetic data
suggests that the proposed method outperforms the state-ofthe-art techniques.

1. Introduction
Optical aberration is one of the most common sources of
image degeneration that affects almost all lens-based imaging systems. High-end lens are carefully designed to reduce
optical aberration. For example, the elements of the compound lens are made of different materials to compensate
the imperfect refractive indices to reduce chromatic aberration. The surfaces of the singlet lenses are of different curvatures to compensate the imperfect focusing of the spherical lenses for educing the spherical, astigmatism and coma
aberration. In general, better lens with less optical aberration are usually larger and cost much more to fabricate, thus
may not applicable in consumer-level cameras. Researchers
1

