Object Scene Flow for Autonomous Vehicles
Moritz Menze
Leibniz Universität Hannover

Andreas Geiger
MPI Tübingen

menze@ipi.uni-hannover.de

andreas.geiger@tue.mpg.de

Abstract
This paper proposes a novel model and dataset for 3D
scene flow estimation with an application to autonomous
driving. Taking advantage of the fact that outdoor scenes
often decompose into a small number of independently moving objects, we represent each element in the scene by
its rigid motion parameters and each superpixel by a 3D
plane as well as an index to the corresponding object. This
minimal representation increases robustness and leads to a
discrete-continuous CRF where the data term decomposes
into pairwise potentials between superpixels and objects.
Moreover, our model intrinsically segments the scene into
its constituting dynamic components. We demonstrate the
performance of our model on existing benchmarks as well
as a novel realistic dataset with scene flow ground truth.
We obtain this dataset by annotating 400 dynamic scenes
from the KITTI raw data collection using detailed 3D CAD
models for all vehicles in motion. Our experiments also reveal novel challenges which cannot be handled by existing
methods.

1. Introduction
“Most of the structures in the visual world are rigid or
at least nearly so.”
David Marr [20]
The estimation of dense 3D motion fields, widely termed
scene flow, is currently gaining increasing attention. Dense
motion vectors yield insights into the geometric layout of
a scene as well as its decomposition into individually moving objects. Important applications include mobile robotics
and autonomous driving where 3D object motion is a fundamental input to high-level tasks such as scene understanding, obstacle avoidance or path planning [5,7,10,28]. In this
paper, we are interested in 3D scene flow estimation with a
focus on autonomous driving. While a number of methods
have recently demonstrated impressive performance in this
context [25,35,37,39], none of them explicitly takes advantage of the fact that such scenes can often be considered as a
small collection of independently moving 3D objects which

Figure 1: Scene Flow Results on the proposed Dataset.
Top-to-bottom: Estimated moving objects with background
object in transparent, flow results and flow ground truth.
include the background motion caused by the moving camera itself. See Fig. 1 for an illustration. Furthermore, due to
the absence of realistic benchmarks with scene flow ground
truth, quantitative evaluations are restricted to synthetic images [18, 39] or static scenes such as the ones provided by
the Middlebury stereo benchmark [27] or the KITTI stereo
and optical flow evaluation [12].
The contribution of this paper is twofold: First, we propose a slanted-plane scene flow model that explicitly reasons about objects while not relying on particular shape
models or pre-trained detectors. In contrast to [35, 37],
we model the 3D structure of the scene as a collection of
planar patches and the 3D motion of these patches by a
small number of rigidly moving objects which we optimize
jointly. This significantly reduces the parameter space and
constrains some of the problems in textureless or ambiguous regions. Besides, our method also outputs a segmentation of the scene into independently moving objects. Second, we present a novel and realistic dataset for quantitative scene flow evaluation. Towards this goal, we collected
400 highly dynamic scenes from the KITTI raw dataset and

