Multiple Instance Learning for Soft Bags via Top Instances
Weixin Li Nuno Vasconcelos
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093, United States
{wel017, nvasconcelos}@ucsd.edu
Abstract
A generalized formulation of the multiple instance learning problem is considered. Under this formulation, both
positive and negative bags are soft, in the sense that negative bags can also contain positive instances. This reflects a
problem setting commonly found in practical applications,
where labeling noise appears on both positive and negative
training samples. A novel bag-level representation is introduced, using instances that are most likely to be positive
(denoted top instances), and its ability to separate soft bags,
depending on their relative composition in terms of positive
and negative instances, is studied. This study inspires a new
large-margin algorithm for soft-bag classification, based on
a latent support vector machine that efficiently explores the
combinatorial space of bag compositions. Empirical evaluation on three datasets is shown to confirm the main findings of the theoretical analysis and the effectiveness of the
proposed soft-bag classifier.

negative bags
positive bags

X

negative instance positive instance
(positive bag)
(positive bag)
(negative bag)
(negative bag)

separating plane

Figure 1. Noisy weak annotation of “flower” in Corel5k, where
negative bags are far more than positive bags in training data. Best
viewed in color (same for the rest).

beling of negatives is as noisy as that of positives. Figure 1
illustrates the problem for the popular Corel5k dataset [4].
Image patches are considered instances of visual concepts
and the goal is to classify images, which are bags of such
patches, with concept labels. The figure shows examples of
positive and negative bags for the concept “flower”. Note
that many of the negative images include regions of flowers.
This labeling noise is common in weakly supervised learning, where human annotators are asked to label data with a
few keywords. The absence of the “flower” label does not
mean that there are no flowers in the image, just that the
labeler did not think of “flower” as one of its predominant
concepts. In result, negative bags frequently contain positive instances. This nullifies the core MIL assumption of
clean negative bags.
To address this common issue, we consider a more general definition of MIL, which softens its constraint on negative bags. Under this formulation, both positive and negative bags are soft (i.e., they can contain both positive and
negative instances, differing only in their composition with
regards to the two instance types). This is unlike the hard
bags of conventional MIL (where presence/absence of posi-

1. Introduction
Multiple instance learning (MIL) [9] is a family of learning algorithms suitable for problems involving substantial
amounts of labeling noise. Examples, denoted as instances
in MIL, are grouped into bags, and a label is attached to
each bag. A bag that contains at least one positive example is considered a positive bag, otherwise it is negative. A
classifier is finally designed to classify bags, rather than individual examples. Over the past twenty years, many MIL
algorithms have been developed and successfully applied
to different tasks where label noise is prevalent, e.g., image categorization [16, 6, 5], object detection [22, 10], retrieval [16, 29, 4], etc. While a substantial step towards the
development of systems that can learn from very weakly labeled data, the current formulation of MIL fails to account
for a very characteristic property of this type of data: negative bags can also have very noisy instance composition.
In fact, for some of the most popular applications of
MIL, e.g., semantic annotation of images or video, the la1

