Robust Image Filtering Using Joint Static and Dynamic Guidance
Bumsub Ham1,⇤
1

Inria

2

Minsu Cho1,⇤

Jean Ponce2,⇤

École Normale Supérieure / PSL Research University

Abstract

Regularizing images under a guidance signal has been
used in various tasks in computer vision and computational
photography, particularly for noise reduction and joint upsampling. The aim is to transfer fine structures of guidance
signals to input images, restoring noisy or altered structures. One of main drawbacks in such a data-dependent
framework is that it does not handle differences in structure
between guidance and input images. We address this problem by jointly leveraging structural information of guidance and input images. Image filtering is formulated as
a nonconvex optimization problem, which is solved by the
majorization-minimization algorithm. The proposed algorithm converges quickly while guaranteeing a local minimum. It effectively controls image structures at different
scales and can handle a variety of types of data from different sensors. We demonstrate the flexibility and effectiveness
of our model in several applications including depth superresolution, scale-space filtering, texture removal, flash/nonflash denoising, and RGB/NIR denoising.

1. Introduction and Background
Many tasks in computer vision and computational photography can be formulated as ill-posed inverse problems,
and thus theoretically and practically, require regularization. In the classical setting, this is used to obtain a
smoothly varying solution and/or ensure stability [4]. Recent work on joint regularization (or joint filtering) [10, 15,
33] provides a new perspective on the regularization process, with a great variety of applications including stereo
correspondence [28, 34], optical flow [28], joint upsampling
[8, 15, 20, 25], dehazing [10], noise reduction [27, 33], and
texture removal [35]. The basic idea of joint regularization
is that the structure of a guidance image is transferred to
an input image, e.g., for preserving sharp structure transitions while smoothing the input image. It assumes that the
guidance image has enough structural information to restore
noisy or altered structures in the input image.
Joint regularization has been used with either static or
⇤ WILLOW project-team, Département d’Informatique de l’Ecole Normale Supérieure, ENS/Inria/CNRS UMR 8548.

dynamic guidance images. Static guidance regularization
(e.g., [10]) provides an output image by modulating the input image with an affinity function that depends on the similarity of features in the guidance signal. This static guidance is fixed during the optimization. It can reflect internal properties of the input image itself, e.g., its gradient
[15, 26], or be another signal aligned with the input image, e.g., a near infrared (NIR) image [33]. This framework
determines the structure of the output image by referring
to that of the guidance image only, and does not consider
structural (or statistical) dependencies and inconsistencies
between input and guidance images. This is problematic,
especially in the case of data from different sensors, e.g.,
depth and color images. Dynamic guidance regularization
(e.g., [35]) uses an affinity function obtained from the regularized input image. It is assumed that the affinity between
neighboring pixels can be determined more accurately from
already regularized images, than from the input image itself [2, 35]. This method is inherently iterative, and dynamic guidance (the regularized input image, i.e., a potential output image) is updated at every step. In contrast to
static guidance regularization, dynamic guidance regularization does not use static guidance and takes into account
of the properties of the input image. Data-dependent static
guidance is needed to impose structures on the input image, especially when the input image is not enough in itself to pull out reliable information, e.g., joint upsampling
[8, 15, 20, 25].
We present a unified framework for image filtering taking advantage of both static and dynamic guidances. We
address the aforementioned problems by fusing appropriate structures of static and dynamic guidance images, rather
than unilaterally transferring structures of guidance images
to the input image. To encourage comparison and future
work, our source code is available at our project webpage1 .

2. Related Work
Static or dynamic guidance can be implicit or explicit.
Implicit regularization stems from a filtering framework.
The input image is filtered using a weight function that depends on the similarity of features in the guidance image
1 http://www.di.ens.fr/willow/research/sdfilter

