Simultaneous Time-of-Flight Sensing and Photometric Stereo
with a Single ToF Sensor
Changpeng Ti
Ruigang Yang
Univ. of Kentucky

James Davis
Univ. of California, Santa Cruz

Zhigeng Pan
Hangzhou Normal Univ.

{cti222, r.yang}@uky.edu

davis@cs.ucsc.edu

zgpan@hznu.edu.cn

Abstract
We present a novel system which incorporates photometric stereo with the Time-of-Flight depth sensor. Adding
to the classic ToF, the system utilizes multiple point light
sources that enable the capturing of a normal field whilst
taking depth images. Two calibration methods are proposed
to determine the light sources’ positions given the ToF sensor’s relatively low resolution. An iterative refinement algorithm is formulated to account for the extra phase delays
caused by the positions of the light sources. We find in experiments that the system is comparable to the classic ToF
in depth accuracy, and it is able to recover finer details that
are lost due to the noise level of the ToF sensor.

1. Introduction
Full-frame time-of-flight (ToF) sensors have been introduced for several years. Developed for real-time acquisition of dynamic scenes, they typically have very fast shutter
speed to take multiple shots of the scene rapidly. For example, ToF cameras based on phase-shift (such as PMD [1],
SwissRanger [2]) take four snapshots to generate a metric
depth map. In this paper, we develop novel techniques to
allow Phase-shift-based ToF cameras to measure both metric distance and surface normal.
Our method starts with a simple addition of three more
LED sources to the original camera. As shown in Figure 1,
the LEDs are now placed away from the imaging sensors.
Instead of illuminating the scene from the same light source
four times to complete one acquisition cycle, we illuminate
the scene with these four lights, one at a time. Based on
four phase images from such a distributed light setup, new
algorithms are developed to recover both the surface normal
and the distance for each pixel.
The main contributions of this paper include: (1) a novel
way to re-purpose the ToF sensor for both normal and depth
capture, the required changes in hardware are low cost and
small. (2) an algorithm to estimate time of flight from dis-

tributed light sources, which provides an alternative solution to frequency modulation to use multiple ToF lights in
the same environment; and (3) new methods to calibrate
point light sources, which are specifically designed to lowresolution images such as these produced by today’s ToF
sensors.
We hope our method will inspire the next generation
of ToF cameras that can produce significantly better depth
maps than the current ones.

2. Related Work
There have been several works attempting to enhance
range maps. In general these techniques are designed for
general purpose depth enhancement and do not differentiate
the underlying measuring principals. Only some of them [3]
take into account the specific ToF sensor behavior. These
techniques can mainly be categorized into two groups. The
first group is based on image super-resolution techniques
that utilize temporal redundancy, while the second group is
mostly based on fusion with other devices to take advantage of spatial redundancy. Our approach falls into the second group. We will briefly discuss existing works in both
categories.
Image super-resolution techniques haven been long studied [4]. With the increasing popularity of ToF sensors, these
techniques have been adapted to accommodate the 2.5-D
range images. Schuon et al [5] use a set of low resolution depth images that are captured from slightly displaced
views and later registered. The enhancement task is formulated under a convex optimization framework with a data
term to maintain the original measurement and a smoothness term that simultaneously preserves high frequency details and suppresses noises. Cui et al extend this technique
by taking into account the specific characteristics of ToF
sensors and incorporates a Nonlinear Anisotropic Regularizer to better preserve the local structures [3]. Both techniques take as input a set of depth maps captured without
large view changes. Moreover, an image registration step,
e.g. using optical flow [3], is required.

