Target Identity-aware Network Flow for Online Multiple Target Tracking
Afshin Dehghan1
1

Yicong Tian1

Philip. H. S. Torr2

Mubarak Shah1

Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida
2
Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford

adehghan@cs.ucf.edu, ytian@crcv.ucf.edu, philip.torr@eng.ox.ac.uk, shah@crcv.ucf.edu

Abstract

are pruned and tracks between images are formed. In most
previous work, these two steps have been considered as two
separate problems and the focus of tracking is mostly on
designing data association techniques. There are two main
classes of data association.

In this paper we show that multiple object tracking
(MOT) can be formulated in a framework, where the detection and data-association are performed simultaneously.
Our method allows us to overcome the confinements of
data association based MOT approaches; where the performance is dependent on the object detection results provided at input level. At the core of our method lies structured learning which learns a model for each target and
infers the best location of all targets simultaneously in a
video clip. The inference of our structured learning is done
through a new Target Identity-aware Network Flow (TINF),
where each node in the network encodes the probability of
each target identity belonging to that node. The proposed
Lagrangian relaxation optimization finds the high quality
solution to the network. During optimization a soft spatial
constraint is enforced between the nodes of the graph which
helps reducing the ambiguity caused by nearby targets with
similar appearance in crowded scenarios. We show that automatically detecting and tracking targets in a single framework can help resolve the ambiguities due to frequent occlusion and heavy articulation of targets. Our experiments
involve challenging yet distinct datasets and show that our
method can achieve results better than the state-of-art.

Local Association. These methods are temporally local, which means they consider only a few frames while
solving the association problem. The best example of
such approaches is bi-partite matching and its extensions
[23, 25, 27, 5]. In [5], the association probabilities are computed jointly across all targets to deal with ambiguities in
association. Shu et. al in [27] use a greedy approach to
combine the responses of part detectors to form a joint likelihood model of multiple cues to associate detections and
object hypotheses. Whilst this class of methods are computationally inexpensive, their assumption of using few frames
makes them prone to ID-switches and other difficulties in
tracking such as long/short term occlusions, pose changes
and camera motion.
Global Association. To better deal with above problems,
another set of data association techniques have recently received a lot of attentions. In global association methods,
the number of frames is increased and sometimes the entire
video is processed at once to infer the tracks [37, 13, 35].
Recent approaches have formulated the data association as
a network flow problem where a set of tracks are found efficiently by solving min-cost flow.
Different solutions to minimum cost flow for MOT have
been proposed recently. In [38] a global optimal solution
is found using push-relabel algorithm. Pirsiavash et al. in
[22] utilize the same graph as [38], and solve the problem
using a fast greedy shortest path procedure based on dynamic programming. Berclaz et al. in [6] introduce an efficient shortest path algorithm to solve the flow problem.
In [9], a new network flow is proposed to incorporate constant velocity motion model in the graph and the solution
is found efficiently using Lagrange relaxation. Shitrit et al.

1. Introduction
Multiple Object Tracking (MOT) is a fundamental problem in computer vision with numerous applications, ranging
from surveillance, behavior analysis, to sport video analysis. Most of the recent approaches that aim to solve the
MOT problem follow two main steps: Object Detection and
Data Association. In the detection phase, a pre-trained object detector is first applied to find some potential object
locations in each frame of a video. Once the object candidates are found, in the data association phase the candidates
1

