Towards Open World Recognition
Abhijit Bendale, Terrance Boult
University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
{abendale,tboult}@vast.uccs.edu

Abstract

Despite the obvious dynamic and open nature of the world,
a vast majority of recognition systems assume a static and
closed world model of the problem where all categories are
known a priori. To address these operational issues, this
paper formalizes and presents steps towards the problem of
open world recognition. The key steps of the problem are
summarized in Fig. 1.

With the of advent rich classification models and high
computational power visual recognition systems have found
many operational applications. Recognition in the real
world poses multiple challenges that are not apparent in
controlled lab environments. The datasets are dynamic and
novel categories must be continuously detected and then
added. At prediction time, a trained system has to deal with
myriad unseen categories. Operational systems require minimal downtime, even to learn. To handle these operational
issues, we present the problem of Open World Recognition
and formally define it. We prove that thresholding sums of
monotonically decreasing functions of distances in linearly
transformed feature space can balance “open space risk”
and empirical risk. Our theory extends existing algorithms
for open world recognition. We present a protocol for evaluation of open world recognition systems. We present the
Nearest Non-Outlier (NNO) algorithm that evolves model
efficiently, adding object categories incrementally while detecting outliers and managing open space risk. We perform
experiments on the ImageNet dataset with 1.2M+ images to
validate the effectiveness of our method on large scale visual
recognition tasks. NNO consistently yields superior results
on open world recognition.

1

As noted by [34], “when a recognition system is trained
and is operational, there are finite set of known objects in
scenes with myriad unknown objects, combinations and configurations – labeling something new, novel or unknown
should always be a valid outcome.” One reason for the
domination of “closed world” assumption of today’s vision
systems is that matching, learning and classification tools
have been formalized as selecting the most likely class from
a closed set. Recent research [34, 33, 15], has re-formalized
learning for recognition as open set recognition. However,
this approach does not explicitly require that inputs be as
known or unknown. In contrast, for open world recognition, we propose the system explicitly label novel inputs as
unknown and then incrementally incorporate them into the
classifier. Furthermore, open set recognition as formulated
by [34] is designed for traditional one-vs-all batch learning
scenario. Thus, it is open set but not incremental and does
not scale gracefully with the number of categories.
While there is a significant body of work on incremental learning algorithms that handle new instances of known
classes [3, 4, 45], open world requires two more general
and difficult steps: continuously detecting novel classes and
when novel inputs are found updating the system to include
these new classes in its multi-class open set recognition algorithm. Novelty detection and outlier detection are complex
issues in their own right with long histories [26, 14] and
they are still active vision research topics [2, 25]. After detecting a novel class, the requirement to add new classes
leaves the system designer with the choice of re-training the
entire system. When the number of categories are small,
such a solution may be feasible, but unfortunately, it does
not scale. Recent studies on ImageNet dataset using SVMs
or CNN require days to train their system [30, 17], e.g. 5-6
CPU/GPU days in case of CNN for 1000 category image

Introduction

Over the past decade, datasets for building and evaluating
visual recognition systems have increased both in size and
variation. The size of datasets has increased from a few
hundred images to millions of images, and the number of
categories within the datasets has increased from tens of
categories to more than a thousand categories. Co-evolution
of rich classification models along with advances in datasets
have resulted in many commercial applications [8, 40, 29]. A
multitude of operational challenges are posed while porting
recognition systems from controlled lab environments to the
real world. A recognition system in the “open world” has to
continuously update with additional object categories and be
robust to unseen categories and have minimum downtime.
1

