Shape-Tailored Local Descriptors
and their Application to Segmentation and Tracking
Naeemullah Khan1 , Marei Algarni1 , Anthony Yezzi2 , and Ganesh Sundaramoorthi1
1
2

King Abdullah University of Science & Technology (KAUST), Saudi Arabia

School of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, USA

{naeemullah.khan,marei.algarni,ganesh.sundaramoorthi}@kaust.edu.sa, ayezzi@ece.gatech.edu

Traditional Descriptors

Abstract
We propose new dense descriptors for texture segmentation. Given a region of arbitrary shape in an image, these
descriptors are formed from shape-dependent scale spaces
of oriented gradients. These scale spaces are defined by
Poisson-like partial differential equations. A key property
of our new descriptors is that they do not aggregate image
data across the boundary of the region, in contrast to existing descriptors based on aggregation of oriented gradients.
As an example, we show how the descriptor can be incorporated in a Mumford-Shah energy for texture segmentation. We test our method on several challenging datasets for
texture segmentation and textured object tracking. Experiments indicate that our descriptors lead to more accurate
segmentation than non-shape dependent descriptors and the
state-of-the-art in texture segmentation.

small textons

large textons

Shape-Tailored Descriptors (ours)

small textons

large textons

Figure 1. [Left]: Descriptors that aggregate local image data
across boundaries of textured regions lead to segmentation errors.
The problem is exacerbated as the texton size increases. [Right]:
Segmentation by Shape-Tailored Descriptors (our method).

boundary. This could lead to segmentation errors if descriptors are grouped to form a segmentation. The problem is exacerbated when the textons in the textures are large. In this
case, the neighborhood of the descriptor needs to be chosen large to fully capture texton data. See Fig. 1. Ideally,
one would need to construct local descriptors that aggregate oriented gradients only from within textured regions.
However, the segmentation is not known a-priori. Thus, it
is necessary to solve for the local descriptors and the region
of the segmentation in a joint problem.

1. Introduction
Local invariant descriptors (e.g., [27, 26, 10, 39, 37])
are image statistics at each pixel that describe neighborhoods in a way that is invariant to geometric and photometric nuisances. They are typically computed by aggregating
smoothed oriented gradients within a neighborhood of the
pixel. These descriptors play an important role in characterizing local textural properties. This is because a texture consists of small tokens, called textons [20], which may vary
by small geometric and photometric nuisances but are otherwise stationary. Careful construction of these descriptors
is crucial since they play a key role in low-level segmentation, which in turn plays a role in higher level tasks such as
object detection and segmentation.
Existing local invariant descriptors aggregate oriented
gradients in predefined pixel neighborhoods that could contain image data from different textured regions, especially
near the boundary of the texture. This leads to ambiguity
in grouping descriptors, especially for descriptors near the

In this paper, we address this joint problem. This is accomplished in two steps. First, we construct novel dense
local invariant descriptors, called Shape-Tailored Local Descriptors (STLD). These descriptors are formed from shapedependent scale spaces of oriented gradients. The shapedependent scale spaces are the solution of Poisson-like partial differential equations (PDE). Of particular importance
is the fact that these scale-spaces are defined within a region of arbitrary shape and do not aggregate data outside the
region of interest. Second, we incorporate Shape-Tailored
Descriptors into the Mumford-Shah energy [29] as an example energy based on these descriptors. Optimization jointly
1

