How many bits does it take for a stimulus to be salient?
Sayed Hossein Khatoonabadi1
Nuno Vasconcelos2
Ivan V. Bajić3
Yufeng Shan4
1,3
Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada, skhatoon@sfu.ca, ibajic@ensc.sfu.ca
2
University of California, San Diego, CA, USA, nuno@uscd.edu
4
Cisco Systems, Boxborough, MA, USA, yshan@cisco.com

Abstract

A considerable research effort has recently been devoted
to the development of computational models of saliency.
Early approaches pursued a circuit driven view of the
center-surround operation, modeling saliency as the result
of center-surround filters and normalization [26]. Under
these models, saliency is computed by a network of neurons, where a stimulus similar to its surround suppresses
neural responses, resulting in low saliency, while a stimulus that differs from its surround is excitatory, leading
to high saliency values. More recently, several works
have tried to identify general computational principles for
saliency, also applicable to the development of other classes
of saliency mechanisms, such as those responsible for topdown saliency effects, or even broader perception [11, 25,
15, 47, 20].

Visual saliency has been shown to depend on the unpredictability of the visual stimulus given its surround. Various previous works have advocated the equivalence between stimulus saliency and uncompressibility. We propose a direct measure of this quantity, namely the number
of bits required by an optimal video compressor to encode
a given video patch, and show that features derived from
this measure are highly predictive of eye fixations. To account for global saliency effects, these are embedded in a
Markov random field model. The resulting saliency measure is shown to achieve state-of-the-art accuracy for the
prediction of fixations, at a very low computational cost.
Since most modern cameras incorporate video encoders,
this paves the way for in-camera saliency estimation, which
could be useful in a variety of computer vision applications.

A particularly fruitful line of research has been to connect saliency to probabilistic inference. This draws on a
long established view, in cognitive science, of the brain as
a probabilistic inference engine [28], tuned to the visual
statistics of the natural world [4, 5, 6, 49]. In the cognitive science literature, it has long been proposed that the
brain operates as a universal compression device [5], where
each layer eliminates as much signal redundancy as possible from its input, while preserving all the information necessary for scene perception. This principle is at the root of
many posterior developments in signal processing and computer vision, such as wavelet theory [36], the now widely
popular use of sparse representations [42], and, more recently, compression based models of saliency.

1. Introduction
Visual attention mechanisms play an important role in
the ability of biological vision to quickly parse complex
scenes, as well as their robustness to scene clutter. In humans, attention is driven by both the visual stimuli that compose the scene and observer biases that derive from highlevel perception. Recently, there has been substantial interest in the modeling of attention mechanisms in computer
vision. Most of these efforts have addressed the stimulus driven component, typically through the development of
models of visual saliency. While some work has attempted
to model the influence of perceptual cues in the saliency
process, most works have addressed what is usually defined
as bottom-up or purely stimulus driven saliency. This has
long been believed to be implemented in the early stages of
vision, via the projection of the visual stimulus along the
features computed by the early stages of visual cortex, and
to consist of a center-surround operation. In general, regions of the field of view that are distinctive compared to
their surroundings attract attention [9].

These models can be divided into two main classes. A
first class of approaches models saliency as a measure of
stimulus information. For example, [11, 57, 41] advocate an
information maximization view of visual attention, where
the saliency of the stimulus at an image location is measured
by the self-information [12] of that stimulus, under the distribution of feature responses throughout the visual field. If
feature responses at the location have low probability under
this distribution, self-information is high and the location
considered salient. Otherwise, the stimulus is not salient.
[25] proposes a similar idea, denoted Bayesian surprise,
1

