R6P - Rolling Shutter Absolute Pose Problem
Cenek Albl1
1

Zuzana Kukelova2

Czech Technical University in Prague,
Faculty of Electrical engineering,
166 27 Praha 6, Technicka 2,
Czech Republic

Tomas Pajdla1
2

Microsoft Research Ltd,
21 Station Road,
Cambridge CB1 2FB, UK
a-zukuke@microsoft.com

{alblcene,pajdla}@cmp.felk.cvut.cz

Abstract
We present a minimal, non-iterative solution to the absolute
pose problem for images from rolling shutter cameras. Absolute pose problem is a key problem in computer vision and
rolling shutter is present in a vast majority of today’s digital
cameras. We propose several rolling shutter camera models
and verify their feasibility for a polynomial solver. A solution based on linearized camera model is chosen and verified in several experiments. We use a linear approximation
to the camera orientation, which is meaningful only around
the identity rotation. We show that the standard P3P algorithm is able to estimate camera orientation within 6 degrees for camera rotation velocity as high as 30deg/frame.
Therefore we can use the standard P3P algorithm to estimate camera orientation and to bring the camera rotation
matrix close to the identity. Using this solution, camera position, orientation, translational velocity and angular velocity can be computed using six 2D-to-3D correspondences,
with orientation error under half a degree and relative position error under 2%. A significant improvement in terms
of the number of inliers in RANSAC is demonstrated.

1. Introduction
Perspective-n-point problem (PnP) for calibrated cameras
is the task of finding a camera orientation and translation
from n 2D-to-3D correspondences. It is a key problem in
many computer vision applications such as structure from
motion, camera localization, object localization and visual
odometry. PnP has been thoroughly studied in the past with
first solution being published in 1841 by Grunert and later
reviewed in [5]. The PnP problem for calibrated cameras
can be formulated as a system of simple polynomial equations and solved from three points in a closed form. Many
authors focused on different formulations of the problem,
comparing numerical stability, speed or methods how to

Figure 1: Result of a standard P3P and our R6P algorithm applied
on image with rolling shutter distortion. All tentative 2D-3D correspondences are shown in black, inliers found by P3P are red and
inliers found by R6P are in green squares. Notice that R6P found
many more matches than P3P.

calculate the camera pose from more than three correspondences [2, 4, 14, 17, 18, 23, 24, 25].
In general, existing methods for calculating PnP can be
divided based on two criteria. They use either (1) a minimal number of 2D-to-3D correspondences, usually within a
RANSAC paradigm to improve robustness, or (2) use more
than minimal number of measurement to simplify the equations. Another division can be made between iterative algorithms and non-iterative algorithms, where the former usually requires some approximate solution to begin with.
Previously mentioned methods assume a perspective
camera model which is a model physically valid for cameras
with a global shutter. However, CMOS sensors that are used
in vast majority of todays consumer cameras, smartphones
etc. use the rolling shutter (RS) mechanism [16] to capture
images. The key difference is that with the global shutter,
the entire image is exposed to the light at once, whereas
when using the RS the individual image rows (or columns)
are captured at different times. When a RS camera moves
while capturing the image, several types of distortion such
as smear, skew or wobble appear. A perspective camera

