Efficient Globally Optimal Consensus Maximisation with Tree Search
Tat-Jun Chin∗ , Pulak Purkait∗ , Anders Eriksson† and David Suter∗
School of Computer Science, The University of Adelaide∗
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Queensland University of Technology†
Abstract

and the θ with the highest score and its consensus set I are
returned. A probabilistic bound on the number of samples
required can be derived as a stopping criterion.
A major shortcoming of randomised methods such as
RANSAC is the lack of absolute certainty that the obtained
solution is optimal, or indeed whether it represents a satisfactory approximation
at all. A less recognised fact is that

even if all Np subsets are examined, we may not find the
globally optimal solution θ∗ to (1), since θ∗ does not generally correspond to an estimate from a p-tuple (see below).
Solving (1) exactly is computationally challenging. Several authors proposed methods based on branch-and-bound
(BnB) [13, 21]. However, BnB is typically slow, especially
if θ is high-dimensional. In fact, RANSAC is suggested
to suboptimally preprocess the data (which may cause genuine inliers to be discarded), before BnB is invoked to refine the result. More fundamentally, the BnB methods are
specialised for linear residuals. For many vision problems,
this entails linearising ri (θ) and adopting algebraic residuals which are not geometrically meaningful.
It has been proven [15, 5] that for various estimation
tasks, θ∗ can be found as the solution on a subset of X of
size d, where d ≥ p and d  N (the actual value of d depends on the particular problem). Both works
 proposed to
find θ∗ by exhaustively searching over all Nd subsets of X .
Although the number of subsets is polynomial w.r.t. N , in
realistic problems the number is impracticably large. Olsson et al. [15] also proposed using RANSAC with an optimality verification step. However, the fact remains that an
enormous number of subsets may need to be sampled.
Due to the much greater computational expense, currently available global methods are not competitive against
RANSAC and its variants. In this paper, we make significant progress towards solving (1) exactly and efficiently.
Leveraging on the framework of LP-type methods [18, 14],
we show how maximising consensus can be casted as a tree
search problem. We then propose an algorithm based on A*
search [8] to traverse the tree. Similar in spirit to [15, 5],
we aim to find the optimal data subset. However, instead
of sampling or enumerating the subsets, our algorithm deterministically locates the best subset. The A* technique
ensures that only a tiny fraction of available subsets need

Maximum consensus is one of the most popular criteria for robust estimation in computer vision. Despite its
widespread use, optimising the criterion is still customarily
done by randomised sample-and-test techniques, which do
not guarantee optimality of the result. Several globally optimal algorithms exist, but they are too slow to challenge the
dominance of randomised methods. We aim to change this
state of affairs by proposing a very efficient algorithm for
global maximisation of consensus. Under the framework of
LP-type methods, we show how consensus maximisation for
a wide variety of vision tasks can be posed as a tree search
problem. This insight leads to a novel algorithm based on
A* search. We propose efficient heuristic and support set
updating routines that enable A* search to rapidly find globally optimal results. On common estimation problems, our
algorithm is several orders of magnitude faster than previous exact methods. Our work identifies a promising solution
for globally optimal consensus maximisation1 .

1. Introduction
Maximum consensus is one of the most popular robust
criteria for geometric estimation problems in computer vision. Given a set of measurements X = {xi }N
i=1 , the criterion aims to find the estimate θ that agrees with as many of
the data as possible (i.e., the inliers) up to a threshold 
max

θ, I⊆X

|I|
(1)

subject to ri (θ) ≤  ∀xi ∈ I,
where ri (θ) is the residual of xi . For example, in triangulation we wish to estimate the 3D point θ seen in N views,
where X contains the 2D observations of the point. The
residual ri (θ) is the reprojection error in the i-th view.
Random sample consensus (RANSAC) [7] has been the
dominant approach. The method randomly draws p-tuples
from X , where p is the minimum number of data to instantiate θ. The consensus score |I| of each sample θ is obtained,
1 Source code is available on the authors’ homepage.

1

