Learning an Efficient Model of Hand Shape Variation from Depth Images
Sameh Khamis12
Jonathan Taylor2
Jamie Shotton2
Cem Keskin2
Shahram Izadi2
Andrew Fitzgibbon2
1
2
University of Maryland
Microsoft Research

Abstract
We describe how to learn a compact and efficient model
of the surface deformation of human hands. The model is
built from a set of noisy depth images of a diverse set of
subjects performing different poses with their hands. We
represent the observed surface using Loop subdivision of a
control mesh that is deformed by our learned parametric
shape and pose model. The model simultaneously accounts
for variation in subject-specific shape and subject-agnostic
pose. Specifically, hand shape is parameterized as a linear
combination of a mean mesh in a neutral pose with a small
number of offset vectors. This mesh is then articulated using
standard linear blend skinning (LBS) to generate the control mesh of a subdivision surface. We define an energy that
encourages each depth pixel to be explained by our model,
and the use of a smooth subdivision surface allows us to optimize for all parameters jointly from a rough initialization.
The efficacy of our method is demonstrated using both synthetic and real data, where it is shown that hand shape variation can be represented using only a small number of basis
components. We compare with other approaches including
PCA and show a substantial improvement in the representational power of our model, while maintaining the efficiency
of a linear shape basis.

S(𝑉(𝛽))

𝑉 𝛽 , 𝐿(𝛽)

Shape Space
𝛽

S(⋅)

𝑉(⋅), 𝐿(⋅)
P(𝜃;⋅)

S(⋅)

P(𝜃; 𝑉 𝛽 , 𝐿 𝛽 )

S P 𝜃; 𝑉 𝛽 , 𝐿 𝛽

Figure 1. Our deformable surface model takes into account both
pose (via an animation-ready kinematic model) and shape (in a
shape space learned to best compose with the kinematic model).
A set of shape parameters β ∈ RK in shape space (left) specifies
(upper center) a neutral mesh V (β) ∈ R3×M and skeleton parameters L(β) ∈ R3×B . A set of joint angles θ deforms the mesh to
obtain a specific posed mesh P(θ; V (β), L(β)) ∈ R3×M (bottom
left) using the linear blend skinning function P(·). A subdivision
surface function S(·) maps these meshes to smooth 3D surfaces
(right column). Simultaneously optimizing the parameters on the
full pipeline from joint angles to 3D shape gives the parameters
that best relate the end-to-end model to sparse and noisy real data.

ing the model requires manual rigging and a multi-camera
capture setup. Taylor et al. [28] demonstrate acquisition of
a user-specialized model from a single depth camera, but
require long calibration sequences in which all degrees of
freedom of the hand have to be exercised.
Our hypothesis is that the absence of a morphable model
for hands is because existing techniques for model construction depend on large datasets of high quality scans. Even
though the number of degrees of freedom of the hand is
similar to that of the body, hands tend to exhibit considerably more self-occlusion, and so such scans have more
holes. Further, hands are smaller, so images of hands typically contain fewer foreground pixels and camera noise will
have a larger effect. Finally, the space of hand poses may be
larger, despite the number of joints being about the same, so
that more captures would be required to allow one to accurately learn the pose space.
In this paper, we overcome these challenges and build a
morphable model of hands from a set of short ‘sequences’

1. Introduction
Morphable models of the human body have been a great
success story of computer vision and graphics. Starting
from the face models of Blanz and Vetter [7], and proceeding to combined shape and pose models of the full
body [5, 13, 15, 12], such models are now starting to see
commercial deployment for applications including virtual
shopping (e.g. Metail), performance capture (e.g. faceshift),
and video gaming (e.g. Kinect Sports Rivals).
However, to our knowledge, no morphable model of the
human hand has yet been constructed. The hand is in some
senses ideal for such modeling: it is normally unclothed,
and has huge potential for natural 3D user interfaces. Ballan
et al. [6] demonstrate that extremely robust hand tracking is
possible given a user-specialized hand model, but acquir1

