Recognize Complex Events from Static Images by Fusing Deep Channels
Yuanjun Xiong1 Kai Zhu1 Dahua Lin1 Xiaoou Tang1,2
1
Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Shenzhen key lab of Comp. Vis. & Pat. Rec., Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology,
CAS, China
xy012@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

zk013@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

dhlin@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract

xtang@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

+\KTZ 6GXGJK

A considerable portion of web images capture events that
occur in our personal lives or social activities. In this paper, we aim to develop an effective method for recognizing events from such images. Despite the sheer amount of
study on event recognition, most existing methods rely on
videos and are not directly applicable to this task. Generally, events are complex phenomena that involve interactions among people and objects, and therefore analysis of
event photos requires techniques that can go beyond recognizing individual objects and carry out joint reasoning
based on evidences of multiple aspects. Inspired by the recent success of deep learning, we formulate a multi-layer
framework to tackle this problem, which takes into account
both visual appearance and the interactions among humans
and objects, and combines them via semantic fusion. An
important issue arising here is that humans and objects discovered by detectors are in the form of bounding boxes, and
there is no straightforward way to represent their interactions and incorporate them with a deep network. We address this using a novel strategy that projects the detected
instances onto multi-scale spatial maps. On a large dataset
with 60, 000 images, the proposed method achieved substantial improvement over the state-of-the-art, raising the
accuracy of event recognition by over 10%.

9KSGTZOI,[YOUT

.UROYZOI
*KKV
8KVXKYKTZGZOUT

9VGZOGR
*KZKIZOUT
3GV

Figure 1: Event recognition is highly challenging due to the
large semantic gap. Even in the same event class, Parade,
the images can look very different. This calls for methods
that are capable of reasoning about high-level semantics by
fusing evidences of multiple aspects.

an effective method for recognizing events from images.
Event recognition is not a new story in computer vision.
However, most existing efforts [1, 5, 32] are devoted to recognizing events from videos. This is not surprising, as it
is a common conception that dynamics play a critical role
in deﬁning an event. Do we really need videos for event
recognition? Our experience seems to suggest otherwise –
people can effortlessly identify events from photos most of
the time. This motivates us to explore a new approach, one
that is able to recognize events from static images.
This is a challenging problem. A major obstacle standing
in our way is the large gap between high-level event semantics and low-level visual features. Event images are complex as compared to object images. They usually involve
multiple objects interacting with each other. As we can see

1. Introduction
The explosive growth of web images, driven primarily by
the thriving of online photo sharing services such as Flickr
and Instagram, has been gradually and profoundly transforming our lives and the way we communicate. Many of
these images are event photos, namely the ones that capture
human activities in either private or social contexts. Such
images not only provide valuable records of our lives and
our world, but also convey useful information that one can
exploit to analyze consumer preferences or study socioeconomic trends. The primary goal of this paper is to develop
1

