Expanding Object Detector’s H ORIZON:
Incremental Learning Framework for Object Detection in Videos
Alina Kuznetsova1,3 , Sung Ju Hwang2 , Bodo Rosenhahn1 , and Leonid Sigal3
1

Leibniz University Hannover , 2 UNIST , 3 Disney Research Pittsburgh

Abstract
Over the last several years it has been shown that imagebased object detectors are sensitive to the training data and
often fail to generalize to examples that fall outside the original training sample domain (e.g., videos). A number of
domain adaptation (DA) techniques have been proposed to
address this problem. DA approaches are designed to adapt
a fixed complexity model to the new (e.g., video) domain.
We posit that unlabeled data should not only allow adaptation, but also improve (or at least maintain) performance
on the original and other domains by dynamically adjusting model complexity and parameters. We call this notion
domain expansion. To this end, we develop a new scalable
and accurate incremental object detection algorithm, based
on several extensions of large-margin embedding (LME).
Our detection model consists of an embedding space and
multiple class prototypes in that embedding space, that represent object classes; distance to those prototypes allows
us to reason about multi-class detection. By incrementally
detecting object instances in video and adding confident detections into the model, we are able to dynamically adjust
the complexity of the detector over time by instantiating new
prototypes to span all domains the model has seen. We test
performance of our approach by expanding an object detector trained on ImageNet to detect objects in egocentric
videos of Activity Daily Living (ADL) dataset and challenging videos from YouTube Objects (YTO) dataset.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Incremental Domain Expansion: Illustration of the the
overall proposed learning framework. First a large margin embedding (LME) detector is built based on labeled static images
from ImageNet. As unlabeled videos arrive, detected objects are
ranked based on detection confidence. Top ranked detections are
expanded into tracks and used for new class prototype learning.
Note that while a TV test sample (in red) may be too far in appearance from the original ImageNet trained model and hence misclassified, new prototypes, added based on tracks from videos, help to
bridge the gap leading to correct classification.

Over the past several years its been shown that there are
significant biases among object detection datasets [19, 34],
as well as between such datasets and the real world imagery.
As a result, supervised classifiers/detectors trained on one
dataset, often fail to work adequately on another, or real
world images, statistics of which may have not been well
captured in the original (labeled) training dataset. To han-

dle such biases a number of supervised [1, 20, 27], semisupervised and unsupervised [9, 12, 13, 16] domain adaptation methods have been proposed, for both classification
[20, 27] and real-valued regression [39] tasks.
While most domain adaptation techniques focus on applications where both training and test instances are images
[20, 27], taken with conventional cameras, a few address
4321

