Adaptive Region Pooling for Object Detection
Yi-Hsuan Tsai
UC Merced

Onur C. Hamsici
Qualcomm Research, San Diego

Ming-Hsuan Yang
UC Merced

ytsai2@ucmerced.edu

ohamsici@qti.qualcomm.com

mhyang@ucmerced.edu

Abstract
Learning models for object detection is a challenging
problem due to the large intra-class variability of objects
in appearance, viewpoints, and rigidity. We address this
variability by a novel feature pooling method that is adaptive to segmented regions. The proposed detection algorithm automatically discovers a diverse set of exemplars
and their distinctive parts which are used to encode the
region structure by the proposed feature pooling method.
Based on each exemplar and its parts, a regression model
is learned with samples selected by a coarse region matching scheme. The proposed algorithm performs favorably
on the PASCAL VOC 2007 dataset against existing algorithms. We demonstrate the benefits of our feature pooling method when compared to conventional spatial pyramid
pooling features. We also show that object information can
be transferred through exemplars for detected objects.

Figure 1. Car images from three different viewpoints and their segmented regions are shown with white lines. Similar region structures are shared between cars from similar viewpoints.

effective in describing non-rigid parts. Other approaches
use simple representations such as spatial pyramid pooling
of local features [26] that discards a significant amount of
geometric information between regions.
In this paper, to address these limitations, we propose
an object detection algorithm with a novel feature pooling
method that utilizes the region structure information adaptively based on different exemplars, referred as adaptive region pooling. We automatically discover a set of representative exemplars in the training set that are segmented into
parts, where the segmentation can be generated by region
proposals [8, 11, 1, 32] for each image. After defining parts
within the object bounding box, the region structure is encoded via feature extraction by our adaptive region pooling
method. Our proposed algorithm is able to adjust the structure and the number of parts based on the segmentation of
the training exemplars. We learn a regressor for each representative exemplar such that each model is able to deal with
one region structure with part information.
Numerous approaches that use multi-models or subcategories for object detection have been proposed [14, 29, 20,
16, 5, 10, 18, 25, 21]. Felzenszwalb et al. [14] and Divvala et al. [10] learn mixture models including global and
part components based on the aspect ratio of the bounding
box. In this case, the number of parts and models are predefined and not inferred from the training examples, which
requires careful tuning of model parameters for each cate-

1. Introduction
Objects appear with large appearance variations due to
parts, features and imaging conditions such as viewpoints,
scale, and background noise, to name a few. Such large
intra-class variability poses a challenging problem for object detection. To cope with large appearance variation, regions or parts [17, 34, 36, 2, 27, 37, 9] are commonly used
to encode the shape and scale information of objects, as well
as to reduce the effect of background noise. Consider images shown in Figure 1 which illustrate segmented cars captured from three different viewpoints. Regions from similar
viewpoints share more similar shapes, sizes and structures
than the other ones. By observing this aspect, we can further relate the region structure to feature extraction. For instance, features obtained from regions of a side-view car
should have a low similarity to features from one in the
frontal view.
Automatically discovering parts of objects provides a
useful mid-level feature representation for numerous vision
tasks [5, 31, 12, 23]. However, these algorithms use rectangular patches to model object segments, which are less
1

