Cascaded Hand Pose Regression
Xiao Sun
Chinese University of Hong Kong

Yichen Wei
Microsoft Research

Shuang Liang∗
Tongji University

sx014@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

yichenw@microsoft.com

shuangliang@tongji.edu.cn

Xiaoou Tang
Chinese University of Hong Kong

Jian Sun
Microsoft Research

xtang@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

jiansun@microsoft.com

Abstract

est [34] or deep convolutional neutral networks [35]. Such
methods are more principled since their learning is directly
guided by the task. Nevertheless, only one regression model
is learnt in such works, which may have insufﬁcient capacity to model the complex image variations, especially under
large viewpoints and hand motions.

We extends the previous 2D cascaded object pose regression work [9] in two aspects so that it works better for
3D articulated objects. Our ﬁrst contribution is 3D poseindexed features that generalize the previous 2D parameterized features and achieve better invariance to 3D transformations. Our second contribution is a principled hierarchical regression that is adapted to the articulated object
structure. It is therefore more accurate and faster. Comprehensive experiments verify the state-of-the-art accuracy
and efﬁciency of the proposed approach on the challenging
3D hand pose estimation problem, on a public dataset and
our new dataset.

We present a cascaded regression approach that is more
robust under large viewpoints and complex hand poses. It
is directly motivated by the cascaded pose regression framework [9], where the object pose is estimated progressively
via a sequence of weak regressors and each weak regressor
uses features that depend on the estimated pose from the
previous stage. Such pose indexed features provide better
geometric invariance and simplify the learning tasks. This
framework has been successfully applied to several 2D pose
estimation tasks [9, 5]. Yet, it is unclear how to use it for 3D
objects with complex articulated structure like human hand.

1. Introduction

We extend the framework for 3D articulated objects.
Our ﬁrst contribution is 3D pose-indexed features. While
we use the similar pixel difference features as in cascaded pose regression [9], face [5], human body [18, 29] and
hand [6, 39, 10, 20, 22], we show that the pixel parameterization is the key to achieve certain geometrical invariance.
We analyze the invariance properties of previous parameterization methods, explain our rationale and propose a new
3D parameterization that generalizes the previous methods
and achieves better invariance to 3D transformations.

The problem of pose estimation of 3D articulated objects
such as human body and hand has been studied for decades.
Recent years have seen rapid progress and signiﬁcant success of human body pose estimation [18, 29, 1, 19, 36] using consumer depth sensors. The state-of-the-art learning
approaches [18, 29] classify depth pixels into body parts
and then infer the body pose from the pixel classiﬁcation
result. This paradigm has been applied for hand pose estimation [6, 39, 10, 22] but is less successful than for body
pose. This is because body is mostly near-frontal and there
is less occlusion between limbs. However, hand motion exhibits much larger variations in both camera viewpoints and
ﬁnger articulations. This generates more complex depth images and makes the pixel classiﬁcation much more difﬁcult.
Furthermore, the pixel classiﬁcation approaches do not capture the structural constraints in the hand pose.
Regression based approaches directly estimate the hand
pose from the depth image, using latent regression for-

Our second contribution is a principled hierarchical approach that is adapted for the structure of articulated objects. Our key observation is that different object parts typically exhibit different amount of variations and degrees of
freedom due to the articulated structure. Thus, regressing
all parts together is unnecessarily difﬁcult and causes slow
convergence and degraded accuracy. Our hierarchical approach regresses the pose of different parts sequentially in
the order of their articulation complexity. It ﬁrstly estimates
the pose of the easier root part (such as palm). Estimation

∗ Corresponding author.

1

