Is object localization for free? –
Weakly-supervised learning with convolutional neural networks
Maxime Oquab∗
INRIA Paris, France

Léon Bottou†
MSR, New York, USA

Ivan Laptev*
INRIA, Paris, France

training images

Abstract

Josef Sivic*
INRIA, Paris, France

train iter. 4200

train iter. 510

train iter. 210

Successful methods for visual object recognition typically rely on training datasets containing lots of richly annotated images. Detailed image annotation, e.g. by object
bounding boxes, however, is both expensive and often subjective. We describe a weakly supervised convolutional neural network (CNN) for object classification that relies only
on image-level labels, yet can learn from cluttered scenes
containing multiple objects. We quantify its object classification and object location prediction performance on the
Pascal VOC 2012 (20 object classes) and the much larger
Microsoft COCO (80 object classes) datasets. We find that
the network (i) outputs accurate image-level labels, (ii) predicts approximate locations (but not extents) of objects, and
(iii) performs comparably to its fully-supervised counterparts using object bounding box annotation for training.

1. Introduction

Figure 1: Evolution of localization score maps for the
motorbike class over iterations of our weakly-supervised
CNN training. Note that the network learns to localize objects despite having no object location annotation at training, just object presence/absence labels. Note also that locations of objects with more usual appearance (such as the
motorbike shown in left column) are discovered earlier during training.

Visual object recognition entails much more than determining whether the image contains instances of certain object categories. For example, each object has a location and
a pose; each deformable object has a constellation of parts;
and each object can be cropped or partially occluded.
Object recognition algorithms of the past decade can
roughly be categorized in two styles. The first style extracts local image features (SIFT, HOG), constructs bag
of visual words representations, and runs statistical classifiers [12, 41, 49, 61]. Although this approach has been
shown to yield good performance for image classification,
attempts to locate the objects using the position of the visual
words have been unfruitful: the classifier often relies on visual words that fall in the background and merely describe
the context of the object.
The second style of algorithms detects the presence of
objects by fitting rich object models such as deformable
part models [19, 59]. The fitting process can reveal useful

attributes of objects such as location, pose and constellations of object parts, but the model is usually trained from
images with known locations of objects or even their parts.
The combination of both styles has shown benefits [25].
A third style of algorithms, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [31, 33] construct successive feature vectors that progressively describe the properties of larger and
larger image areas. Recent applications of this framework
to natural images [30] have been extremely successful for a
variety of tasks including image classification [6, 30, 37, 43,
44], object detection [22, 44], human pose estimation [52]
and others. Most of these methods, however, require detailed image annotation. For example bounding box super-

∗ WILLOW project, Departement d’Informatique de l’École Normale
Supérieure, ENS/INRIA/CNRS UMR 8548, Paris, France
† Léon Bottou is now with Facebook AI Research, New York.

1

