Just Noticeable Defocus Blur Detection and Estimation
Jianping Shi†
Li Xu‡
Jiaya Jia†
†
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
‡
Image & Visual Computing Lab, Lenovo R&T
jpshi@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

xulihk@lenovo.com

leojia@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
We tackle a fundamental problem to detect and estimate
just noticeable blur (JNB) caused by defocus that spans a
small number of pixels in images. This type of blur is common during photo taking. Although it is not strong, the
slight edge blurriness contains informative clues related to
depth. We found existing blur descriptors based on local
information cannot distinguish this type of small blur reliably from unblurred structures. We propose a simple yet
effective blur feature via sparse representation and image
decomposition. It directly establishes correspondence between sparse edge representation and blur strength estimation. Extensive experiments manifest the generality and robustness of this feature.

Figure 1. This image found over internet was captured with aperture size f/5.6 and exposure time 1/500s. When this supposedly
clear image is viewed in its original resolution, slight blurriness
can still be noticed. It is a general phenomenon.

blurring.
With regard to blur estimation, our work contributes in
spatially-varying blur strength estimation in the pixel level.
The relative blurriness estimation actually carries the scene
depth estimation, which avails many tasks. Besides, depth
itself forms vital data to help object recognition and classification. Our work does not need to capture extra depth
data. As long as slight blur exists, a single image is enough
to infer usable depth. We will show several results later.

1. Introduction
Photos awaken our pictorial memories. A good photo
generally contains clear and sharp objects that are important. With the prevalence of high-resolution imaging sensors, blurriness and its spatial change become perceivable.
Our experiments show that a typical 13 mega-pixel mobile phone camera could produce blur spanning up to 58 pixels even we put these points in focus. We name the
commonly occurred small defocus blur just noticeable blur
(JNB), which is formally defined as blur spanning about 3-9
pixels and losing a quantitatively insignificant level of structures.
JNB commonly exists in images. It actually gives us
useful information to understand the scene. A typical example is shown in Fig. 1, where sight blurriness implies
foreground and the salient object we should notice.

Challenges Though valuable in research, this JNB problem faces its unique challenges compared to traditional blur
estimation. It is not feasible for existing methods to trivially address it. We explain it with respect to two possible
solutions.
First, advanced deblurring algorithms [5, 17, 25, 12, 28,
13] can estimate blur kernels and deconvolve input images.
But it is still difficult to handle spatially varying blur, especially when it is not caused by camera motion. Existing non-uniform deblurring methods assume camera motion
models and are generally computationally expensive even
for a small-resolution image.
Second, there are a limited number of methods to handle
explicit blur detection [8, 14, 19, 24, 31, 30, 29, 22]. Nearly

Impact These facts motivate us to study the new JNB
detection and estimation problem. It finds loads of potentially interesting applications. For example, it could avail
computer-aided image quality assessment. It can be used
to manipulate images and generate special effects, including background blur magnification and partial image de1

