DevNet: A Deep Event Network for Multimedia Event Detection
and Evidence Recounting
Chuang Gan1∗ Naiyan Wang2∗ Yi Yang3 Dit-Yan Yeung2 Alexander G. Hauptmann4
1
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University, China
2
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
Centre for Quantum Computation and Intelligent Systems, University of Technology, Sydney, Australia
4
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, USA
{ganchuang1990, winsty, yee.i.yang }@gmail.com,
dyyeung@cse.ust.hk, alex@cs.cmu.edu
Abstract

Complex Event Video

In this paper, we focus on complex event detection in
internet videos while also providing the key evidences of the
detection results. Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
have achieved promising performance in image classiﬁcation and action recognition tasks. However, it remains an
open problem how to use CNNs for video event detection
and recounting, mainly due to the complexity and diversity
of video events. In this work, we propose a ﬂexible deep
CNN infrastructure, namely Deep Event Network (DevNet),
that simultaneously detects pre-deﬁned events and provides
key spatial-temporal evidences. Taking key frames of videos
as input, we ﬁrst detect the event of interest at the video level by aggregating the CNN features of the key frames. The
pieces of evidences which recount the detection results, are
also automatically localized, both temporally and spatially. The challenge is that we only have video level labels, while the key evidences usually take place at the frame
levels. Based on the intrinsic property of CNNs, we ﬁrst
generate a spatial-temporal saliency map by back passing
through DevNet, which then can be used to ﬁnd the key
frames which are most indicative to the event, as well as
to localize the speciﬁc spatial position, usually an object, in
the frame of the highly indicative area. Experiments on the
large scale TRECVID 2014 MEDTest dataset demonstrate
the promising performance of our method, both for event
detection and evidence recounting.

Temporal Key Evidence

Event Label

Spatial Key Evidence

Attempting a
bike trick
Temporal key evidence

Figure 1. Given a video for testing, DevNet not only provides an
event label but also spatial-temporal key evidences.

computer vision community. Compared to atomic concept
recognition, which mainly focuses on recognizing particular objects and scene in still images or simple motions in
short video clips of 5-10 seconds, multimedia event detection deals with more complex videos that consist of various
interactions of human actions and objects in different scenes
often lasting for several minutes to even an hour. Thus, an
event is a semantic abstraction of video sequences of higher
level than a concept and often consists of multiple concepts.
For example, a “Town hall meeting” event can be described
by multiple objects (e.g., persons, podium), a scene (e.g.,
in a conference room), actions (e.g., talking, meeting) and
acoustic concepts (e.g., speech, clapping). Besides the concern of detecting semantic events, in many situations just
assigning a video an event label is not enough, as discussed
in [35, 34, 25, 45], because a long unconstrained video
may contain a lot of irrelevant information and even the
same event label may contain large intra-class variations. Besides providing a single event label, many users also

1. Introduction
Detecting complex events in videos is a challenging
task which has received signiﬁcant research attention in the
∗ The ﬁrst two authors contribute equally to this work.

4321

