Exemplar SVMs as Visual Feature Encoders
Joaquin Zepeda and Patrick Pérez
Technicolor

Abstract

task-tailored representations (Fig. 1). In particular, our approach can be used to enhance the performance of state-ofthe art image retrieval methods such as those of [7, 9].
Extracting distinctive signatures from images, with subsequent use for image comparison, retrieval or classification, is the aim of feature encoder in existing image representation pipelines. Such encoders, however, often rely
on the intuition of the designer. In contrast, our approach
performs this extraction explicitly relative to a universe of
features consistent with the targeted application.
Besides the utilization of basic E-SVMs as an encoding
mechanism, we also propose using E-SVM learning in a recursive framework: An initial set of E-SVM features is extracted for the pool of generic negatives, and the process is
repeated a certain number of times by using the resulting ESVM features as input features in the subsequent recursion.
This method shares some lineage with the now widely popular deep approaches that appeared following the success
of [17]. As we shall demonstrate, encoding image features
with recursive E-SVM (RE-SVM) further improves image
search performance.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: in Section 2, related work on image representation and exemplarSVMs is discussed into more depth; We introduce proposed
E-SVM encoding method in Section 3, along with its use in
the context of image search and its recursive variant; Section 4 is devoted to implementation details and to experiments in the context of image retrieval; We outline several
perspective to this work in Section 5, before concluding.

In this work, we investigate the use of exemplar SVMs
(linear SVMs trained with one positive example only and
a vast collection of negative examples) as encoders that
turn generic image features into new, task-tailored features.
The proposed feature encoding leverages the ability of the
exemplar-SVM (E-SVM) classifier to extract, from the original representation of the exemplar image, what is unique
about it. While existing image description pipelines rely on
the intuition of the designer to encode uniqueness into the
feature encoding process, our proposed approach does it explicitly relative to a “universe” of features represented by
the generic negatives. We show that such a post-processing
enhances the performance of state-of-the art image retrieval
methods based on aggregated image features, as well as the
performance of nearest class mean and K-nearest neighbor image classification methods. We establish these advantages for several features, including “traditional” features as well as features derived from deep convolutional
neural nets. As an additional contribution, we also propose
a recursive extension of this E-SVM encoding scheme (RESVM) that provides further performance gains.

1. Introduction
Exemplar SVMs (E-SVMs), proposed by Malisiewicz
and Efros [21], are linear classifiers learned from a single
positive example, referred to as the exemplar, and a pool
N of generic examples that is used as the set of negative
examples. Despite several shortcomings of the approach
(see Section 2), exemplar SVMs have given good results
in a wide range of tasks requiring generalization in dataconstrained scenarios, e.g., [2, 20, 30]. This results from
the ability of the approach to extract, in the form of a linear classifier, what is unique about a specific image (given
a generic representation of it), relative to a universe of features stemming from the task-tailored pool of negative examples. This is the property that we wish to leverage in our
work.
In this paper we propose to use E-SVM as an encoding mechanism that turns generic image features into better

2. Related work
2.1. Exemplar SVMs (E-SVMs)
Exemplar SVM have been introduced by Malisiewicz
and Efros [21] to address the task of learning a classifier
from a single positive exemplar and a set N of negative examples. For a given exemplar image, the approach produces
a linear classifier that captures distinctive aspects of the exemplar relative to the ”universe” represented by the generic
negatives pool.
Training good exemplar SVMs requires that the generic
negative set N be very large, consisting of as many as
1

