Combination Features and Models for Human Detection
Yunsheng Jiang and Jinwen Ma∗
Department of Information Science, School of Mathematical Sciences
and LMAM, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, China
jwma@math.pku.edu.cn

Abstract

variations in visual appearance, which can be caused by various viewpoints and scales in photo-taking, different clothes
and poses on target people, changeful illumination and large
intra-class variations. Besides, the possible occlusions and
complex backgrounds may create further difficulties.
Generally, an human detector mainly has two components: a feature extraction algorithm that encodes an input
image as a feature vector, and a detection model that locates
the target human bodies according to the computed vector.
In fact, feature extraction is a fundamental process for
human detection. A good feature extraction algorithm
should provide robust invariance to the large variations of
human bodies while extracting enough information for detection. Dalal & Triggs [7] suggested the Histograms of
Oriented Gradients (HOG) features that are robust to significant changes in image illumination and color as well as small changes in image contour locations and directions. The
HOG features have proven effective for the detection of human and other shape-based object categories. Zhang et al.
[32] and Wang et al. [30] showed that HOG-LBP features, a
combination of HOG and Local Binary Patterns (LBP) [24],
under some circumstances, could further improve the detection performance. This fact implies that the HOG features
also have self-bias, and thus could be improved by combining with the other kinds of features. Other popular features
for detection include the Scale-Invariant Feature Transform
(SIFT) [23], Haar-like features [22], Wavelet features [29],
Shape-Context features [1], and so on.
As for detection model, it is clear that a monolithic model is not so effective for human detection in consideration of
the articulated structure of human bodies. A representation
based on serval parts seems more powerful. Felzenszwalb
[10, 12] introduced the Deformable Part-based Model (DPM), which described an object as a root block surrounded with several movable parts, and thus could alleviate the
problems of appearance variations and occlusion. The DPM and its variants have shown significant progress on many
difficult datasets, such as PASCAL VOC datasets.
On the basis of general grammar formalism [13], Girshick et al. [15] further proposed the person Grammar Mod-

This paper presents effective combination models with
certain combination features for human detection. In the
past several years, many existing features/models have
achieved impressive progress, but their performances are
still limited by the biases rooted in their self-structures, that
is, a particular kind of feature/model may work well for
some types of human bodies, but not for all the types. To
tackle this difficult problem, we combine certain complementary features/models together with effective organization/fusion methods. Specifically, the HOG features, color features and bar-shape features are combined together
with a cell-based histogram structure to form the so-called
HOG-III features. Moreover, the detections from different
models are fused together with the new proposed weightedNMS algorithm, which enhances the probable “true” activations as well as suppresses the overlapped detections. The experiments on PASCAL VOC datasets demonstrate
that, both the HOG-III features and the weighted-NMS fusion algorithm are effective (obvious improvement for detection performance) and efficient (relatively less computation cost): When applied to human detection task with the
Grammar model and Poselet model, they can boost the detection performance significantly; Also, when extended to
detection of the whole VOC 20 object categories with the
deformable part-based model and deepCNN-based model,
they still show competitive improvements.

1. Introduction
Object detection is an essential task in computer vision,
which grants computers the ability to “see” objects in digital
images/videos. Human Detection is a primary issue among
object detection, due to the specificity of human bodies in
our daily lives. Unlike pedestrian detection (where almost
all the targets are upright persons in distant views), human
detection is still a challenging problem because of the large
∗ The corresponding author.

1

