Cross-Age Face Verification by Coordinating with Cross-Face Age Verification
Liang Du
Haibin Ling∗
Department of Computer and Information Sciences, Temple University, Philadelphia, USA
{liang.du, hbling}@temple.edu

Abstract
In this paper we present a novel framework for cross-age
face verification (FV) by seeking help from its “competitor” named cross-face age verification (AV), i.e., deciding
whether two face photos are taken at similar ages. While
FV and AV share some common features, FV pursues age
insensitivity and AV seeks age sensitivity. Such correlation suggests that AV may be used to guide feature selection in FV, i.e., by reducing the chance of choosing age
sensitive features. Driven by this intuition, we propose to
learn a solution for cross-age face verification by coordinating with a solution for age verification. Specifically, a
joint additive model is devised to simultaneously handling
both tasks, while encoding feature coordination by a competition regularization term. Then, an alternating greedy
coordinate descent (AGCD) algorithm is developed to solve
this joint model. As shown in our experiments, the algorithm effectively balances feature sharing and feature exclusion between the two tasks; and, for face verification,
the algorithm effectively removes distracting features used
in age verification. To evaluate the proposed algorithm, we
conduct cross-age face verification experiments using two
benchmark cross-age face datasets, FG-Net and MORPH.
In all experiments, our algorithm achieves very promising
results and outperforms all previously tested solutions.

1. Introduction
Facial image analysis has a wide range of applications
such as visual surveillance, human computer interactions,
and biometric verification. As an important factor in facial
image analysis, human age is gaining increasing attention
especially in two topics: cross-age face identity analysis and
age inference. These two topics can be viewed as competing
with each other: one seeks age insensitivity while the other
age sensitivity. Previously the tasks in these two topics are
investigated independently, while in this paper we explore
the benefit of the coordination between them.
∗ Correspondence author.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Feature importance map (spatially projected): (a) Baseline face verification (FV) without coordination; (b) age verification (AV) coordinating with FV; (c) FV coordinating with AV. The
baseline FV uses a large amount of features around the forehead
region. While in our joint learning solution, such age-sensitive
features are effectively inhibited (c) by coordinating with AV (b).

Intuitively, knowing a priori that two tasks have conflicting goals can help inhibit irrelevant features for each task
and hence improve the performance. For example, some
critical features for age estimation, e.g., wrinkles on forehead, may be irrelevant for cross-age face verification and
can be safely excluded [19]. Inhibition of such features
may reduce the risk of over-fitting, an annoying issue for
cross-age face verification that involves many sources of
uncertainties but often has limited training data. This intuition suggests us to improve cross-age face verification algorithms by incorporating information from age inference,
i.e., identifying and avoiding age sensitive features in a principled way. The intuition is validated in our experimental
analysis as shown in Fig. 1.
While the above observation is interesting, it is worth
emphasizing that the exclusion of features should not be
performed at a macro level1 , e.g., excluding a spatial face
area, but at a fine-grained level, i.e., some feature dimensions of a specific type of features. Using the wrinkles on
forehead as an illustrative example, for FV, it is desirable
to exclude features which are discriminative for wrinkles
rather than exclude all features from the whole forehead.
Moreover, aside from the confliction in some age sensitive
features, the two tasks may still share some features. For ex1 By macro level feature sharing, we mean features from the same specific type or spatial area. For example, using different feature responses
from the same pixel location is not counted as “sharing”.

