Unifying Holistic and Parts-Based Deformable Model Fitting
Joan Alabort-i-Medina
Stefanos Zafeiriou
Department of Computing, Imperial College London, United Kingdom
{ja310, s.zafeiriou}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract

strategies are generally posed as a regularized search for
the optimal shape p and texture c parameters that minimize
a global measure of misalignment that simultaneously depends on the position of all landmarks i.e.:

The construction and fitting of deformable models that
capture the degrees of freedom of articulated objects is
one of the most popular areas of research in computer vision. Two of the most popular approaches are: Holistic Deformable Models (HDMs), which try to represent the object
as a whole, and Parts-Based Deformable Models (PBDMs),
which model object parts independently. Both models have
been shown to have their own advantages. In this paper
we try to marry the previous two approaches into a unified
one that potentially combines the advantages of both. We
do so by merging the well-established frameworks of Active
Appearance Models (holistic) and Constrained Local Models (part-based) using a novel probabilistic formulation of
the fitting problem. We show that our unified holistic and
part-based formulation achieves state-of-the-art results in
the problem of face alignment in-the-wild. Finally, in order to encourage open research and facilitate future comparisons with the proposed method, our code will be made
publicly available to the research community1 .

p∗ , c∗ = arg min R(p, c) + D(s, I)
p,c

(1)

where R is a regularization term that penalizes complex
shape and texture deformations and D is a data term that
quantifies the global measure of misalignment given the
current position of all landmark points xi = (xi , yi )T defining the shape s = (xT1 , . . . , xTv )T of the object on the image
I. HDMs are capable of producing very accurate fitting results [2, 33, 3]. However, the large dimensionality of their
parameter space makes them difficult to optimize and likely
to converge to undesirable local minima. Additionally, they
are also highly sensitive to inaccurate initializations.
On the contrary, PBDMs, such as Constrained Local
Models (CLMs) [14, 28], model texture locally as the combination of several independent local texture parts. PBDMs
fitting strategies are commonly formulated as a regularized
search for the optimal shape p parameters (local texture
parts are usually learned discriminatively) that jointly minimize v local measures of misalignment dependent on each
landmark xi i.e:

1. Introduction
Deformable model fitting has been an active area of research in computer vision for over 20 years. Fitting a deformable model consists of registering a parametric shape
model to an image such that its landmarks accurately describe the shape of the object being modelled. Although a
large variety of models and fitting strategies have been proposed throughout the years [12, 21, 28, 8, 37, 11, 4, 35, 33],
in general, research in this area can be divided into two
different groups: (i) Holistic Deformable Models (HDMs)
and (ii) Parts-Based Deformable Models (PBDMs). The
main difference between both groups is the approach used
to model object texture.
HDMs, such as Active Appearance Models (AAMs)
[12, 21], define texture globally, typically, by means of
a generative representation. Consequently, HDMs fitting

p∗ = arg min R(p) +
p

v
∑

Di (xi , I)

(2)

i=1

where, in this case, R is a regularization term that penalizes only complex shape deformations and Di are independent data terms quantifying the local misalignment measures given by the current position of each landmark xi
on the image I. PBDMs are generally easier to optimize
than HDMs, less dependent on the initialization and better
suited to handle partial occlusions due to their local nature
[37, 4, 20, 7]. However, they are unable to match the accuracy of optimally fitted HDMs.
In this paper, we propose to overcome the previous limitations by unifying holistic and parts-based deformable
model fitting. To this end, we derived a novel probabilistic

1 An open-source implementation of the proposed method will be made
available as part of the Menpo Project [1] http://www.menpo.org/.

1

