Learning to Compare Image Patches via Convolutional Neural Networks
Sergey Zagoruyko
Universite Paris Est, Ecole des Ponts ParisTech

Nikos Komodakis
Universite Paris Est, Ecole des Ponts ParisTech

sergey.zagoruyko@imagine.enpc.fr

nikos.komodakis@enpc.fr

Abstract

similarity

In this paper we show how to learn directly from image
data (i.e., without resorting to manually-designed features)
a general similarity function for comparing image patches,
which is a task of fundamental importance for many computer vision problems. To encode such a function, we opt
for a CNN-based model that is trained to account for a
wide variety of changes in image appearance. To that end,
we explore and study multiple neural network architectures,
which are specifically adapted to this task. We show that
such an approach can significantly outperform the state-ofthe-art on several problems and benchmark datasets.

decision network

ConvNet

patch 1

patch 2

Figure 1. Our goal is to learn a general similarity function for image patches. To encode such a function, here we make use of and
explore convolutional neural network architectures.

1. Introduction
Comparing patches across images is probably one of the
most fundamental tasks in computer vision and image analysis. It is often used as a subroutine that plays an important
role in a wide variety of vision tasks. These can range from
low-level tasks such as structure from motion, wide baseline
matching, building panoramas, and image super-resolution,
up to higher-level tasks such as object recognition, image
retrieval, and classification of object categories, to mention
a few characteristic examples.
Of course, the problem of deciding if two patches correspond to each other or not is quite challenging as there exist
far too many factors that affect the final appearance of an
image [17]. These can include changes in viewpoint, variations in the overall illumination of a scene, occlusions, shading, differences in camera settings, etc. In fact, this need
of comparing patches has given rise to the development of
many hand-designed feature descriptors over the past years,
including SIFT [15], that had a huge impact in the computer vision community. Yet, such manually designed descriptors may be unable to take into account in an optimal
manner all of the aforementioned factors that determine the
appearance of a patch. On the other hand, nowadays one
can easily gain access to (or even generate using available

software) large datasets that contain patch correspondences
between images [22]. This begs the following question: can
we make proper use of such datasets to automatically learn
a similarity function for image patches ?
The goal of this paper is to affirmatively address the
above question. Our aim is thus to be able to generate a
patch similarity function from scratch, i.e., without attempting to use any manually designed features but instead directly learn this function from annotated pairs of raw image
patches. To that end, inspired also by the recent advances in
neural architectures and deep learning, we choose to represent such a function in terms of a deep convolutional neural
network [14, 13] (Fig. 1). In doing so, we are also interested
in addressing the issue of what network architecture should
be best used in a task like this. We thus explore and propose
various types of networks, having architectures that exhibit
different trade-offs and advantages. In all cases, to train
these networks, we are using as sole input a large database
that contains pairs of raw image patches (both matching
and non-matching). This allows to further improve the performance of our method simply by enriching this database
with more samples (as software for automatically generating such samples is readily available [21]).
To conclude this section, the paper’s main contributions
are as follows: (i) We learn directly from image data (i.e.,
without any manually-designed features) a general similar-

Source code and trained models are available online at http://
imagine.enpc.fr/∼zagoruys/deepcompare.html (work supported by
EC project FP7-ICT-611145 ROBOSPECT).

1

