A Light Transport Model for Mitigating Multipath Interference in Time-of-flight
Sensors
Nikhil Naik1,2

Achuta Kadambi1
Ramesh Raskar1
1

Christoph Rhemann2
Sing Bing Kang2

Shahram Izadi2

MIT Media Lab 2 Microsoft Research

{naik,kadambi,raskar}@mit.edu {chrheman,shahrami,sbkang}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Continuous-wave Time-of-flight (TOF) range imaging
has become a commercially viable technology with many
applications in computer vision and graphics. However, the
depth images obtained from TOF cameras contain scene dependent errors due to multipath interference (MPI). Specifically, MPI occurs when multiple optical reflections return to
a single spatial location on the imaging sensor. Many prior
approaches to rectifying MPI rely on sparsity in optical reflections, which is an extreme simplification. In this paper,
we correct MPI by combining the standard measurements
from a TOF camera with information from direct and global
light transport. We report results on both simulated experiments and physical experiments (using the Kinect sensor).
Our results, evaluated against ground truth, demonstrate a
quantitative improvement in depth accuracy.

(a) No MPI

b) MPI: 2 bounce

(c) MPI: Subsurface Scattering

Figure 1. Multipath interference in time of flight cameras. In (a)
the typical operation of TOF cameras is shown. A single optical
path returns to the image sensor. In (b) an indirect bounce from
point q to p causes two optical paths to return to the image sensor.
In (c), subsurface scattering causes many optical paths to return to
the sensor (one possible path is shown).

1. Introduction

era sensor. This problem is particularly significant for TOF
sensors, where depth calculations assume a single optical
reflection.
Figure 1 illustrates three different measurement scenarios for a TOF sensor. In Figure 1a, the standard operation
is shown, where a single reflection from point p strikes the
image sensor. Figure 1b and Figure 1c illustrate cases of
MPI where multiple optical reflections strike the imaging
sensor. The former considers a simple two-bounce reflection and the latter subsurface scattering, which cannot be
described by a discrete model.
Most prior MPI correction algorithms assume sparsity in
optical reflections. Since sparsity is a weak approximation
for the complexity of scattering, the space of sparse solutions has, to date, been restricted to toy scenes [3, 10, 8].
Other techniques rely on optical computing, which involves
significant optical and electronic modifications to the camera [40, 32].
In this paper we cast the problem of MPI into the realm

Time-of-flight (TOF) cameras represent an increasingly
popular method to obtain depth maps at full framerates of
30 FPS. The recent release of the TOF-based Kinect sensor [47] will result in the wide-spread adaption of TOF
cameras for various traditional and non-traditional applications [35, 23, 31, 34, 24, 2, 44] in computer vision, graphics and physics. In this paper we restrict our discussion to
continuous-wave TOF cameras, which calculate depth by
measuring the phase difference between an emitted and received optical signal. In Section 3 we provide an overview
of the technology and a more extensive overview can be be
found in [7, 21].
Even though TOF cameras represent an attractive technology for generating depth images in real-time, they suffer
from many sources of error [9]. We focus on perhaps the
main source of error: the problem of multi-path interference (MPI). The MPI problem occurs when multiple reflections of light in a scene return to a single pixel on the cam1

