Semi-supervised Domain Adaptation with Subspace Learning
for Visual Recognition
Ting Yao † , Yingwei Pan ‡ , Chong-Wah Ngo § , Houqiang Li ‡ , and Tao Mei †
†
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
‡
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
§
City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong
{tiyao, tmei}@microsoft.com, panyw.ustc@gmail.com, cscwngo@cityu.edu.hk, lihq@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
In many real-world applications, we are often facing the
problem of cross domain learning, i.e., to borrow the labeled data or transfer the already learnt knowledge from a
source domain to a target domain. However, simply applying existing source data or knowledge may even hurt
the performance, especially when the data distribution in
the source and target domain is quite different, or there
are very few labeled data available in the target domain.
This paper proposes a novel domain adaptation framework,
named Semi-supervised Domain Adaptation with Subspace
Learning (SDASL), which jointly explores invariant lowdimensional structures across domains to correct data distribution mismatch and leverages available unlabeled target examples to exploit the underlying intrinsic information in the target domain. Specifically, SDASL conducts the
learning by simultaneously minimizing the classification error, preserving the structure within and across domains, and
restricting similarity defined on unlabeled target examples.
Encouraging results are reported for two challenging domain transfer tasks (including image-to-image and imageto-video transfers) on several standard datasets in the context of both image object recognition and video concept detection.

1. Introduction
In the standard machine learning technologies, the training and test data are assumed to be drawn from the same
distribution. When the distribution changes, the need to rebuilt most statistical models from scratch using the newly
collected training data, however, makes the task intellectually expensive or unpractical for many real-world applications. As a result, domain adaptation would be desirable.
In general, domain adaptation involves two distinct types
of datasets, one from a source domain and the other from a

target domain. The source domain contains a large amount
of labeled data such that a classifier can be reliably built,
while the target domain refers broadly to a dataset that is
assumed to have different characteristics from the source.
Thus, simply applying the classifier learnt in the source domain may hurt the performance in the target domain, a phenomenon known as “domain shift” [29]. Furthermore, the
labeled target data are often very few and they alone are not
sufficient to construct a good classifier. Therefore, our main
objective is to attain good performance on the target domain
by utilizing the source data or adapting classifiers trained in
the source domain. In addition, how to effectively leverage
unlabeled target data also remains an important issue for
domain adaptation.
In the literature, there have been several techniques being proposed for addressing the challenge of domain shift
by learning a common feature representation [3, 5]. The
objective is to identify a new feature representation that is
invariant across domains. With this, the source and the target domain exhibit more shared characteristics. However,
in general, these approaches highly depend on the heuristic
selection of pivot features appearing frequently in both domains. Furthermore, the criterion of feature selection may
be sensitive to different applications. On the other hand,
it is assumed that visual data exist in the low-dimensional
subspaces, which can provide a meaningful description of
the underlying domain shift [11, 12, 13, 22]. Given the data
from two domains, we are investigating in this paper how
to obtain the projections of mapping the data from source
and target domains onto a subspace. The new feature representations in this subspace should be able to reduce the
data distribution mismatch as much as possible, meanwhile
preserving the structure property of the original data. Furthermore, to tackle with the challenge of target labeled data insufficiency, the unlabeled target data is also leveraged
on smooth assumption encoded in a regularizer, which has
been shown effective for semi-supervised learning [17].

