Sparse Convolutional Neural Networks∗
Baoyuan Liu1 , Min Wang1 , Hassan Foroosh1 , Marshall Tappen3 , and Marianna Penksy2
1

Computational Imaging Lab, Computer Science, University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL, USA
2
Department of Mathematics, University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL, USA
3
Amazon.com, Seattle, WA 98109
{bliu, mwang, foroosh}@cs.ucf.edu, tappenm@amazon.com, Marianna.Pensky@ucf.edu

Abstract

input	
  feature	
  maps	
  

input	
  feature	
  maps	
  
channel	
  
	
  	
  	
  basis	
  

Deep neural networks have achieved remarkable performance in both image classification and object detection
problems, at the cost of a large number of parameters and
computational complexity. In this work, we show how to
reduce the redundancy in these parameters using a sparse
decomposition. Maximum sparsity is obtained by exploiting both inter-channel and intra-channel redundancy, with
a fine-tuning step that minimize the recognition loss caused
by maximizing sparsity. This procedure zeros out more than
90% of parameters, with a drop of accuracy that is less
than 1% on the ILSVRC2012 dataset. We also propose
an efficient sparse matrix multiplication algorithm on CPU
for Sparse Convolutional Neural Networks (SCNN) models.
Our CPU implementation demonstrates much higher efficiency than the off-the-shelf sparse matrix libraries, with
a significant speedup realized over the original dense network. In addition, we apply the SCNN model to the object detection problem, in conjunction with a cascade model
and sparse fully connected layers, to achieve significant
speedups.

kernel	
  
	
  basis	
  
convolu1on	
  kernels	
  
sparse	
  
kernel	
  
matrix	
  
output	
  feature	
  maps	
  

output	
  feature	
  maps	
  

Figure 1: Overview of our sparse convolutional neural network.
Left: the operation of convolution layer for classical CNN, which
convolves large amount of convolutional kernels with the input
feature maps. Right: our proposed SCNN model. We apply twostage decompositions over the channels and the convolutional kernels, obtaining a remarkably(more than 90%) sparse kernel matrix
and converting the operation of convolutional layer to spare matrix
multiplication.

1. Introduction

network size and the classification accuracy. The ILSRVR
2014 submission from VGG [20] builds a network with up
to 16 convolutional layers that reduces the top-5 classification error to 7.4%, at the expense of approximately one
month of network training with 4 high-end GPUs.

In this paper, we show how expressing the filtering steps
in a convolutional neural network using sparse decomposition can dramatically cut down the cost of computation,
while maintaining the accuracy of the system. Deep neural networks have achieved remarkable performance in both
image classification and object detection problems [14][8].
Results of ImageNet LSVRC [2] competitions in recent
years have demonstrated a strong correlation between the

The structure of these networks makes it reasonable to
conjecture that there exists heavy redundancy in these huge
networks. Due to the highly non-convex property of neural
networks, over-parameterization, together with random initialization, is necessary to overcome the negative impact of
local minimum in network training. Additionally, the fact
that no independence constraint is imposed among the con-

∗ This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under grants IIS-1212948, IIS-091686, DMS-1106564 and DMS1407475.

1

