Depth Camera Tracking with Contour Cues
Qian-Yi Zhou
Vladlen Koltun
Intel Labs

Abstract
We present an approach for tracking camera pose in real
time given a stream of depth images. Existing algorithms
are prone to drift in the presence of smooth surfaces that
destabilize geometric alignment. We show that useful contour cues can be extracted from noisy and incomplete depth
input. These cues are used to establish correspondence constraints that carry information about scene geometry and
constrain pose estimation. Despite ambiguities in the input,
the presented contour constraints reliably improve tracking
accuracy. Results on benchmark sequences and on additional challenging examples demonstrate the utility of contour cues for real-time camera pose estimation.

(a) Depth and color images

(b) KinectFusion

1. Introduction
Tracking self-motion is a primary function of visual perception in animals [7, 25]. In computer vision, the corresponding problem of visual odometry underlies a host of
applications and has been extensively studied [5, 18, 11].
Our work concerns depth cameras, which are increasingly
utilized in computer vision systems. Our goal is to improve
the accuracy of depth camera tracking, particularly in challenging scenarios that currently lead to odometry drift.
The influential KinectFusion system [16] demonstrated
real-time depth camera tracking and dense scene reconstruction by registering incoming depth images to a volumetric representation of the scene. Our work extends these
ideas by integrating occluding contours into the optimization objective and showing that explicit handling of contours can lead to significant gains in tracking accuracy. A
different extension of the KinectFusion approach was developed by Bylow et al. [2], who derived a principled optimization algorithm but did not track occluding contours.
Our experiments demonstrate that contour tracking has significant benefits.
A number of odometry systems use both depth and color
images [1, 9, 26]. Our work aims to maximize tracking accuracy without relying on a color image stream. One reason
is that some depth cameras are not accompanied by color
cameras. Another is that even if a color camera is present,

(c) Our approach
Figure 1. (a) Depth and color images from an input sequence. (b)
Surface registration slips on planar surfaces, leading to tracking
drift and reconstruction failure. (c) Our approach establishes contour constraints that stabilize real-time camera tracking (red). The
color image (a, right) is shown for clarity and is not used by either
approach.

its viewpoint is different and its shutter may not be perfectly
synchronized with the depth camera. Finally, we aim for
systems that function even in minimal lighting.
Our approach is based on tracking occluding contours
and using contour cues to constrain registration. This addresses a common failure mode of geometric registration
approaches based on the iterative closest point (ICP) algorithm and its variants [19], namely instability in the presence of smooth surfaces [6]. This is illustrated in Figure 1,
which shows a cabinet being imaged by a depth camera. In
some aspects, the cabinet is seen as a collection of large planar surfaces that cause geometric alignment to slip and cam1

