Causal Video Object Segmentation From Persistence of Occlusions
Brian Taylor
Vasiliy Karasev
Stefano Soatto
UCLA Vision Lab, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095
btay@cs.ucla.edu

vasiliykarasev@ucla.edu

soatto@ucla.edu

Figure 1: Sample outcomes of our scheme: background c(x) = 0 (gray) and foreground layers c(x) = 1, c(x) = 2, c(x) = 3
indicated by , , respectively. On the far right, our algorithm correctly infers that the bag strap is in front of the woman’s
arm, which is in front of her trunk, which is in front of the background. Project page: http://vision.ucla.edu/cvos/

Abstract

undefined), or knowledge of its partition into regions. Hence
the conundrum: to determine occlusion relations, so that
objects can be segmented, we need to know the objects in
the first place. The first contribution of our work is to break
the conundrum by leveraging motion and appearance priors to hallucinate motion in the occluded region. With the
occluder/occluded relations we can obtain a depth-layer partition for the image domain. In video, however, nuisances
such as motion blur, quantization, scale, and lack of motion
can cause layer segmentation to fail. Thus, the second contribution is a causal framework for integrating occlusion cues
exploiting temporal consistency priors to partition the video
into depth layers. Our third contribution is to make the solution of the resulting optimization problem efficient using a
primal-dual scheme. Our proposed method is competitive to
state-of-the-art approaches qualitatively in visual boundaries
and quantitatively in numerical benchmarks, while processing video sequences causally, rather than in batch. Samples
from our scheme are shown in Fig. 1.
The paper is organized as follows: we set up our problem
in Sec. 2. We describe our first contribution in determining
occluder relations in Sec. 2.1 and how we leverage prior
work [3] in Sec. 2.2. Sec. 3 explores how we causally
integrate cues to construct priors for foreground regions in
Sec. 3.1, obtain persistent object boundaries in Sec. 3.2, and
aggregate occluder relations in Sec. 3.3. Our final model
is presented in Sec. 3.4. Implementation and optimization
details are covered in Sec. 4–5, including our approach for
hallucinating motion in the occluded regions in Sec. 4.2.
Empirical evaluation appears in Sec. 6, where we show that
the typical failure modes of prior approaches stemming from
unreliable occlusion relations are mitigated.

Occlusion relations inform the partition of the image domain into “objects” but are difficult to determine from a single image or short-baseline video. We show how long-term
occlusion relations can be robustly inferred from video, and
used within a convex optimization framework to segment the
image domain into regions. We highlight the challenges in
determining these occluder/occluded relations and ensuring
regions remain temporally consistent, propose strategies to
overcome them, and introduce an efficient numerical scheme
to perform the partition directly on the pixel grid, without
the need for superpixelization or other preprocessing steps.

1. Introduction
Partitioning the image domain into regions that correspond to “objects” is elusive absent an explicit definition of
objects that has a measurable correlate in the image. Gestalt
principles [33] provide grouping criteria: continuity, regularity, proximity, compactness, the last of which (figure/ground,
or occlusion) is best informed by video. Occlusions have
been used extensively for grouping [32, 5, 7, 3]. A feature of
[3] is that grouping is obtained via a linear program: local ordering constraints provided by occluder/occluded relations
are integrated to globally partition the image domain into
depth layers. The challenge is that errors in determining
occlusion relations can have a cascading effect.
Occlusions are usually detected from the residual of optical flow, but even assuming this detection is correct, occluder relations are non-trivial to determine. As we show in
Fig. 2, correct determination of the occluder requires either
knowledge of the motion of the occluded region (which is
1

