A Flexible Tensor Block Coordinate Ascent Scheme for Hypergraph Matching
Quynh Nguyen Ngoc1,2 , Antoine Gautier2 , Matthias Hein2
1

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbrücken, Germany
2
Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany

Abstract
The estimation of correspondences between two images
resp. point sets is a core problem in computer vision. One
way to formulate the problem is graph matching leading to
the quadratic assignment problem which is NP-hard. Several so called second order methods have been proposed
to solve this problem. In recent years hypergraph matching leading to a third order problem became popular as it
allows for better integration of geometric information. For
most of these third order algorithms no theoretical guarantees are known. In this paper we propose a general framework for tensor block coordinate ascent methods for hypergraph matching. We propose two algorithms which both
come along with the guarantee of monotonic ascent in the
matching score on the set of discrete assignment matrices.
In the experiments we show that our new algorithms outperform previous work both in terms of achieving better matching scores and matching accuracy. This holds in particular
for very challenging settings where one has a high number
of outliers and other forms of noise.

1. Introduction
Graph resp. hypergraph matching has been used in a variety of problems in computer vision such as object recognition [20], feature correspondences [7, 24], shape matching
[11, 23, 25] and surface registration [27]. Given two sets of
points, the task is to find the correspondences between them
based on extracted features and/or geometric information.
In general, the graph matching problem is NP-hard, therefore, many approximation algorithms have been proposed
over the years. They can be grouped into second order and
third order methods.
Among recent second order approaches, Leordeanu and
Hebert [17] proposed the Spectral Matching (SM) algorithm, and Cour et al. [9] the Spectral Matching with Affine
Constraint (SMAC). Both of these methods are based on the

best rank-1 approximation of an affinity matrix. Leordeanu
et al. later on proposed the Integer Projected Fixed Point
(IPFP) algorithm [19], where they optimize the quadratic
objective using a gradient-type algorithm interleaved with
projection onto the discrete constraint set using e.g. the
hungarian method. Lee et al. [15] tackle the graph matching problem using stochastic sampling, whereas Cho et
al. [6] propose a reweighted random walk (RRWM) where
the reweighting jumps are aiming at enforcing the matching constraints. Recently, Cho et al. [8] proposed a novel
max pooling matching (MPM), where they tweak the power
method to better cope with noise in the affinities. Although
the algorithm comes without theoretical guarantees, it turns
out to perform very well in practice, in particular, when one
has a large number of outliers. Other second order methods
include the work of Zhou and Torre [29] and Zaslavskiy
et al. [25], where they propose deformable graph matching
(DGM) and a path-following algorithm respectively.
As second order methods are limited to pairwise similarities between two correspondences, higher order methods
can integrate better geometric information. While they have
higher computational complexity, they can cope better with
geometric transformations such as scaling or other forms
of noise. Compared to second order methods, higher order approaches are less well studied in literature due to the
difficulty in handling the third order optimization problem.
Duchenne et al. [10] formulated the hypergraph matching problem as a third order tensor optimization problem
and proposed a higher order power method for solving the
problem. This approach has shown significant improvements over second order ones which were proposed earlier.
Zass and Shashua [26] introduced a probabilistic view to
the problem, and proposed a Hypergraph Matching (HGM)
algorithm. Their idea is to marginalize the tensor to a vector and solve again a lower dimensional problem. Chertok and Keller [4] extended this idea and marginalized the
tensor to a matrix, resulting in a second order matching
problem which is solved by spectral methods. Both methods are based on tensor marginalization, which leads to

