Exact Bias Correction and Covariance Estimation for Stereo Vision
Charles Freundlich
Duke University

Michael Zavlanos
Duke University

Philippos Mordohai
Stevens Institute of Technology

charles.freundlich@duke.edu

michael.zavlanos@duke.edu

mordohai@cs.stevens.edu

Abstract

through the two camera centers and the centers of the two
corresponding pixels. It represents an entire region formed
by the intersection of two infinitely long pyramids created
by the camera centers and the pixels, shown in Fig. 1(a).
The sides of each pyramid are formed by the planes defined
by the camera centers and edges of the pixels. 3D cells
are larger, more elongated and asymmetric the further away
from the cameras they are. This means that points far from
the cameras are often subject to large error.
Assuming that points in the 3D cell are uniformly distributed in space, then the expected value of the reconstructed point is the first moment, or the centroid, of the

We present an approach for correcting the bias in 3D
reconstruction of points imaged by a calibrated stereo rig.
Our analysis is based on the observation that, due to quantization error, a 3D point reconstructed by triangulation essentially represents an entire region in space. The true location of the world point that generated the triangulated
point could be anywhere in this region. We argue that the
reconstructed point, if it is to represent this region in space
without bias, should be located at the centroid of this region, which is not what has been done in the literature. We
derive the exact geometry of these regions in space, which
we call 3D cells, and we show how they can be viewed as
uniform distributions of possible pre-images of the pair of
corresponding pixels. By assuming a uniform distribution
of points in 3D, as opposed to a uniform distribution of the
projections of these 3D points on the images, we arrive at a
fast and exact computation of the triangulation bias in each
cell. In addition, we derive the exact covariance matrices
of the 3D cells. We validate our approach in a variety of
simulations ranging from 3D reconstruction to camera localization and relative motion estimation. In all cases, we
are able to demonstrate a marked improvement compared
to conventional techniques for small disparity values, for
which bias is significant and the required corrections are
large.

(a) Illustration of a 3D cell

{

1. Introduction
Pixelation, or quantization, error has long been acknowledged as a limiting factor for stereo vision systems
[1, 10, 14, 2]. Since digital camera pairs map points from
the continuous world to a discrete set of pixel pairs, their
observations are subject to pixelation error. As a result, distinct world points become indistinguishable after projection
and reconstruction by triangulation. Pixelation effectively
groups sets of points in the world, which we hereafter refer
to as 3D cells, by assigning to each group a single 3D location: the reconstructed point. In classical stereo vision the
reconstructed point is the intersection of two rays that pass

(b) Cross-section of the cell
Figure 1. Illustrations of quantization error in stereo vision. (a) a
3D cell created by the intersection of the viewing cones (pyramids)
emanating from corresponding pixels in the left and right camera.
(b) Cross-section of the 3D cell. The dark dot is the centroid of the
cell and should be used as the reconstructed point, instead of the
intersection of the rays that is currently used.

1

