PatchCut: Data-Driven Object Segmentation via Local Shape Transfer
Jimei Yang1 , Brian Price2 , Scott Cohen2 , Zhe Lin2 , and Ming-Hsuan Yang1
1

UC Merced

2

Adobe Research

Figure 1: Overview of proposed object segmentation algorithm using examples. Given a test image and a set of segmentation
examples, our algorithm first performs multiscale image matching in patches by PatchMatch. The local shape masks within
the matched patches are then transferred to represent the patch-wise segmentation candidates for the test image. Finally, local
mask candidates are selected based on MRF energy function to produce the segmentation in a coarse-to-fine manner.

Abstract

Recent methods [29, 20] show that object segmentation
can be solved efficiently with a carefully prepared bounding
box around the target and further refined by user inputs. In
these interactive algorithms [6, 29, 20], color is commonly
used to separate foreground from background. Although
more complex image cues such as textures are shown to be
useful to improve segmentation performance [34], a critical source of information, object shape, is clearly missing
in these algorithms. Similar situations exist in salient object
segmentation [28, 25, 8] in that most of algorithms work
well when the images have high foreground-background
color contrast, but work poorly in cluttered images. A notable exception is Li et al.’s latest work [22] that achieves
impressive object segmentation results on the PASCAL images [10] by integrating shape sensitive object proposals [7]
with a classic saliency map [11]. On the other hand, in
model-based algorithms [5, 19, 18, 4, 36], shape is always
the major driving force for segmentation. Category-specific
shape models are usually designed [18] based on prior
knowledge or learned offline from training data [21, 36].
This category-specific nature limits the generalizability of
model based algorithms to handle unseen objects.

Object segmentation is highly desirable for image understanding and editing. Current interactive tools require a
great deal of user effort while automatic methods are usually limited to images of special object categories or with
high color contrast. In this paper, we propose a data-driven
algorithm that uses examples to break through these limits.
As similar objects tend to share similar local shapes, we
match query image patches with example images in multiscale to enable local shape transfer. The transferred local shape masks constitute a patch-level segmentation solution space and we thus develop a novel cascade algorithm,
PatchCut, for coarse-to-fine object segmentation. In each
stage of the cascade, local shape mask candidates are selected to refine the estimated segmentation of the previous
stage iteratively with color models. Experimental results
on various datasets (Weizmann Horse, Fashionista, Object
Discovery and PASCAL) demonstrate the effectiveness and
robustness of our algorithm.

1. Introduction

In this work, we propose a data-driven object segmentation algorithm that addresses the problems mentioned above
by using a database of existing segmentation examples.
Our algorithm requires neither offline training of categoryspecific shape models nor prior knowledge of object shapes.
Instead we transfer shape masks from similar segmentation
examples to the test images by image retrieval and matching. Compared to user- and saliency-driven algorithms, the
transferred shape cues help resolve segmentation ambigui-

Object segmentation, separating a foreground object
from its background with a clear boundary, has long been
an important challenge for computer vision. It not only
provides mid-level representations for high-level recognition tasks [7] but also has immediate applications to image
editing [1]. Object segmentation is typically formulated as a
binary labeling problem on Markov Random Fields (MRFs)
with foreground/background appearance models [6].
1

