Image Parsing with a Wide Range of Classes and Scene-Level Context
Marian George
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich, Switzerland

Abstract
This paper presents a nonparametric scene parsing approach that improves the overall accuracy, as well as the
coverage of foreground classes in scene images. We first improve the label likelihood estimates at superpixels by merging likelihood scores from different probabilistic classifiers.
This boosts the classification performance and enriches the
representation of less-represented classes. Our second contribution consists of incorporating semantic context in the
parsing process through global label costs. Our method
does not rely on image retrieval sets but rather assigns a
global likelihood estimate to each label, which is plugged
into the overall energy function. We evaluate our system on
two large-scale datasets, SIFTflow and LMSun. We achieve
state-of-the-art performance on the SIFTflow dataset and
near-record results on LMSun.

1. Introduction
Scene parsing is the assignment of semantic labels to
each pixel in a scene image. There are various outdoor
and indoor scenes (e.g., beach, highway, city street and airport) that image parsing algorithms try to label. Several
systems [3, 7, 6, 9, 11, 15, 18, 19, 20, 24, 27, 28, 33, 36]
have been designed to semantically classify each pixel in an
image. Among the main challenges which face image parsing methods is that their recognition rate significantly varies
among different types of classes. Background classes,
which typically occupy a large proportion of the image’s
pixels, usually have uniform appearance and are recognised
with a high rate (e.g., water, mountain, and building). Foreground classes, which typically occupy relatively few pixels
in the image, have deformable shapes and can be occluded
or arranged in different forms. Such classes (e.g., person,
car, and sign) represent salient image regions that often capture the eye of a human observer. However, they frequently
represent failure cases with recognition rates significantly
lower than those of background classes.
Parametric scene parsing methods [16, 20, 27, 34] have
achieved impressive performance on datasets with tens of

labels. However, for relatively large datasets with hundreds
of labels, it is more difficult to apply these methods due to
expensive learning and optimisation requirements.
Recently, nonparametric image parsing methods have
been proposed [6, 10, 25, 18, 29, 33] to efficiently handle
the increasing number of scene categories and semantic labels. Nonparametric methods typically start by reducing the
problem space from individual pixels to superpixels. First,
an image set is retrieved, which contains the training images
that are most visually similar to the query image. The number of candidate labels for a query image is restricted to the
labels present in the retrieval set only. Second, classification
likelihood scores of superpixels are obtained through visual
features matching. Finally, context is enforced through minimizing an energy function which combines the data cost
and knowledge about the classes co-occurences in neighboring superpixels.
A common challenge that faces nonparametric parsing
methods is the image retrieval step. While image retrieval
is useful for limiting the number of labels to consider, it is
regarded as a very critical step in the pipeline [25, 33]. If the
true labels are not included in the retrieved images, there is
no chance to recover from this error. In [33], it is stated that
most of the failure cases occur due to incorrect retrieval.
In this paper, we propose a novel nonparametric image parsing algorithm which targets better overall accuracy,
with better recognition rates of less-represented classes. We
design a system that is efficient and scalable to a continuously increasing number of labels. We make the following
contributions:
1. We improve the likelihood scores of labels at superpixels through combining classifiers. Our system combines the output probabilities of multiple classification
models to produce a more balanced score for each label at each superpixel. We learn the weights for combining the scores by applying likelihood normalization
method on the training set in an automatic way.
2. We incorporate semantic context in a probabilistic
framework. To avoid the elimination of relevant labels
that cannot be recovered at later steps, we do not con-

