Event-Driven Stereo Matching for Real-Time 3D Panoramic Vision
Stephan Schraml, Ahmed Nabil Belbachir
AIT Austrian Institute of Technology
Digital Safety & Security Department
New Sensor Technologies
Donau-City-Straße 1, 1220 Vienna, Austria

Horst Bischof
Graz University of Technology
Institute for Computer Graphics and Vision
8010 Graz, Austria
bischof@icg.tugraz.at

{stephan.schraml,nabil.belbachir}@ait.ac.at

Abstract
This paper presents a stereo matching approach for
a novel multi-perspective panoramic stereo vision system,
making use of asynchronous and non-simultaneous stereo
imaging towards real-time 3D 360◦ vision. The method is
designed for events representing the scenes visual contrast
as a sparse visual code allowing the stereo reconstruction of
high resolution panoramic views. We propose a novel cost
measure for the stereo matching, which makes use of a similarity measure based on event distributions. Thus, the robustness to variations in event occurrences was increased.
An evaluation of the proposed stereo method is presented
using distance estimation of panoramic stereo views and
ground truth data. Furthermore, our approach is compared
to standard stereo methods applied on event-data. Results
show that we obtain 3D reconstructions of 1024 × 3600
round views and outperform depth reconstruction accuracy
of state-of-the-art methods on event data.

1. Introduction
The role of sparse information has been shown to be an
effective technique for solving tasks or boosting the performance of many computer vision applications. Typical
examples are highly condensed and possibly enriched descriptions of distinctive scene points used for e.g. solving
visual correspondences, object matching and image analysis [1, 20, 32]. Stereo matching, which is recognized to be
a computationally expensive task, can be efficiently computed using such sparse feature descriptors [28].
Another approach, providing a sparse representation of
scene content, is given by the biologically inspired dynamic
vision sensors (DVS) [16] that convey visual information
by generating and passing events yielding a sparse visual
code [3], which we call event-driven vision. These sensors allow high energy efficiency, high temporal resolution

and compressed sensing [3] to efficiently solve computer
vision tasks: e.g. real-time gesture control interface [14],
event-driven formulation of epipolar constraint [4], stereo
matching and 3D reconstruction [25, 6] and high-speed object classification [2].
By implementing the concept of sparse information at
the pixel level, these sensors only detect scene content that
has undergone a relative contrast change. Similar to biological neural systems, they feature massively parallel preprocessing of the visual information making use of an analog circuit at each pixel, combined with asynchronous event
information encoding and communication. A scene content is thereby not presented as an image frame; instead
the therein-detected relative intensity changes are coded and
transferred as a variable stream of asynchronous events,
efficiently capturing scene dynamics (frameless) at a high
temporal resolution and high dynamic range. The advantages of event-driven vision include: Firstly, that static
background containing redundant information does not lead
to the generation of events, resulting in a massive reduction of data volume, which in turn helps to save processing
time and computational resources. Secondly, relative contrast changes are mainly caused by moving objects, which
eliminates the need for a time-consuming segmentation of
moving (foreground) and static background objects as a preprocessing step, e.g. tracking of people [22].
Panoramic vision in 3D [13] has the advantage of providing a full 360◦ view; hence features and objects can be
observed continuously supporting navigation [29] and localization tasks [11], e.g. a driverless google car. Laserbased systems [31] are capable of providing 360◦ panoramas in 3D. Although this technology guarantees high accuracy, it has a low vertical resolution at high cost (∼80k$).
On the other hand, there have been a number of attempts
to obtain panoramic views based on stereo vision in literature [10, 21, 30]. However, achieving the performance
required for applications targeted on embedded systems in
terms of real-time capability with limited computing re-

