Light Field Layer Matting
Juliet Fiss
University of Washington

Brian Curless
University of Washington

Richard Szeliski
Microsoft Research

jfiss@uw.edu

curless@cs.washington.edu

szeliski@microsoft.com

Abstract

(u,v)

In this paper, we use matting to separate foreground layK(x,y,u,v)
ers from light fields captured with a plenoptic camera. We
represent the input 4D light field as a 4D background light
field, plus a 2D spatially varying foreground color layer
α(x,y)
with alpha. Our method can be used to both pull a fore(x,y)
F(x,y)
ground matte and estimate an occluded background light
field. Our method assumes that the foreground layer is thin
L(x,y,u,v)
and fronto-parallel, and is composed of a limited set of colors that are distinct from the background layer colors. Our
method works well for thin, translucent, and blurred foreFigure 1. We model the input light field as foreground layer composited over a background light field.
ground occluders. Our representation can be used to render the light field from novel views, handling disocclusions
while avoiding common artifacts.
db
(u,v)

1. Introduction

Background Scene Content

K(x,y,u,v)

dτ  

Many photographs of natural scenes have a layered composition, where a foreground layerα(x,y)
partially occludes backForeground Occluder
ground content. The natural image matting problem ad- (x,y)
df
F(x,y)
Foreground Plane
dresses the separation and modeling of these layers. Most
L(x,y,u,v)
image matting algorithms accept a trimap, which
segments
Figure 2. Depth parameters inform the algorithm where to place
the image into foreground, background, and unknown rethe foreground plane, and whether content should be considered
gions. However, for many common types of layered scenes,
part of the background or the foreground.
providing a trimap is not practical. For example, consider a
scene photographed through a dusty or dirty window. In this
example, the foreground layer is spatially complex, made of
We model the input light field as a composite of two laymany small, irregular, translucent occluders.
ers: a background light field, plus a foreground layer with
In this paper, we propose a method for matting such layconstant depth, spatially varying color, and spatially varyers from light fields. Our method assumes that the foreing alpha. Our method recovers the background light field,
ground plane is fronto-parallel. Instead of a trimap, our
foreground color, and foreground alpha automatically.
method takes as user input two depth parameters: df , which
specifies the depth at which the foreground layer is most
1.1. Background
in focus, and d⌧ , a threshold depth that separates the foreWe model a light field L, captured by a plenoptic camground layer from the background layer. To select these
era, as a composite of a background light field K with a
parameters, the user sweeps a synthetic focal plane through
foreground layer color map F and alpha matte ↵. Our goal
the scene (e.g. with a depth slider) and makes selections by
is to estimate K, F , and ↵ given L and some additional
visual inspection. These parameters are necessary to sigparameters describing the scene.
nal user intent: what content should be considered part of
the foreground, and what content part of the background?
In this section, we use a two-plane ray parameterization

Background Scene

Foreground O

Foreground

