TVSum: Summarizing Web Videos Using Titles
Yale Song, Jordi Vallmitjana, Amanda Stent, Alejandro Jaimes
Yahoo Labs, New York
{yalesong,jvallmi,stent,ajaimes}@yahoo-inc.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
The sheer amount of video available online has increased
the demand for efficient ways to search and retrieve desired content [46]. Currently, users choose to watch a video
based on various metadata, e.g., thumbnail, title, description, video length, etc. This does not, however, provide a
concrete sense of the actual video content, making it difficult to find desired content quickly [48]. Video summarization aims to provide this information by generating the
gist of a video, benefiting both the users (through a better
user experience) and companies that provide video streaming and search (with increased user engagement).
Video summarization is a challenging problem in part
because knowing which part of a video is important, and
thus “summary worthy,” requires prior knowledge about
its main topic. Conventional approaches produce a sum-

Input Video

“reporter”

“hog”

“killer bees” “beekeeper”

“hog”

“reporter”

Images

Canonical Visual Concepts
Exclusive to video

Exclusive to images

Video
“hog”
Summary

Video summarization is a challenging problem in part
because knowing which part of a video is important requires
prior knowledge about its main topic. We present TVSum,
an unsupervised video summarization framework that uses
title-based image search results to find visually important
shots. We observe that a video title is often carefully chosen to be maximally descriptive of its main topic, and hence
images related to the title can serve as a proxy for important visual concepts of the main topic. However, because
titles are free-formed, unconstrained, and often written ambiguously, images searched using the title can contain noise
(images irrelevant to video content) and variance (images
of different topics). To deal with this challenge, we developed a novel co-archetypal analysis technique that learns
canonical visual concepts shared between video and images, but not in either alone, by finding a joint-factorial representation of two data sets. We introduce a new benchmark
dataset, TVSum50, that contains 50 videos and their shotlevel importance scores annotated via crowdsourcing. Experimental results on two datasets, SumMe and TVSum50,
suggest our approach produces superior quality summaries
compared to several recently proposed approaches.

Video Title: Killer Bees Hurt 1000-lb Hog in Bisbee AZ
“anchor”

“killer bees”
…

“beekeeper”
…

“hog”
…

Figure 1. An illustration of title-based video summarization.
We use title-based image search results to generate a summary
by selecting shots that are the most relevant to, and representative
of, canonical visual concepts shared between the given video and
images. Our novel co-archetypal analysis learns canonical visual
concepts by focusing on the shared region (yellow dotted rectangle
area), singling out patterns that are exclusive to either set, allowing
us to discard images irrelevant to video frames (and vice versa).

mary by defining a generic scheme, e.g., based on content frequency [52] or non-redundancy [12, 50]; while simple and efficient, visual frequency is not directly related
to topicality. Recent work has addressed this issue by
using images and videos collected from the web, learning a predictive model tailored to a predefined set of categories [28, 38, 43] or constrained to a limited object domain [25]; while promising, it remains as a challenge to
deal with the variety of topics in online videos.
We present TVSum (Title-based Video Summarization),
an unsupervised video summarization framework that uses
the video title to find visually important shots. We observe that a title is often carefully chosen to describe its
main topic, and thus serves as a strong prior on the expected summary. This motivates us to collect title-based
image search results, and use them to select shots that are

