Pooled Motion Features for First-Person Videos
M. S. Ryoo, Brandon Rothrock, and Larry Matthies
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA
mryoo@jpl.nasa.gov

Abstract
In this paper, we present a new feature representation
for first-person videos. In first-person video understanding
(e.g., activity recognition), it is very important to capture
both entire scene dynamics (i.e., egomotion) and salient local motion observed in videos. We describe a representation framework based on time series pooling, which is designed to abstract short-term/long-term changes in feature
descriptor elements. The idea is to keep track of how descriptor values are changing over time and summarize them
to represent motion in the activity video. The framework is
general, handling any types of per-frame feature descriptors
including conventional motion descriptors like histogram of
optical flows (HOF) as well as appearance descriptors from
more recent convolutional neural networks (CNN).
We experimentally confirm that our approach clearly
outperforms previous feature representations including
bag-of-visual-words and improved Fisher vector (IFV)
when using identical underlying feature descriptors. We
also confirm that our feature representation has superior
performance to existing state-of-the-art features like local
spatio-temporal features and Improved Trajectory Features
(originally developed for 3rd-person videos) when handling
first-person videos. Multiple first-person activity datasets
were tested under various settings to confirm these findings.

1. Introduction
First-person videos, also called egocentric videos, are
videos taken from an actor’s own viewpoint. The volume of egocentric video is rapidly increasing due to the
recent ubiquity of small wearable devices. The main difference between conventional 3rd-person videos and 1stperson videos is that, in 1st-person videos, the person wearing the camera is actively involved in the events being
recorded. Strong egomotion is observed in first-person
videos, which makes them visually very unique (Figure 1).
Automated understanding of such videos (i.e., first-person
activity recognition) is crucial for many societal applications including quality-of-life systems to support daily liv-

ing and video-based life-logging. Applications also include
robot perception and human-robot interactions, since videos
from the robot’s viewpoint naturally are in first-person.
Despite a massive amount of first-person videos becoming available, approaches to semantically understand such
videos have been very limited. This is particularly true for
research on ‘motion features’ for first-person videos, which
serves as a fundamental component for visual grounding of
actions and events. Even though there has been previous
works on extraction of first-person-specific semantic features like hand locations [11] and human gaze [13], features and representations designed to capture motion dynamics of first-person videos have been lacking. Representing this egomotion is very essential for recognition of
sports activities, accident activities for patient/health monitoring (e.g., a person collapsing), activities for surveillance/military (e.g., another person assaulting), and many
others from first-person videos. Most of the previous firstperson activity recognition works [9, 18] focused on the use
of existing features and representations designed for conventional 3rd-person videos, without tailoring motion features for the first-person case.
This paper introduces a new feature representation
named pooled time series (PoT). Our PoT is a general
representation framework based on time series pooling of
feature descriptors, which is particularly designed to capture motion information in first-person videos. Given a sequence of per-frame feature descriptors (e.g., HOF or CNN
features) from a video, PoT abstracts them by computing
short-term/long-term changes in each descriptor element.
The motivation is to develop a new feature representation
that captures ‘details’ of entire scene dynamics displayed
in first-person videos, thereby obtaining better video recognition performances. Capturing egomotion information is
crucial for recognition of ego-actions and interactions from
first-person videos, and our PoT representation allows the
system to do so by keeping track of very detailed changes
in feature descriptor values while suppressing noise. Multiple novel pooling operators are introduced, and are combined with temporal filters to handle the temporal structure
of human activities.

