Articulated Motion Discovery using Pairs of Trajectories
Luca Del Pero1
ldelper@inf.ed.ac.uk
1

Susanna Ricco2

Rahul Sukthankar2

Vittorio Ferrari1

ricco@google.com

sukthankar@google.com

ferrari@inf.ed.ac.uk

University of Edinburgh

2

Google Research

Abstract
We propose an unsupervised approach for discovering
characteristic motion patterns in videos of highly articulated objects performing natural, unscripted behaviors,
such as tigers in the wild. We discover consistent patterns
in a bottom-up manner by analyzing the relative displacements of large numbers of ordered trajectory pairs through
time, such that each trajectory is attached to a different
moving part on the object. The pairs of trajectories descriptor relies entirely on motion and is more discriminative
than state-of-the-art features that employ single trajectories. Our method generates temporal video intervals, each
automatically trimmed to one instance of the discovered
behavior, and clusters them by type (e.g., running, turning head, drinking water). We present experiments on two
datasets: dogs from YouTube-Objects and a new dataset of
National Geographic tiger videos. Results confirm that our
proposed descriptor outperforms existing appearance- and
trajectory-based descriptors (e.g., HOG and DTFs) on both
datasets and enables us to segment unconstrained animal
video into intervals containing single behaviors.

1. Introduction
Internet videos provide a wealth of data that could be
used to learn the appearance or expected behaviors of many
object classes. However, traditional supervised learning
techniques used on still images [1,2,4] do not easily transfer
due to the prohibitive cost of generating ground-truth annotations in videos. In order to realize the full potential of this
vast resource, we must instead rely on methods that require
as little human supervision as possible.
We propose a bottom-up method for discovering the
characteristic motion patterns of an articulated object class
in the wild. Unlike the majority of action recognition
datasets, in which human actors perform scripted actions [6,
31, 33, 44], and/or clips are trimmed to contain a single action [16, 34], our videos are unstructured, such as animals
performing unscripted behaviors. The only assumption we
make is that each video contain at least one instance of the
object class. We leverage that the object is engaged in some

Figure 1. Examples of articulated motion pattern clusters discovered using pairs of trajectories (PoTs). These clusters capture
tigers running, walking, and turning their heads, respectively. Inset shows detail of one PoT within the walking cluster. Yellow
lines connect the first trajectories (on the tigers’ body); red lines
connect the second (on moving extremities).

(unknown) behaviors, and that such behaviors exhibit observable consistency, which we term characteristic motion
patterns.
Our method does not require knowledge of the number
or types of behaviors, nor that instances of different behaviors be temporally segmented within a video. The output of
our method is a set of video intervals, clustered according
to the observed characteristic motion patterns. Each interval
contains one temporally segmented instance of the pattern.
Fig. 1 shows some behaviors automatically discovered in
tiger videos, such as walking, turning head, and running.
We identify consistency between observed motion patterns by analyzing the relative displacement of large numbers of ordered trajectory pairs (PoTs). The first trajectory
in the pair defines a reference frame in which the motion of
the second trajectory is measured. We preferentially sample trajectory pairs across joints, resulting in features particularly well-suited to representing fine-grained behaviors

