Neuroaesthetics in Fashion: Modeling the Perception of Fashionability
Edgar Simo-Serra1 ,
1

Sanja Fidler2 ,

Francesc Moreno-Noguer1 ,

Institut de Robòtica i Informàtica Industrial (CSIC-UPC),

2

Raquel Urtasun2

University of Toronto
Prediction
Claustrophobic Setting
User Cluster 20
Brown/Blue Jacket (2)

Abstract
In this paper, we analyze the fashion of clothing of a
large social website. Our goal is to learn and predict how
fashionable a person looks on a photograph and suggest
subtle improvements the user could make to improve her/his
appeal. We propose a Conditional Random Field model that
jointly reasons about several fashionability factors such as
the type of outfit and garments the user is wearing, the type
of the user, the photograph’s setting (e.g., the scenery behind the user), and the fashionability score. Importantly,
our model is able to give rich feedback back to the user,
conveying which garments or even scenery she/he should
change in order to improve fashionability. We demonstrate
that our joint approach significantly outperforms a variety
of intelligent baselines. We additionally collected a novel
heterogeneous dataset with 144,169 user posts containing
diverse image, textual and meta information which can be
exploited for our task. We also provide a detailed analysis
of the data, showing different outfit trends and fashionability scores across the globe and across a span of 6 years.

Recommendation
Black Casual (7)
Black Boots/Tights (4)
Black/Blue Going out (3)

Figure 1: Example of recommendations provided by our
model for the post on the left. In this case the user is wearing what we have identified as “Brown/Blue Jacket”. This
photograph obtains a score of 2 out of 10 in fashionability.
Additionally the user is classified as belonging to cluster
20 and took a picture in the “Claustrophobic” setting. If
the user were to wear a “Black Casual” outfit as seen on
the right, our model predicts she would improve her fashionability to 7 out of 10. This prediction is conditioned on
the user, setting and other factors allowing the recommendations to be tailored to each particular user.
of applications such as virtual garments in online shopping.
Being able to automatically parse clothing is also key in
order to conduct large-scale sociological studies related to
family income or urban groups [20, 26].
In this paper, our goal is to predict how fashionable a person looks on a particular photograph. The fashionability is
affected by the garments the subject is wearing, but also by
a large number of other factors such as how appealing the
scene behind the person is, how the image was taken, how
visually appealing the person is, her/his age, etc. The garment itself being fashionable is also not a perfect indicator
of someone’s fashionability as people typically also judge
how well the garments align with someone’s “look”, body
characteristics, or even personality.
Our aim here is to give a rich feedback to the user: not
only whether the photograph is appealing or not, but also
to make suggestions of what clothing or even the scenery
the user could change in order to improve her/his look, as
illustrated in Fig. 1. We parametrize the problem with a
Conditional Random Field that jointly reasons about several important fashionability factors: the type of outfit and
garments, the type of user, the setting/scenery of the photograph, and fashionability of the user’s photograph. Our

1. Introduction
“The finest clothing made is a person’s skin, but, of
course, society demands something more than this.”
Mark Twain
Fashion has a tremendous impact on our society. Clothing typically reflects the person’s social status and thus puts
pressure on how to dress to fit a particular occasion. Its
importance becomes even more pronounced due to online
social sites like Facebook and Instagram where one’s photographs are shared with the world. We also live in a technological era where a significant portion of the population
looks for their dream partner on online dating sites. People want to look good; business or casual, elegant or sporty,
sexy but not slutty, and of course trendy, particularly so
when putting their picture online. This is reflected in the
growing online retail sales, reaching 370 billion dollars in
the US by 2017, and 191 billion euros in Europe [19].
Computer vision researchers have started to be interested
in the subject due to the high impact of the application domain [1, 2, 3, 6, 8, 11, 18, 29]. The main focus has been to
infer clothing from photographs. This can enable a variety
1

