Part-based modelling of compound scenes from images
Anton van den Hengel12∗ Chris Russell3† Anthony Dick1 John Bastian1
Daniel Pooley1 Lachlan Fleming1 Lourdes Agapito3†
The University of Adelaide1 The Australian Centre for Robotic Vision2 University College London3
Anton.vandenHengel@adelaide.edu.au, crussell@cs.ucl.ac.uk

Abstract

accident, or a temple might collapse in an earthquake”.
In this work, we focus on Lego R block based reconstructions of both synthetic and natural scenes. We do this
for two reasons: The use of Lego blocks emphasizes the
tactile and interactive nature of our reconstructions, while
the grid structure of Lego also provides a natural discrete
parametrization of our pose space. It should be emphasized,
however, that despite the grid structure of Lego, our method
can be successfully applied to reconstructing natural structures that are not based on a grid.

We propose a method to recover the structure of a compound scene from multiple silhouettes. Structure is expressed as a collection of 3D primitives chosen from a predefined library, each with an associated pose. This has
several advantages over a volume or mesh representation
both for estimation and the utility of the recovered model.
The main challenge in recovering such a model is the combinatorial number of possible arrangements of parts. We
address this issue by exploiting the intrinsic structure and
sparsity of the problem, and show that our method scales to
scenes constructed from large libraries of parts.

1. Introduction
We propose a method to estimate the structure of compound scenes from a set of images. Such scenes are prevalent in our everyday environment, and in many cases our
knowledge of their innate structure is essential to our understanding of them. They include man made objects such as
buildings, furniture, and cars, but also natural objects such
as trees and plants. Our goal is to find the simplest construction which explains the shape of the scene, using a given
library of parts. Unlike most work on the recovery of shape
from images, our method does not generate a point cloud,
or a volume, but a structural explanation of way the scene
depicted is constructed. In this sense it is aligned with the
blocks-world approach [15], recently revisited by [7].
Much like the blocks-world approaches, our goal is to
recover a semantic model of the structure of the scene. Instead of creating a simpler volumetric, or point cloud model
of a scene, we wish to create a model which captures interdependencies between parts of a scene, and allows us to
say “These are the wheels of the car so this is how it will
move.” (fig. 1), or “This is how a wall might collapse in an

Figure 1. An illustration of the deconstruction process, from real
world images, and silhouettes, to an estimate of the building blocks
from which an object is constructed, and how they fit together.

The method we propose reasons in 3D about the structure of a scene on the basis of its appearance in an image set.
This requires an initial set of building blocks from which an
scene might be composed. As we are interested in structure,
rather than appearance, these building blocks are defined
uniquely by their shape and position. Our recovered structure estimate is the smallest set of building blocks required
to reconstruct the scene in question.
By estimating structure, rather than shape, the method
provides a semantic interpretation of the elements from
which the scene is constructed. This means that the re-

∗ This work was in part funded by the Data to Decisions Cooperative
Research Centre, Australia, and by the Australian Research Council.
† Authors part funded by the European Research Council under the ERC
Starting Grant agreement 204871-HUMANIS

1

