Graph-based Simplex Method for Pairwise Energy Minimization with Binary
Variables
Daniel Průša
Center for Machine Perception, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University
Karlovo náměstı́ 13, 121 35 Prague, Czech Republic
prusapa1@fel.cvut.cz

Abstract
We show how the simplex algorithm can be tailored to
the linear programming relaxation of pairwise energy minimization with binary variables. A special structure formed
by basic and nonbasic variables in each stage of the algorithm is identified and utilized to perform the whole iterative
process combinatorially over the input energy minimization
graph rather than algebraically over the simplex tableau.
This leads to a new efficient solver. We demonstrate that
for some computer vision instances it performs even better
than methods reducing binary energy minimization to finding maximum flow in a network.

1. Introduction
Energy minimization is a well known NP-hard combinatorial problem which arises in MAP inference in graphical
models [16]. It is of great importance in low-level computer
vision. A lot of effort has been spent by researchers to invent methods finding exact or approximate solutions.
Pairwise energy minimization with binary variables has a
prominent role. It is easily expressible as quadratic pseudoboolean optimization (QPBO) [1, 8]. Max-flow/min-cut algorithms can be applied to find a partial optimal solution,
with some variables undecided. This shrinks the size of the
input problem. The undecided variables can be further resolved by applying e.g. the probing technique [13] or, in
general, by branch and bound. A complete optimal solution is always returned by QPBO for submodular instances.
This is further utilized in some cases of energy minimization with general variables. Every multi-label energy minimization reduces to the binary one [6, 14], preserving the
submodularity property. Further, solving submodular binary instances is a crucial part of approximate minimizations [3].
Since binary energy minimization is cast as a maxflow/min-cut problem, the key prerequisite for solving it

efficiently has been so far to come up with a max-flow algorithm working well on vision instances. The popular algorithm by Boykov and Kolmogorov [2] fulfills this role.
An empirical comparison of max-flow algorithms recently
done by Verma and Batra [15] reveals that some other contemporary implementations are more suitable for instances
with dense graphs.
In this paper we introduce a different principle to solve
the binary case. We do not perform any translation to maxflow. Our starting point is the linear programming (LP)
relaxation of the problem [17]. For binary variables, it is
known to be half-integral, i.e., all components of each optimal solution are in {0, 12 , 1}. Moreover, the solution coincides with the result of QPBO – value 12 indicates undecided
variables [1]. We show that the simplex method solving the
LP relaxation can be turned into a very efficient algorithm,
performed purely over the input energy minimization graph.
Special versions of the simplex method with similar properties have already been proposed for transportation, assignment and minimum cost-flow problems [4]. They are
known as the network simplex algorithms. There is even a
customization for the maximum flow problem [5], though it
does not figure among the leading implementations.
The proposed algorithm has practical benefit. Our experiments demonstrate there are vision instances, where the
algorithm performs better than max-flow based solvers. Besides that, it allows to study the behavior of the simplex
method on large-scale data and gives a hope for a generalization to multi-label problems. And finally, its impact may
extend beyond the scope of energy minimization as it can
be applied to min-cut which is expressible as submodular
binary energy minimization. Since the formulation and the
underlying structure is different than in the case of the network simplex algorithm for max-flow, new ideas for solving
min-cut/max-flow may emerge.
We assume the reader is familiar with the simplex
method, as presented e.g. in [4]. Knowledge of notions like
basis, basic variable, basic feasible solution, pivoting rule
or minimum ratio test is essential for understanding the text.

