A Coarse-to-Fine Model for 3D Pose Estimation and Sub-category Recognition
Roozbeh Mottaghi1∗, Yu Xiang2,3 , and Silvio Savarese3
1
Allen Institute for AI, 2 University of Michigan-Ann Arbor, 3 Stanford University

Abstract
Despite the fact that object detection, 3D pose estimation, and sub-category recognition are highly correlated
tasks, they are usually addressed independently from each
other because of the huge space of parameters. To jointly
model all of these tasks, we propose a coarse-to-fine hierarchical representation, where each level of the hierarchy
represents objects at a different level of granularity. The hierarchical representation prevents performance loss, which
is often caused by the increase in the number of parameters
(as we consider more tasks to model), and the joint modeling enables resolving ambiguities that exist in independent
modeling of these tasks. We augment PASCAL3D+ [34]
dataset with annotations for these tasks and show that our
hierarchical model is effective in joint modeling of object
detection, 3D pose estimation, and sub-category recognition.

1. Introduction
Traditional object detectors [33, 32, 7] usually estimate
a 2D bounding box for the objects of interest. Although
the 2D bounding box representation is useful, it is not sufficient. In several applications (e.g., autonomous driving
or robotics manipulation), we need to reason about objects’
3D pose or viewpoint in addition to their bounding box location. Therefore, pose estimation methods [29, 25, 1] have
been developed to provide a richer description for objects
in terms of their viewpoint/pose. Fine-grained recognition
methods [6, 36, 3] are another class of methods that also
aim to provide richer descriptions since they enable more
accurate reasoning about the detailed geometry and appearance of objects. Ideally, an object detector should estimate
an object’s location, its 3D pose and sub-category.
Note that these three tasks, namely object detection, 3D
pose estimation, and sub-category recognition, are correlated tasks. For instance, learning an object model for
sedans seen from a particular viewpoint is ‘easier’ than
learning a model for general cars as the former forms a
tighter cluster in the appearance space. On the other hand,
∗ The work was done while the first author was at Stanford University.

Car

Discrete
Viewpoint

Coarse
180
90

135

Sedan

Fine

Sedan
Type I

Finer

continuous

Continuous
Viewpoint

continuous

Figure 1. A coarse-to-fine hierarchical representation of an object.
The top-layer captures high-level information such as a discrete
viewpoint and a rough object location, while the layers below represent the object more accurately using continuous viewpoint, subcategory, and finer-sub-category information.

more accurate localization of the object helps to better estimate its sub-category and viewpoint. Although these tasks
are highly correlated, they are usually solved independently.
One of the main issues in joint modeling of these tasks
is that the number of parameters increases as we consider
more tasks to model. This typically leads to requiring a
larger number of images for training in order to avoid overfitting and performance loss compared to independent modeling. For instance, images of a particular type of truck
taken from a certain viewpoint might be rare in the training
set, hence learning a robust model for that might be difficult. This issue has been addressed in the literature by different techniques (for example, part sharing between different viewpoints [13, 35]). In this work, we take an alternative
approach and leverage coarse-to-fine modeling.
We propose a novel coarse-to-fine hierarchical model to
represent objects, where each layer of the hierarchy represents objects at a different level of granularity. As shown in
Figure 1, the coarsest level of the hierarchy reasons about
the basic-level categories (e.g., cars vs. other categories)
and provides a rough discrete estimate for the viewpoint. As
we go down the hierarchy, the level of granularity changes,
and more details are added to the model. For instance, for
car recognition, at one level we reason about sub-categories

