Semantics-Preserving Hashing for Cross-View Retrieval
Zijia Lin†,‡
Guiguang Ding‡
Mingqing Hu§
Jianmin Wang‡
†
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, P.R.China
‡
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, P.R.China
§
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, P.R.China

Abstract
With benefits of low storage costs and high query speeds,
hashing methods are widely researched for efficiently retrieving large-scale data, which commonly contains multiple views, e.g. a news report with images, videos and texts.
In this paper, we study the problem of cross-view retrieval
and propose an effective Semantics-Preserving Hashing
method, termed SePH. Given semantic affinities of training data as supervised information, SePH transforms them
into a probability distribution and approximates it with tobe-learnt hash codes in Hamming space via minimizing the
Kullback-Leibler divergence. Then kernel logistic regression with a sampling strategy is utilized to learn the nonlinear projections from features in each view to the learnt
hash codes. And for any unseen instance, predicted hash
codes and their corresponding output probabilities from observed views are utilized to determine its unified hash code,
using a novel probabilistic approach. Extensive experiments conducted on three benchmark datasets well demonstrate the effectiveness and reasonableness of SePH.

1. Introduction
For numerous algorithms in the field of information retrieval, computer vision, etc., retrieving nearest neighbours
for an instance plays a fundamental role. However, with
the explosion of data recently, nearest neighbour retrieval
from large-scale databases becomes challenging. To tackle
that, hashing methods are proposed. By representing each
instance as a 𝑘-bit binary hash code (i.e. 0 or 1), data can be
compactly stored and Hamming distances can be fast calculated with bit-wise XOR operations. With such benefits of
low storage costs and high query speeds, hashing methods
attract much attention from both academia and industries.
Existing hashing methods can be roughly classified into
two categories: single-view hashing [16, 21, 4, 11, 6, 13,
8, 22, 10] and multi-view hashing [1, 9, 20, 24, 23, 18, 27,
14, 3, 25, 17, 26, 19], with the former focusing on data with
a single view while the latter focusing on that with multi-

ple views, e.g. a news report with images, videos and texts.
In this paper, we study the problem of cross-view retrieval
for data with multiple views. Actually, as revealed in [19],
cross-view retrieval is becoming popular, since it just needs
one view of a query and can retrieve nearest neighbours in
different views. For example, we can use a query image to
retrieve relevant videos or texts from a database. Recently,
various hashing methods for cross-view retrieval have been
proposed, including unsupervised ones [27, 14, 3, 25] and
supervised ones [1, 9, 24, 23, 18, 17, 26, 19].
In this paper, we propose a supervised SemanticsPreserving Hashing method termed SePH for cross-view
retrieval. Given the semantic affinities of training data
as the supervised information, the proposed SePH firstly
transforms them into a probability distribution 𝒫 and approximates it in Hamming space, via transforming all
pairwise Hamming distances between to-be-learnt hash
codes into another probability distribution 𝒬 and minimizing its Kullback-Leibler divergence (abbreviated as KLdivergence) from 𝒫. Unlike previous work [9, 26, 19]
that utilizes the supervised information for independently
weighting each pairwise distance/similarity between hash
codes, SePH standardizes all Hamming distances by transforming each into a probability that depends on all others.
And thus correlations between Hamming distances are incorporated for forcing the to-be-learnt hash codes to better
preserve the semantic structure of training instances. With
learnt semantics-preserving hash codes on training data,
SePH utilizes kernel logistic regression with a sampling
strategy as basic hash functions to model the projections
from features in each view to the hash codes. And for any
unseen instance, with predicted hash codes as well as their
corresponding output probabilities from different observed
views, SePH determines its unified hash code using a novel
probabilistic approach. Note that SePH is a two-step hashing framework, and the learning of hash functions for outof-sample extension is open for any effective method. Extensive experiments conducted on three benchmark datasets
well demonstrate that SePH is effective and reasonable.
Contributions of our work can be summarized as follows.

