Active Learning for Structured Probabilistic Models
with Histogram Approximation
Qing Sun
Virginia Tech

Ankit Laddha
CMU

Dhruv Batra
Virginia Tech

sunqing@vt.edu

aladdha@andrew.cmu.edu

dbatra@vt.edu

Abstract

lection efforts such as PASCAL VOC [4], ImageNet [5],
and MS COCO [6] typically involve spending thousands of
human-hours and dollars on crowdsourcing websites such
as Amazon Mechanical Turk.

This paper studies active learning in structured probabilistic models such as Conditional Random Fields (CRFs). This
is a challenging problem because unlike unstructured prediction problems such as binary or multi-class classification, structured prediction problems involve a distribution
with an exponentially-large support, for instance, over the
space of all possible segmentations of an image. Thus, the
entropy of such models is typically intractable to compute.
We propose a crude yet surprisingly effective histogram approximation to the Gibbs distribution, which replaces the
exponentially-large support with a coarsened distribution
that may be viewed as a histogram over M bins. We show
that our approach outperforms a number of baselines and
results in a 90%-reduction in the number of annotations
needed to achieve nearly the same accuracy as learning
from the entire dataset.

Active learning [7] is a natural candidate for reducing annotation efforts by seeking labels only on the most informative images, rather than the annotator passively labeling
all images, many of which may be uninformative. Unfortunately, active learning for structured-output models is challenging. Perhaps even the simplest definition of “informative” involves computing the entropy of the learnt model
over the output space:
H(P) = −EP(y|x) [log(P(y|x))]
X
=−
P(y|x) log P(y|x),

(1a)
(1b)

y∈Y

which is intractable due to the summation over an
exponentially-large output space Y.

Overview and Contributions. In this paper, we study active learning for probabilistic models such as Conditional
Random Fields (CRFs) that encode probability distributions
over an exponentially-large structured output space.

1. Introduction
A number of problems in Computer Vision – image segmentation, geometric labeling, human body pose estimation
– can be written as a mapping from an input image x ∈ X
to an exponentially large space Y of structured outputs. For
instance, in semantic segmentation, Y is the space of all
possible (super-)pixel labelings, |Y| = Ln , where n is the
number of (super-)pixels and L is the number of object labels that each (super-)pixel can take.
As a number of empirical studies have found [1–3], the
amount of training data is one of the most significant factors
influencing the performance of a vision system. Unfortunately, unlike unstructured prediction problems – binary or
multi-class classification – data annotation is a particularly
expensive activity for structured prediction. For instance,
in image segmentation annotations, we must label every
(super-)pixel in every training image, which may easily run
into millions. In pose estimation annotations, we must label
2D/3D locations of all body parts and keypoints of interest
in thousands of images. As a result, modern dataset col-

Our main technical contribution is a variational approach [8] for approximate entropy computation in such
models. Specifically, we present a crude yet surprisingly
effective histogram approximation to the Gibbs distribution, which replaces the exponentially-large support with
a coarsened distribution that may be viewed a histogram
over M bins. As illustrated in Fig. 1, each bin in the histogram corresponds to a subset of solutions – for instance,
all segmentations where size of foreground (number of ON
pixels) is in a specific range [L U ]. Computing the entropy
of this coarse distribution is simple since M is a small constant (∼10). Importantly, we prove that the optimal histogram, i.e. one that minimizes the KL-divergence to the
Gibbs distribution, is composed
P of the mass of the Gibbs
distribution in each bin, i.e. y∈bin P (y|x). Unfortunately,
the problem of estimating sums of the Gibbs distribution
under general hamming-ball constraints continues to be #P1

