Understanding Image Virality
Arturo Deza
UC Santa Barbara

Devi Parikh
Virginia Tech

deza@dyns.ucsb.edu

parikh@vt.edu

Abstract
Virality of online content on social networking websites
is an important but esoteric phenomenon often studied in
fields like marketing, psychology and data mining. In this
paper we study viral images from a computer vision perspective. We introduce three new image datasets from Reddit1 and define a virality score using Reddit metadata. We
train classifiers with state-of-the-art image features to predict virality of individual images, relative virality in pairs
of images, and the dominant topic of a viral image. We also
compare machine performance to human performance on
these tasks. We find that computers perform poorly with low
level features, and high level information is critical for predicting virality. We encode semantic information through
relative attributes. We identify the 5 key visual attributes
that correlate with virality. We create an attribute-based
characterization of images that can predict relative virality with 68.10% accuracy (SVM+Deep Relative Attributes)
–better than humans at 60.12%. Finally, we study how human prediction of image virality varies with different “contexts” in which the images are viewed, such as the influence
of neighbouring images, images recently viewed, as well as
the image title or caption. This work is a first step in understanding the complex but important phenomenon of image
virality. Our datasets and annotations will be made publicly
available.

(a) Example viral images.

(b) Example non-viral images.

Figure 1: Top: Images with high viral scores in our dataset depict
internet “celebrity” memes ex. “Grumpy Cat”; Bottom: Images
with low viral scores in our dataset. The picture of Peter Higgs
(Higgs Boson) was popular, but was not reposted multiple times
and is hence not considered viral.

by a large number of people. Understanding what makes
content viral has thus been studied extensively by marketing researchers [7, 4, 11, 5].
Many factors such as the time of day and day of week
when the image was uploaded, the title used with the image, etc. affect whether an image goes viral or not [25]. To
what extent is virality dependent on these external factors,
and how much of the virality depends on the image content itself? How well can state-of-the-art computer vision
image features and humans predict virality? Which visual
attributes correlate with image virality?
In this paper, we address these questions. We introduce
three image databases collected from Reddit and a virality
score. Our work identifies several interesting directions for
deeper investigation where computer vision techniques can
be brought to bear on this complex problem of understanding and predicting image virality.

1. Introduction
What graphic should I use to make a new startup more
eye-catching than Instagram? Which image caption will
help spread an under-represented shocking news? Should
I put an image of a cat in my YouTube video if I want millions of views? These questions plague professionals and
regular internet users on a daily basis. Impact of advertisements, marketing strategies, political campaigns, non-profit
organizations, social causes, authors and photographers, to
name a few, hinges on their ability to reach and be noticed

2. Related Work
Most existing works [26, 2, 30] study how people share
content on social networking sites after it has been posted.
They use the network dynamics soon after the content has
been posted to detect an oncoming snowballing effect and
predict whether the content will go viral or not. We argue
that predicting virality after the content has already been
posted is too late in some applications. It is not feasible

1 www.reddit.com, Reddit is considered the main engine of virality
around the world, and is ranked 24th among the top sites on the web by
Alexa (www.alexa.com) as of March 2015

1

