Classifier Adaptation at Prediction Time
Amelie Royer
ENS Rennes, France

Christoph H. Lampert
IST Austria

amelie.royer@ens-rennes.fr

chl@ist.ac.at

Abstract

Previous test examples

Classifiers for object categorization are usually evaluated by their accuracy on a set of i.i.d. test examples. This
provides us with an estimate of the expected error when applying the classifiers to a single new image. In real application, however, classifiers are rarely only used for a single image and then discarded. Instead, they are applied sequentially to many images, and these are typically not i.i.d.
samples from a fixed data distribution, but they carry dependencies and their class distribution varies over time.
In this work, we argue that the phenomenon of correlated
data at prediction time is not a nuisance, but a blessing in
disguise. We describe a probabilistic method for adapting
classifiers at prediction time without having to retrain them.
We also introduce a framework for creating realistically distributed image sequences, which offers a way to benchmark
classifier adaptation methods, such as the one we propose.
Experiments on the ILSVRC2010 and ILSVRC2012 datasets
show that adapting object classification systems at prediction time can significantly reduce their error rate, even with
no additional human feedback.

Current test query
The current test example depicts a
showcase in a shop but it is hard to see
in what type of shop exactly.
Previously seen test examples provide
context that suggest it should be in a
bakery, which is in fact the case.

Figure 1. Example of a sequence of test examples with label correlations that help to correctly classify ambiguous images.

appear much less often or not at all. A second difference is
that the images at prediction time will not be independent of
each other. For example, when a customer in a shop takes
a photo of a broccoli, chances are high that the next image
will also be a vegetable rather than a dairy product.
Machine learning research generally considers it undesirable if the data distribution changes between training
time and prediction time. The phenomenon is called a domain shift and is studied in the field of domain adaptation.
Typically, a domain shift leads to a reduction of classification accuracy, and a significant part of domain adaptation
research studies the question of how such a loss in accuracy
can be prevented, or at least theoretically quantified.
In this work, we argue in favor of a different view: at
prediction time, non-uniformly sampled and correlated data
are actually beneficial. A non-uniform class distribution
has lower entropy than a uniform one, thus we have less
uncertainty about which classes to expect and which ones
not. A statistical dependence between subsequent images
in a sequence means that the past images carry information
about the next ones. This can also be used to infer informa-

1. Introduction
Object recognition systems have become efficient and
reliable enough to be useful for practical, even commercial, applications. For example, a system that recognizes all
20,000 ImageNet categories could be sold pre-trained to a
wide range of customers. Each customer could use the system afterwards for his or her own application, e.g., supporting customers in a supermarket by recognizing products,
educating children by identifying zoo animals, or helping
robots to navigate safely in an office environment.
These scenarios have in common that the statistical distribution of the images that need to be classified differs from
the distribution of images in the dataset used to train the
classifier. One difference is a change in class probabilities: for instance, in the robot example, furniture and office equipment will appear more often than their fraction in
ImageNet. Most other classes, such as exotic animals, will
1

