Symmetry-Based Text Line Detection in Natural Scenes

1

Zheng Zhang1 Wei Shen2 Cong Yao1 Xiang Bai1∗
School of Electronic Information and Communications, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Key Lab of Specialty Fiber Optics and Optical Access Networks, Shanghai University

Abstract
Recently, a variety of real-world applications have triggered huge demand for techniques that can extract textual
information from natural scenes. Therefore, scene text detection and recognition have become active research topics in computer vision. In this work, we investigate the
problem of scene text detection from an alternative perspective and propose a novel algorithm for it. Different from
traditional methods, which mainly make use of the properties of single characters or strokes, the proposed algorithm exploits the symmetry property of character groups
and allows for direct extraction of text lines from natural
images. The experiments on the latest ICDAR benchmarks
demonstrate that the proposed algorithm achieves state-ofthe-art performance. Moreover, compared to conventional
approaches, the proposed algorithm shows stronger adaptability to texts in challenging scenarios.

1. Introduction
The mass popularization of smart phones and rapid development of the Internet have brought forth tremendous
new products and services, which have triggered huge demand for practical vision techniques. Scene text detection
and recognition, affording a way to directly access and utilize the textual information in natural scenes, are obviously
among the most pressing techniques. Consequently, text localization and recognition in natural scenes have attracted
much attention from the computer vision community and
document analysis community.
Though extensively studied in the past decade [5, 7, 25,
35, 41, 27, 3, 42, 12], detecting and reading texts in natural
scenes are still difficult tasks. The major challenges stem
from three aspects [43]: (1) Diversity of scene text: Texts
in uncontrolled environments may exhibit entirely different fonts, colors, scales and orientations; (2) Complexity of
background: The backgrounds in natural scenes can be very
complex. Elements like signs, fences, bricks and grasses are
virtually undistinguishable from true text, and thus are eas∗ Email: xbai@hust.edu.cn

Figure 1. Though the sizes of the characters within the yellow rectangles are small, human can easily discover and localize such text
lines.

ily to cause confusions and errors; (3) Interference factors:
Various interference factors, such as noise, distortion, low
resolution, non-uniform illumination and partial occlusion,
may give rise to failures in scene text detection and recognition.
In this paper, we tackle the problem of scene text detection, which involves discovering and localizing texts from
natural scene images. There are mainly two classes of
mainstream methods for scene text detection: those based
on a sliding window [5, 36, 27] and those based on connected component extraction [7, 25, 9]. The latter category
has become the mainstream in the field of scene text detection, since these methods are usually more efficient and
relatively insensitive to variations in scale, orientation, font,
and language type. In these methods, Maximally Stable Extremal Regions (MSER) [25] and Stroke Width Transform
(SWT) [7] are widely adopted as the basic representation
due to their efficiency and stability. However, such representations may perform poorly under severe conditions,
such as blur, non-uniform illumination, low resolution and
disconnected strokes.
To address these issues, we propose in this work a novel
representation for localizing text regions. Unlike conventional text detection methods, which typically start from
finding character candidates via connected component extraction or sliding-window scanning, the proposed representation directly hunts text lines from natural images.
The mechanism of how mankind identify and recognize
text in natural scenes is still not clear at present, but it has
been shown that people with normal vision can effortlessly
discover text regions without looking into each individual
character, even at a glance. For example, we can easily distinguish the text regions in Fig. 1, even though the charac-

