Generalized Deformable Spatial Pyramid: Geometry-Preserving Dense
Correspondence Estimation

1

Junhwa Hur1 , Hwasup Lim1,2 , Changsoo Park1 , and Sang Chul Ahn1,2
Center for Imaging Media Research, Robot & Media Institute, KIST, Seoul, Korea
2
HCI & Robotics Dept., University of Science & Technology, Korea
{hurjunhwa, hslim, winspark, asc}@imrc.kist.re.kr

Abstract
We present a Generalized Deformable Spatial Pyramid
(GDSP) matching algorithm for calculating the dense correspondence between a pair of images with large appearance variations. The main challenges of the problem generally originate in appearance dissimilarities and geometric variations between images. To address these challenges,
we improve the existing Deformable Spatial Pyramid (DSP)
[10] model by generalizing the search space and devising
the spatial smoothness. The former is leveraged by rotations and scales, and the latter simultaneously considers
dependencies between high-dimensional labels through the
pyramid structure. Our spatial regularization in the highdimensional space enables our model to effectively preserve the meaningful geometry of objects in the input images while allowing for a wide range of geometry variations
such as perspective transform and non-rigid deformation.
The experimental results on public datasets and challenging scenarios show that our method outperforms the stateof-the-art methods both qualitatively and quantitatively.

Source

Ours

SIFT Flow

Target

DSP

DFF

Source

Ours

SIFT Flow

Target

DSP

DFF

Figure 1: Backward warping results of each algorithm given a pair
of images with significant geometric and photometric variations:
SIFT Flow [12], DSP [10], DAISY Filter Flow (DFF) [23], and
our algorithm. Images are courtesy of L. Liu, the author of [13].

1. Introduction
Densely matching two correlated images at the pixel
level is one of the most fundamental tasks in computer vision applications. A tremendous number of research efforts have been conducted in various forms. For example,
narrow-baseline stereo matching finds a pixel-level correspondence along each scan-line, and 2D motion flow estimates dense correspondence fields under a small displacement constraint. In a broad concept, general dense correspondence algorithms address matching two images with
different objects or scenes.
Specifically, general dense correspondence algorithms,
where the object and viewpoint differ significantly, do not
have explicit low-level constraints between the input images. There mainly exist two principal challenges: (1) pho-

tometric variations due to different camera settings and illumination conditions and (2) geometric variations due to
viewpoint changes, object pose changes, and the non-rigid
deformation of objects between the images. These various
factors are projected onto the 2D space; thus, it is challenging to decompose these factors from the images.
Many approaches have attempted to resolve these difficulties by simplifying the complex factors. A common
way to gain robustness for photometric variation is to adapt
illumination-invariant descriptors, such as SIFT [14], SURF
[1], or DAISY [19]. However, it is infeasible to decompose
1

