Early burst detection for memory-efficient image retrieval
Miaojing Shi ∗
Peking University

Yannis Avrithis
University of Athens, NTUA

a context of textual information retrieval. As in [18, 20]
where models like the Dirichlet distributions [20] are proposed to better reflect the bursty nature of documents.
Computer vision researchers question the issue of feature independence implicitly assumed in the bag-of-words
model [14, 17, 8, 31, 41, 9], they show the importance of
taking care of visual burstiness in image retrieval and image classification: the bursty features tend to dominate the
similarity measure, which degrades the quality of the comparison, as other non-bursty yet possibly distinctive features
have a comparatively lower contribution.

Abstract
Recent works show that image comparison based on local descriptors is corrupted by visual bursts, which tend to
dominate the image similarity. The existing strategies, like
power-law normalization, improve the results by discounting the contribution of visual bursts to the image similarity.
In this paper, we propose to explicitly detect the visual
bursts in an image at an early stage. We compare several
detection strategies jointly taking into account feature similarity and geometrical quantities. The bursty groups are
merged into meta-features, which are used as input to stateof-the-art image search systems such as VLAD or the selective match kernel. Then, we show the interest of using this
strategy in an asymmetrical manner, with only the database
features being aggregated but not those of the query.
Extensive experiments performed on public benchmarks
for visual retrieval show the benefits of our method, which
achieves performance on par with the state of the art but
with a significantly reduced complexity, thanks to the lower
number of features fed to the indexing system.

Various strategies have been proposed to discount the
contribution of bursts on the similarity measure. Among
the proposed approaches, some are inspired by text like
the so-called power-law normalization [14, 17] for bag-ofwords or the Polya or Dirichlet models [8]. These strategies
have been pragmatically extended to and improved for more
complex image vector representations such as VLAD [2, 9]
or the Fisher vector [25, 8]. They are also standardly used
in matching approaches like Hamming Embedding [15] or
selective match kernels (SMK/ASMK) [37]. Recently, We
stress a key difference between textual and visual bursts. In
images, the space of features is continuous and not discrete
as in text, which makes it difficult to determine which features are bursty or not. This may explain why bursts are handled by very simple techniques such as power-law, residual
normalization [2, 37] or weighting votes [14].

1. Introduction

S

Hervé Jégou
Inria

ELF - SIMILARITY in images is a recurring concept in

image analysis and computer vision. It is related to
the statistics of natural images, which are highly redundant.
This concept has been tackled in many applications. For
instance, it is exploited in the non-local means de-noising
algorithm [6], where each patch is updated by a weighted
sum of similar patches. It is also useful for spatial verification and image rectification by exploiting the geometrical assumption of repeated patterns [28]. In the context of
image matching, early works [10] like the one of Shechtman and Irani [33] compute the similarity between two images with the “self-similarity descriptor”, a compact local
descriptor that is densely computed on the image.
In recent works based on SIFT local features [19], the
underlying statistical phenomenon is often referred to as visual burstiness [14], by analogy to the terminology used in

This paper revisits the concept of visual bursts by considering several detection strategies aiming at identifying
the bursts directly from the SIFT descriptors. Our approach
is inspired by the work of Turcot and Lowe [42], who remove the features that are unlikely to match a query in an
image collection. In contrast to their approach, which requires to off-line cross-match the whole database, we focus
on detecting bursts within an image. Another difference is
that we merge similar descriptors into a single representative vector instead of selecting features. Therefore we compress the representation without discarding any feature.
The effectiveness of our approach depends on two important design choices. First, we construct the affinity matrix between patches. We combine (i) a probabilistic measure learned on a patch database [44] with (ii) a kernel de-

∗ Miaojing Shi has worked on this paper while he was a visiting student
at INRIA Rennes.

1

