Space-Time Tree Ensemble for Action Recognition
Shugao Ma
Boston University

Leonid Sigal
Disney Research

Stan Sclaroff
Boston University

shugaoma@bu.edu

lsigal@disneyresearch.com

sclaroff@bu.edu

Abstract
10

Human actions are, inherently, structured patterns of
body movements. We explore ensembles of hierarchical
spatio-temporal trees, discovered directly from training
data, to model these structures for action recognition. The
hierarchical spatio-temporal trees provide a robust midlevel representation for actions. However, discovery of frequent and discriminative tree structures is challenging due
to the exponential search space, particularly if one allows
partial matching. We address this by first building a concise
action vocabulary via discriminative clustering. Using the
action vocabulary we then utilize tree mining with subsequent tree clustering and ranking to select a compact set of
highly discriminative tree patterns. We show that these tree
patterns, alone, or in combination with shorter patterns (action words and pairwise patterns) achieve state-of-the-art
performance on two challenging datasets: UCF Sports and
HighFive. Moreover, trees learned on HighFive are used in
recognizing two action classes in a different dataset, Hollywood3D, demonstrating the potential for cross-dataset generality of the trees our approach discovers.

...

24
18

...

18
...

...

10

root
action word

24

part
action word

spatial (temporal) overlap

spatial edge
(to upper space)
...

temporal edge
(to future)

space-time segment

Figure 1. One example tree structure discovered by our approach
for the lifting action and its best match in a testing video. In the
tree, one node (red) indexes to a root action word and is matched
to an STS of the upward movement of the whole body; three nodes
(blue) index to the part action words and are matched to STSs of
the upward movement of the upper-body and two temporally consecutive movements of the left arm and lower left arm respectively.

simplest scenarios. First, the execution of the action may
differ from subject to subject, involving different body parts
or different space-time progressions of body part movements. Second, the video capture process introduces intraclass variations due to occlusions or variations in camera
viewpoint. Thus, the resulting space-time and appearance
variations necessitate using a collection of spatio-temporal
structures that can best represent the action at large.
In this work, we propose a formulation that discovers a
collection of hierarchical space-time trees from video training data, and then learns a discriminative action model
that builds on these discovered trees to classify actions in
videos. Fig. 1 illustrates one simple discovered tree and
its best match in a testing video and Fig. 2 shows more
examples. Given a video, we first extract a collection of
space-time segments (STSs); each STS is a sub-volume that
can be produced by video segmentation, and it may cover
the whole human body or a body part in space-time. We
explore the hierarchical, spatial and temporal relationships
among the STSs; this transforms a video into a graph. We

1. Introduction
Automatic recognition of human actions in video is important for applications in surveillance, HCI, video search
and retrieval. Human actions, or interactions, are inherently defined by structured patterns of the humans’ movement. As such, human actions can be modeled as spatiotemporal graphs, where the graph vertices encode movements of whole body or body parts, and the graph edges encode spatio-temporal relationships between pairs of movement elements, for instance temporal progression, e.g., one
movement followed by another movement, spatial composition, e.g., movement of upper body coupled with movement
of lower extremities, or even hierarchical relationships of
elements, e.g., movement of the body as a whole can decompose into local movements of the limbs.
A single spatio-temporal structure, however, is unlikely
to be sufficient to represent a class of action in all but the
1

