24/7 place recognition by view synthesis
Akihiko Torii Relja Arandjelović Josef Sivic Masatoshi Okutomi Tomas Pajdla
Tokyo Tech∗
INRIA†
INRIA†
Tokyo Tech∗
CTU in Prague‡

Abstract
We address the problem of large-scale visual place recognition for situations where the scene undergoes a major
change in appearance, for example, due to illumination
(day/night), change of seasons, aging, or structural modifications over time such as buildings built or destroyed. Such
situations represent a major challenge for current largescale place recognition methods. This work has the following three principal contributions. First, we demonstrate
that matching across large changes in the scene appearance becomes much easier when both the query image and
the database image depict the scene from approximately the
same viewpoint. Second, based on this observation, we develop a new place recognition approach that combines (i)
an efficient synthesis of novel views with (ii) a compact indexable image representation. Third, we introduce a new
challenging dataset of 1,125 camera-phone query images
of Tokyo that contain major changes in illumination (day,
sunset, night) as well as structural changes in the scene. We
demonstrate that the proposed approach significantly outperforms other large-scale place recognition techniques on
this challenging data.

(a) Query image

(b) Street-view

(c) Synthesized view

(d) Locations on the map

Figure 1. Matching across major changes in scene appearance
is easier for similar viewpoints. (a) Query image. (b) The original database image cannot be matched to the query due to a major
change in scene appearance combined with the change in the viewpoint. (c) Matching a more similar synthesized view is possible.
(d) Illustration of locations of (a-c) on the map. The dots and arrows indicate the camera positions and view directions.

file [33, 39] or product quantization [20] indexing techniques. Despite this progress, identifying the same place
across major changes in the scene appearance due to illumination (day/night), change of seasons, aging, or structural
modifications over time [12, 30], as shown in figure 1, remains a major challenge. Solving this problem would have,
however, significant practical implications. Imagine, for example, automatically searching public archives to find all
imagery depicting the same place to analyze changes over
time for applications in architecture, archeology and urban
planning; or visualize the same place in different illuminations, seasons or backward in time.
In this paper, we demonstrate that matching across large
changes in scene appearance is easier when both the query
image and the database image depict the scene from approximately the same viewpoint. We implement this idea
by synthesizing virtual views on a densely sampled grid on
the map. This poses the following three major challenges.

1. Introduction
Recent years have seen a tremendous progress [3, 6, 7, 8,
10, 14, 24, 28, 34, 35, 36, 40, 44] in the large-scale visual
place recognition problem [27, 36]. It is now possible to
obtain an accurate camera position of a query photograph
within an entire city represented by a dataset of 1M images [3, 8, 40] or a reconstructed 3D point cloud [28, 34].
These representations are built on local invariant features
such as SIFT [29] so that recognition can proceed across
moderate changes in viewpoint, scale or partial occlusion by
other objects. Efficiency is achieved by employing inverted
∗ Department of Mechanical and Control Engineering, Graduate School
of Science and Engineering, Tokyo Institute of Technology
† WILLOW project, Laboratoire d’Informatique de l’École Normale
Supérieure, ENS/INRIA/CNRS UMR 8548.
‡ Center for Machine Perception, Department of Cybernetics, Faculty
of Electrical Enginnering, Czech Technical University in Prague

1

