The Common Self-polar Triangle of Concentric Circles and Its Application to
Camera Calibration
Haifei Huang1,2 , Hui Zhang2,3 , and Yiu-ming Cheung1,2
1

Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong SAR, China
2
United International College, BNU-HKBU, Zhuhai, China
3
Shenzhen Key Lab of Intelligent Media and Speech, Shenzhen, China
{mikehuang,amyzhang}@uic.edu.hk ymc@comp.hkbu.edu.hk

Abstract
In projective geometry, the common self-polar triangle
has often been used to discuss the position relationship of
two planar conics. However, there are few researches on
the properties of the common self-polar triangle, especially
when the two planar conics are special conics. In this paper, we explore the properties of the common self-polar triangle, when the two conics happen to be concentric circles. We show there exist infinite many common self-polar
triangles of two concentric circles, and provide a method
to locate the vertices of these triangles. By investigating
all these triangles, we find that they encode two important
properties. The first one is all triangles share one common
vertex, and the opposite side of the common vertex lies on
the same line, which are the circle center and the line at
the infinity of the support plane. The second is all triangles
are right triangles. Based on these two properties, the imaged circle center and the varnishing line of support plane
can be recovered simultaneously, and many conjugate pairs
on vanishing line can be obtained. These allow to induce
good constraints on the image of absolute conic. We evaluate two calibration algorithms, whereby accurate results
are achieved.
The main contribution of this paper is that we initiate a
new perspective to look into circle-based camera calibration problem. We believe that other calibration methods
using different circle patterns can benefit from this perspective, especially for the patterns which involve more than two
circles.

1. Introduction
In computer vision, camera calibration plays an important role in many applications, such as 3D model recon-

struction [13, 12], robot navigation [3] and image-based
rendering [11]. The issue of camera calibration includes
the estimation of internal parameters, external parameters
and lens distortion [22, 28]. Many calibration methods
have been presented in past decades [19, 28, 29, 5, 8, 14].
Traditional object-based calibration involves highly accurate tailor-made 3D objects, which usually consist of two
or three orthogonal planes [19]. These calibration methods can achieve a high calibration accuracy, but they require an expensive calibration apparatus, and an elaborate
setup [28]. Recently, sphere, a common simple 3D object,
has been used in calibration [18, 1, 25, 27]. The images of
spheres provide good projective constrains on camera calibration, but the size of the sphere, as well as the distance
between the sphere and the image center, largely affect the
calibration results [22]. To obtain a certain of flexibility and
acceptable accuracy, 2D planar pattern has been employed
in camera calibration. Roughly, there are two popular types
of 2D planar pattern. The first one utilizes grid pattern. For
instance, Zhang [28] used a planar grid pattern and achieved
accurate results. The second one utilizes circular patterns.
In [15] , Meng et al. proposed a method using a pattern
that consists of a circle and straight lines passing through
its centers. Ying and Zha [24] presented a method for camera calibration by using one circle image and one coplanar
vanishing point. In [4], Chen et al. provided a novel camera
calibration method to estimate the extrinsic parameters and
the focal length of a camera by using only one single image
of two coplanar circles with arbitrary radius. Further, papers [10, 20, 26] have discussed about the use of concentric
circles pattern.
In this paper, we focus on the concentric circles pattern.
Previous works always recover the imaged circle center and
the vanishing line of the support plane in separate steps. In
[10], they put rank-1 constraint on the linear combination

