Radial Distortion Homography
Zuzana Kukelova1
1

Jan Heller2

Martin Bujnak3

2

Microsoft Research Ltd,
21 Station Road,
Cambridge CB1 2FB, UK

Czech Technical University
in Prague, 166 27 Praha 6,
Technická 2, Czech Republic

a-zukuke@microsoft.com

{hellej1,pajdla}@cmp.felk.cvut.cz

Abstract
The importance of precise homography estimation is often
underestimated even though it plays a crucial role in various vision applications such as plane or planarity detection, scene degeneracy tests, camera motion classification,
image stitching, and many more. Ignoring the radial distortion component in homography estimation—even for classical perspective cameras—may lead to significant errors or
totally wrong estimates. In this paper, we fill the gap among
the homography estimation methods by presenting two algorithms for estimating homography between two cameras
with different radial distortions. Both algorithms can handle planar scenes as well as scenes where the relative motion between the cameras is a pure rotation. The first algorithm uses the minimal number of five image point correspondences and solves a nonlinear system of polynomial
equations using Gröbner basis method. The second algorithm uses a non-minimal number of six image point correspondences and leads to a simple system of two quadratic
equations in two unknowns and one system of six linear
equations. The proposed algorithms are fast, stable, and
can be efficiently used inside a RANSAC loop.

1. Introduction
The estimation of a homography between two views is a
crucial problem in computer vision with many application,
e.g., in image stitching, structure from motion or camera
calibration. A homography exists between projections of
points on a 3D plane in two views or between projections
of general 3D points in two views when the transformation
between the two views is a pure rotation.
A number of algorithms have been proposed for homography estimation in the past. The classical linear algorithm [8] estimates the general homography from 4 point
correspondences. This algorithm is frequently used in
practice, but it assumes perspective projection and thus it

Tomas Pajdla2
3

Capturing Reality s.r.o.,
Syslia 46, 821 05,
Bratislava, Slovakia

martin@capturingreality.com

doesn’t provide accurate estimates for image correspondences corrupted by radial distortion.
This is a serious drawback, since virtually all real projections involve some amount of radial distortion. It was
shown that ignoring the radial distortion, even for standard
consumer cameras, may lead to significant errors in 3D reconstruction [7], metric measurements from images, or in
camera calibration.
One way to deal with radial distortion is to model it in the
final optimization step, i.e., in the bundle adjustment [13].
However, this approach requires a set of correct image
matches which may be difficult to find and thus in many
situations—and especially for larger radial distortions—it is
necessary to consider the distortion already when searching
for image correspondences in a RANSAC loop [6, 4]. By
not providing correct initial radial distortion estimates, the
bundle adjustment is more likely to fall into a local minima
without recovering correct distortion parameters. Radial
distortion modelling proved to be a mathematically challenging task and algorithms for estimating homography or
epipolar geometry for cameras with radial distortion have
been proposed only recently [7, 1, 9, 2, 3].
In [7], Fitzgibbon proposed a one parameter division
model for modeling radial distortion and, based on this
model, algorithms for fundamental matrix and homography
estimation. The homography estimation algorithm assumes
one common radial distortion parameter and uses five image
point correspondences. It leads to a quadratic eigenvalue
problem yielding up to 18 real solutions.
Two algorithms for estimating homography between
cameras undergoing pure rotation, i.e., the panorama stitching problem, have also been proposed recently [9, 2]. Both
algorithms use three image point correspondences to estimate homography as well as one radial distortion parameter
and the focal length.
The first algorithm proposed in [9] formulates the
panorama stitching problem as an optimization problem
and employs Levenberg-Marquardt method to solve it. Be-

