Functional correspondence by matrix completion
Artiom Kovnatsky1 , Michael M. Bronstein1 ,
Xavier Bresson2 , and Pierre Vandergheynst2
1
Faculty of Informatics, Università della Svizzera italiana (USI)
2
Signal Processing Lab, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)

Abstract
In this paper, we consider the problem of finding dense
intrinsic correspondence between manifolds using the recently introduced functional framework. We pose the functional correspondence problem as matrix completion with
manifold geometric structure and inducing functional localization with the L1 norm. We discuss efficient numerical procedures for the solution of our problem. Our
method compares favorably to the accuracy of state-of-theart correspondence algorithms on non-rigid shape matching benchmarks, and is especially advantageous in settings
when only scarce data is available.

1. Introduction
Correspondence problems are, without doubt, among the
most important problems that have to be dealt when analyzing highly-complex geometric data. Establishing correspondence between images is a cornerstone of many algorithms in computer vision and image analysis [50]. In
geometry processing and graphics, finding intrinsic correspondence between deformable 3D shapes is one of the
fundamental problems with a plethora of applications ranging from texture mapping to animation [46]. In machine
learning applications, correspondence problems in highdimensional spaces arise in multi-modal data analysis problems such as manifold alignment and multi-view clustering
[49, 13].
Related work A wide class of correspondence methods
aims at minimizing some structure distortion, which can include similarity of local features [30, 9, 2, 52, 22], geodesic
[25, 7] or diffusion distances [11, 8], or a combination
thereof [44]. Zeng et al. [54] used higher-order structures.
Typically, the computational complexity of such methods is
high, and there have been several attempts to alleviate the
computational complexity using hierarchical [37] or smart
sampling [43] methods. Several approaches formulate the

correspondence problem as an NP-hard quadratic assignment and propose different relaxations thereof [45, 19, 34].
A recent trend is to use machine learning techniques, such
as random forests, to learn correspondences [38, 36].
Another important class of methods strives to embed the
intrinsic structure of the manifold into some other space,
where the correspondence can be parametrized with a small
number of degrees of freedom. Elad and Kimmel [12] used
multi-dimensional scaling to embed the geodesic metric
of the matched manifolds into the Euclidean space, where
alignment of the resulting “canonical forms” is then performed by simple rigid matching (ICP) [10, 3, 27]. Mateus et al. [23] used the first eigenfunctions of the LaplaceBeltrami operator as embedding coordinates. A more recent method of spectral kernel map [39] follows this path.
Lipman et al. [21, 15, 16] used conformal embeddings to
parametrize correspondence as a Möbius transformation.
More recently, there is an emerging interest in soft correspondence approaches. Several methods formulated soft
correspondence as a mass-transportation problem [24, 41].
Ovsjanikov et al. [29] introduced the functional correspondence framework, modeling the correspondence as a linear operator between spaces of functions on two manifolds,
which has an efficient representation in the Laplacian eigenbases. In such a formulation, the problem of finding correspondence is reduced to solving a linear system of equations given some known set of corresponding functions on
the two manifolds. Pokrass et al. [33] extended this approach to the case when the ordering of the corresponding
functions is unknown, and introduced a regularization on
the diagonal structure of the correspondence matrix representation in the Laplacian eigenbases. Kovnatsky et al. [18]
proposed constructing coupled bases by simultaneous diagonalization of Laplacians. In such bases the correspondence
is represented by an approximately diagonal matrix, which
allows to solve the linear system of equations for diagonal
elements only.
Main contribution Our paper deals with the problem of
finding dense intrinsic correspondence between manifolds

