Elastic Functional Coding of Human Actions: From Vector-Fields to Latent
Variables
Rushil Anirudh1,2, Pavan Turaga2,1, Jingyong Su3 , and Anuj Srivastava4
1

School of Electrical, Computer, and Energy Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ
2
School of Arts, Media and Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ
3
Department of Mathematics & Statistics, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX
4
Department of Statistics, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL
{ranirudh@asu.edu, pturaga@asu.edu, jingyong.su@ttu.edu, anuj@stat.fsu.edu}

Abstract
Human activities observed from visual sensors often give
rise to a sequence of smoothly varying features. In many
cases, the space of features can be formally defined as a
manifold, where the action becomes a trajectory on the
manifold. Such trajectories are high dimensional in addition to being non-linear, which can severely limit computations on them. We also argue that by their nature, human actions themselves lie on a much lower dimensional manifold
compared to the high dimensional feature space. Learning
an accurate low dimensional embedding for actions could
have a huge impact in the areas of efficient search and
retrieval, visualization, learning, and recognition. Traditional manifold learning addresses this problem for static
points in Rn , but its extension to trajectories on Riemannian manifolds is non-trivial and has remained unexplored.
The challenge arises due to the inherent non-linearity, and
temporal variability that can significantly distort the distance metric between trajectories. To address these issues
we use the transport square-root velocity function (TSRVF)
space, a recently proposed representation that provides a
metric which has favorable theoretical properties such as
invariance to group action. We propose to learn the low dimensional embedding with a manifold functional variant of
principal component analysis (mfPCA). We show that mfPCA effectively models the manifold trajectories in several
applications such as action recognition, clustering and diverse sequence sampling while reducing the dimensionality
by a factor of ∼ 250×. The mfPCA features can also be reconstructed back to the original manifold to allow for easy
visualization of the latent variable space.
Rushil Anirudh & Pavan Turaga were supported by NSF CCF CIF
grant #1320267. Anuj Srivastava was supported by NSF CCF CIF grant
#1319658.

Figure 1: Overview of our work

1. Introduction
There have been significant advances in understanding
differential geometric properties of image and video features in vision and robotics. Examples include activity
recognition [25, 4, 29], medical image analysis [6], and
shape analysis [21]. Some of the popular non-Euclidean
features used for activity analysis include shape silhouettes
on the Kendall’s shape space [28], pairwise transformations
of skeletal joints on SE(3)×SE(3) · · ·×SE(3) [29], linear
dynamical system on the Grassmann manifold [25], and histogram of oriented optical flow (HOOF) on a hyper-sphere
[4]. A commonly occurring theme in many applications is

