MUlti-Store Tracker (MUSTer): a Cognitive Psychology Inspired Approach to
Object Tracking
Zhibin Hong1 , Zhe Chen1 , Chaohui Wang2 , Xue Mei3 , Danil Prokhorov3 , and Dacheng Tao1
1

Centre for Quantum Computation and Intelligent Systems, Faculty of Engineering and Information Technology,
University of Technology, Sydney, NSW 2007, Australia
2
Laboratoire d’Informatique Gaspard Monge, UMR CNRS 8049, Université Paris-Est, 77454 Marne-la-Vallée, France
3
Toyota Research Institute, North America, Ann Arbor, MI 48105, USA
{zhibin.hong@student., zhe.chen@student., dacheng.tao@}uts.edu.au, chaohui.wang@u-pem.fr,
{xue.mei, danil.prokhorov}@tema.toyota.com

Abstract
Environmental
Input Signals

Variations in the appearance of a tracked object, such
as changes in geometry/photometry, camera viewpoint, illumination, or partial occlusion, pose a major challenge to
object tracking. Here, we adopt cognitive psychology principles to design a flexible representation that can adapt to
changes in object appearance during tracking. Inspired by
the well-known Atkinson-Shiffrin Memory Model, we propose MUlti-Store Tracker (MUSTer), a dual-component approach consisting of short- and long-term memory stores
to process target appearance memories. A powerful and
efficient Integrated Correlation Filter (ICF) is employed
in the short-term store for short-term tracking. The integrated long-term component, which is based on keypoint
matching-tracking and RANSAC estimation, can interact with the long-term memory and provide additional information for output control. MUSTer was extensively evaluated on the CVPR2013 Online Object Tracking Benchmark
(OOTB) and ALOV++ datasets. The experimental results
demonstrated the superior performance of MUSTer in comparison with other state-of-art trackers.

Auditory
Information

Visual
Information

Haptic
Information

Sensory
Register

Short-term
Store
Rehearsal
Coding
Decision
Retrieval
Response
Output

Remembering
Forgetting

Long-term
Store

Figure 1. The Atkinson-Shiffrin memory model represented by an
illustrative neural network. Nodes and their connections inside the
short- and long-term stores represent the possible structure of the
neural network inside the human brain.

1. Introduction
Object tracking is relatively easy for humans. Humans
respond quickly to visual information by recognizing temporal consistency and memorizing useful visual features to
recover from tracking failures when the target leaves fieldof-view. Memory is one of the most powerful, but least well
understood, functions of the human brain. With the sophisticated memory system, humans are capable of adapting to
complex environments and behaving stably and consistently when facing temporal issues. We hypothesize that the
principles of biological memory can be exploited to design

solutions to tracking problems, which can be regarded as a
time-series motion estimation problem.
Although how human memory works is still not fully understood, several memory models have been proposed. We
focus on the well-known Atkinson-Shiffrin Memory Model (ASMM, also known as the multi-store model, outlined
in Figure 1), which was proposed by Atkinson and Shiffrin
in 1968 [1] to explain the basic structure and function of
1

