Appearance-Based Gaze Estimation in the Wild
Xucong Zhang1
Yusuke Sugano1
Mario Fritz2
Andreas Bulling1
1
Perceptual User Interfaces Group, 2 Scalable Learning and Perception Group
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbrücken, Germany
{xczhang,sugano,mfritz,bulling}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract

Input Image

Eye image e
Generic face
model

Appearance-based gaze estimation is believed to work
well in real-world settings, but existing datasets have been
collected under controlled laboratory conditions and methods have been not evaluated across multiple datasets. In
this work we study appearance-based gaze estimation in
the wild. We present the MPIIGaze dataset that contains
213,659 images we collected from 15 participants during
natural everyday laptop use over more than three months.
Our dataset is significantly more variable than existing
ones with respect to appearance and illumination. We also
present a method for in-the-wild appearance-based gaze estimation using multimodal convolutional neural networks
that significantly outperforms state-of-the art methods in
the most challenging cross-dataset evaluation. We present
an extensive evaluation of several state-of-the-art imagebased gaze estimation algorithms on three current datasets,
including our own. This evaluation provides clear insights
and allows us to identify key research challenges of gaze
estimation in the wild.

3D head rotation r
and
eye location t
Face and landmark
detection

Gaze angle
vector g

Data
normalisation
CNN model

Camera
calibration

Head angle
vector h

Figure 1: Overview of our method for in-the-wild
appearance-based gaze estimation using multimodal convolutional neural networks.

collected under controlled laboratory conditions. These conditions are characterised by limited variability of eye appearances as well as the assumption of accurate head pose estimates. Current appearance-based gaze estimation methods
are also not evaluated across different datasets, which bears
the risk of significant dataset bias – a key problem also in
object recognition [43] and salient object detection [23].
In this work we make the first step towards appearancebased gaze estimation in the wild. Given a lack of realistic data, we created the MPIIGaze dataset that contains
213,659 images collected from 15 laptop users over several
months (see Figure 2). MPIIGaze covers a realistic variability in appearance and illumination and therefore represents
a significant advance over existing datasets. Laptops not
only allow us to record in the wild but they also have considerable potential as an application platform, such as for
gaze interaction [28]. The dataset and annotations are publicly available online.
We study two key tasks through extensive evaluations of
appearance-based gaze estimation algorithms on three publicly available gaze estimation datasets:

1. Introduction
Appearance-based gaze estimation is well established
as a research topic in computer vision because of its relevance for several application domains, including gaze-based
human-computer interaction and visual behaviour analysis [31]. Purely learning-based methods were recently proposed to learn generic gaze estimators from large amounts
of person, and head pose-independent training data [10, 34,
39]. Such methods have the potential to bring appearancebased methods into settings that do not require any user- or
device-specific training. Gaze estimation using monocular
cameras is particularly promising given the proliferation of
such cameras in hand-held and portable devices, such as
mobile phones and laptops, as well as interactive displays.
While appearance-based gaze estimation is believed to
perform well in everyday settings, state-of-the-art learningbased methods are still developed and evaluated on datasets

1. Handling appearance differences between training and
testing data. Since we cannot always assume a training
dataset that can cover the whole test space, the important question is how robustly the estimator can handle
unknown appearance conditions.
1

