Iteratively Reweighted Graph Cut for Multi-label MRFs with Non-convex Priors
Thalaiyasingam Ajanthan, Richard Hartley, Mathieu Salzmann, and Hongdong Li
Australian National University & NICTA
Canberra, Australia

Abstract
While widely acknowledged as highly effective in computer vision, multi-label MRFs with non-convex priors are
difficult to optimize. To tackle this, we introduce an algorithm that iteratively approximates the original energy with
an appropriately weighted surrogate energy that is easier
to minimize. Our algorithm guarantees that the original energy decreases at each iteration. In particular, we consider
the scenario where the global minimizer of the weighted
surrogate energy can be obtained by a multi-label graph
cut algorithm, and show that our algorithm then lets us handle of large variety of non-convex priors. We demonstrate
the benefits of our method over state-of-the-art MRF energy
minimization techniques on stereo and inpainting problems.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we introduce an algorithm to minimize the
energy of multi-label Markov Random Fields (MRFs) with
non-convex edge priors. In general, minimizing a multilabel MRF energy function is NP-hard. While in rare cases
a globally optimal solution can be obtained in polynomial
time, e.g., in the presence of convex priors [10], in most scenarios one has to rely on an approximate algorithm. Even
though graph-cut-based algorithms [6] have proven successful for specific problems (e.g., metric priors), there does
not seem to be a single algorithm that performs well with
different non-convex priors such as the truncated quadratic,
the Cauchy function and the corrupted Gaussian.
Here, we propose to fill this gap and introduce an iterative graph-cut-based algorithm to minimize multi-label
MRF energies with a certain class of non-convex priors.
Our algorithm iteratively minimizes a weighted surrogate
energy function that is easier to optimize, with weights
computed from the solution at the previous iteration. We
show that, under suitable conditions on the non-convex priors, and as long as the weighted surrogate energy can be
decreased, our approach guarantees that the true energy de-

creases at each iteration.
More specifically, we consider MRF energies with arbitrary data terms and where the non-convex priors are concave functions of some convex priors over pairs of nodes. In
this scenario, and when the label set is linearly ordered, the
solution at each iteration of our algorithm can be obtained
by applying the multi-label graph cut algorithm of [10].
Since the resulting solution is optimal, our algorithm guarantees that our MRF energy decreases.
In fact, our method is inspired by the Iteratively
Reweighted Least Squares (IRLS) algorithm which is wellknown for continuous optimization. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first time that such a technique is
transposed to the MRF optimization scenario.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithm on
the problems of stereo correspondence estimation and image inpainting. Our experimental evaluation shows that
our method consistently outperforms other state-of-the-art
graph-cut-based algorithms [6, 24], and, in most scenarios,
yields lower energy values than TRW-S [13], which was
shown to be one of the best-performing multi-label approximate energy minimization methods [22, 12].

1.1. Related work
Over the years, two different types of approximate MRF
energy minimization methods have been proposed. The first
class of such methods consists of move-making techniques
that were inspired by the success of the graph cut algorithm
at solving binary problems in computer vision. These techniques include α-expansion, α-β swap [6] and multi-label
moves [24, 23, 11]. The core idea of these methods is to
reduce the original multi-label problem to a sequence of binary graph cut problems. Each graph cut problem can then
be solved either optimally by the max-flow algorithm [5]
if the resulting binary energy is submodular, or approximately via a roof dual technique [4] otherwise. The second
type of approximate energy minimization methods consists
of message passing algorithms, such as belief propagation
(BP) [8], tree-reweighted message passing (TRW) [25, 13]
and the dual decomposition-based approach of [14], which
TRW is a special case of.

