Propagated Image Filtering
Jen-Hao Rick Chang
Dept. Electrical and Computer Engineering
Carnegie Mellon University

Yu-Chiang Frank Wang
Research Center for IT Innovation
Academia Sinica

rickchang@cmu.edu

ycwang@citi.sinica.edu.tw

Abstract

determine beforehand. For example (and as discussed later
in Section 3), choosing a large neighborhood for highly textural regions would result in cross-region mixing, while selecting a small one would limit the filtering performance.
Recently, Lu et al. [17] tackled this problem by thresholding neighborhoods within a predefined pixel value difference. Instead of predefined pixel neighborhoods, geodesic
filtering [5, 12] dynamically determines their filtering kernels by calculating the accumulated difference between the
values of adjacent pixels. As discussed in Section 3, although geodesic filters have shown promising results for
denoising tasks, they still suffer from cross-region mixing
in smoothing and other filtering tasks.
In this paper, we propose a propagation filter for solving
the above tasks. Our propagation filter is able to observe
and preserve image characteristics without the need to apply explicit spatial kernel functions. We will show that our
filtering process can be regarded as a one-step estimator,
which minimizes the expected error between the filtered and
desirable image outputs. In the experiments, we consider
several image processing applications such as image denoising/smoothing, image fusion, and high-dynamic-range
(HDR) imaging. We will verify that our proposed filter
would perform favorably against existing bilateral, guided,
and geodesic filters on the above tasks.

We propose the propagation filter as a novel image filtering operator, with the goal of smoothing over neighboring
image pixels while preserving image context like edges or
textural regions. In particular, our filter does not to utilize
explicit spatial kernel functions as bilateral and guided filters do. We will show that our propagation filter can be
viewed as a robust estimator, which minimizes the expected
difference between the filtered and desirable image outputs.
We will also relate propagation filtering to belief propagation, and suggest techniques if further speedup of the filtering process is necessary. In our experiments, we apply our
propagation filter to a variety of applications such as image denoising, smoothing, fusion, and high-dynamic-range
(HDR) compression. We will show that improved performance over existing image filters can be achieved.

1. Introduction
Image filtering is a process of updating pixel values in an
image to achieve particular goals like denoising, smoothing,
enhancement, or matting. It typically requires the extraction
of particular image characteristics, while undesirable patterns like noise or irrelevant textural regions need to be disregarded. If cross-region mixing occurs during the filtering
process, i.e., the characteristics of adjacent image regions
are blended, the output image would contain blurry regions
which result in degraded visual quality.
Bilateral [22, 24] and guided filters [14] are popular
edge-preserving image filters, which are able to alleviate
the aforementioned problem during the filtering process.
The idea of these filters is to observe and process neighboring pixels with similar pixel values, so that desirable image context can be preserved. Both bilateral and guided
filters have been successfully applied to a variety of applications such as noise reduction [1, 16, 20, 8], tone management [2, 7, 21, 9], and image fusion [15]. However, these
filters require predefined pixel neighborhood regions (via
spatial functions or kernels), which are typically difficult to

2. Related Work
2.1. Bilateral Filtering
Well known as an edge-preserving filter, the bilateral filter [22] calculates the value for pixel s as follows:
1 X
g(dBF (s, t); σs ) g(dBF (Is , It ); σr ) It ,
(1)
Zs
t∈Ω
where Is0 is the filtered output at pixel s, Ω denotes the set
of pixels t in the input I , and g(x; σ) is a Gaussian function with variance σ 2 . For bilateral filters, the spatial and
photometric distances between pixels s and t are defined as:
Is0 =

dBF (s, t) = kt − sk, and dBF (Is , It ) = kIt − Is k,

1

(2)

