A Graphical Model Approach for Matching Partial Signatures
Xianzhi Du1 , David Doermann2 , and Wael AbdAlmageed3
1

UMIACS, University of Maryland, College Park, xianzhi@umiacs.umd.edu
UMIACS, University of Maryland, College Park, doermann@umiacs.umd.edu
3
Information Sciences Institute, University of Southern California, wamageed@isi.edu
2

Abstract
In this paper, we present a novel partial signature matching method using graphical models. Shape context features
are extracted from the contour of signatures to capture local variations, and K-means clustering is used to build a
visual vocabulary from a set of reference signatures. To describe the signatures, supervised latent Dirichlet allocation
is used to learn the latent distributions of the salient regions over the visual vocabulary and hierarchical Dirichlet
processes are implemented to infer the number of salient
regions needed. Our work is evaluated on three datasets
derived from the DS-I Tobacco signature dataset with clean
signatures and the DS-II UMD dataset with signatures with
different degradations. The results show the effectiveness of
the approach for both the partial and full signature matching.

1. Introduction
In today’s electronic world, signatures are still widely
used as a method for authorization, identification, and in
some cases, document retrieval. This is due to the fact that
signatures are written in a ballistic manner and will carry
discriminative features that are difficult to forge by an amateur [7] [9]. The signature matching problem aims to identify the author of a query signature, based on shape comparisons with reference signatures.
For matching we distinguish between two problems—
full signature matching, which assumes an accurate segmentation and an author who has produced a complete and
consistent signature, and partial signature matching, where
we enroll a full reference signature, but may only have a
partial signature or even initials to match against the reference signature. A lot of work has shown great promise for
addressing the full signature matching problem using feature descriptors such as shape context [16] [8]. However,

partial signature matching remains an open problem. When
dealing with real applications, even though full signatures
are collected, many query signatures are only part of the
authors’ full name. This is due to multiple factors including the fact that people sometimes only sign their first/last
names or initials, part of a signature may be missed when
performing signature extraction, or when the signature is
obscured by other information, such as the machine-printed
text in a signature block.
In general, state of the art methods for signature matching can be grouped into global-shape based approaches and
point-level approaches. Global-shape approaches use holistic shape representations to address this problem. For example, Srihari et al. [12] used global shape structure and Lin et
al. [10] used Fourier descriptors. When working with full,
high quality signatures, these methods work efficiently and
accurately. However, global-shape methods work poorly
when degradations are present, or when the signatures become occluded or are partial.
For point-level methods, signatures are modeled as contour points or skeleton points, and features such as shape
context [4], or FREAK features [2] are used to describe the
relations between local points. Signatures are matched either by computing the point-wise correspondences of two
signatures or by comparing high-level features built for each
signature. Du et al. [8] clustered all features of contour
points and then built a term-frequency histogram for each
signature as the high-level feature. Nearest neighbor search
was then used to find the closest sample for a query signature. This method is fast and efficient, but it still does
not work on partial signatures as local information is used
together to build holistic features for each signature. Zhu
et al. [16] compared all pairs of points between each pair
of signatures to form global weights in the training stage.
Each query signature is then compared point-wise with all
samples to find the closest match. This method can tolerate a low degree of variation, which makes it more robust
to the partial matching problem, but it does not scale to

