Reflectance Hashing for Material Recognition
Hang Zhang 1 Kristin Dana 1 Ko Nishino 2
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 08854
2
Department of Computer Science, Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA 19104
zhang.hang@rutgers.edu, kdana@ece.rutgers.edu, kon@drexel.edu

Abstract
We introduce a novel method for using reflectance to
identify materials. Reflectance offers a unique signature of
the material but is challenging to measure and use for recognizing materials due to its high-dimensionality. In this
work, one-shot reflectance of a material surface which we
refer to as a reflectance disk is capturing using a unique
optical camera. The pixel coordinates of these reflectance
disks correspond to the surface viewing angles. The reflectance has class-specific stucture and angular gradients
computed in this reflectance space reveal the material class.
These reflectance disks encode discriminative information
for efficient and accurate material recognition. We introduce a framework called reflectance hashing that models
the reflectance disks with dictionary learning and binary
hashing. We demonstrate the effectiveness of reflectance
hashing for material recognition with a number of realworld materials.

1. Introduction
Color and geometry are not a full measure of the richness
of visual appearance. Material composition of a physical
surface point determines the characteristics of light interaction and the reflection to an observer. In the everyday real
world there are a vast number of materials that are useful
to discern including concrete, metal, plastic, velvet, satin,
asphalt, carpet, tile, skin, hair, wood, and marble. A computational method for identifying these materials has important implications in developing new algorithms and new
technologies for a broad set of application domains. For example, a mobile robot or autonomous automobile can use
material recognition to determine whether the terrain is asphalt, grass, gravel, ice or snow in order to optimize mechanical control. An indoor mobile robot can distinguish
among wood, tile, or carpet for cleaning tasks. The material
composition of objects can be tagged for an e-commerce

(a) Leather Surface

(b) Reflectance Disk

(c) Texton Map

(d) Auto Paint Surface

(e) Reflectance Disk

(f) Texton Map

Figure 1: Reflectance disks provide a quick snapshot of the
intrinsic reflectance of a surface point. Gradients of the reflectance space are captured with textons and provide a signature for material recognition.

inventory or for characterizing multi-composite 3D printed
objects. The potential applications are limitless in areas
such as robotics, digital architecture, human-computer interaction, intelligent vehicles, and advanced manufacturing.
Furthermore, just as computer vision algorithms now use
depth sensors directly from RGB-D cameras, material sensors can have foundational importance in nearly all vision
algorithms including segmentation, feature matching, scene
recognition, image-based rendering, context-based search,
object recognition, and motion estimation. Our approach
uses reflectance for material recognition because of the advantages of having an intrinsic optical signature for the surface. However, we bypass the use of a gonioreflectometer
by using a novel one-shot reflectance camera based on a
parabolic mirror design. The output of this camera is a reflectance disk, a dense sampling of the surface reflectance of
the material projected into a single image as shown for two

