FaLRR: A Fast Low Rank Representation Solver
Shijie Xiao† , Wen Li† , Dong Xu† , Dacheng Tao‡
†
School of Computer Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
‡
Centre for Quantum Computation & Intelligent Systems and the Faculty of Engineering and
Information Technology, University of Technology, Sydney, Australia
{XIAO0050, WLI1, DongXu}@ntu.edu.sg, Dacheng.Tao@uts.edu.au

Abstract

Among the spectral clustering based approaches, the
low-rank representation (LRR) method [14, 13] aims to
learn a low rank data representation matrix for constructing the desired similarity matrix. Based on a convex formulation, LRR is robust to noise (see [13] and references
therein), and thus it has achieved promising performance in
dealing with real-world vision problems [14, 13, 9].
Regarding optimization, several algorithms [14, 12, 13]
were proposed to exactly solve LRR. Moreover, to efficiently obtain an approximated solution of LRR, a distributed
framework [17] was developed. However, existing algorithms are usually based on the original formulation [14]
or a similar variant [13], either of which is a two-variable
problem with regard to the original data matrix.
In this paper, we reformulate LRR based on the factorized data, so that the resultant problem contains the components from skinny singular value decomposition (SVD)
of the original data matrix. Interestingly, the new problem benefits both the optimization and the theoretical study.
In terms of optimization, we develop an efficient algorithm
based on the alternating direction method (ADM) [2, 12],
in which both resultant subproblems can be solved exactly. We show that our new optimization algorithm achieves a
global optimum in theory and it outperforms the existing LRR solvers [13, 12] in terms of efficiency. Moreover, based
on the new form, we provide theoretical analysis regarding
the influence of the parameter in LRR. Last but not least,
the proposed algorithm can be readily incorporated into the
distributed framework [17] of LRR, to further improve the
efficiency.
Notations: For convenient presentation, we denote a
vector (resp., matrix) with a lowercase (resp., uppercase)
letter in boldface. The transpose of a vector/matrix is denoted by the superscript ′ . In ∈ Rn×n , Om×n ∈ Rm×n
denote the n × n identity matrix and the m × n zero matrix,
respectively. 0n ∈ Rn , 1n ∈ Rn denote the column vectors
with all elements being zeros and ones, respectively. For
simplicity, we drop the subscripts of In , Om×n , 0n and 1n
when the dimension is obvious.

Low rank representation (LRR) has shown promising
performance for various computer vision applications such
as face clustering. Existing algorithms for solving LRR
usually depend on its two-variable formulation which contains the original data matrix. In this paper, we develop
a fast LRR solver called FaLRR, by reformulating LRR as
a new optimization problem with regard to factorized data (which is obtained by skinny SVD of the original data matrix). The new formulation benefits the corresponding optimization and theoretical analysis. Specifically, to
solve the resultant optimization problem, we propose a new
algorithm which is not only efficient but also theoretically
guaranteed to obtain a globally optimal solution. Regarding the theoretical analysis, the new formulation is helpful
for deriving some interesting properties of LRR. Last but
not least, the proposed algorithm can be readily incorporated into an existing distributed framework of LRR for further acceleration. Extensive experiments on synthetic and
real-world datasets demonstrate that our FaLRR achieves
order-of-magnitude speedup over existing LRR solvers, and
the efficiency can be further improved by incorporating our
algorithm into the distributed framework of LRR.

1. Introduction
Data in many real-world problems often lies in a union
of low-dimensional subspaces. Given data sampled from
multiple subspaces, the goal of subspace clustering is to
partition the data into a pre-defined number of groups, such
that each group corresponds to exactly one subspace. The
subspace clustering problem has been extensively studied
[20, 7, 14] for various real-world applications such as face
clustering [14, 7]. Recently, there are growing research
interests in the spectral clustering based methods [7, 14],
which solve the subspace clustering problem by applying
spectral clustering [21, 15] on a desired similarity matrix.
1

