From Categories to Subcategories: Large-scale Image Classification
with Partial Class Label Refinement
Marko Ristin1
1

Juergen Gall2
Matthieu Guillaumin1
Luc Van Gool1,3
2
3
ETH Zurich
University of Bonn
KU Leuven

Abstract

feline

The number of digital images is growing extremely
rapidly, and so is the need for their classification. But,
as more images of pre-defined categories become available,
they also become more diverse and cover finer semantic differences. Ultimately, the categories themselves need to be
divided into subcategories to account for that semantic refinement. Image classification in general has improved significantly over the last few years, but it still requires a massive amount of manually annotated data. Subdividing categories into subcategories multiples the number of labels,
aggravating the annotation problem. Hence, we can expect
the annotations to be refined only for a subset of the already
labeled data, and exploit coarser labeled data to improve
classification. In this work, we investigate how coarse category labels can be used to improve the classification of subcategories. To this end, we adopt the framework of Random
Forests and propose a regularized objective function that
takes into account relations between categories and subcategories. Compared to approaches that disregard the extra coarse labeled data, we achieve a relative improvement
in subcategory classification accuracy of up to 22% in our
large-scale image classification experiments.

∈ Sf ine
cat

lion
feline
∈ Scoarse

subcategory not available

Figure 1: Given training data annotated with a set of categories like “feline”, our goal is to refine the classification
into subcategories like “cat” and “lion”. We assume that the
refined labels are available only for a subset of the training
data Sf ine , while for the rest, Scoarse , subcategory labels
are not available.

contain thousands of categories and millions of images. In
such datasets, categories are often organized in a hierarchy.
The deeper one goes in the hierarchy, the finer the categories
are and annotated training data becomes rare. In order to obtain training data for fine subcategories, a natural approach
is to search for images of coarser categories and refine the
labels. This can be very expensive, especially if the subcategories require expert knowledge [12] (e.g., breeds of dogs,
bird or flower species, etc.). In this work, we are interested
in such a scenario where only a subset of the training data
is annotated with fine subcategory labels while the rest has
only coarse category labels (cf . Fig. 1).

1. Introduction
Over the last few years, we have witnessed an exponential growth of digital imaging. Possibilities for sharing visual content through social media, such as Facebook and
Flickr, together with affordable high-quality cameras have
made images ubiquitous in our lives. The semantic organization of images becomes therefore an imperative if one
wants to access them effortlessly in a meaningful way. With
such a growth, manual categorization is excessively tedious
and expensive. As computers became more powerful and
better algorithms were developed, automatic image classification has become accurate on smaller datasets with hundreds of categories and thousands of images.
The research community has since then moved to more
challenging, larger datasets, such as ImageNet [28], which

In that scenario, we are particularly interested in investigating how the learning of subcategory classification can
be improved by the simultaneous presence of training data
annotated with coarser labels. To this end, we build on the
framework of NCM forests [26], which are classification
forests with splitting functions based on nearest class mean
(NCM) classifiers [23]. NCM Forests are multiclass classifiers that can be efficiently trained and have shown to per1

