Displets: Resolving Stereo Ambiguities using Object Knowledge
Fatma Güney
MPI Tübingen

Andreas Geiger
MPI Tübingen

fatma.guney@tue.mpg.de

andreas.geiger@tue.mpg.de

Abstract

0

Stereo techniques have witnessed tremendous progress
over the last decades, yet some aspects of the problem still
remain challenging today. Striking examples are reflecting and textureless surfaces which cannot easily be recovered using traditional local regularizers. In this paper, we
therefore propose to regularize over larger distances using object-category specific disparity proposals (displets)
which we sample using inverse graphics techniques based
on a sparse disparity estimate and a semantic segmentation
of the image. The proposed displets encode the fact that
objects of certain categories are not arbitrarily shaped but
typically exhibit regular structures. We integrate them as
non-local regularizer for the challenging object class ’car’
into a superpixel based CRF framework and demonstrate
its benefits on the KITTI stereo evaluation. At time of submission, our approach ranks first across all KITTI stereo
leaderboards.

160

Figure 1: Resolving Stereo Matching Ambiguities: Current state-of-the-art stereo methods often fail at reflecting,
textureless or semi-transparent surfaces (top, [68]). By using object knowledge, we encourage disparities to agree
with plausible surfaces (center). This improves results both
quantitatively and qualitatively while simultaneously recovering the 3D geometry of the objects in the scene (bottom).

1. Introduction
“In many cases it is sufficient to know or conjecture that
an object exhibits certain regularities in order to correctly
interpret its perspective image as a 3D shape.”
Hermann von Helmholtz, 1867

central role. Thus how important are Helmholtz’s early observations [59] for binocular stereo matching after all?
In this paper we investigate the utility of mid-level processes such as object recognition and semantic segmentation for stereo matching. In particular, we focus our attention on the reconstruction of well-defined objects for which
the data term is weak and current methods perform poorly,
such as cars. Due to their textureless, reflective and semitransparent nature, those object categories represent a major challenge for current state-of-the-art algorithms, as illustrated in Fig. 1 (top). While the reconstruction of purely
specular surfaces has been successfully demonstrated using
multiple frames [21,62], such techniques are hard to employ
in our setting due to the superposition of several deteriorating visual effects in real-world scenes.

Since David Marr’s influential investigations into the human representation and processing of visual information
[39], stereo matching has been considered primarily a lowlevel process that builds upon bottom-up representations
like Marr’s primal sketch. And indeed, the vast majority
of binocular stereo matching algorithms that have been proposed in the literature rely on low-level features in combination with relatively simple first or second order smoothness assumptions about the world. Little is known about the
importance of recognition for this problem and the leading
entries in current benchmarks such as Middlebury [50] or
KITTI [13] even completely ignore semantic information.
This is in stark contrast to current trends in single image
reconstruction [8, 19, 32, 35, 49] where recognition plays a

In contrast, as humans we are able to effortlessly extract
information about the geometry of cars even from a single
1

