Efficient ConvNet-based Marker-less Motion Capture in General Scenes
with a Low Number of Cameras
A. Elhayek

E. de Aguiar

A. Jain

J. Tompson

L. Pishchulin

MPI Informatics

MPI Informatics

New York University

New York University

MPI Informatics

M. Andriluka

C. Bregler

B. Schiele

C. Theobalt

Stanford University

New York University

MPI Informatics

MPI Informatics

Abstract
We present a novel method for accurate marker-less
capture of articulated skeleton motion of several subjects
in general scenes, indoors and outdoors, even from input
filmed with as few as two cameras. Our approach unites
a discriminative image-based joint detection method with a
model-based generative motion tracking algorithm through
a combined pose optimization energy. The discriminative
part-based pose detection method, implemented using Convolutional Networks (ConvNet), estimates unary potentials
for each joint of a kinematic skeleton model. These unary
potentials are used to probabilistically extract pose constraints for tracking by using weighted sampling from a
pose posterior guided by the model. In the final energy,
these constraints are combined with an appearance-based
model-to-image similarity term. Poses can be computed
very efficiently using iterative local optimization, as ConvNet detection is fast, and our formulation yields a combined pose estimation energy with analytic derivatives. In
combination, this enables to track full articulated joint angles at state-of-the-art accuracy and temporal stability with
a very low number of cameras.

Figure 1. Our ConvNet-based marker-less motion capture algorithm reconstructs joint angles of multiple people performing complex motions in outdoor settings, such as in this scene recorded
with only three mobile phones: (left) 3D pose overlaid with one
camera view, (right) 3D visualization of captured skeletons.

model with attached shape proxies, and they track the motion by optimizing an alignment metric between model and
images in terms of the joint angles. Formulating and optimizing this usually highly non-convex energy is difficult.
Global optimization of the pose is computationally expensive, and thus local methods are often used for efficiency,
at the price of risking convergence to a wrong pose. With
a sufficiently high number of cameras (≥ 8), however, efficient high accuracy marker-less tracking is feasible with
local pose optimizers. Unfortunately, this strategy starts to
fail entirely if only 2 − 3 cameras are available, even when
recording simple scenes inside a studio.
In a separate strand of work, researchers developed
learning-based discriminative methods for body part detection in a single image. Since part detection alone is often
unreliable, it is often combined with higher-level graphical
models, such as in pictorial structures [3], to improve robustness of 2D part or joint localization. Recently, these 2D
pose estimation methods were extended to the multi-view
case, yielding 3D joint positions from a set of images taken
at the same time step [5]. Detection-based pose estimation
can compute joint locations from a low number of images
taken under very general conditions. However, accuracy of

1. Introduction
Optical motion capture methods estimate the articulated
joint angles of moving subjects from multi-view video
recordings. Motion capture has many applications, for instance in sports, biomedical research, or computer animation. While most commercial systems require markers on
the human body, marker-less approaches developed in research work directly on unmodified video streams [27, 32,
35]. Latest work shows that marker-less skeletal motion
tracking is also feasible in a less controlled studio setting
and outdoors, as well as in front of more general backgrounds where foreground segmentation is hard [15, 21].
Commonly these methods rely on a kinematic skeleton
1

