From Captions to Visual Concepts and Back
Hao Fang∗
Li Deng
Margaret Mitchell

Saurabh Gupta∗
Piotr Dollár†
John C. Platt‡

Forrest Iandola∗
Jianfeng Gao
C. Lawrence Zitnick

Rupesh K. Srivastava∗
Xiaodong He
Geoffrey Zweig

Microsoft Research
Abstract
This paper presents a novel approach for automatically
generating image descriptions: visual detectors, language
models, and multimodal similarity models learnt directly
from a dataset of image captions. We use multiple instance
learning to train visual detectors for words that commonly
occur in captions, including many different parts of speech
such as nouns, verbs, and adjectives. The word detector
outputs serve as conditional inputs to a maximum-entropy
language model. The language model learns from a set of
over 400,000 image descriptions to capture the statistics
of word usage. We capture global semantics by re-ranking
caption candidates using sentence-level features and a deep
multimodal similarity model. Our system is state-of-the-art
on the official Microsoft COCO benchmark, producing a
BLEU-4 score of 29.1%. When human judges compare the
system captions to ones written by other people on our heldout test set, the system captions have equal or better quality
34% of the time.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. An illustrative example of our pipeline.

When does a machine “understand” an image? One definition is when it can generate a novel caption that summarizes the salient content within an image. This content may
include objects that are present, their attributes, or their relations with each other. Determining the salient content requires not only knowing the contents of an image, but also
deducing which aspects of the scene may be interesting or
novel through commonsense knowledge [51, 5, 8].
This paper describes a novel approach for generating image captions from samples. We train our caption generator

from a dataset of images and corresponding image descriptions. Previous approaches to generating image captions relied on object, attribute, and relation detectors learned from
separate hand-labeled training data [47, 22].
The direct use of captions in training has three distinct
advantages. First, captions only contain information that is
inherently salient. For example, a dog detector trained from
images with captions containing the word dog will be biased towards detecting dogs that are salient and not those
that are in the background. Image descriptions also contain
variety of word types, including nouns, verbs, and adjectives. As a result, we can learn detectors for a wide variety of concepts. While some concepts, such as riding or
beautiful, may be difficult to learn in the abstract, these

∗ H. Fang, S. Gupta, F. Iandola and R. K. Srivastava contributed equally
to this work while doing internships at Microsoft Research. Current affiliations are H. Fang: University of Washington; S. Gupta and F. Iandola:
University of California at Berkeley; R. K. Srivastava: IDSIA, USI-SUPSI.
† P. Dollár is currently at Facebook AI Research.
‡ J. Platt is currently at Google.

1

