Feedforward semantic segmentation with zoom-out features
Mohammadreza Mostajabi, Payman Yadollahpour and Gregory Shakhnarovich
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
{mostajabi,pyadolla,greg}@ttic.edu

Abstract

“car”

We introduce a purely feed-forward architecture for semantic segmentation. We map small image elements (superpixels) to rich feature representations extracted from a
sequence of nested regions of increasing extent. These regions are obtained by ”zooming out” from the superpixel
all the way to scene-level resolution. This approach exploits
statistical structure in the image and in the label space without setting up explicit structured prediction mechanisms,
and thus avoids complex and expensive inference. Instead
superpixels are classified by a feedforward multilayer network. Our architecture achieves 69.6% average accuracy
on the PASCAL VOC 2012 test set.

multi-layer perceptron
φ1 . . . φ6 . . . φ10 . . . φ13 φsubscene φscene

1. Introduction
We consider one of the central vision tasks, semantic segmentation: assigning to each pixel in an image a
category-level label. Despite attention it has received, it remains challenging, largely due to complex interactions between neighboring as well as distant image elements, the
importance of global context, and the interplay between
semantic labeling and instance-level detection. A widely
accepted conventional wisdom, followed in much of modern segmentation literature, is that segmentation should be
treated as a structured prediction task, which most often
means using a random field or structured support vector machine model of considerable complexity.
This in turn brings up severe challenges, among them the
intractable nature of inference and learning in many “interesting” models. To alleviate this, many recently proposed
methods rely on a pre-processing stage, or a few stages, to
produce a manageable number of hypothesized regions, or
even complete segmentations, for an image. These are then
scored, ranked or combined in a variety of ways.
Here we consider a departure from these conventions,
and approach semantic segmentation as a single-stage classification task, in which each image element (superpixel)
is labeled by a feedforward model, based on evidence computed from the image. Surprisingly, in experiments on PAS-

Figure 1. Schematic description of our approach. Features are extracted from a nested sequence of “zoom-out” regions around the
superpixel at hand (red). Here we show four out of thirteen levels: 1 (cyan), 6 (olive), 10 (purple) and 13 (blue), as well as the
subscene level (orange) and scene level (green). The features computed at all levels are concatenated and fed to a multi-layer perceptron that classifies the superpixel.

CAL VOC 2012 segmentation benchmark we show that this
simple sounding approach leads to results significantly surpassing previously published ones, advancing the current
state of the art to 69.6%.
The “secret” behind our method is that the evidence used
in the feedforward classification is not computed from a
small local region in isolation, but collected from a sequence of levels, obtained by “zooming out” from the closeup view of the superpixel. Starting from the superpixel
itself, to a small region surrounding it, to a larger region
around it and all the way to the entire image, we compute
a rich feature representation at each level and combine all
the features before feeding them to a classifier. This allows
us to exploit statistical structure in the label space and dependencies between image elements at different resolutions
without explicitly encoding these in a complex model.

