A Statistical Model of Riemannian Metric Variation
for Deformable Shape Analysis
Andrea Gasparetto and Andrea Torsello
Dipartimento di Scienze Ambientali, Informatica e Statistica
Universitá Ca’ Foscari Venezia - via Torino, 155 - 30172 Venice Italy
{andrea.gasparetto,torsello}@unive.it

Abstract
The analysis of deformable 3D shape is often cast in
terms of the shape’s intrinsic geometry due to its invariance to a wide range of non-rigid deformations. However,
object’s plasticity in non-rigid transformation often result
in transformations that are not completely isometric in the
surface’s geometry and whose mode of deviation from isometry is an identifiable characteristic of the shape and its deformation modes. In this paper, we propose a novel generative model of the variations of the intrinsic metric of deformable shapes, based on the spectral decomposition of the
Laplace-Beltrami operator. To this end, we assume two independent models for the eigenvectors and the eigenvalues
of the graph-Laplacian of a 3D mesh which are learned in a
supervised way from a set of shapes belonging to the same
class. We show how this model can be efficiently learned
given a set of 3D meshes, and evaluate the performance of
the resulting generative model in shape classification and
retrieval tasks. Comparison with state-of-the-art solutions
for these problems confirm the validity of the approach.

1. Introduction
The ability to retrieve similar 3D objects given a query
object has become of great importance in several field,
like medical research, automatic information retrieval systems and copyright protection. The main challenge in 3D
object retrieval algorithms is to define an invariant representation of a shape capable of capturing geometrical and
topological properties of a shape [37, 7, 47]. A large
number of methods for 3D shape retrieval have been proposed [35, 20, 44, 32, 3], but most of them are only suitable
for the representation of rigid 3D shapes. Non-rigid 3D
shape descriptors are more challenging to define. Indeed,
those representations still need to capture the most distinctive properties of a shape, but they should be also insensitive
to many other transformations (e.g. inelastic transformation,

acquisition resolution and noise etc.).
Various methods have been proposed to address the nonrigid shape retrieval problem. These can be mainly categorized according to two main directions: topology-based
approaches against surface-based methods and the employment of shape descriptors that can be local or global. The
first solution usually capture the global topological structure
of the shape [31, 25, 34], while the surface-based methods
usually exploit spectral shape analysis in order to build a
spectral descriptor [46, 5, 42] to be used for the task. Finally, one can employ global descriptors in order to characterize the whole shape [46, 11] or define a set of of local
descriptors [13, 15] that characterize only parts of the object
(e.g. segments or points).

1.1. Related works
The methods which define a shape descriptor (both local and global) to tackle the non-rigid 3D shape recognition are the ones we are most interested in. A popular approach to define shape descriptors is through spectral shape
analysis. Research efforts have recently resulted in several spectral descriptors [46, 5, 40, 22] usually based on the
spectral decomposition of the Laplace-Beltrami operator. In
particular, the graph-Laplacian, the discrete counterpart of
the Laplace-Beltrami operator, has been extensively used to
provide spectral representations of structures [29]. Reuter
et al. [39] suggest to use the Laplace-Beltrami spectra as
fingerprints of surfaces, while Jain and Zhang [19] propose
to use the eigenvalues of the geodesic distance matrix of
a 3D object in order to build the associated shape descriptor. Huang et al. [18], on the other hand, build the signature
directly over local features, selecting discriminative volumetric features over pre-aligned shapes.
The aggregation of local descriptors in order to build a
global descriptor is a general thread in the literature. For
this purpose, the Bag-of-Features (BoF) paradigm is quite
popular and has been successfully applied to 3D shape description [10, 12, 23, 48]. Li and Hamza [27] used the
BoF paradigm combining the exploitation of hierarchical

