KL Divergence based Agglomerative Clustering for Automated Vitiligo Grading
Mithun Das Gupta1∗, Srinidhi Srinivasa2 , Dr. Madhukara J.3 , Dr. Meryl Antony3
IBM Research Labs, Bangalore India.1
Ricoh Innovations Pvt. Ltd., Bangalore, India.2
St. John’s Hospital, Bangalore, India.3
mithgupt@in.ibm.com, srinidhis@ripl.ricoh.com,

Abstract

madhudoc2009@yahoo.com,

merylantony@hotmail.com

Scoring Index (VASI) [22] and the Vitiligo European Task
Force (VETF) [35] tools were proposed to offer more accurate measures of disease severity indexes and treatment
evaluation criteria compared to simple clinical photography. VASI provides a relatively simple method to measure
depigmentation over the entire patient body. Disease and
treatment outcomes can be assessed using a system developed by VETF, that combines analysis of extent, stage and
disease progression with respect to particular sites. Extent
is evaluated by the rule of nines [20], staging is based on
cutaneous and hair pigmentation, and spreading is assessed
based on Wood’s light examination. Objective methods to
measure the spread (area) have been reported by Van Geel et
al [38], but a detailed look at multiple regions of depigmentation, especially for darker skin tones (type IV and V) has
largely remained an open challenge for the research community. Fig. 1 shows a typical patient with both partial as
well as completely depigmented regions. Several selection
criteria are of importance while considering surgical treatment in vitiligo, namely, disease type, total disease extension, resistance to non-surgical therapy, disease stability and
age of the patients. Disease stability has been considered
to be the most important criterion in the selection. However, no consensus exists regarding the clinical evaluation
of disease activity. According to the literature, the majority of authors classified vitiligo as being stable when further progression of lesions or development of new lesions
were absent in the past year. Clinical observation of lesions
over time, leading to longitudinal recording of an objective
score for area with respect to depigmentation seems to be
an acceptable alternative. Consequently, accurate measurement of lesion area for different depigmentation is of primary importance [1]. Due to the subjectivity involved in
the demarcation of the area boundary, as well as the inherent difficulty of this task, subjective measurements such as
palm based eye-balling have been proposed [22]. Faint transitions between depigmented and pigmented skin patches
render edge based segmentation methods obsolete. Further,
illumination variations in a clinical setting can cause pixel

In this paper we present a symmetric KL divergence
based agglomerative clustering framework to segment multiple levels of depigmentation in Vitiligo images. The proposed framework starts with a simple merge cost based on
symmetric KL divergence. We extend the recent body of
work related to Bregman divergence based agglomerative
clustering and prove that the symmetric KL divergence is
an upper-bound for uni-modal Gaussian distributions. This
leads to a very powerful yet elegant method for bottomup agglomerative clustering with strong theoretical guarantees. We introduce albedo and reflectance fields as features
for the distance computations. We compare against other
established methods to bring out possible pros and cons of
the proposed method.

Figure 1. Vitiligo patch and its annotation by an expert. The red
boundary marks the completely depigmented skin. The yellow
boundary is for the partially depigmented skin. All figures are
best viewed in colour.

1. Introduction
Vitiligo is the most common depigmenting disorder affecting 0.5 − 1% of the worldwide population causing disfigurement and seriously lowers quality of life. Vitiligo
suffers from a lack of consensus on methods of assessment, which makes it difficult to analyse or compare the
outcomes of different studies. Recently, the Vitiligo Area
∗ This work was done when author was part of Ricoh Innovations Pvt

Ltd

1

