Real-Time Coarse-to-fine Topologically Preserving Segmentation
Jian Yao1 , Marko Boben2 , Sanja Fidler1 , Raquel Urtasun1
1

2

University of Toronto,

University of Ljubljana

Abstract
In this paper, we tackle the problem of unsupervised segmentation in the form of superpixels. Our main emphasis is
on speed and accuracy. We build on [31] to define the problem as a boundary and topology preserving Markov random
field. We propose a coarse to fine optimization technique
that speeds up inference in terms of the number of updates
by an order of magnitude. Our approach is shown to outperform [31] while employing a single iteration. We evaluate
and compare our approach to state-of-the-art superpixel algorithms on the BSD and KITTI benchmarks. Our approach
significantly outperforms the baselines in the segmentation
metrics and achieves the lowest error on the stereo task.

Ours

SEEDS [7]

SLIC [1]

Figure 1. Our approach generates regular superpixels that preserve
boundary and topology. Notice how our approach better snaps to
image boundaries.

is likely to increase the overall labeling energy. This was addressed by [31] who proposed an optimization strategy that
only considers updating the boundary pixels at each iteration. Their segmentation method additionally incorporates
length of the boundary as shape regularization, as well as
evidence from stereo image pairs. The final super pixel algorithm then reasons jointly about the partitioning as well
as the stereo estimation in the form of slanted planes.
In this paper, we build on [31] and propose a much more
efficient optimization algorithm that results in an order of
magnitude less updates (speed-up). Inspired by the SEEDS
algorithm [8] our method uses a coarse-to-fine energy update strategy, which allows the optimization to reach better
energy minima than [31] when employing even a single iteration.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in two
important settings: unsupervised segmentation of RGB images, as well as joint segmentation and stereo estimation
via slanted planes. Our results on BSD [19] demonstrate
that our approach significantly outperforms SLIC in all segmentation metrics and SEEDS under the boundary recall
metric. Furthermore, we outperform [31] in a single iteration, achieving a much better minima of the labeling energy.
We test the stereo super pixels on the autonomous driving
dataset KITTI [11], where real-time processing is of partic-

1. Introduction
Superpixels have become an established image preprocessing step to significantly reduce the complexity of
higher-level computer vision techniques. They have been
applied in a wide variety of domains such as image labeling [32, 25], object proposal generation [6], optical flow estimation [31], tracking [2], and stereo [28]. Typically their
role is to partition the image into a tractable set of “units”,
which make the consequent processing run several order
of magnitude faster while at the same time do not sacrifice their performance. Superpixels also serve as an efficient regularizer for domains such as segmentation, stereo
or flow estimation, where pixel-level estimates are noisy or
even missing.
A useful superpixel algorithm should thus ideally run
fast, possibly real-time, and guarantee a reliable, regular,
and topologically coherent image partitioning. While a majority of existing work does not satisfy most of these requirements, particularly speed [5, 21, 33, 18], some of the
recent work reported real-time running times [1, 8]. One of
the fastest approaches is SLIC [1] which performs iterative
k-means style clustering, but which does not ensure that the
final segmentation is connected. A post-processing step is
typically needed to correct for this issue, however, this step
1

