Direction Matters: Depth Estimation with a Surface Normal Classifier
Christian Häne, L’ubor Ladický , Marc Pollefeys
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zürich, Switzerland
{christian.haene, lubor.ladicky, marc.pollefeys}@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
In this work we make use of recent advances in data
driven classification to improve standard approaches for
binocular stereo matching and single view depth estimation. Surface normal direction estimation has become feasible and shown to work reliably on state of the art benchmark datasets. Information about the surface orientation
contributes crucial information about the scene geometry
in cases where standard approaches struggle. We describe,
how the responses of such a classifier can be included in
global stereo matching approaches. One of the strengths
of our approach is, that we can use the classifier responses
for a whole set of directions and let the final optimization
decide about the surface orientation. This is important in
cases where based on the classifier, multiple different surface orientations seem likely. We evaluate our method on
two challenging real-world datasets for the two proposed
applications. For the binocular stereo matching we use
road scene imagery taken from a car and for the single view
depth estimation we use images taken in indoor environments.

Figure 1. Overview of our method. Top Row: The input to our
method is depicted in the top row. On a single input image (left)
two classifiers are evaluated, single view depth estimation (middle) and surface normal directions (right). Bottom Row: On the
bottom the obtained depth map by our surface normal direction
based regularization is shown (left) together with two renderings
of the obtained dense point cloud (middle and right).

ambiguities in the input data. For example when matching
the often slightly reflective ground in indoor imagery it happens that the reflection on the ground is matched better than
the often less textured floor.
To tackle all these difficulties, global optimization algorithms have been applied to this problem. It is common
to not only include matching costs based on a dissimilarity
measures into the energy, but also use image edge information and priors such that planar surfaces are preferred (for
example [35]).
Recently, single view depth estimation has also started to
be a topic in the computer vision literature. For this problem, strong assumptions, such that there are vertical objects
standing on the ground, or data driven machine learning approaches that do not assume a special layout, have been utilized. The advances in machine learning approaches have
also lead to classifiers that are able to estimate surface orientation based on a single image. We argue that information
about the surface orientation that is extracted from the input
image gives additional important cues about the geometry
exactly in these cases where standard algorithms struggle.
Therefore we propose a global optimization approach that

1. Introduction
The problem of finding a dense disparity map from a
stereo rectified image pair is well studied in the computer
vision literature. Despite that, in real-world situations,
where images contain noise and reflections, it is still a hard
problem. The main driving force of the published techniques is to compare the similarity of image patches at different depths. For the rectified binocular case this is usually
defined in terms of a displacement, called disparity, along
the image scan lines. Often images contain texture-less areas, such as walls in indoor environments. Matching image
patches will not lead to a confident estimate for the depth in
this case, as many different disparities lead to low matching
costs. Also overexposed spots on images , which frequently
occur in real life images makes matching image patches infeasible. Another failure cases of standard approaches are
1

