Deep Semantic Ranking Based Hashing for Multi-Label Image Retrieval
Fang Zhao Yongzhen Huang Liang Wang Tieniu Tan
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{fang.zhao,yzhuang,wangliang,tnt}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract

Multi-label images

...

...

...
...

...

building, car

Multilevel sematic
similarity

...

Representing images efficiently is an important task for
large scale content-based image retrieval. Binary hashing
has attracted extensive attention due to computational and
storage efficiencies of binary hash codes. It aims to map
high-dimensional image data to compact binary codes in a
Hamming space while maintaining some notion of similarity (e.g., metric similarity in the original feature space or
semantic similarity based on labels).
Early hashing methods are data-independent, such as locality sensitive hashing [5] and its variants, which use random projections as hash functions without exploring the

tree, sun, sky

Database image list

1. Introduction

tree, sky

Deep feature
representations

Query image

With the rapid growth of web images, hashing has received increasing interests in large scale image retrieval.
Research efforts have been devoted to learning compact binary codes that preserve semantic similarity based on labels. However, most of these hashing methods are designed
to handle simple binary similarity. The complex multilevel
semantic structure of images associated with multiple labels
have not yet been well explored. Here we propose a deep
semantic ranking based method for learning hash functions
that preserve multilevel semantic similarity between multilabel images. In our approach, deep convolutional neural network is incorporated into hash functions to jointly
learn feature representations and mappings from them to
hash codes, which avoids the limitation of semantic representation power of hand-crafted features. Meanwhile, a
ranking list that encodes the multilevel similarity information is employed to guide the learning of such deep hash
functions. An effective scheme based on surrogate loss is
used to solve the intractable optimization problem of nonsmooth and multivariate ranking measures involved in the
learning procedure. Experimental results show the superiority of our proposed approach over several state-of-theart hashing methods in term of ranking evaluation metrics
when tested on multi-label image datasets.

Semantic ranking supervision

CNN models

Compact
hash codes

Figure 1. The proposed deep semantic ranking based hashing.
Solid and hollow arrows indicate forward and backward propagation directions of features and gradients respectively. Hash functions consist of deep convolutional neural network (CNN) and binary mappings of the feature representation from the top hidden
layers of CNN. Multilevel semantic ranking information is used to
learn such deep hash functions to preserve the semantic structure
of multi-label images.

data distribution. Recently, various data-dependent hashing
methods have been proposed, which learn hash functions
according to the data distribution. Some of them mainly focus on preserving the metric structure of the data in the original feature space, such as spectral hashing [32] and binary
reconstructive embedding [14]. However, distance metrics
(e.g., Euclidean distance) in the original space sometimes
cannot measure well the semantic similarity that is essential
for image retrieval.
To preserve semantic structure of the data, hashing methods with supervisory information in form of class labels
have been further developed [24, 27, 28, 19, 17]. Through
formulating hash function learning as a classification problem or as an optimization problem of pairwise relation
based loss functions, these methods are able to learn hash
codes which preserve binary semantic similarity. But in
practice images are usually simultaneously associated with
multiple semantic labels, and in this case the similarity re-

