Image Retrieval using Scene Graphs
Justin Johnson1 , Ranjay Krishna1 , Michael Stark2 , Li-Jia Li3,4 , David A. Shamma3 ,
Michael S. Bernstein1 , Li Fei-Fei1
1

Stanford University, 2 Max Planck Institute for Informatics, 3 Yahoo Labs, 4 Snapchat
Abstract

This paper develops a novel framework for semantic image retrieval based on the notion of a scene graph. Our
scene graphs represent objects (“man”, “boat”), attributes
of objects (“boat is white”) and relationships between objects (“man standing on boat”). We use these scene graphs
as queries to retrieve semantically related images. To this
end, we design a conditional random field model that reasons about possible groundings of scene graphs to test images. The likelihoods of these groundings are used as
ranking scores for retrieval. We introduce a novel dataset
of 5,000 human-generated scene graphs grounded to images and use this dataset to evaluate our method for image retrieval. In particular, we evaluate retrieval using full
scene graphs and small scene subgraphs, and show that our
method outperforms retrieval methods that use only objects
or low-level image features. In addition, we show that our
full model can be used to improve object localization compared to baseline methods.

(a) Results for the query on a popular image search engine.

(b) Expected results for the query.

Figure 1: Image search using a complex query like “man holding
fish and wearing hat on white boat” returns unsatisfactory results
in (a). Ideal results (b) include correct objects (“man”, “boat”),
attributes (“boat is white”) and relationships (“man on boat”).

scene can be highly complex, going beyond simple pairwise
relations, and (2) the assumption of a closed universe where
all classes are known beforehand does not hold.
In order to address these challenges, this paper proposes
a novel framework for detailed semantic image retrieval,
based on a conditional random field (CRF [36]) model of visual scenes. Our model draws inspiration from recent work
in computer graphics that uses graph-based formulations to
compare [20] and generate [7] scenes. We use the notion of
a scene graph to represent the detailed semantics of a scene.
Our scene graphs capture the detailed semantics of visual
scenes by explicitly modeling objects, attributes of objects,
and relationships between objects. Our model performs semantic image retrieval using scene graphs as queries. Replacing textual queries with scene graphs allows our queries
to describe the semantics of the desired image in precise detail without relying on unstructured text. This formulation is
related to a number of methods for object and scene recognition using context [25, 13]. But by using scene graphs,
we can model multiple modes of interaction between pairs
of objects while traditional CRF models are more restricted,
and encode a fixed relation given two nodes (e.g. think of

1. Introduction
Retrieving images by describing their contents is one of
the most exciting applications of computer vision. An ideal
system would allow people to search for images by specifying not only objects (“man”, “boat”) but also structured relationships (“man on boat”) and attributes (“boat is white”)
involving these objects. Unfortunately current systems fail
for these types of queries because they do not utilize the
structured nature of the query, as shown in Fig. 1.
To solve this problem, a computer vision system must
explicitly represent and reason about the objects, attributes,
and relationships in images, which we refer to as detailed
semantics. Recently Zitnick et al. have made important
steps toward this goal by studying abstract scenes composed of clip-art [71, 72, 22]. They show that perfect recognition of detailed semantics benefits image understanding
and improves image retrieval.
Bringing this level of semantic reasoning to real-world
scenes would be a major leap forward, but doing so involves
two main challenges: (1) interactions between objects in a
1

