Attributes and Categories for Generic Instance Search from One Example
Ran Tao1 , Arnold W.M. Smeulders1 , Shih-Fu Chang2
1
ISLA, Informatics Institute, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands
2
Department of Electrical Engineering, Columbia University, USA

Abstract
This paper aims for generic instance search from one
example where the instance can be an arbitrary 3D object
like shoes, not just near-planar and one-sided instances like
buildings and logos. Firstly, we evaluate state-of-the-art instance search methods on this problem. We observe that
what works for buildings loses its generality on shoes. Secondly, we propose to use automatically learned categoryspecific attributes to address the large appearance variations present in generic instance search. On the problem
of searching among instances from the same category as
the query, the category-specific attributes outperform existing approaches by a large margin. On a shoe dataset
containing 6624 shoe images recorded from all viewing angles, we improve the performance from 36.73 to 56.56 using
category-specific attributes. Thirdly, we extend our methods to search objects without restricting to the specifically
known category. We show the combination of category-level
information and the category-specific attributes is superior
to combining category-level information with low-level features such as Fisher vector.

1. Introduction
In instance search, the objective is to retrieve all images
of a specific object given a few query examples of that object [3, 16, 25, 31]. We consider the challenging case of
only 1 query image and admitting large differences in the
imaging angle and other imaging conditions between the
query image and the target images. A very hard case is a
query specified in frontal view while the relevant images in
the search set show a view from the back which has never
been seen before. Humans solve the search task by employing two types of general knowledge. First, when the query
instance is a certain class, say a female, answers should
be restricted to be from the same class. And, queries in
the frontal view showing one attribute, say brown hair, will
limit answers to show the same or no such attribute, even
when the viewpoint is from the back. In this paper, we use
and evaluate these two types of general knowledge to han-

dle a wide variety of circumstances for instance search.
In instance search, excellent results have been achieved
by restricting the search to buildings [3, 4, 29]. Searching
buildings can be used in location recognition and 3D reconstruction. Another set of good results has been achieved in
searching for logos [20, 34, 40] for the estimation of brand
exposure. And, [44] searches for book and magazine covers. All these cases of instance search show good results
for near-planar, and one-sided objects. In this work, we aim
for broader classes of query instances. We aim to perform
generic instance search from 1 example. Generic implies
we consider arbitrary objects, and not just planar objects.
And, generic implies we aim to use one approach not optimized for a certain type of instances, such as RANSAC
matching the planarity of the objects. In our case, instances
can be buildings and logos, but also shoes, clothes and other
objects.
The challenge in instance search is to represent the query
image invariant to the (unknown) appearance variations of
the query while maintaining a sufficiently rich representation to permit distinction from other, similar instances.
To solve this, most existing approaches in instance search
match the appearance of spots in the potential target to the
query [16, 19, 29, 40, 41]. The quality of match in these
approaches between two images is the sum of similarities
over all local descriptor pairs. The difference between the
cited approaches lies in the way local descriptors are encoded and in the computation of the similarity. Good performance has been achieved by this paradigm on buildings,
logos and scenes from a distance. However, when searching
for an arbitrary thing with wider range of viewpoint variability, more sides, and possibly having self-occlusion and
non-rigid deformation, these methods are likely to fail as local descriptor matching becomes unreliable in these cases.
For instance search from only one example, more information on the target object is always needed, coupled to a representation robust against appearance variations to successfully address generic instance search.
In this paper we propose to use attribute representation [10, 23] to handle a wide range of visual appearances. In this way, we aim to be more robust against ap-

