Deep Networks for Saliency Detection via Local Estimation and Global Search
Lijun Wang† , Huchuan Lu† , Xiang Ruan‡ and Ming-Hsuan Yang§
†
Dalian University of Technology ‡ OMRON Corporation § University of California at Merced

Abstract
This paper presents a saliency detection algorithm by integrating both local estimation and global search. In the
local estimation stage, we detect local saliency by using
a deep neural network (DNN-L) which learns local patch
features to determine the saliency value of each pixel. The
estimated local saliency maps are further refined by exploring the high level object concepts. In the global search
stage, the local saliency map together with global contrast
and geometric information are used as global features to
describe a set of object candidate regions. Another deep
neural network (DNN-G) is trained to predict the saliency score of each object region based on the global features. The final saliency map is generated by a weighted
sum of salient object regions. Our method presents two interesting insights. First, local features learned by a supervised scheme can effectively capture local contrast, texture
and shape information for saliency detection. Second, the
complex relationship between different global saliency cues
can be captured by deep networks and exploited principally
rather than heuristically. Quantitative and qualitative experiments on several benchmark data sets demonstrate that
our algorithm performs favorably against the state-of-theart methods.

1. Introduction
Saliency detection, which aims to identify the most important and conspicuous object regions in an image, has received increasingly more interest in recent years. Serving
as a preprocessing step, it can efficiently focus on the interesting image regions related to the current task and broadly
facilitates computer vision applications such as segmentation, image classification, and compression, to name a few.
Although much progress has been made, it remains a challenging problem.
Existing methods mainly formulate saliency detection by
a computational model in a bottom-up fashion with either a
local or a global view. Local methods [13, 25, 19, 39] compute center-surround differences in a local context for color,
texture and edge orientation channels to capture the region-

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Figure 1. Saliency detection by different methods. (a) Original
images. (b) Ground truth saliency maps. (c) Saliency maps by a
local method [13]. (d) Saliency maps by a global method [7]. (e)
Saliency maps by the proposed method.

s locally standing out from their surroundings. Although
being biologically plausible, local models often lack global
information and tend to highlight the boundaries of salient
objects rather than the interiors (See Figure 1(c)). In contrast, global methods [1, 24, 29] take the entire image into
consideration to predict the salient regions which are characterized by holistic rarity and uniqueness, and thus help
detect large objects and uniformly assign saliency values
to the contained regions. Unlike local methods which are
sensitive to high frequency image contents like edges and
noise, global methods are less effective when the textured
regions of salient objects are similar to the background (See
Figure 1(d)). The combination of local and global methods has been explored by a few recent studies, where background prior, center prior, color histograms and other handcrafted features are utilized in a simple and heuristic way to
compute saliency maps.
While the combination of local and global models [32,
36] is technically sound, these methods have two major
drawbacks. First, these methods mainly rely on handcrafted features which may fail to describe complex image scenarios and object structures. Second, the adopted
saliency priors and features are mostly combined based on

