Learning from Massive Noisy Labeled Data for Image Classification
Tong Xiao1 , Tian Xia2 , Yi Yang2 , Chang Huang2 , and Xiaogang Wang1
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Baidu Research

Abstract
Large-scale supervised datasets are crucial to train convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for various computer vision problems. However, obtaining a massive amount of
well-labeled data is usually very expensive and time consuming. In this paper, we introduce a general framework
to train CNNs with only a limited number of clean labels
and millions of easily obtained noisy labels. We model the
relationships between images, class labels and label noises
with a probabilistic graphical model and further integrate
it into an end-to-end deep learning system. To demonstrate
the effectiveness of our approach, we collect a large-scale
real-world clothing classification dataset with both noisy
and clean labels. Experiments on this dataset indicate that
our approach can better correct the noisy labels and improves the performance of trained CNNs.

1. Introduction
Deep learning with large-scale supervised training
dataset has recently shown very impressive improvement
on multiple image recognition challenges including image
classification [12], attribute learning [29], and scene classification [8]. While state-of-the-art results have been continuously reported [23, 25, 28], all these methods require reliable annotations from millions of images [6] which are
often expensive and time-consuming to obtain, preventing deep models from being quickly trained on new image
recognition problems. Thus it is necessary to develop new
efficient labeling and training frameworks for deep learning.
One possible solution is to automatically collect a large
amount of annotations from the Internet web images [10]
(i.e. extracting tags from the surrounding texts or keywords
from search engines) and directly use them as ground truth
to train deep models. Unfortunately, these labels are extremely unreliable due to various types of noise (e.g. labeling mistakes from annotators or computing errors from extraction algorithms). Many studies have shown that these

Corrected
Labels

Chiffon √

Sweater √

Knitwear √

Down Coat √

Label
Noise
Model

Detect and correct the wrong labels

CNNs

Extract features

Training
Images

Noisy
Labels

Windbreaker ×

Shawl ×

Sweater ?

Windbreaker ?

Web
Images

Figure 1. Overview of our approach. Labels of web images often
suffer from different types of noise. A label noise model is proposed to detect and correct the wrong labels. The corrected labels
are used to train underlying CNNs.

noisy labels could adversely impact the classification accuracy of the induced classifiers [20, 22, 31]. Various label noise-robust algorithms are developed but experiments
show that performances of classifiers inferred by robust algorithms are still affected by label noise [3, 26]. Other data
cleansing algorithms are proposed [2, 5, 17], but these approaches are difficult in distinguishing informative hard examples from harmful mislabeled ones.
Although annotating all the data is costly, it is often easy
to obtain a small amount of clean labels. Based on the observation of transferability of deep neural networks, people initialize parameters with a model pretrained on a larger
yet related dataset [12], and then finetune on the smaller
dataset of specific tasks [1, 7, 21]. Such methods may better
avoid overfitting and utilize the relationships between the

