Random Tree Walk toward Instantaneous 3D Human Pose Estimation
Ho Yub Jung1

Soochahn Lee2

Yong Seok Heo3

Il Dong Yun4

Div. of Comp. & Elect. Sys. Eng.,
Hankuk U. of Foreign Studies
Yongin, Korea, 449-791

Dept. of Elect. Eng.
Soonchunghyang U.
Asan-si, Korea, 336-745

Dept. of Elect. & Comp. Eng.
Ajou University
Suwon, Korea, 336-745

jung.ho.yub@gmail.com1

sclsch@sch.ac.kr2

ysheo@ajou.ac.kr3

yun@hufs.ac.kr

4

Abstract
The availability of accurate depth cameras have made
real-time human pose estimation possible; however, there
are still demands for faster algorithms on low power processors. This paper introduces 1000 frames per second pose
estimation method on a single core CPU. A large computation gain is achieved by random walk sub-sampling. Instead
of training trees for pixel-wise classification, a regression
tree is trained to estimate the probability distribution to the
direction toward the particular joint, relative to the current
position. At test time, the direction for the random walk
is randomly chosen from a set of representative directions.
The new position is found by a constant step toward the direction, and the distribution for next direction is found at
the new position. The continual random walk through 3D
space will eventually produce an expectation of step positions, which we estimate as the joint position. A regression
tree is built separately for each joint. The number of random walk steps can be assigned for each joint so that the
computation time is consistent regardless of the size of body
segmentation. The experiments show that even with large
computation gain, the accuracy is higher or comparable to
the state-of-the-art pose estimation methods.

1. Introduction
The introduction of accurate depth cameras has made human pose estimation a much more feasible problem, facilitating the development of many advanced methods. Among
these are methods using generative models, where a pose
is estimated by minimizing the distance between a human
model and the depth map [14, 29, 9, 10, 27, 28]. This minimization often requires a complex optimization and thus
these methods rely heavily on temporal constraints by setting the initial pose as the one from the previous frame.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. The red lines represents the random tree walks trained
to find the head position. The random walk starts from the body
center in (a). In (b), the head position is found with fewer steps by
starting from the chest, which is much closer than the body center.

Moreover, these tracking approaches often additionally require an accurate human model beforehand.
In contrast, a discriminative approach aims to directly
train the conditional probability of the body part labels or
positions. This enables pose estimation even from a single
depth image, without any initialization from previous frame
and accurate body models [19, 13, 20, 22]. The methods
based on a randomized decision and regression forest have
shown to be effective and efficient, being able to operate in
real-time and on commercial products [16].
Despite their efficiency, there is still demand for even
more improvement. The implementation of Shotton et al.
relies on parallel computation using either a GPU or a multicore CPU [19]. These resources are not easily available

