Representing 3D Texture on Mesh Manifolds for Retrieval and Recognition
Applications
Naoufel Werghi, Claudio Tortorici
Khalifa University of Science, Technology & Research
Sharjah, UAE

Stefano Berretti, Alberto Del Bimbo
University of Florence
Florence, Italy

Naoufel.Werghi@kustar.ac.ae

stefano.berretti@unifi.it

Abstract
In this paper, we present and experiment a novel approach for representing texture of 3D mesh manifolds using local binary patterns (LBP). Using a recently proposed
framework [37], we compute LBP directly on the mesh surface, either using geometric or photometric appearance.
Compared to its depth-image counterpart, our approach is
distinguished by the following features: a) inherits the intrinsic advantages of mesh surface (e.g., preservation of the
full geometry); b) does not require normalization; c) can
accommodate partial matching. In addition, it allows earlylevel fusion of the geometry and photometric texture modalities. Through experiments conducted on two application
scenarios, namely, 3D texture retrieval and 3D face recognition, we assess the effectiveness of the proposed solution
with respect to state of the art approaches.

and flexible format by the triangular mesh manifold modality. This is widely used in many fields, such as animation,
medical imaging, computer-aided design, terrain modeling,
etc. The recent advances in shape scanning and modeling
have also allowed the integration of both photometric and
geometric information into a single support defined over a
3D mesh-manifold. However, despite the abundance and
the richness of the mesh manifold modality, the number of
solutions for representing the geometry of 3D objects is still
limited, and not comparable with the large variety of methods available in 2D.

(a)

1. Introduction
The advancement of 3D imaging technologies resulted in
a new generation of acquisition devices capable of capturing
the geometry of 3D objects in the three-dimensional physical space. The geometric information captured by such
3D acquisition devices is typically in the form of a cloud
of points, which represents the three-dimensional coordinates of a set of samples of the 3D object surface. However,
the direct processing of these point clouds is not convenient
or even possible, so that other representation formats have
been established. Depth images are one of the most commonly used imaging modality, since they permit a direct
extension to the depth dimension of many computer vision
and pattern recognition solutions developed for analyzing
the photometric information in 2D images. Though the possibility of a straightforward extension of 2D techniques is
attractive, this modality loses the full 3D geometry, by reducing it to a 2.5D projection. The full 3D shape information is instead preserved and encoded in a simple, compact

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Example 3D objects with different 3D textures: (a)
3D geometric texture, characterized by repeatable patterns of the
mesh surface; (b) 3D photometric texture attached to the triangular
mesh. In this case, the textural information is most present in the
photometric appearance of the mesh, rather than in the geometric appearance; (c) Combination of 3D geometric and photometric
texture on a 3D mesh manifold.

An evidence of this is given by the lack of efficient
descriptors to represent the texture component associated
to 3D objects. This motivated us to focus on this aspect
that can reveal new possibilities in 3D objects retrieval and
recognition. In particular, two different meanings are associated here to the broad term “texture”: On the one hand, we
consider the 3D geometric texture as a property of the surface, distinct from the shape, which is characterized by the
presence of repeatable geometric patterns (see Fig. 1(a)).
These patterns can be seen as geometric corrugations of the
surface that do not alter the overall 3D shape, but rather
change the local smoothness and appearance of the surface.

