Visual Saliency Based on Multiscale Deep Features
Guanbin Li
Yizhou Yu
Department of Computer Science, The University of Hong Kong
https://sites.google.com/site/ligb86/mdfsaliency/

Abstract

tion tasks [32], such as image classification [36] and person
re-identification [39].

Visual saliency is a fundamental problem in both cognitive and computational sciences, including computer vision.
In this paper, we discover that a high-quality visual saliency
model can be learned from multiscale features extracted
using deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs), which
have had many successes in visual recognition tasks. For
learning such saliency models, we introduce a neural network architecture, which has fully connected layers on top
of CNNs responsible for feature extraction at three different
scales. We then propose a refinement method to enhance the
spatial coherence of our saliency results. Finally, aggregating multiple saliency maps computed for different levels
of image segmentation can further boost the performance,
yielding saliency maps better than those generated from a
single segmentation. To promote further research and evaluation of visual saliency models, we also construct a new
large database of 4447 challenging images and their pixelwise saliency annotations. Experimental results demonstrate that our proposed method is capable of achieving
state-of-the-art performance on all public benchmarks, improving the F-Measure by 5.0% and 13.2% respectively on
the MSRA-B dataset and our new dataset (HKU-IS), and
lowering the mean absolute error by 5.7% and 35.1% respectively on these two datasets.

Human visual and cognitive systems involved in the visual attention process are composed of layers of interconnected neurons. For example, the human visual system has
layers of simple and complex cells whose activations are determined by the magnitude of input signals falling into their
receptive fields. Since deep artificial neural networks were
originally inspired by biological neural networks, it is thus
a natural choice to build a computational model of visual
saliency using deep artificial neural networks. Specifically,
recently popular convolutional neural networks (CNN) are
particularly well suited for this task because convolutional
layers in a CNN resemble simple and complex cells in the
human visual system [14] while fully connected layers in a
CNN resemble higher-level inference and decision making
in the human cognitive system.
In this paper, we develop a new computational model
for visual saliency using multiscale deep features computed
by convolutional neural networks. Deep neural networks,
such as CNNs, have recently achieved many successes in
visual recognition tasks [24, 12, 15, 17]. Such deep networks are capable of extracting feature hierarchies from raw
pixels automatically. Further, features extracted using such
networks are highly versatile and often more effective than
traditional handcrafted features. Inspired by this, we perform feature extraction using a CNN originally trained over
the ImageNet dataset [10]. Since ImageNet contains images
of a large number of object categories, our features contain rich semantic information, which is useful for visual
saliency because humans pay varying degrees of attention
to objects from different semantic categories. For example,
viewers of an image likely pay more attention to objects like
cars than the sky or grass. In the rest of this paper, we call
such features CNN features.

1. Introduction
Visual saliency attempts to determine the amount of attention steered towards various regions in an image by the
human visual and cognitive systems [6]. It is thus a fundamental problem in psychology, neural science, and computer vision. Computer vision researchers focus on developing computational models for either simulating the human visual attention process or predicting visual saliency
results. Visual saliency has been incorporated in a variety
of computer vision and image processing tasks to improve
their performance. Such tasks include image cropping [31],
retargeting [4], and summarization [34]. Recently, visual
saliency has also been increasingly used by visual recogni-

By definition, saliency is resulted from visual contrast
as it intuitively characterizes certain parts of an image that
appear to stand out relative to their neighboring regions or
the rest of the image. Thus, to compute the saliency of
an image region, our model should be able to evaluate the
contrast between the considered region and its surrounding
1

