A Low-dimensional Step Pattern Analysis Algorithm with Application to
Multimodal Retinal Image Registration
Jimmy Addison Lee, Jun Cheng, Beng Hai Lee, Ee Ping Ong,
Guozhen Xu, Damon Wing Kee Wong, Jiang Liu,
Institute for Infocomm Research (I2 R), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR)
1 Fusionopolis Way, Connexis (South Tower), Singapore 138632
{jalee, jcheng, benghai, epong, xug, wkwong, jliu}@i2r.a-star.edu.sg

Augustinus Laude and Tock Han Lim
National Healthcare Group, Eye Institute, Tan Tock Seng Hospital
11 Jalan Tan Tock Seng Singapore 308433
laude augustinus@ttsh.com.sg, tock han lim@nhg.com.sg

Abstract

Existing feature descriptor-based methods on retinal image registration are mainly based on scale-invariant feature transform (SIFT) or partial intensity invariant feature
descriptor (PIIFD). While these descriptors are often being exploited, they do not work very well upon unhealthy
multimodal images with severe diseases. Additionally, the
descriptors demand high dimensionality to adequately represent the features of interest. The higher the dimensionality, the greater the consumption of resources (e.g. memory
space). To this end, this paper introduces a novel registration algorithm coined low-dimensional step pattern analysis (LoSPA), tailored to achieve low dimensionality while
providing sufficient distinctiveness to effectively align unhealthy multimodal image pairs. The algorithm locates
hypotheses of robust corner features based on connecting
edges from the edge maps, mainly formed by vascular junctions. This method is insensitive to intensity changes, and
produces uniformly distributed features and high repeatability across the image domain. The algorithm continues
with describing the corner features in a rotation invariant
manner using step patterns. These customized step patterns
are robust to non-linear intensity changes, which are wellsuited for multimodal retinal image registration. Apart from
its low dimensionality, the LoSPA algorithm achieves about
two-fold higher success rate in multimodal registration on
the dataset of severe retinal diseases when compared to the
top score among state-of-the-art algorithms.

1. Introduction
Retinal image registration is increasingly important for
assisting ophthalmologists in diagnosis and treatment of
various eye diseases. The registration can be categorized
into three groups [10, 30, 37]. The first group aligns a set of
images of different viewpoints taken during a single session
with a patient to form a single mosaic view of the retina.
The second group aligns images taken weeks, months or
years apart to reveal disease progression. The third group
aligns images of different modalities captured by different
sensors to obtain a more complete detail of the subject. This
paper focuses on multimodal retinal image registration in
the third group. The main challenges in multimodal retinal image registration are the non-linear intensity differences between two modalities and the poor quality of the
multimodal retinal images which are adversely affected by
pathologies or noise. The two challenges can be seen in
Fig. 1. The color fundus images appear different from the
fluorescein angiographic (FA) images as the FA images are
obtained after injection of fluorescein dye into the bloodstream, where the dye highlights the blood vessels in the
back of the eye causing the intensity of the angiograms to
vary substantially. The blood vessels are generally darker
than the background tissues in the color fundus images but
brighter in the FA images, and are sometimes being obscured due to the effects of the diseases.
Recently, attempts [6, 9, 16, 31, 35] using feature
descriptor-based methods have been made to achieve multimodal registration of retinal images, mainly by remodeling
or adding on to the popular SIFT [21] algorithm. Modifications are usually made to the gradient orientations and
magnitudes of the corresponding locations in multimodal

