Dynamically Encoded Actions based on Spacetime Saliency
Christoph Feichtenhofer1
Axel Pinz1
Richard P. Wildes2
1
Institute of Electrical Measurement and Measurement Signal Processing, TU Graz, Austria
2
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, York University, Toronto, Canada
{feichtenhofer, axel.pinz}@tugraz.at

wildes@cse.yorku.ca

Abstract
Human actions typically occur over a well localized extent in both space and time. Similarly, as typically captured in video, human actions have small spatiotemporal
support in image space. This paper capitalizes on these
observations by weighting feature pooling for action recognition over those areas within a video where actions are
most likely to occur. To enable this operation, we define
a novel measure of spacetime saliency. The measure relies on two observations regarding foreground motion of
human actors: They typically exhibit motion that contrasts
with that of their surrounding region and they are spatially
compact. By using the resulting definition of saliency during feature pooling we show that action recognition performance achieves state-of-the-art levels on three widely considered action recognition datasets. Our saliency weighted
pooling can be applied to essentially any locally defined
features and encodings thereof. Additionally, we demonstrate that inclusion of locally aggregated spatiotemporal
energy features, which efficiently result as a by-product of
the saliency computation, further boosts performance over
reliance on standard action recognition features alone.

1. Introduction
Recently, a great amount of effort has addressed videobased action recognition, with many approaches employing the Bags-of-visual-Word (BoW) principle consisting of
three general steps: 1) In the primitive feature extraction
step, local features are extracted either from interest points
or densely from regular locations by application of handdesigned or learned filters. 2) A feature transformation step
generates intermediate representations that map local features into more effective representations for the underlying
task (e.g. by using unsupervised or supervised learned visual words). 3) A pooling step accumulates transformed
features over pre-defined regions. Steps 2) and 3) may be
applied several times in a hierarchical manner (as e.g. in
deep learning methods [20, 23, 37]). Finally, these pooled,

(a)

(d) GT-mask

(b)

(c)

1

10

1

0.9

9

0.9

0.8

8

0.8

0.7

7

0.7

0.6

6

0.6

0.5

5

0.5

0.4

4

0.4

0.3

3

0.3

0.2

2

0.2

0.1

1

0.1

0

0

(e) GT-flow

(f) ST

Figure 1. Our proposed measure of spacetime saliency to enhance
feature pooling for action recognition. (a)-(c) Input frames of
a video from the J-HMDB dataset [19] showing a catch action.
(d) Ground truth puppet mask annotation [19]. (e) The puppet
flow generated from ground truth body part annotations [55]. (f)
Our spacetime saliency measure, ST , for weighting the contribution of local spatiotemporal features for action recognition. Note
the large similarities between the user-annotated puppet flow and
our saliency measure which is computed efficiently from motion
statistics without any form of supervision.

transformed features are fed into a classifier for decision.
For action recognition, typical techniques used in the
BoW steps are: 1) SIFT [28], HOG3D [21], spacetime correlation patches [36], Histograms of Optical Flow (HOF)
[25], Motion Boundary Histograms (MBH) [12], trajectories [42], and Spatiotemporal Oriented Energy (SOE) [13];
2) Locality-constrained Linear Coding (LLC) [45], Super
Vector (SV) [52], Vector of Locally Aggregated Descriptors
(VLAD) [17] and Fisher Vectors (FV) [32]; 3) average- and
max-pooling with geometry embedded by aggregating with
Spatial Pyramid Matching (SPM) [27, 50]. Classification is
mostly realized using a Support Vector Machine (SVM) [9].
Pooling typically has been performed across an entire
video, sometimes in conjunction with spatial pyramids [27].
Some research, however, has investigated selective pooling
over regions where actors are likely to be present. From
the perspective of what might be accomplished in principle,
research has shown that hand annotated ground truth indicating where actors are present can improve action recognition [19] (see e.g. Figure 1(d) and 1(e)). From a more practical perspective, various approaches have been developed

