Shape and Light Directions from Shading and Polarization
Trung Thanh Ngo ∗
Hajime Nagahara
Rin-ichiro Taniguchi
Faculty of Information Science and Electrical Engineering, Kyushu University

Abstract

the shape. In our research, we focus on the direction and
polarization state of light to recover the 3D shape.

We introduce a method to recover the shape of a smooth
dielectric object from polarization images taken with a light
source from different directions. We present two constraints
on shading and polarization and use both in a single optimization scheme. This integration is motivated by the
fact that photometric stereo and polarization-based methods have complementary abilities. The polarization-based
method can give strong cues for the surface orientation and
refractive index, which are independent of the light direction. However, it has ambiguities in selecting between two
ambiguous choices of the surface orientation, in the relationship between refractive index and zenith angle (observing angle), and limited performance for surface points with
small zenith angles, where the polarization effect is weak.
In contrast, photometric stereo method with multiple light
sources can disambiguate the surface orientation and give
a strong relationship between the surface normals and light
directions. However, it has limited performance for large
zenith angles, refractive index estimation, and faces the ambiguity in case the light direction is unknown. Taking their
advantages, our proposed method can recover the surface
normals for both small and large zenith angles, the light
directions, and the refractive indexes of the object. The proposed method is successfully evaluated by simulation and
real-world experiments.

Photometric stereo method has been studied intensively
and has provided very promising results recently [5, 12,
14, 15]. Conventional photometric stereo methods consider
light from different directions interacting with the object
surface to sense the 3D structure. In most photometric
stereo methods, the light directions are known for the reconstruction. The bidirectional reflection distribution function
(BRDF), which models the incoming and outgoing light,
plays an important role; however, BRDF is a complex function that depends on the material. Many efforts have been
made to overcome the complexity of the BRDF [5, 12, 15],
yet these methods usually ignore the refractive index and
polarization of the dielectric materials and hence they do
not handle polarization images captured with a polarizer.
Moreover, the photometric stereo approach usually faces a
limitation at the edge with a large observing angle, where
BRDF is not well-modeled.
Polarization-based shape reconstruction methods consider polarization states of light reflected on the material
surface to sense the 3D structure. The Fresnel equations
on refraction and reflection [9] in the interaction of light
with a smooth dielectric surface are the main theory underlying this approach. Two types of reflection are considered
in this approach: specular and diffuse reflections. In case
of specular reflection, we need to obtain the specular reflection for the whole object, and therefore require many
light sources which limits the practical use. In case of diffuse reflection, we do not have to use many light sources. In
contrast to the photometric stereo methods, the polarizationbased methods do not require manipulation of the light direction and basically does not use the information on the
light source. However, the polarization-based methods only
work well at the edge of an object where the polarization
effect is strong. The polarization-based approach usually
requires us to know the refractive index [1,6] or use a homogeneous material with a uniform refractive index [23]. Due
to these limitations, a polarization-based method is better
to be combined with another method to improve the accuracy. In fact, polarization-based methods are combined with
multiview stereo [2] or photometric stereo [3] to improve

1. Introduction
Three-dimensional (3D) reconstruction is a key research
topic in computer vision, for which various approaches have
been proposed. Fundamental research works rely on the
basic physical parameters of light such as the speed [10],
direction [18], intensity shading [20], frequency [13], and
polarization state [3] to reconstruct the 3D shape. For instance, the photometric stereo method observes an object
from different light directions while the polarization-based
method observes the object in different polarization states
through a polarizer. Naturally, when using more parameters
of light, there is more information with which to recover
∗ Email: trungbeo@gmail.com

1

