Deep Domain Adaptation for Describing People Based on
Fine-Grained Clothing Attributes
Qiang Chen1∗ , Junshi Huang3∗ , Rogerio Feris2 , Lisa M Brown2 , Jian Dong3 ,Shuicheng Yan3
1

IBM Research, Australia, 2 IBM T.J. Watson Research Center, 3 National University of Singapore

qiangchen@au1.ibm.com, {rsferis, lisabr}@us.ibm.com, {junshi.huang, a0068947, eleyans}@nus.edu.sg

Fine-Grained Attribute Mining

Abstract

Shopping Domain

We address the problem of describing people based on
fine-grained clothing attributes. This is an important problem for many practical applications, such as identifying
target suspects or finding missing people based on detailed clothing descriptions in surveillance videos or consumer photos. We approach this problem by first mining
clothing images with fine-grained attribute labels from online shopping stores. A large-scale dataset is built with
about one million images and fine-detailed attribute subcategories, such as various shades of color (e.g., watermelon red, rosy red, purplish red), clothing types (e.g., down
jacket, denim jacket), and patterns (e.g., thin horizontal
stripes, houndstooth). As these images are taken in ideal
pose/lighting/background conditions, it is unreliable to directly use them as training data for attribute prediction in
the domain of unconstrained images captured, for example, by mobile phones or surveillance cameras. In order to
bridge this gap, we propose a novel double-path deep domain adaptation network to model the data from the two
domains jointly. Several alignment cost layers placed inbetween the two columns ensure the consistency of the two
domain features and the feasibility to predict unseen attribute categories in one of the domains. Finally, to achieve
a working system with automatic human body alignment,
we trained an enhanced RCNN-based detector to localize
human bodies in images. Our extensive experimental evaluation demonstrates the effectiveness of the proposed approach for describing people based on fine-grained clothing
attributes.

Describing People in
Unconstrained Photos

Deep Domain Adaptation
Network (DDAN)

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed approach. We propose a novel
deep domain adaptation method to bridge the gap between images
crawled from online shopping stores and unconstrained photos.
Another unique aspect of our work is the ability to decribe people
based on their fine-grained clothing attributes.

tionwide wanted bank robbers 1 has clear examples of such
fine-grained descriptions, including attributes covering detailed color information (e.g., “light blue” “khaki”, “burgundy”), a variety of clothing types (e.g., ‘leather jacket”,
“polo-style shirt”, “zip-up windbreaker”) and also detailed
clothing patterns (e.g., “narrow horizontal stripes”, “LA
printed text”, “checkered”).
Traditional computer vision methods for describing people, however, have only focused on a small set of coarsegrained attributes. As an example, the recent work of
Zhang et al. [46] achieves impressive attribute prediction
performance in unconstrained scenarios, but only considers
nine human attributes. Existing systems for fashion analysis [3, 45] and people search in surveillance videos [11, 41]
also rely on a relatively small set of clothing attributes.
Our work addresses the problem of describing people
with very fine-grained clothing attributes. In particular, we
consider attribute sub-categories that differ in subtle de-

1. Introduction
Describing people in detail is an important task for many
applications. For instance, criminal investigation processes
often involve searching for suspects based on detailed descriptions provided by eyewitnesses or compiled from images captured by surveillance cameras. The FBI list of na-

1 https://bankrobbers.fbi.gov/

* indicates equal contributions

1

