Book2Movie: Aligning Video scenes with Book chapters
Makarand Tapaswi
Martin Bäuml
Rainer Stiefelhagen
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, 76131 Karlsruhe, Germany
{makarand.tapaswi, baeuml, rainer.stiefelhagen}@kit.edu

Abstract

vide rich textual descriptions in the form of attributes or
actions of the content that are depicted visually in the video
(e.g., specially for characters and their surroundings). Due
to the large number of such adaptations of descriptive text
into video, such data can prove to be an excellent source for
learning joint textual and visual models.
Determining how a specific part of the novel is adapted
to the video domain is a very interesting problem in itself [9, 17, 31]. A classical example of this is to pin-point
the differences between books and their movie adaptations1 .
Differences are at various levels of detail and can range
from appearance, presence or absence of characters, all the
way up to modification of the sub-stories. As a start, we address the problem of finding differences at the scene level,
more specifically on how chapters and scenes are ordered,
and which scenes are not backed by a chapter from the book.
A more fine-grained linkage between novels and films
can have direct commercial applications. Linking the two
encourages growth in the consumption of both literary and
audio-visual material [3].
In this work, we target the problem of aligning video
scenes to specific chapters of the novel (Sec. 4). Fig. 1
presents an example of the ground truth alignment between
book chapters and parts of the video along with a discussion
of some of the challenges in the alignment problem. We emphasize on finding scenes that are not part of the novel and
perform our evaluation with this goal in mind (Sec. 5).
There are many applications which emerge from the
alignment. Sec. 6 discusses how vivid descriptions in a
book can be used as a potential source of weak labels to
improve video understanding. Similar to [25], an alignment
between video and text enables text-based video retrieval
since searching for a part of the story in the video can be
translated to searching in the text (novel). In contrast to
[25], which used short plot synopses of a few sentences per
video, novels provide a much larger pool of descriptions
which can potentially match a text-based search. Novels often contain more information than what appears in a short
video adaptation. For example, minor characters that appear

Film adaptations of novels often visually display in a few
shots what is described in many pages of the source novel.
In this paper we present a new problem: to align book chapters with video scenes. Such an alignment facilitates finding
differences between the adaptation and the original source,
and also acts as a basis for deriving rich descriptions from
the novel for the video clips.
We propose an efficient method to compute an alignment between book chapters and video scenes using matching dialogs and character identities as cues. A major consideration is to allow the alignment to be non-sequential.
Our suggested shortest path based approach deals with the
non-sequential alignments and can be used to determine
whether a video scene was part of the original book. We
create a new data set involving two popular novel-to-film
adaptations with widely varying properties and compare
our method against other text-to-video alignment baselines.
Using the alignment, we present a qualitative analysis of
describing the video through rich narratives obtained from
the novel.

1. Introduction
TV series and films are often adapted from novels [4]. In
the fantasy genre, popular examples include the Lord of the
Rings trilogy, the TV series Game of Thrones based on the
novel series A Song of Ice and Fire, the Chronicles of Narnia and Harry Potter series. There are many other examples from various genres: The Bourne series (action), The
Hunger Games (adventure), the House of Cards TV series
(drama), and a number of super hero movies (e.g. Batman,
Spiderman) many of which are based on comic books.
We believe that such adaptations are a large untapped
resource that can be used to simultaneously improve and
understand the story semantics for both video and natural
language. In recent years there is a rising interesting to automatically generate meaningful captions for images [10,
11, 16, 30] and even user-generated videos [7, 21, 29]. For
readers to visualize the story universe, novels often pro-

1 There are websites which are dedicated to locating such differences,
e.g. http://thatwasnotinthebook.com/

1

