Beyond Mahalanobis Metric: Cayley-Klein Metric Learning
Yanhong Bi, Bin Fan, Fuchao Wu
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Beijing, 100190, China
{yanhong.bi, bfan, fcwu}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Cayley-Klein metric is a kind of non-Euclidean metric
suitable for projective space. In this paper, we introduce
it into the computer vision community as a powerful metric and an alternative to the widely studied Mahalanobis
metric. We show that besides its good characteristic in nonEuclidean space, it is a generalization of Mahalanobis metric in some specific cases. Furthermore, as many Mahalanobis metric learning, we give two kinds of Cayley-Klein
metric learning methods: MMC Cayley-Klein metric learning and LMNN Cayley-Klein metric learning. Experiments
have shown the superiority of Cayley-Klein metric over Mahalanobis ones and the effectiveness of our Cayley-Klein
metric learning methods.

1. Introduction
Distance metric plays an important role in many computer vision and pattern recognition tasks, such as classification [4, 30, 17], retrieval [2, 7] and clustering [19]. The
most widely used distance metric is the Euclidean metric,
which considers the input space as an isotropic one. However, such an isotropic assumption may not hold in many
practical applications. For this reason, Euclidean metric can
not fairly reflect the underlying relationships between input
instances, which further limits its performance in many applications [6, 8, 9, 24, 30].
A simple and popular solution is to replace the Euclidean
metric by Mahalanobis metric. While the Euclidean metric
treats all the data dimensions equally, Mahalanobis could
take the correlation among different data dimensions into
consideration. Basically, Mahalanobis metric can be viewed
as Euclidean metric on a global linear transformed input space. How to estimate such linear transformations on the
input space is at core of Mahalanobis metric learning, which
aims to obtain a distance metric better modeling the underlying relationship among input data [31, 25, 30, 5, 16, 21].
Except for learning a positive semidefinite matrix for
Mahalanobis metric, few attempts have been made for a

Figure 1. Results of similarity search on OSR (first two rows) and
PubFig (last two rows). We present for each query the 5 nearest
neighbors returned by our method (first row) and by LMNN (second row). Results in blue correspond to images in the same class
as the query while results in red are images from different classes.
Our method can return more semantically relevant images.

proper non-Euclidean metric. In this paper, we present a
non-Euclidean metric beyond Mahalanobis framework. The
core idea lies in a novel distance metric defined based on the
non-Euclidean geometry discovered by A. Cayley and F. Klein in the 19th century. The so called Cayley-Klein metric,
induced by an invertible symmetric matrix, is a metric in
projective space defined using a cross-ratio. We show in
this paper that in special case the Cayley-Klein metric can
be considered as a generalized Mahalanobis metric. Furthermore, by integrating it into two typical supervised metric learning paradigms (MMC [31] and LMNN [30]), we
obtain two Cayley-Klein metric learning methods. Experi-

