Saliency Propagation from Simple to Difﬁcult
Chen Gong1,2 , Dacheng Tao2 , Wei Liu3 , S.J. Maybank4 , Meng Fang2 , Keren Fu1 , and Jie Yang1
1

2

Institute of Image Processing and Pattern Recognition, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
The Centre for Quantum Computation & Intelligent Systems, University of Technology, Sydney
3
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center
4
Birkbeck College, London
Please contact:

jieyang@sjtu.edu.cn; dacheng.tao@gmail.com

Abstract
Saliency propagation has been widely adopted for identifying the most attractive object in an image. The propagation sequence generated by existing saliency detection
methods is governed by the spatial relationships of image
regions, i.e., the saliency value is transmitted between two
adjacent regions. However, for the inhomogeneous difﬁcult
adjacent regions, such a sequence may incur wrong propagations. In this paper, we attempt to manipulate the propagation sequence for optimizing the propagation quality.
Intuitively, we postpone the propagations to difﬁcult regions
and meanwhile advance the propagations to less ambiguous
simple regions. Inspired by the theoretical results in educational psychology, a novel propagation algorithm employing the teaching-to-learn and learning-to-teach strategies is
proposed to explicitly improve the propagation quality. In
the teaching-to-learn step, a teacher is designed to arrange
the regions from simple to difﬁcult and then assign the simplest regions to the learner. In the learning-to-teach step,
the learner delivers its learning conﬁdence to the teacher to
assist the teacher to choose the subsequent simple regions.
Due to the interactions between the teacher and learner,
the uncertainty of original difﬁcult regions is gradually
reduced, yielding manifest salient objects with optimized
background suppression. Extensive experimental results on
benchmark saliency datasets demonstrate the superiority of
the proposed algorithm over twelve representative saliency
detectors.

Figure 1. The results achieved by typical propagation methods and
our method on two example images. From left to right: input
images, results of [27], [10], and our method.

tional intelligence have been proposed. They can be roughly
divided into two categories: bottom-up methods that are
data and stimulus driven, and top-down methods that are
task and knowledge driven.
Top-down methods are usually related to the subsequent
applications. For example, Maybank [19] proposed a probabilistic deﬁnition of salient image regions for image matching. Yang et al. [28] combined dictionary learning and Conditional Random Fields (CRFs) to generate discriminative
representation of target-speciﬁc objects.
Different from top-down methods, bottom-up methods
use low-level cues, such as contrast and spectral information, to recognize the most salient regions without realizing
content or speciﬁc prior knowledge about the targets. The
representatives include [3, 6, 8, 9, 11, 13, 14, 15, 17, 20].
Recently, propagation methods have gained much popularity in bottom-up saliency detection and achieved state-ofthe-art performance. To conduct saliency propagations, an
input image is represented by a graph over the segmented
superpixels, in which the adjacent superpixels in the image
are connected by weighted edges. The saliency values are
then iteratively diffused along these edges from the labeled
superpixels to their unlabeled neighbors. However, such

1. Introduction
Saliency detection has attracted intensive attention and
achieved considerable progress during the past two decades.
Up to now, a great number of detectors based on computa1

