Classifier Based Graph Construction for Video Segmentation
Anna Khoreva1,

Fabio Galasso2,
Matthias Hein3,
Bernt Schiele1
1
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Germany
2
OSRAM Corporate Technology, Germany
3
Saarland University, Germany

Abstract
Video segmentation has become an important and
active research area with a large diversity of proposed approaches. Graph-based methods, enabling topperformance on recent benchmarks, consist of three essential components: 1. powerful features account for object appearance and motion similarities; 2. spatio-temporal neighborhoods of pixels or superpixels (the graph edges) are
modeled using a combination of those features; 3. video
segmentation is formulated as a graph partitioning problem. While a wide variety of features have been explored
and various graph partition algorithms have been proposed, there is surprisingly little research on how to construct a graph to obtain the best video segmentation performance. This is the focus of our paper. We propose to combine features by means of a classifier, use calibrated classifier outputs as edge weights and define the graph topology
by edge selection. By learning the graph (without changes
to the graph partitioning method), we improve the results
of the best performing video segmentation algorithm by 6%
on the challenging VSB100 benchmark, while reducing its
runtime by 55%, as the learnt graph is much sparser.

BPR

Video

GT

VPR

Galasso et al. ’14 [19]

Proposed [L(G)]

Figure 1: Climbing up! We consider state-of-the-art features for
the computation of superpixel similarities and the graph partitioning theory of recent work [19]. We contribute theory and bestpractices for graph construction and set a new state-of-the-art performance on the challenging VSB100 [20] (BPR and VPR reported here, more details in Section 4.)

19]. The use of graphs is long established in segmentation [45, 3, 25, 11, 21, 35, 7, 38, 47]. Graphs provide a natural representation of image/video sequences, where edges
encode the spatio-temporal structure, and allow long-term
reasoning due to their transitivity property. Graph-based
video segmentation techniques: 1. compute features among
pairs of pixels or superpixels; 2. design a graph according
to the spatio-temporal neighborhood of the pixels or superpixels and manually combine features to weight its edges;
3. partition the graphs with spatio-temporal clustering.
Previous work has used a variety of features and has proposed various graph partitioning algorithms. However, we
argue in this paper that constructing the underlying graph
is a crucial step for best performance of such graph-based
methods that has received little attention in the literature.
This paper therefore explicitly addresses the problem of
graph construction. We propose and empirically evaluate
procedures and validation-based best practices to learn both
the edge topology and weights. Our contribution includes
1. using a classifier for learning the pairwise similarities
between superpixels, leveraging the recent availability of

1. Introduction
Video segmentation recently witnesses growing interest [4, 5, 6, 9, 17, 26, 33, 35, 38, 39, 44, 49, 55, 59]. On the
one hand, this is motivated by its usefulness for applications
such as semantic scene understanding [26], activity recognition [50], or geometric context classification [41]. In these
cases, organizing a video into spatio-temporal tubes allows
the joint consideration of appearance and motion, while reducing the search space for the solution. On the other hand,
video segmentation poses interesting research questions. In
addition to the scene and scale ambiguities of image segmentation [3, 16, 25, 42], various parts of the scene will
change over time as well as appear or disappear.
Graph-based approaches are among the top-performing
methods for video segmentation [21, 17, 32, 7, 38, 44, 56,
1

