Visual Recognition by Learning from Web Data:
A Weakly Supervised Domain Generalization Approach
Li Niu, Wen Li, and Dong Xu
School of Computer Engineering, Nanyang Technology University (NTU), Singapore
{lniu002,wli1,dongxu}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

fer to the training dataset and testing dataset as the source
domain and target domain, respectively. When target domain data is unavailable during the training process, the
domain adaptation problem becomes another related task
called domain generalization, which aims to learn robust
classifiers that can generalize well to any unseen target domain [27, 36, 43]. Domain generalization is also an important research problem for the real-world visual recognition
applications. For example, the datasets containing the photos/videos from each user can be considered as one target
domain because different users may use different cameras
to capture the photos/videos in their own ways. So we have
a large number of target domains from various users and
meanwhile some users may not be willing to share their
photos/videos to others as target domain data due to the privacy issue. In this case, it is more desirable to develop new
domain generalization approaches without using target domain data in the training process.
In this work, we study the domain generalization problem by exploiting web images/videos as source domain data. In Section 3, we propose an effective weakly supervised
domain generalization (WSDG) approach to address this
problem. In our approach, we consider two important issues when exploiting web images/videos as source domain
data: 1) the training web images and videos are often associated with inaccurate labels, so the learnt classifiers may
be less robust, and the recognition performance may be significantly degraded as well; 2) the test data in the target domain usually has a different distribution from the training
images/videos, and the target domain data is often unavailable in the training stage.
Specifically, to cope with label noise of web training images and videos, we partition the training samples from each
class into a set of clusters, and then treat each cluster as a
“bag” and the samples in each cluster as “instances”. Inspired by the multi-instance learning (MIL) methods, we
only know the labels of training bags, while the labels of instances within each training bag remain unknown. Then, we
aim to select a subset of training samples from each training
bag to represent this bag, such that the training bags from all

In this work, we formulate a new weakly supervised
domain generalization approach for visual recognition by
using loosely labeled web images/videos as training data.
Specifically, we aim to address two challenging issues when
learning robust classifiers: 1) coping with noise in the labels of training web images/videos in the source domain;
and 2) enhancing generalization capability of learnt classifiers to any unseen target domain. To address the first issue,
we partition the training samples in each class into multiple
clusters. By treating each cluster as a “bag” and the samples in each cluster as “instances”, we formulate a multiinstance learning (MIL) problem by selecting a subset of
training samples from each training bag and simultaneously
learning the optimal classifiers based on the selected samples. To address the second issue, we assume the training
web images/videos may come from multiple hidden domains with different data distributions. We then extend our MIL
formulation to learn one classifier for each class and each
latent domain such that multiple classifiers from each class
can be effectively integrated to achieve better generalization capability. Extensive experiments on three benchmark
datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our new approach
for visual recognition by learning from web data.

1. Introduction
Recently, there is an increasing research interest in exploiting web images/videos crawled from Internet as training data to learn robust classifiers for recognizing new images/videos. However, the visual feature distributions of
training and testing samples may differ considerably in
terms of statistical properties, which is known as the dataset
bias problem [39]. To this end, a large number of domain
adaptation approaches have been proposed for various computer vision tasks [4, 44, 16, 38, 29, 22, 13, 15, 33, 14, 8, 9,
32].
Following the terminology in domain adaptation, we re1

