Convolutional Neural Networks at Constrained Time Cost
Kaiming He

Jian Sun

Microsoft Research
{kahe,jiansun}@microsoft.com

Abstract

commercial search engine needs to response to a request in
real-time; a cloud service is required to handle thousands
of user-submitted images per second; even for off-line processes like web-scale image indexing, the system needs to
handle tens of billions of images in a few days. Increasing the computational power of the hardware can partially
relief these problems, but will take very expensive commercial cost. Furthermore, on smartphones or portable devices,
the low computational power (CPUs or low-end GPUs) limits the speed of the real-world recognition applications. So
in industrial and commercial scenarios, engineers and developers are often faced with the requirement of constrained
time budget.

Though recent advanced convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) have been improving the image recognition accuracy, the models are getting more complex and timeconsuming. For real-world applications in industrial and
commercial scenarios, engineers and developers are often
faced with the requirement of constrained time budget. In
this paper, we investigate the accuracy of CNNs under constrained time cost. Under this constraint, the designs of the
network architectures should exhibit as trade-offs among
the factors like depth, numbers of filters, filter sizes, etc.
With a series of controlled comparisons, we progressively
modify a baseline model while preserving its time complexity. This is also helpful for understanding the importance of
the factors in network designs. We present an architecture
that achieves very competitive accuracy in the ImageNet
dataset (11.8% top-5 error, 10-view test), yet is 20% faster
than “AlexNet” [14] (16.0% top-5 error, 10-view test).

Besides the test-time demands, the off-line training procedure can also be constrained by affordable time cost. The
recent models [1, 9, 22, 23] take a high-end GPU or multiple GPUs/clusters one week or several weeks to train, which
can sometimes be too demanding for the rapidly changing
industry. Moreover, even if the purpose is purely for pushing the limits of accuracy (like for the ImageNet competition [20]), the maximum tolerable training time is still a
major bottleneck for experimental research. While the time
budget can be loose in this case, it is worthwhile to understand which factors can gain more improvement.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [15, 14] have recently brought in revolutions to the computer vision area.
Deep CNNs not only have been continuously advancing the
image classification accuracy [14, 21, 24, 1, 9, 22, 23], but
also play as generic feature extractors for various recognition tasks such as object detection [6, 9], semantic segmentation [6, 8], and image retrieval [14, 19].
Most of the recent advanced CNNs are more timeconsuming than Krizhevsky et al.’s [14] original architecture in both training and testing. The increased computational cost can be attributed to the increased width1 (numbers of filters) [21, 24, 1], depth (number of layers) [22, 23],
smaller strides [21, 24, 22], and their combinations. Although these time-consuming models are worthwhile for
advancing the state of the art, they can be unaffordable or
unnecessary for practical usages. For example, an on-line

This paper investigates the accuracy of CNN architectures at constrained time cost during both training and testing stages. Our investigations involve the depth, width, filter
sizes, and strides of the architectures. Because the time cost
is constrained, the differences among the architectures must
be exhibited as trade-offs between those factors. For example, if the depth is increased, the width and/or filter sizes
need to be properly reduced. In the core of our designs is
“layer replacement” - a few layers are replaced with some
other layers that preserve time cost. Based on this strategy,
we progressively modify a model and investigate the accuracy through a series of controlled experiments. This not
only results in a more accurate model with the same time
cost as a baseline model, but also facilitates the understandings of the impacts of different factors to the accuracy.

1 In this paper, we use “width” to term the number of filters in a layer.
In some literatures, the term “width” can have different meanings.

From the controlled experiments, we draw the follow1

