Rolling Shutter Motion Deblurring
Shuochen Su1,2
Wolfgang Heidrich2,1
1
2
University of British Columbia
KAUST

Abstract
Although motion blur and rolling shutter deformations
are closely coupled artifacts in images taken with CMOS
image sensors, the two phenomena have so far mostly been
treated separately, with deblurring algorithms being unable
to handle rolling shutter wobble, and rolling shutter algorithms being incapable of dealing with motion blur.
We propose an approach that delivers sharp and undistorted output given a single rolling shutter motion blurred
image. The key to achieving this is a global modeling of
the camera motion trajectory, which enables each scanline
of the image to be deblurred with the corresponding motion
segment. We show the results of the proposed framework
through experiments on synthetic and real data.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: Simulated blur kernels for global (a) and rolling
shutter (b) cameras. Blur kernels in global shutter images
tend to be spatially invariant (assuming a static scene and
negligible in-plane roation) while in a rolling shutter image
they are always spatially variant. (c) Spatial variance of the
blur kernel in a real RSMB image indicated by light streaks.

1. Introduction and Related Work
Motion blur (MB) from camera shake is one of the most
noticeable degradations in hand-held photography. Without
information about the underlying camera motion, an estimate of the latent sharp image can be restored using socalled blind deblurring (BD), which has been studied extensively in the past decade. Some representative work on this
problem includes Cho et al. [6] in which salient edges and
the FFT are used to speed up the uniform deblurring, and
the introduction of motion density functions by Gupta et
al. [7], which specializes in non-uniform cases. Maximum
a posteriori (MAP) estimation is a popular way to formulate
the objective of blind deblurring – a theoretical analysis on
its convergence was conducted in [12] recently.
One common assumption made in almost all previous
deblurring methods [6, 7, 8, 9, 12, 15, 16, 17, 18] is the use
of a global shutter (GS) sensor. That is, each part of the
image is regarded as having been exposed during the exact same interval of time. This assumption, however, does
not hold for images captured by a CMOS sensor that uses
an electronic rolling shutter (RS), which is the case for the
majority of image sensors on the market. This is due to
the fact that RS exposes each row sequentially as opposed
to simultaneously, and that the popularity of RS sensors in
mobile devices makes them particularly susceptible to mo-

tion blur, especially in low light scenarios. Fig. 1 demonstrates some samples of the point-spread-functions (PSFs)
simulated by applying the same camera motion to a global
and a rolling shutter camera during exposure. Assuming a
static scene and no in-plane rotation, the blur kernel of the
global shutter image in Fig. 1(a) is shift invariant, since all
pixels integrate over the same motion trajectory. For the
rolling shutter image, however, different scanlines integrate
over a slightly different segment of the trajectory, resulting
in a shift-variant kernel in Fig. 1(b) even in the case of static
object and no in-plane rotation. Thus, when applied to the
wide range of RSMB images such as that shown in Fig. 1(c),
existing methods [6, 7, 8, 9, 12, 15, 16, 17, 18] are destined
to fail.
The shift variance of the rolling shutter kernel effect can
be modeled by capturing the overall camera motion with a
gyroscope and computing different kernels for each scanline [11]. Without such specialized hardware, an alternative
is to solve different blind deconvolution problems for blocks
1

