Sketch-based 3D Shape Retrieval using Convolutional Neural Networks
Fang Wang1
1

Le Kang2

Yi Li1

2
NICTA and ANU
ECE, University of Maryland at College Park
1
{fang.wang, yi.li}@nicta.com.au, 2 lekang@umiacs.umd.edu

Abstract
Retrieving 3D models from 2D human sketches has received considerable attention in the areas of graphics, image retrieval, and computer vision. Almost always in state
of the art approaches a large amount of “best views” are
computed for 3D models, with the hope that the query sketch
matches one of these 2D projections of 3D models using
predefined features.
We argue that this two stage approach (view selection
– matching) is pragmatic but also problematic because the
“best views” are subjective and ambiguous, which makes
the matching inputs obscure. This imprecise nature of
matching further makes it challenging to choose features
manually. Instead of relying on the elusive concept of “best
views” and the hand-crafted features, we propose to define
our views using a minimalism approach and learn features
for both sketches and views. Specifically, we drastically
reduce the number of views to only two predefined directions for the whole dataset. Then, we learn two Siamese
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), one for the views
and one for the sketches. The loss function is defined on
the within-domain as well as the cross-domain similarities.
Our experiments on three benchmark datasets demonstrate
that our method is significantly better than state of the art
approaches, and outperforms them in all conventional metrics.

1. Introduction
Retrieving 3D models from 2D sketches has important applications in computer graphics, information retrieval, and computer vision [9, 13, 18]. Compared to the
early attempts where keywords or 3D shapes are used as
queries [23], the sketch-based idea is very attractive because
sketches by hand provide an easy way to input, yet they are
rich enough to specify shapes.
Directly matching 2D sketches to 3D models suffers
from significant differences between the 2D and 3D representations. Thus, in many state of the art methods 3D mod-

Figure 1. Examples of sketch based 3D shape retrieval.

els are projected to multiple 2D views, and a sketch matches
a 3D model if it matches one of its views. Fig. 1 shows a
few examples of 2D sketches and their corresponding 3D
models. One can immediately see the variations in both the
sketch styles and 3D models.
In almost all state of the art approaches, sketch based
3D shape retrieval amounts to finding the “best views” for
3D models and hand-crafting the right features for matching sketches and views. First, an automatic procedure is
used to select the most representative views of a 3D model.
Ideally, one of the viewpoints is similar to that of the query
sketches. Then, 3D models are projected to 2D planes using
a variety of line rendering algorithms. Subsequently, many
2D matching methods can be used for computing the similarity scores, where features are always manually defined
(e.g., Gabor, dense SIFT, and GALIF [9]).
This stage-wise methodology appears pragmatic, but it
also brings a number of puzzling issues. To begin with,
there is no guarantee that the best views have similar viewpoints with the sketches. The inherent issue is that identifying the best views is an unsolved problem on its own, partially because the general definition of best views is elusive.
In fact, many best view methods require manually selected
viewpoints for training, which makes the view selection by
finding “best views” a chicken-egg problem.
Further, this viewpoint uncertainty makes it dubious to
match samples from two different domains without learning their metrics. Take Fig. 1 for example, even when the

