Heteroscedastic Max-min Distance Analysis
Bing Su1 , Xiaoqing Ding1 , Changsong Liu1 , Ying Wu2
1
Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China
subingats@gmail.com,{dxq,lcs}@ocrserv.ee.tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, 60208, USA
yingwu@eecs.northwestern.edu

Abstract
Many discriminant analysis methods such as LDA and
HLDA actually maximize the average pairwise distances
between classes, which often causes the class separation
problem. Max-min distance analysis (MMDA) addresses this problem by maximizing the minimum pairwise distance in the latent subspace, but it is developed under
the homoscedastic assumption. This paper proposes Heteroscedastic MMDA (HMMDA) methods that explore the
discriminative information in the difference of intra-class scatters for dimensionality reduction. WHMMDA maximizes
the minimal pairwise Chenoff distance in the whitened space. OHMMDA incorporates this objective and the minimization of class compactness into a trace quotient formulation and imposes an orthogonal constraint to the final
transformation, which can be solved by a bisection search
algorithm. Two variants of OHMMDA are further proposed to encode the margin information. Experiments on
several UCI Machine Learning datasets and the Yale Face
database demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed HMMDA methods.

1. Introduction
Dimensionality reduction (DR) has become a ubiquitous
procedure in many pattern recognition and machine learning applications. Among a number of DR approaches, a
class of linear supervised techniques referred to as discriminant analysis (DA) has received a lot of attention, which
maximizes the separability of classes. Various criteria have
been proposed based on different definitions of separability in the literature. Linear discriminant analysis (LDA) is
probably the most widely used method, which was first proposed for two-class problems by Fisher in [6] and extended
to general multi-class problems by Rao in [16]. LDA optimizes the so-called Fisher criterion by maximizing the ratio
of between-class scatter over within-class scatter under the
homoscedastic Gaussian assumption. The Fisher criterion

is extended to handle tensor data in [27] and sequence data
in [19].
However, in practice, the distributions of classes are often non-Gaussian, and the covariances of different classes
are not equal. These situations have been studied in extensive literatures. Subclass discriminant analysis [24, 30] considers the general distribution types by dividing each class
into several subclasses each described by one Gaussian distribution. Marginal Fisher Analysis [25] uses marginal and
neighboring points to construct inter-class separability and
intra-class compactness. Locality preserving property is
combined with LDA in [10] to handle multimodal data.
The optimal class representation is determined in [20] to
replace the mean class vector. The Bayes error is directly minimized in [7]. The heteroscedastic Gaussian model
parameters are jointly estimated with DR in the maximumlikelihood framework in [11]. Heteroscedastic LDA (HLDA) [12] extends LDA to heteroscedastic cases by utilizing the Chernoff criterion instead of the Fisher criterion,
where the Chernoff distance is employed to generalize the
between-class scatter. A theoretical analysis of HLDA is
presented in [15]. In [17], the Chernoff distance is maximized in the transformed space by a gradient-based algorithm, and its performance compared with LDA and HLDA
is evaluated in [1].
These methods actually maximize the average of all pairwise distances between classes due to the definition of
between-class scatter. This will cause the so-called “class
separation” problem [13]. Specifically, these methods tend
to pay close attention to classes with larger distances, but ignore those with smaller distances, resulting in the overlap of
“neighbouring” classes in the projected subspace on the basis of a specific distance measure. An example to illustrate
the class separation problem is shown in Fig. 1(a), where
class 1 and class 2 locate closely to each other while class
3 is far away from them. All classes have the same unit covariance. (In this case, HLDA degenerates into LDA.) The
average of pairwise distances between classes is maximized
when the dominant large distances between class 3 and the

