Joint Action Recognition and Pose Estimation From Video
Bruce Xiaohan Nie, Caiming Xiong and Song-Chun Zhu
Center for Vision, Cognition, Learning and Art
University of California, Los Angeles, USA
{niexh,caimingxiong}@ucla.edu, sczhu@stat.ucla.edu

Abstract
Action recognition and pose estimation from video are
closely related tasks for understanding human motion, most
methods, however, learn separate models and combine them
sequentially. In this paper, we propose a framework to integrate training and testing of the two tasks. A spatialtemporal And-Or graph model is introduced to represent action at three scales. Specifically the action is decomposed
into poses which are further divided to mid-level ST-parts
and then parts. The hierarchical structure of our model
captures the geometric and appearance variations of pose
at each frame and lateral connections between ST-parts at
adjacent frames capture the action-specific motion information. The model parameters for three scales are learned discriminatively, and action labels and poses are efficiently inferred by dynamic programming. Experiments demonstrate
that our approach achieves state-of-art accuracy in action
recognition while also improving pose estimation.

Figure 1. (a) Single frame human poses estimated by [29]. (b)
Action recognition and poses estimation by our approach.

background in action datasets, the most discriminative parts
(such as ’arms’, ’hands’, ’legs’ and ’feet’) are often missed
in pose estimation, thereby deteriorating subsequent action
recognition. However, those human parts have large motion
in actions and can be recovered by motion information. For
example, Fig. 1 shows that the arms and legs mis-detected
by a pose estimation method [29] are successfully detected
by our method. Besides the motion information on arms and
legs, action recognition also provides strong priors on the
pose sequences. Furthermore, if actions are limited to predefined categorizes, the actions provide strong constraints
on the plaussible poses in space and time [7].
Many methods for action recognition bypass body poses and achieve promising results by using coarse/mid-level
features for action classification on some datasets[6, 10,
26, 12, 18, 2, 33, 30]. In this paper, we will jointly train
coarse/mid-level features with pose estimation so that these
features are better aligned with body parts and improve the
results.
The prevailing methods for pose estimation from still images adopt probabilistic and compositional graphical
models where nodes represent part appearance and edges
represent geometrical deformation[29, 19, 17, 20]. Errors
mainly arise from small parts, like forearms and wrists due

1. Introduction
1.1. Motivation and Objective
Action recognition and pose estimation are both important tasks for vision-based human motion understanding. They are widely used in applications, such as, intelligent surveillance systems and human-computer interaction systems. Despite their different goals, the two tasks
are highly coupled and it is desirable to study them in
a common framework. However, existing methods train
models for the two tasks separately and combine the inference sequentially: taking pose estimation as input for action recognition[15, 34, 25, 8, 27, 24]. For certain actions
defined by specific geometric configuration of body parts,
pose estimation from a single image may be sufficient for
action recognition [15, 28, 5, 32].
The main drawback of such methods is that the accuracy of action recognition highly relies on the obtained pose
estimations. Due to the large pose variation and complex
1

