Face Alignment using Cascade Gaussian Process Regression Trees
Donghoon Lee
Hyunsin Park
Chang D. Yoo
Korea Advanced institute of Science and Technology
291 Daehak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, Korea
{iamdh, hs.park, cd yoo}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a face alignment method
that uses cascade Gaussian process regression trees (cGPRT) constructed by combining Gaussian process regression trees (GPRT) in a cascade stage-wise manner. Here,
GPRT is a Gaussian process with a kernel defined by a set
of trees. The kernel measures the similarity between two inputs as the number of trees where the two inputs fall in the
same leaves. Without increasing prediction time, the prediction of cGPRT can be performed in the same framework
as the cascade regression trees (CRT) but with better generalization. Features for GPRT are designed using shapeindexed difference of Gaussian (DoG) filter responses sampled from local retinal patterns to increase stability and to
attain robustness against geometric variances. Compared
with the previous CRT-based face alignment methods that
have shown state-of-the-art performances, cGPRT using
shape-indexed DoG features performed best on the HELEN
and 300-W datasets which are the most challenging dataset
today.

1. Introduction
Face alignment is a task to locate fiducial facial landmark points, such as eye corners, nose tip, mouth corners,
and chin, in a face image. Accurate and robust face alignment is conducive in achieving the goals of various applications involving a face, such as face recognition [3, 21],
facial expression recognition [7], face synthesis [22], and
age estimation [11].
Shape regression has become an accurate, robust, and
fast framework for face alignment [4, 5, 9, 13, 17]. In
shape regression, face shape s = (x1 , y1 , · · · , xp , yp )> ,
that is a concatenation of p facial landmark coordinates
{(xi , yi )}pi=1 , is initialized and iteratively updated through
a cascade regression trees (CRT) as shown in Figure 1. Each
tree estimates the shape increment from the current shape
estimate, and the final shape estimate is given by a cumulated sum of the outputs of the trees to the initial estimate.

The two key elements of shape regression that impact to the
prediction performance are gradient boosting [10] for learning the CRT and the shape-indexed features [5] which the
trees are based.
The CRT learned through gradient boosting generally
exhibits overfitting [10, 13]. In gradient boosting, each
stage iteratively fits training data in a greedy stage-wise
manner by reducing the regression residuals that are defined as the differences between the ground truth shapes
and shape estimates. Overfitting occurs when there is a discrepancy between the fitting rates during learning and prediction. Fitting the training data too quickly within a few
stages, which often happened without regularization, can
lead to poor generalization and inaccurate shape estimations
during prediction.
Overfitting is even more critical when using the shapeindexed features [5, 13, 17] which are closely coupled with
the shape estimate: the shape estimate is determined by the
shape-indexed features, and the shape-indexed features are
extracted from the pixel coordinates referenced by the shape
estimate. A discrepancy between the fitting rates lead to irrelevant shape-indexed features to be extracted during prediction which in turn leads even more irrelevant features to
be extracted.
Various regularization methods have been considered in
shape regression to reduce overfitting and to attain better
generalization. Cao et al. [5] augmented training data by
generating multiple initial shape estimates for one face image, and this data augmentation method has been adopted in
subsequent studies [13, 17]. Kazemi and Sullivan [13] considered shrinkage and averaging as regularization methods:
in the gradient boosting learning procedure, a learning rate
parameter 0 < ν < 1 is multiplied to each regression tree
(shrinkage) or multiple trees are individually learned and
averaged (averaging). Ren et al. [17] split up the learning
procedure into two steps: (1) learning binary mapping function and (2) learning linear regression matrix. The binary
mapping function consists of a set of local binary mapping
functions that are induced from independently learned trees
using a single facial landmark point. The linear regression

