Enriching Object Detection with 2D-3D Registration
and Continuous Viewpoint Estimation
Christopher Bongsoo Choy† , Michael Stark‡ , Sam Corbett-Davies† , Silvio Savarese†
†
Stanford University, ‡ Max Planck Institute for Informatics
{chrischoy, scorbett, ssilvio}@stanford.edu, ‡ stark@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract
A large body of recent work on object detection has focused on exploiting 3D CAD model databases to improve
detection performance. Many of these approaches work by
aligning exact 3D models to images using templates generated from renderings of the 3D models at a set of discrete
viewpoints. However, the training procedures for these
approaches are computationally expensive and require gigabytes of memory and storage, while the viewpoint discretization hampers pose estimation performance.
We propose an efficient method for synthesizing templates from 3D models that runs on the fly – that is, it
quickly produces detectors for an arbitrary viewpoint of
a 3D model without expensive dataset-dependent training
or template storage. Given a 3D model and an arbitrary
continuous detection viewpoint, our method synthesizes a
discriminative template by extracting features from a rendered view of the object and decorrelating spatial dependences among the features. Our decorrelation procedure relies on a gradient-based algorithm that is more numerically
stable than standard decomposition-based procedures, and
we efficiently search for candidate detections by computing
FFT-based template convolutions. Due to the speed of our
template synthesis procedure, we are able to perform joint
optimization of scale, translation, continuous rotation, and
focal length using Metropolis-Hastings algorithm. We provide an efficient GPU implementation of our algorithm, and
we validate its performance on 3D Object Classes and PASCAL3D+ datasets.

1. Introduction
Current approaches to object class detection have
reached a remarkable level of performance in 2D bounding box localization [4, 5, 22, 13, 7], due to their ability to
generalize across differences in object appearance, lighting,
and viewpoint. While this generalization ability is beneficial for robustness, it limits the level of detail that these

Figure 1: Using a database of 3D CAD models, we generate NZWHO templates which can be used to either detect objects directly
or enrich the output of an existing detector with high-quality, continuous pose and 3D CAD model exemplar.

detectors can deliver as an output.
As a consequence, there has been increased interest in
multi-view object recognition, where viewpoint estimates
are provided by detectors in addition to 2D bounding boxes.
Several attempts have been made to extend existing detectors to estimate viewpoint along with object class detections, including the implicit shape model [25], the constellation model [24], and the deformable part model [5, 8, 28,
18, 6, 11].
Recently, an even higher level of geometric detail was
reached in the form of aligning 3D CAD model instances to
real world test images [1, 12, 17, 2, 20]. Interestingly, the
problem of matching 3D models to 2D images has been explored since the early days of computer vision [15], but had
largely been neglected in recent years in favor of 2D detectors based on robust local features and statistical learning
techniques. Now, this problem is being revisited for two
main reasons: (i) the availability of 3D CAD models for
many object classes and (ii) the availability of robust image
matching techniques.
For (i), recent approaches to 2D-3D matching [1, 12]
rely on a collection of 3D exemplar models, which they
render from a large number of viewpoints. The resulting
artificial images are then used to train exemplar models that
can be matched to a real-world image at test time. For

