Efficient Illuminant Estimation for Color Constancy Using Grey Pixels
Kai-Fu Yang
Shao-Bing Gao
Yong-Jie Li
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
{yang kf,gao shaobing}@163.com, liyj@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
Illuminant estimation is a key step for computational
color constancy. Instead of using the grey world or grey
edge assumptions, we propose in this paper a novel method
for illuminant estimation by using the information of grey
pixels detected in a given color-biased image. The underlying hypothesis is that most of the natural images include
some detectable pixels that are at least approximately grey,
which can be reliably utilized for illuminant estimation. We
first validate our assumption through comprehensive statistical evaluation on diverse collection of datasets and then
put forward a novel grey pixel detection method based on
the illuminant-invariant measure (IIM) in three logarithmic
color channels. Then the light source color of a scene can
be easily estimated from the detected grey pixels. Experimental results on four benchmark datasets (three recorded
under single illuminant and one under multiple illuminants)
show that the proposed method outperforms most of the
state-of-the-art color constancy approaches with the inherent merit of low computational cost.

1. Introduction
Efficiently removing the color cast triggered by light
source, i.e., color constancy, is necessary for color feature
extraction in both computer vision systems and biological
visual systems[19, 23, 24, 29]. As a typical ill-posed inverse
problem [33], the majority of the existing color constancy
models are generally realized by first estimating the color
of light source from the given color-biased image and then
transforming the color-biased image to a canonical image
rendered under the white light source through the process
of chromatic adaption [30].
One common way to estimate the illuminant from a
recorded image primarily relies on certain knowledge or
constraints imposed on the distribution of the reflectance
that reflects a kind of intrinsic properties of the scene. Typical methods include the Grey-world-based models [23, 9,
37, 17, 44], which usually take the average or maximum
response of each (preprocessed) color channel of an RGB

image as the estimated illuminant components by assuming that certain kind of reflectance distribution in a scene is
achromatic. For example, the Grey-edge [44] assumes that
the average reflectance difference in separate color channel
of a scene is normally achromatic.
Instead of hypothesizing the reflectance distribution of
a scene with an oversimplified statistics (e.g., mean), more
sophisticated assumptions about the reflectance distribution
of a scene have been further introduced. Bayesian based
algorithms consider the reflectance as the random variable
of normal distribution [8, 26]. Gamut-mapping based methods assume that the observable reflectance distribution under certain illuminant in real world is limited [2, 29, 18].
Compared to the simple-hypothesis based models, the obvious advantage of these models is that they are able to capture the more detailed structure information of surface reflectance and further improve the performance of illuminant
estimation, but most of these models are database-oriented
and normally depend on an extensive training phase [30].
Other models attempt to build more universal illuminant
estimation algorithms through machine learning techniques
[28]. Some of them are based on middle- or high-level information and may have a physical interpretation [45, 7].
In contrast, others are mainly based on empirical observation by using scene descriptors to decide which algorithm
is likely to work better for specific scene category (e.g.,
indoor or outdoor) [43, 5, 6]. On the other hand, some
biologically-inspired models have brought the recent advances in visual color constancy closer to the computational
level [24, 25, 15, 13, 41, 34].
Another line of illuminant estimation is to exploit certain
photometric indicators in images which may encode the information about the illuminant. The accurate illuminant estimation can be obtained once the indicators are recovered.
Some studies used the presence of highlight or bright pixels
in images to estimate the illuminant [42, 38, 35, 14, 11]. A
recent work improves the performance of Grey-Edge (GE)
by explicitly measuring the specular edges in images [31].
However, these models generally suffer from the difficulty
of retrieving the specular reflection [30] and pixel clipping
[21]. In addition, some methods attempt to identify the in-

