Action Recognition with Trajectory-Pooled Deep-Convolutional Descriptors
Limin Wang1,2
1
2

Yu Qiao2

Xiaoou Tang1,2

Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Shenzhen key lab of Comp. Vis. & Pat. Rec., Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, CAS, China
07wanglimin@gmail.com, yu.qiao@siat.ac.cn, xtang@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract

Trajectory extraction

Trajectory pooling

Fisher vector

Hand-Crafted

Input video

Visual features are of vital importance for human action
understanding in videos. This paper presents a new video
representation, called trajectory-pooled deep-convolutional
descriptor (TDD), which shares the merits of both handcrafted features [31] and deep-learned features [24].
Specifically, we utilize deep architectures to learn discriminative convolutional feature maps, and conduct trajectoryconstrained pooling to aggregate these convolutional features into effective descriptors. To enhance the robustness
of TDDs, we design two normalization methods to transform convolutional feature maps, namely spatiotemporal
normalization and channel normalization. The advantages
of our features come from (i) TDDs are automatically
learned and contain high discriminative capacity compared
with those hand-crafted features; (ii) TDDs take account
of the intrinsic characteristics of temporal dimension and
introduce the strategies of trajectory-constrained sampling
and pooling for aggregating deep-learned features. We
conduct experiments on two challenging datasets: HMDB51 and UCF101. Experimental results show that TDDs
outperform previous hand-crafted features [31] and deeplearned features [24]. Our method also achieves superior
performance to the state of the art on these datasets 1 .

HOF

Deep-Learned

HOG

MBH

...

Input video

Convolution Layer

Pooling Layer

...

Prediction

Figure 1. There are mainly two types of features in action
recognition: hand-crafted features and deep-learned features. For
hand-crafted features, improved trajectories [31] combined with
Fisher vector are most successful. For deep-learned features,
Convolutional Networks (ConvNets) [18] are popular deep architectures, which contain a sequence of convolutional and pooling
layers. They aims to automatically learn features with a deep
discriminatively trained neural network.

viewpoint change, and various motion speeds and styles.
Meanwhile, the high dimension and low resolution of
video further increases the difficulty to design efficient and
robust recognition method. Visual representations from
action videos are crucial for dealing with these issues and
designing effective recognition systems. Currently, there
are mainly two types of video features available for action
recognition, as illustrated in Figure 1.
The first type of representations are the hand-crafted
local features, and typical local features include Space
Time Interest Points [16], Cuboids [7], Dense Trajectories
[30], and Improved Trajectories [31]. Calculation of these
local features can be usually decomposed into two phrases:
detector, which aims to discover the salient and informative
regions for action understanding, and descriptor, whose
goal is to describe the visual patterns of extracted regions.
Among these local features, improved trajectories with
rich descriptors of HOG, HOF, MBH have shown to
be successful on a number of challenging datasets (e.g.
HMDB51 [15], UCF101 [26]) and contests (e.g. THUMOS

1. Introduction
Human action recognition [1, 24, 31, 35, 36] in videos
attracts increasing research interests in computer vision
community due to its potential applications in video surveillance, human computer interaction, and video content
analysis. However, action recognition remains as a difficult problem when focusing on realistic datasets collected
from movies [17], web videos [15, 26], and TV shows
[20]. There are large intra-class variations in the same
action class, which may be caused by background clutter,
1 The TDD code and learned two-stream ConvNet models are available
at https://wanglimin.github.io/tdd/index.html

1

