Semantic Alignment of LiDAR Data at City Scale
Fisher Yu

Jianxiong Xiao
Princeton University

Thomas Funkhouser

Figure 1: Our system aligns LiDAR captured by StreetView cars throughout a large area of New York City. The two images
on the left show overhead maps of the car trajectories. The third image shows the original alignments provided by Google.
The rightmost image shows our alignment. Different colors represent different scans of the same surfaces.

Abstract

stripes of 3D point samples at 1 degree increments over a
180 degree range approximately 75 times per second. These
scanners yield a set of 3D points on both sides of the street at
approximately 20 centimeter resolution on nearby building
facades. While this 3D data already provides fairly detailed
geometry throughout a city, it is not a globally consistent
3D reconstruction.
The problem is that the absolute point position acquired
by the 3D scanners depends on the scanner poses predicted
by GPS, inertial sensors, and SfM, which are notoriously
inaccurate in urban environments. Different runs (continuous capture sessions) through the same region of a city can
be misaligned by tens of meters due to inaccuracies of GPS
(Figure 2), and sets of points acquired within any single run
can suffer warps due to drifts in pose estimations. The misalignments are usually so serious that traditional point cloud
registration methods such as Iterative Closest Points (ICP)
fail to converge to correct solutions.
The goal of our paper is to investigate robust methods
to perform registration of LiDAR scans collected from car
mounted scanners in urban environments. Our approach is
to align semantic features. We detect semantic objects commonly found in cities (roads, facades, poles, cars, segments,
etc.) to establish features within the LiDAR, and then we
align those features across all scans simultaneously with an
all-to-all ICP algorithm. This approach is advantageous in
situations where data is noisy and seen from disparate views
because it considers the entire shape of an object for feature
detection, which can be recognized repeatably and distinctively for many types of objects in urban environments.
We demonstrate the value of semantic features in an ICP
framework for large-scale alignment of LiDAR scans. Our
variant of ICP leverages the fact that different semantic features are distinctive within neighborhoods of different sizes

This paper describes an automatic algorithm for global
alignment of LiDAR data collected with Google Street View
cars in urban environments. The problem is challenging
because global pose estimation techniques (GPS) do not
work well in city environments with tall buildings, and
local tracking techniques (integration of inertial sensors,
structure-from-motion, etc.) provide solutions that drift
over long ranges, leading to solutions where data collected
over wide ranges is warped and misaligned by many meters.
Our approach to address this problem is to extract “semantic features” with object detectors (e.g., for facades, poles,
cars, etc.) that can be matched robustly at different scales,
and thus are selected for different iterations of an ICP algorithm. We have implemented an all-to-all, non-rigid, global
alignment based on this idea that provides better results
than alternatives during experiments with data from large
regions of New York, San Francisco, Paris, and Rome.

1. Introduction
There has been a recent explosion in worldwide efforts to
acquire 3D models of real-world urban environments. The
motivation for these efforts is to provide 3D representations
of cities that can be used for mapping, urban planning, virtual tourism, security analysis, and commerce applications.
For most of these applications, the 3D model must be detailed, true-to-life, and globally consistent.
With this motivation, several companies routinely acquire LiDAR data from scanners mounted on cars driving
systematically through cities. For example, Google Street
View cars are mounted with three LiDAR scanners, two
of which point directly left and right and capture vertical
1

