Material Recognition in the Wild with the Materials in Context Database
Sean Bell∗
Paul Upchurch∗
Noah Snavely
Kavita Bala
Department of Computer Science, Cornell University
{sbell,paulu,snavely,kb}@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
Recognizing materials in real-world images is a challenging task. Real-world materials have rich surface texture,
geometry, lighting conditions, and clutter, which combine
to make the problem particularly difficult. In this paper, we
introduce a new, large-scale, open dataset of materials in
the wild, the Materials in Context Database (MINC), and
combine this dataset with deep learning to achieve material
recognition and segmentation of images in the wild.
MINC is an order of magnitude larger than previous material databases, while being more diverse and well-sampled
across its 23 categories. Using MINC, we train convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for two tasks: classifying
materials from patches, and simultaneous material recognition and segmentation in full images. For patch-based classification on MINC we found that the best performing CNN
architectures can achieve 85.2% mean class accuracy. We
convert these trained CNN classifiers into an efficient fully
convolutional framework combined with a fully connected
conditional random field (CRF) to predict the material at
every pixel in an image, achieving 73.1% mean class accuracy. Our experiments demonstrate that having a large,
well-sampled dataset such as MINC is crucial for real-world
material recognition and segmentation.

1. Introduction
Material recognition plays a critical role in our understanding of and interactions with the world. To tell whether
a surface is easy to walk on, or what kind of grip to use
to pick up an object, we must recognize the materials that
make up our surroundings. Automatic material recognition
can be useful in a variety of applications, including robotics,
product search, and image editing for interior design. But recognizing materials in real-world images is very challenging.
Many categories of materials, such as fabric or wood, are
visually very rich and span a diverse range of appearances.
Materials can further vary in appearance due to lighting and
shape. Some categories, such as plastic and ceramic, are of∗ Authors contributed equally

(a) Constructing MINC
Flickr

AMT

AMT

Houzz

MINC
3 million
patches

AMT

OpenSurfaces

(b) Patch material classification
(trained)
CNN
Patch
(c) Full scene material classification

“wood”
P(material)

Transfer weights

Sliding
CNN

Dense
CRF

(fixed)

(discretely
optimized)

Material
Labels

Figure 1. Overview. (a) We construct a new dataset by combining
OpenSurfaces [1] with a novel three-stage Amazon Mechanical
Turk (AMT) pipeline. (b) We train various CNNs on patches from
MINC to predict material labels. (c) We transfer the weights to a
fully convolutional CNN to efficiently generate a probability map
across the image; we then use a fully connected CRF to predict the
material at every pixel.

ten smooth and featureless, requiring reasoning about subtle
cues or context to differentiate between them.
Large-scale datasets (e.g., ImageNet [21], SUN [31, 19]
and Places [34]) combined with convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been key to recent breakthroughs in
object recognition and scene classification. Material recognition is similarly poised for advancement through large-scale
data and learning. To date, progress in material recognition
has been facilitated by moderate-sized datasets like the Flickr
Material Database (FMD) [26]. FMD contains ten material
categories, each with 100 samples drawn from Flickr photos.
These images were carefully selected to illustrate a wide
range of appearances for these categories. FMD has been
used in research on new features and learning methods for
material perception and recognition [17, 10, 20, 25]. While
FMD was an important step towards material recognition, it
is not sufficient for classifying materials in real-world im-

