A Discriminative CNN Video Representation for Event Detection
Zhongwen Xu† Yi Yang† Alexander G. Hauptmann§
†
QCIS, University of Technology, Sydney § SCS, Carnegie Mellon University
zhongwen.xu@student.uts.edu.au yee.i.yang@gmail.com alex@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

tures [28], yields good performance in event detection, as
evidenced by the reports of the top ranked teams in the
TRECVID Multimedia Event Detection (MED) competition [3, 22, 29, 30] and research papers [26, 31, 40, 45]
that have tackled this problem. By utilizing additional data
to assist complex event detection, researchers propose the
use of “video attributes” derived from other sources to facilitate event detection [27], or to utilize related exemplars
when the training exemplars are very few [46]. As we focus
on improving video representation in this paper, this new
method can be readily fed into those frameworks to further
improve their performance.

In this paper, we propose a discriminative video representation for event detection over a large scale video
dataset when only limited hardware resources are available. The focus of this paper is to effectively leverage deep
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) to advance event
detection, where only frame level static descriptors can be
extracted by the existing CNN toolkits. This paper makes
two contributions to the inference of CNN video representation. First, while average pooling and max pooling have
long been the standard approaches to aggregating frame
level static features, we show that performance can be significantly improved by taking advantage of an appropriate
encoding method. Second, we propose using a set of latent
concept descriptors as the frame descriptor, which enriches
visual information while keeping it computationally affordable. The integration of the two contributions results in
a new state-of-the-art performance in event detection over
the largest video datasets. Compared to improved Dense
Trajectories, which has been recognized as the best video
representation for event detection, our new representation
improves the Mean Average Precision (mAP) from 27.6%
to 36.8% for the TRECVID MEDTest 14 dataset and from
34.0% to 44.6% for the TRECVID MEDTest 13 dataset.

Dense Trajectories and its enhanced version improved
Dense Trajectories (IDT) [44] have dominated complex
event detection in recent years due to their superior performance over other features such as the motion feature
STIP [23] and the static appearance feature Dense SIFT [3].
Despite good performance, heavy computation costs greatly
restrict the usage of the improved Dense Trajectories on a
large scale. In the TRECVID MED competition 2014 [2],
the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
introduced a very large video collection, containing 200,000
videos of 8,000 hours in duration. Paralleling 1,000 cores,
it takes about one week to extract the improved Dense Trajectories for the 200,000 videos in the TRECVID MEDEval 14 collection. Even after the spatial re-sizing and temporal down-sampling processing, it still takes 500 cores one
week to extract the features [3]. As a result of the unaffordable computation cost, it would be extremely difficult
for a relatively smaller research group with limited computational resources to process large scale MED datasets.
It becomes important to propose an efficient representation
for complex event detection with only affordable computational resources, e.g., a single machine, while at the same
time attempting to achieve better performance.

1. Introduction and Related Work
Complex event detection [1, 2], which targets the detection of such events as “renovating a home” in a large video
collection crawled from Youtube, has recently attracted a lot
of research attention in computer vision. Compared to concept analysis in videos, e.g., action recognition, event detection is more difficult primarily because an event is more
complex and thus has greater intra-class variations. For example, a “marriage proposal” event may take place indoors
or outdoors, and may consist of multiple concepts such as
ring (object), kneeling down (action) and kissing (action).
Recent research efforts have shown that combining multiple features, including static appearance features [9, 25,
41], motion features [23, 7, 43, 44, 33] and acoustic fea-

One instinctive idea would be to utilize the deep learning approach, especially Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs), given their overwhelming accuracy in image analysis and fast processing speed, which is achieved by leveraging the massive parallel processing power of GPUs [21].
However, it has been reported that the event detection
1

