LMI-based 2D-3D Registration: from Uncalibrated Images to Euclidean Scene
Danda Pani Paudel1 , Adlane Habed2 , Cédric Demonceaux1 , Pascal Vasseur3
1

Le2i laboratory, University of Bourgogne, CNRS, France
ICube laboratory, University of Strasbourg, CNRS, France
3
LITIS EA laboratory, University of Rouen, France,
{danda-pani.paudel,cedric.demonceaux}@u-bourgogne.fr, adlane.habed@icube.unistra.fr,
2

pascal.vasseur@univ-rouen.fr

Abstract
This paper investigates the problem of registering a
scanned scene, represented by 3D Euclidean point coordinates, and two or more uncalibrated cameras. An unknown
subset of the scanned points have their image projections
detected and matched across images. The proposed approach assumes the cameras only known in some arbitrary
projective frame and no calibration or autocalibration is
required. The devised solution is based on a Linear Matrix
Inequality (LMI) framework that allows simultaneously estimating the projective transformation relating the cameras
to the scene and establishing 2D-3D correspondences without triangulating image points. The proposed LMI framework allows both deriving triangulation-free LMI cheirality
conditions and establishing putative correspondences between 3D volumes (boxes) and 2D pixel coordinates. Two
registration algorithms, one exploiting the scene’s structure
and the other concerned with robustness, are presented.
Both algorithms employ the Branch-and-Prune paradigm
and guarantee convergence to a global solution under mild
initial bound conditions. The results of our experiments are
presented and compared against other approaches.

1. Introduction
With the ongoing surge in affordable high quality 3D and
2D capture sensors, the two modalities are increasingly often jointly used in vision-based systems. Using information from both 2D and 3D sensors, such as a laser scanner or RGB-D camera, provides several advantages ranging from texture mapping to scene understanding. It, however, may also come with its share of difficulties and challenges. When the 3D sensor and 2D cameras are rigidly
attached, the system can be calibrated at once. If the two

sensor modalities are free, many such systems require the
2D cameras to be internally calibrated and registered with
the 3D sensor at all time. Camera calibration can be carried
out either by using a dedicated pattern in the scene or via
autocalibration. The registration of the 2D cameras and the
3D sensor is generally achieved by establishing correspondences in two ways: (i) between scanned 3D data and 2D
features; (ii) between scanned 3D points and 3D triangulated points from calibrated cameras.
The problem of establishing correspondences between
3D data and 2D features has been tackled in [23] for
points, [5] for lines, [12] using planes, [22] using skylines
and [13] by relying on scene constraints. The success of
such methods is often undermined by the absence of reliable 3D descriptors and their lack of compatibility with
2D descriptors. They may also be undermined by the likewise unreliable descriptors for certain image features such
as lines. Other registration methods are based on mutual
information [29] and region segmentation [27] but suffer
from similar drawbacks. Establishing correspondences between scanned and triangulated 3D points is often carried
out using the Iterative Closest Point (ICP) algorithm. The
image-induced scene may however be reconstructed only up
to a scale ambiguity making the problem particularly difficult to solve. In [6], this ambiguity is handled by an extension of the 4-points congruent sets algorithm [1]. Other
scale-invariant registration methods perform registration either by a voting approach [19] or performing mean-shift in
the scale invariant space [20]. None of these methods guarantees convergence to a globally optimal solution. The recent Go-ICP method, proposed in [30], is a globally optimal method for registering 3D point clouds with the same
scale. The scale of the image-induced 3D scene can only be
corrected with additional knowledge. However, using any
of [6, 19, 20, 30] requires the cameras to be calibrated.

