Inferring 3D Layout of Building Facades from a Single Image
Jiyan Pan
Google Inc.†

Martial Hebert
Carnegie Mellon University

Takeo Kanade
Carnegie Mellon University

jiyanpan@google.com

hebert@ri.cmu.edu

Takeo.Kanade@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel algorithm that infers
the 3D layout of building facades from a single 2D image of
an urban scene. Different from existing methods that only
yield coarse orientation labels or qualitative block approximations, our algorithm quantitatively reconstructs building
facades in 3D space using a set of planes mutually related
by 3D geometric constraints. Each plane is characterized
by a continuous orientation vector and a depth distribution.
An optimal solution is reached through inter-planar interactions. Due to the quantitative and plane-based nature of our
geometric reasoning, our model is more expressive and informative than existing approaches. Experiments show that
our method compares competitively with the state of the art
on both 2D and 3D measures, while yielding a richer interpretation of the 3D scene behind the image.

1. Introduction
Given a single image of an urban scene, automatically
inferring the underlying 3D layout of building facades in
the scene would significantly benefit many tasks in fields
such as autonomous navigation and augmented reality. It
goes beyond depth map estimation [22, 23, 19, 15], because
it provides a richer understanding of the scene, such as camera pose, locations of planes and blocks, and how they are
related with each other in 3D [6].
Nevertheless, recovering building facades in 3D space
is a particularly challenging task. The difficulty comes
from the fact that building facades could have highly flexible combinations in 3D space, and therefore do not have
a definitive shape either in 2D image or 3D space. In fact,
they are “stuffs”rather than “objects”, and are thus unable to
be located by a single 3D coordinate. An example is shown
in Figure 1, where the facades do not even follow the Manhattan world assumption.
Although we cannot locate building facades in the same
way we locate objects, we observe that unlike other regions
† Jiyan Pan was at the Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
when the work was performed.

Figure 1. Our algorithm detects building facades in a single 2D image, decomposes them into distinctive planes of different 3D orientations, and infers their optimal depth in 3D space based on cues
from individual planes and 3D geometric constraints among them.
Left: Detected facade regions are covered by shades of different
colors, each color representing a distinctive facade plane. Middle/Right: Ground contact lines of building facades on the ground
plane before/after considering inter-planar geometric constraints.
The coarser grid spacing is 10m.

such as trees or sky, building facades are more structured,
and can be decomposed into a set of planes that can be
represented quantitatively. The orientations and locations
of those planes are mutually constrained by their 3D geometric relationships derived from physical plausibility. In
this paper, we model building facades as a set of planes
with continuous orientations, and then quantitatively reason
over their 3D locations using inter-planar geometric constraints. This approach would produce a richer interpretation of the facade scene than existing pixel/segment based
approaches [11, 12, 19] and block-based approaches [6].
More specifically, our approach is able to provide critical
scene understanding information (e.g. quantitative orientation, depth, and relationships of facade planes) that existing
algorithms do not provide.
The main contributions of this work are as follows. 1)
We propose a plane-based fully quantitative model to infer the 3D layout of building facades, where each plane is
represented by a continuous orientation vector and a distribution of depth values. 2) In such a model, multiple cues,
such as semantic segmentation, surface layout, and vanishing lines, are utilized to detect and decompose the building
region into distinctive planes. 3) The quality of an individual candidate plane is determined by its compatibility
with both 2D evidence from image features and 3D evidence such as camera and building height. 4) We model
different types of 3D geometric relationships among candi-

