Real-time Joint Estimation of Camera Orientation and Vanishing Points
Jeong-Kyun Lee and Kuk-Jin Yoon
Computer Vision Laboratory
Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology
{leejk, kjyoon}@gist.ac.kr

Abstract
A widely-used approach for estimating camera orientation is to use points at infinity, i.e., vanishing points (VPs).
By enforcing the orthogonal constraint between the VPs,
called the Manhattan world constraint, a drift-free camera orientation estimation can be achieved. However, in
practical applications this approach suffers from many spurious parallel line segments or does not perform in nonManhattan world scenes. To overcome these limitations, we
propose a novel method that jointly estimates the VPs and
camera orientation based on sequential Bayesian filtering.
The proposed method does not require the Manhattan world
assumption, and can perform a highly accurate estimation
of camera orientation in real time. In addition, in order to
enhance the robustness of the joint estimation, we propose
a feature management technique that removes false positives of line clusters and classifies newly detected lines. We
demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method through
an extensive evaluation using synthetic and real datasets
and comparison with other state-of-the-art methods.

VP 3

Z
VP 1

VP 2
VP
X 4

Y

Figure 1. In a general scene (top left), given the line segments
detected in the image sequence (top right), the proposed method
clusters parallel lines (bottom left) and jointly estimates the camera orientation and VPs (bottom right).

monly appears, is imposed on the 3D reconstruction because the constraint allows VPs to be matched more easily
in wide-baseline images and aligned more precisely. Thus,
the methods produce highly accurate rotation estimates in
cooperation with optimization techniques.
In recent years, the computation of rotation from VPs
has been implemented for smartphone applications and unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV), and therefore noise-robust
and real-time processing in sequential images is required.
In [8, 4, 5], methods for achieving robust and real-time
rotation estimation in an image sequence were proposed.
A key point of the methods is to incorporate the Manhattan world constraint into the rotation estimation. This allows us to quickly find the VP correspondences in a smallbaseline image sequence and improve the robustness of the
rotation estimation even when noisy line segments are extracted. However, some difficult problems still remain. The
previous methods use accumulation- or sample consensusbased VP detection techniques, and therefore many dominant parallel lines corresponding to VPs should appear and
be observed on an image. Unfortunately, in the real-world
scenes, a cluster of parallel lines often includes many spurious parallel lines on the image, or the scene may be a non-

1. Introduction
The projections of parallel lines onto an image plane intersect at a point called a vanishing point (VP). Because of
the advantages of its special geometric attributes, the VP
has been extensively studied in computer vision communities and employed in many applications, such as camera
calibration [15, 6] and rotation estimation [3, 20, 19, 16]. In
particular, the estimation of camera orientation using VPs is
applied to 3D scene reconstruction [20, 19] and vehicle control [16, 11] because a VP is a translation-invariant feature
and therefore the rotation estimation can be more accurate
by using VPs.
In previous researches [3, 20, 19], rotation estimation using VPs has been studied for elaborate 3D reconstruction of
urban scenes from multiple wide-baseline images. In the
case of urban scenes, the so-called Manhattan world constraint, where a triplet of mutually orthogonal VPs com1

