Discriminative Learning of Iteration-wise Priors for Blind Deconvolution
Wangmeng Zuo1 , Dongwei Ren1 , Shuhang Gu2 , Liang Lin3 , and Lei Zhang2
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
2
Dept. of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China
3
Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China

{cswmzuo,rendongweihit}@gmail.com,{cssgu,cslzhang}@comp.polyu.edu.hk,linliang@ieee.org

where σn is the standard deviation (std.) of additive white
Gaussian noise, φ (x) and ϕ (k) are some regularizers for
x and k, respectively, λ and µ are the trade-off parameters.
Several regularizers on k had been proposed to enforce the
sparsity and spatial smoothness of the estimated kernel. As
to x, one natural choice is based on image prior or natural
image statistics, e.g., hyper-Laplacian of gradients [14].
However, naive MAP prefers the trivial delta kernel solution [16]. To make MAP work, salient structure selection [4, 11, 32] and carefully designed image priors [15, 34]
should be adopted to enhance strong edges while suppressing harmful small-scale textures. So far, a number of edge
prediction methods and image priors had been proposed,
and the recent MAP approaches can achieve high quality
results for blind deconvolution and even spatially variant
blind deblurring [8, 34]. Edge prediction based approaches
usually involve some heuristic and engineered methods,
e.g., shock and bilateral filters in [4] and relative total variation (RTV) [10], to restore salient edges explicitly. Image
prior-based approaches generally deploy novel regularizers,
e.g., l1 /l2 [15] and generalized l0 [34], for implicit edge selection. These edge based methods may fail to handle small
scale textures, in which, on the contrary, power-spectrum
based methods can work well [35, 9, 18, 7, 36].
For better estimation of k, researchers had noted that
parameters for edge prediction and image regularization
should be dynamically tuned during the iterations. For
edge prediction-based approaches, strong edges are selected
for coarse kernel estimation in the first a few iterations,
and subsequently more details are added to further refine
the estimated kernel [15, 27]. Under the MAP framework
[3, 15, 27, 23], the regularization parameter λ is set small
to preserve strong edges while suppressing detailed textures
in the first a few iterations, and gradually tuned along with
the iteration to produce accurate kernel. In summary, most
MAP approaches involve carefully designed regularizers
and handcrafted parameter tuning to guide the algorithms

Abstract
The maximum a posterior (MAP)-based blind deconvolution framework generally involves two stages: blur kernel estimation and non-blind restoration. For blur kernel
estimation, sharp edge prediction and carefully designed
image priors are vital to the success of MAP. In this paper, we propose a blind deconvolution framework together
with iteration specific priors for better blur kernel estimap
tion. The family of hyper-Laplacian (Pr(d) ∝ e−kdkp /λ )
is adopted for modeling iteration-wise priors of image gradients, where each iteration has its own model parameters
{λ(t) , p(t) }. To avoid heavy parameter tuning, all iterationwise model parameters can be learned using our principled
discriminative learning model from a training set, and can
be directly applied to other dataset and real blurry images.
Interestingly, with the generalized shrinkage / thresholding
operator, negative p value (p < 0) is allowable and we
find that it contributes more in estimating the coarse shape
of blur kernel. Experimental results on synthetic and real
world images demonstrate that our method achieves better deblurring results than the existing gradient prior-based
methods. Compared with the state-of-the-art patch priorbased method, our method is competitive in restoration results but is much more efficient.

1. Introduction
Blind deconvolution is a severely ill-posed problem, in
which both latent image x and blur kernel k are required to
be estimated from an input blurred image y. One class of
popular solutions to blind deconvolution is the maximum a
posterior (MAP) approaches [3, 22, 24], in which the pair
(x, k) can be jointly estimated by maximizing a posterior
probability,
λ
2
(1)
min 2 kk ⊗ x − yk + φ (x) + µϕ (k) ,
x,k 2σn
1

