Salient Object Detection via Bootstrap Learning
Na Tong1 , Huchuan Lu1 , Xiang Ruan2 and Ming-Hsuan Yang3
1
Dalian University of Technology 2 OMRON Corporation 3 University of California at Merced

Abstract
We propose a bootstrap learning algorithm for salient
object detection in which both weak and strong models are
exploited. First, a weak saliency map is constructed based
on image priors to generate training samples for a strong
model. Second, a strong classifier based on samples directly from an input image is learned to detect salient pixels.
Results from multiscale saliency maps are integrated to further improve the detection performance. Extensive experiments on six benchmark datasets demonstrate that the proposed bootstrap learning algorithm performs favorably against the state-of-the-art saliency detection methods. Furthermore, we show that the proposed bootstrap learning approach can be easily applied to other bottom-up saliency
models for significant improvement.

1. Introduction
As an important preprocessing step in computer vision
problems to reduce computational complexity, saliency detection has attracted much attention in recent years. Although significant progress has been made, it remains a
challenging task to develop effective and efficient algorithms for salient object detection.
Saliency models include two main research areas: visual attention which is extensively studied in neuroscience
and cognitive modeling, and salient object detection which
is of great interest in computer vision. Salient object detection methods can be categorized as bottom-up stimulidriven [1, 8–12, 15–18, 20, 23, 28–38, 41, 43] and top-down
task-driven [19, 40, 42] approaches. Bottom-up methods
are usually based on low-level visual information and are
more effective in detecting fine details rather than global
shape information. In contrast, top-down saliency models are able to detect objects of certain sizes and categories
based on more representative features from training samples. However, the detection results from top-down methods tend to be coarse with fewer details. In terms of computational complexity, bottom-up methods are often more
efficient than top-down approaches.
In this paper, we propose a novel algorithm for salien-

Figure 1. Saliency maps generated by the proposed method.
Brighter pixels indicate higher saliency values. Left to right: input, ground truth, weak saliency map, strong saliency map, and
final saliency map.

t object detection via bootstrap learning [22]. To address
the problems of noisy detection results and limited representations from bottom-up methods, we present a learning
approach to exploit multiple features. However, unlike existing top-down learning-based methods, the proposed algorithm is bootstrapped with samples from a bottom-up model, thereby alleviating the time-consuming off-line training
process or labeling positive samples manually.

2. Related Work and Problem Context
Both weak and strong learning models are exploited in
the proposed bootstrap learning algorithm. First, we compute a weak contrast-based saliency map based on superpixels of an input image. This coarse saliency map is smoothed by a graph cut method, where a set of training
samples is collected, where positive samples are pertaining
to the salient objects while negative samples are from the
background in this image. Next, a strong classifier based on
Multiple Kernel Boosting (MKB) [39] is learned to measure
saliency where three feature descriptors (RGB, CIELab color pixels, and the Local Binary Pattern histograms) are extracted and four kernels (linear, polynomial, RBF, and sigmoid functions) are used to exploit rich feature representations. Furthermore, we use multiscale superpixels to detect
salient objects of varying sizes. As the weak saliency model tends to detect fine details and the strong saliency model
focuses on global shapes, these two are combined to generate the final saliency map. Experiments on six benchmark

