Learning Hypergraph-regularized Attribute Predictors
Sheng Huang† Mohamed Elhoseiny‡ Ahmed Elgammal‡ Dan Yang†
†
Chongqing University, P.R.China ‡ Rutgers University, USA
huangsheng@cqu.edu.cn m.elhoseiny@cs.rutgers.edu

elgammal@cs.rutgers.edu

dyang@cqu.edu.cn

Abstract
We present a novel attribute learning framework named
Hypergraph-based Attribute Predictor (HAP). In HAP, a hypergraph is leveraged to depict the attribute relations in the
data. Then the attribute prediction problem is casted as
a regularized hypergraph cut problem, in which a collection of attribute projections is jointly learnt from the feature
space to a hypergraph embedding space aligned with the
attributes. The learned projections directly act as attribute
classifiers (linear and kernelized). This formulation leads
to a very efficient approach. By considering our model as
a multi-graph cut task, our framework can flexibly incorporate other available information, in particular class label.
We apply our approach to attribute prediction, Zero-shot
and N -shot learning tasks. The results on AWA, USAA and
CUB databases demonstrate the value of our methods in
comparison with the state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
Attribute learning aims at achieving an intermediate representation on top of the low-level visual feature space,
which encodes semantic properties shared across different
categories of objects or scenes. Such an intermediate representation plays a role as the vehicles of semantics in humanmachine communication. Farhadi et al. [9] and Lampert et
al. [21] showed that supervised attributes can be transferred
across object categories, allowing description and naming
of objects from categories not seen during training. Therefore, attributes provide a way to encode and share knowledge to achieve challenging tasks such as the Zero-Shot
Learning (ZSL) problem, where the goal is to categorize
classes that are unseen during training [21, 20].
Several approaches have been proposed for attribute
learning, e.g. [21, 9, 30, 24, 1, 17, 11, 23, 15]. Two fundamental issues remain unsolved, although recent research
has started to pay attention to them e.g. [1, 17, 11]. First,
traditional approaches learn attributes independently from
each other (one-vs-all classifiers) [21, 9], without explicitly exploiting the correlation between attributes. Second,
learning attribute classifiers are typically done independent

Figure 1. The visualization of the hypergraph cut for predicting the
attribute ”water”. Each ellipse with solid lines denotes a hyperedge that encodes an attribute relation and each circle represents a
sample.

of the subsequent tasks, such as categorization or zero shot
learning, and typically category labels are ignored in the
learning process. Optimizing the attribute prediction independent of the succeeding task does not guarantee to yield
the best attribute predictor for that task.
Correlations naturally exist among attributes. Is it better to exploit the correlation or to discourage the correlation
during attribute learning, i.e. decorrelation? Several papers
have argued that exploiting correlation between attributes
improves their discriminative powers, e.g. [34, 31]. Recent
works attempted to address the issue of joint attribute learning with a focus on decorrelating attributes [1, 17]. Jayaraman et al. [17] argued that attribute learning approaches
are prone to learn visual features that correlates with attributes, not attributes themselves. Therefore they argued
for decorrelation of attributes, by exploiting feature competition during learning through a multitask learning framework. Decorrelation of attributes might be suitable in tasks
such as describing images with text, key-word based retrieval, or generating image annotations. However, preserving and exploiting correlation between attributes should
preserve the natural clustering in the data and should be better for classification and zero-shot learning tasks. Correlation is a nature of attributes and compulsively decorrelating

