Semantic Object Segmentation via Detection in Weakly Labeled Video
Yu Zhang1 , Xiaowu Chen1∗, Jia Li1,2 , Chen Wang1 , Changqun Xia1
1

State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University
2

International Research Institute for Multidisciplinary Science, Beihang University

Abstract
Semantic object segmentation in video is an important
step for large-scale multimedia analysis. In many cases,
however, semantic objects are only tagged at video-level,
making them difficult to be located and segmented. To address this problem, this paper proposes an approach to segment semantic objects in weakly labeled video via object
detection. In our approach, a novel video segmentationby-detection framework is proposed, which first incorporates object and region detectors pre-trained on still images to generate a set of detection and segmentation proposals. Based on the noisy proposals, several object tracks
are then initialized by solving a joint binary optimization
problem with min-cost flow. As such tracks actually provide rough configurations of semantic objects, we thus refine the object segmentation while preserving the spatiotemporal consistency by inferring the shape likelihoods of pixels from the statistical information of tracks. Experimental
results on Youtube-Objects dataset and SegTrack v2 dataset
demonstrate that our method outperforms state-of-the-arts
and shows impressive results.

Frame# 1

…

…

…

…

Frame# 21

(a) Tags:

(b) Noisy proposals

(c) Segmentation

Figure 1. The motivation of our approach. (a) The input video is
weakly labeled with semantic tags, making it difficult to locate and
segment the desired objects (e.g., the horse is occluded by fence
in frame #21); (b) Per-frame detection and segmentation proposals provide location information but are often very noisy; (c) The
proposed segmentation-by-detection framework can generate consistent object segmentation results from noisy detection and segmentation proposals.

pled from videos with irrelevant tags. These instances,
which may be inadequately selected or inaccurately labeled, were then fed into the weakly supervised learning
framework (e.g., multi-instance learning [12], negative mining [25] and label transfer [21]) to train a segment classifier.
Although these approaches can achieve promising results
on certain scenarios, the ambiguity of training instances
may lead to unexpected segmentation results. Moreover,
multiple videos are required during training, preventing the
usage of these approaches in single video segmentation.
To address these problems, this paper proposes to segment semantic objects in video via detection. The proposed
approach does not need segment-level training stage and
thus avoids the selection of ambiguous instances. Instead,
the image-based object detectors, which have demonstrated
great successes in segmenting semantic objects in images
[32, 17, 14, 26, 31], are employed into our segmentationby-detection framework. In this framework, object and region detectors pre-trained on still images are first used to
generate a set of detection and segmentation proposals on
various video frames. As shown in Fig. 1, such image-based
proposals often lack spatiotemporal consistency and may be
inaccurate due to blurred boundaries generated from video
compression, object occlusion and camera motion. Therefore, we propose to initialize several object tracks from

1. Introduction
Semantic video object segmentation, which aims to detect and segment object-like regions in video according to
predefined object labels, is an essential step in computer vision and multimedia analysis. In many scenarios, however,
objects are only labeled at video-level, making them difficult to be located and segmented. As videos tagged with
only semantic labels are growing explosively on the Internet, it is necessary to explore how to segment the desired
semantic objects in such weakly labeled videos.
Recently, many approaches (e.g., [12, 25, 21]) have been
proposed to address this problem through weakly supervised learning. In the learning process, object-relevant instances were usually selected among videos sharing the
same semantic tags, while background instances were sam∗ Corresponding author (email: chen@buaa.edu.cn)

1

