Grasp Type Revisited: A Modern Perspective on A Classical Feature for Vision
Yezhou Yang1 , Cornelia Fermüller1 , Yi Li2 , and Yiannis Aloimonos1
1

Computer Vision Lab, University of Maryland, College Park 2 NICTA and ANU

Abstract
The grasp type provides crucial information about human action. However, recognizing the grasp type from unconstrained scenes is challenging because of the large variations in appearance, occlusions and geometric distortions.
In this paper, first we present a convolutional neural network to classify functional hand grasp types. Experiments
on a public static scene hand data set validate good performance of the presented method. Then we present two applications utilizing grasp type classification: (a) inference of
human action intention and (b) fine level manipulation action segmentation. Experiments on both tasks demonstrate
the usefulness of grasp type as a cognitive feature for computer vision. This study shows that the grasp type is a powerful symbolic representation for action understanding, and
thus opens new avenues for future research.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. (a) Rest or Extension on the handlebar vs. (b) Firmly
power cylindrical grasping the handlebar.

standing in the outdoor garden scene, with a knife in his/her
hand. However, we human beings will react dramatically
different when experiencing the two different scenes, because of our ability to recognize immediately the different
ways the person is handling the knife, i.e., the grasp type.
We can effectively infer the possible activity the man is going to do based on his way of grasping the knife. After
seeing scene Fig. 2(a), we could believe this man is going
to cut something hard, or even might be malicious, since
he is “Power Hook” grasping the knife. After seeing scene
Fig. 2(b), we may react with a movement to acquire the
knife (shown in Fig. 2(c)) since the man is “Precision Lumbrical” grasping the knife indicating a passing action. From
this example we can see that the grasp type is a strong cue
for us to infer the human action intention.

1. Introduction
The grasp type contains fine-grain information about human action. Consider the two scenes in Fig. 1 from the
VOC challenge. Current computer vision systems can easily detect that there is one bicycle and one cyclist (human
being) in the image. Through human pose estimation, the
system can further confirm that these two cyclists are riding the bike. But humans can tell that the cyclist on the left
side literally is not “riding” the bicycle since his hands are
posing in a “Rest or Extension” grasp next to the handlebar while the cyclist on the right side is racing because his
hands firmly hold the handlebar with a “Power Cylindrical”
grasp. In other words, the recognition of grasp type is essential for a more detailed analysis of human action, beyond
the processes of current state-of-the-art vision systems.
Moreover, recognizing grasp type can help an intelligent
system predict the human action intention. Consider an intelligent agent looking at the two scenes in Fig. 2(a) and (b).
Current state-of-the-art computer vision techniques can accurately recognize many visual aspects from both of these
scenes, such as the fact that there must be a human being

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 2. (a) Power Hook Grasp a knife vs. (b) Precision Lumbrical Grasp a knife. (c) A natural reaction when seeing scene (b) is
to open the hand to receive the knife.

These are two examples demonstrating how important it
is for us to be able to recognize grasp types. The grasp type
1

