Multi-Feature Max-Margin Hierarchical Bayesian Model for Action Recognition
Shuang Yang, Chunfeng Yuan, Baoxin Wu, Weiming Hu
NLPR, Institution of Automation, CAS
Beijing, China

Fangshi Wang
Beijing Jiaotong University
Beijing, China

{syang,cfyuan,bxwu,wmhu}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

fshwang@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

successful results. A common idea of these methods is to
construct a graphical model for each class and describe actions by combining the learned class-speciﬁc parameters.
Then a prediction score for each action class is obtained by
a class-speciﬁc inference process, and the ﬁnal action class
is obtained through a maximum-voting process based on
the class-speciﬁc scores. One challenge of these methods
is that the powerful capability of discriminative classiﬁers, like max-margin classiﬁers, is excluded in the learning
process, which makes the learned representations may be
appropriate for description, but may be not optimal for classiﬁcation.
In this paper, we propose a multi-feature max-margin hierarchical Bayesian model (M3 HBM), which jointly learns
a multi-feature hierarchical generative model (HGM) as the
representation part together with max-margin classiﬁers in
a uniﬁed Bayesian framework for action recognition. Inspired by the recent success of hierarchical structures for
representation, we model actions by a hierarchical generative model (HGM) including three layers: point-level visual
observations, region-level local STPs which are distributed in many different small neighbourhoods, and top-level
global STPs which are shared among all different classes
without position limitation.
Through HGM, we learn from multiple feature modalities to jointly characterize different aspects of actions and represent actions by the probabilistic distributions over the top-level global STPs. For the classiﬁcation
part in M3 HBM, Gibbs classiﬁers are applied to minimize
the expected loss based on the max-margin principle, and
Gaussian priors are introduced to the classiﬁers to perform
Bayesian estimation for classiﬁer parameters. We employ
the classiﬁers as regularization terms of M3 HBM to jointly learn the parameters in HGM and Gibbs classiﬁers in
a united process. By learning the representations together
with the classiﬁers in a uniﬁed framework, the learned latent STPs are both descriptive and discriminative for action
recognition.
Additionally, we integrate the multi-task learning into
our model to learn shared latent STPs from multiple fea-

In this paper, a multi-feature max-margin hierarchical
Bayesian model (M3 HBM) is proposed for action recognition. Different from existing methods which separate representation and classiﬁcation into two steps, M3 HBM jointly learns a high-level representation by combining a hierarchical generative model (HGM) and discriminative maxmargin classiﬁers in a uniﬁed Bayesian framework. Specifically, HGM is proposed to represent actions by distributions over latent spatial temporal patterns (STPs) which
are learned from multiple feature modalities and shared among different classes. For recognition, we employ Gibbs
classiﬁers to minimize the expected loss function based on
the max-margin principle and use the classiﬁers as regularization terms of M3 HBM to perform Bayeisan estimation
for classiﬁer parameters together with the learning of STPs. In addition, multi-task learning is applied to learn the
model from multiple feature modalities for different classes. For test videos, we obtain the representations by the
inference process and perform action recognition by the
learned Gibbs classiﬁers. For the learning and inference
process, we derive an efﬁcient Gibbs sampling algorithm
to solve the proposed M3 HBM. Extensive experiments on
several datasets demonstrate both the representation power
and the classiﬁcation capability of our approach for action
recognition.

1. Introduction
Human action recognition in video is an active area for
its potential in a number of real-world applications. Various
methods have been proposed to achieve automatic action
recognition. The traditional procedure for action recognition [25, 2, 32] includes two separate steps: designing descriptors to represent actions and then training classiﬁers to
predict the action class for test video.
Recently, many work [15, 13, 27] propose to perform
representation and classiﬁcation together in a single model
with the aid of probabilistic graphical models and present
1

