Inverting RANSAC: Global Model Detection via Inlier Rate Estimation
Roee Litman∗ Simon Korman∗ Alex Bronstein Shai Avidan
School of Electrical Engineering, Tel-Aviv university
RANSAC'spapproach
1

assumep
orpestimate
threshold

Abstract

2

maximize
inlierprate

%pofpmatches
groundptruthp

100
2

1
2

Proposedpapproach

This work presents a novel approach for detecting inliers in a given set of correspondences (matches). It does
so without explicitly identifying any consensus set, based
on a method for inlier rate estimation (IRE). Given such an
estimator for the inlier rate, we also present an algorithm
that detects a globally optimal transformation. We provide
a theoretical analysis of the IRE method using a stochastic generative model on the continuous spaces of matches
and transformations. This model allows rigorous investigation of the limits of our IRE method for the case of 2Dtranslation, further giving bounds and insights for the more
general case. Our theoretical analysis is validated empirically and is shown to hold in practice for the more general case of 2D-affinities. In addition, we show that the
combined framework works on challenging cases of 2Dhomography estimation, with very few and possibly noisy
inliers, where RANSAC generally fails.

1

inlierprate
estimation
(IRE)

2

minimize
error

match
errorp

0
1

Figure 1. Our approach is “orthogonal” to RANSAC, which
assumes a fixed error-threshold for inliers and then searches for
a model that maximizes the inlier rate. Our method works in an
opposite order: the inlier rate of matches is first estimated from the
data and then, a model that minimizes the error of such a portion
of inliers is searched for.

is most commonly formulated as the consensus set maximization problem, where the goal is to find a maximal set
of matches that agree on a model, up to some tolerance.
This work presents a different approach, as is illustrated
in Figure 1. The green curve is a cumulative error distribution of matches between a pair of images, under a
ground-truth transformation. In RANSAC (and any other
consensus-set-maximization approach), a fixed error threshold is chosen and a model with a maximal number of inliers
within the threshold is searched for (depicted by vertical
red lines, for different thresholds). Our approach, on the
other hand, first estimates the true inlier rate of the matches
(about 70% in this example) and then searches for a model
with lowest possible match errors over the detected portion
of matches (depicted by the blue horizontal arrow).
The portion of inliers and the noise level of inlier
matches are generally unknown, and any a-priori choice of
error threshold is rather arbitrary. Our inlier rate estimation (IRE) method makes a principled prediction based on
minimizing an indicative quantity, denoted v(p), over any
possible inlier rate p. The measure v ’counts’ the number
of transformations (or portion of transformation space) that
have a p-tile error ’similar’ to the best one possible. It turns
out that v has a very particular behavior around the true inlier rate, where it attains a surprisingly clear minimum.
As a combinatorial metaphor of this phenomenon, consider a bag with N balls, k of which are white, and the remaining N −k are black. In this metaphor, white and black
balls correspond, respectively, to inliers and outliers. Also,
a ’selection’ of balls represents a transformation and v is the

1. Introduction
The problem of image correspondence is a fundamental
problem in computer vision, as it arises as a primitive in
many tasks such as image retrieval, 3D reconstruction and
panorama stitching. While some works solve these types
of problems using direct methods [11, 5, 8], the vast majority of recent methods use large sets of matching (pairs of)
points as their entry point, later discarding the content of the
images. This is largely due to the tremendous improvement
over the last decades in algorithms for detecting stable image feature points and representing them by descriptors that
are designed for the task of matching [10, 13, 14].
The desired outcome of such a point matching process is
that a large portion of the matches is accurate, while only a
few of them (preferably none) can have arbitrarily bad errors. These two groups of matches are called inliers and
outliers, respectively. The final step of image matching is
therefore to robustly detect the “true” transformation underlying the inliers while ignoring the outliers. In practice, this
∗ equal contributors

1

