Robust Video Segment Proposals with Painless Occlusion Handling
Zhengyang Wu(1) , Fuxin Li(1) , Rahul Sukthankar(2) , James M. Rehg(1)
(1) Computational Perception Lab - Georgia Tech. (2) Google Research
[zwu66, fli, rehg]@cc.gatech.edu, sukthankar@google.com

Abstract
We propose a robust algorithm to generate video segment proposals. The proposals generated by our method
can start from any frame in the video and are robust to
complete occlusions. Our method does not assume specific motion models and even has a limited capability to
generalize across videos. We build on our previous least
squares tracking framework, where image segment proposals are generated and tracked using learned appearance
models. The innovation in our new method lies in the use
of two efficient moves, the merge move and free addition,
to efficiently start segments from any frame and track them
through complete occlusions, without much additional computation. Segment size interpolation is used for effectively
detecting occlusions. We propose a new metric for evaluating video segment proposals on the challenging VSB-100
benchmark and present state-of-the-art results. Preliminary
results are also shown for the potential use of our framework to track segments across different videos.

1. Introduction
Following the successes of image segmentation and
segment-based object recognition, there has been increasing
interest in video segmentation. Video offers an excellent opportunity for utilizing motion and appearance cues to potentially reduce the ambiguity in image segmentation. Progress
in video segmentation could enable new approaches to
building non-rigid 3D object models from video, understanding dynamic scenes, analyzing robot-object interactions, and other high-level vision tasks.
The increasing interest in video segmentation has also
led to a diverse set of problem definitions and different
assumptions based on these definitions. Video segmentation has been defined by different researchers as separating foreground from background [4, 28, 37, 45], identifying
moving objects [12, 29, 34], creating segmentation proposals [3, 28, 31, 45], computing hierarchical sets of coarse-tofine video segments [19, 24, 36, 42], or generating motion
segmentations [24, 35]. Each of these definitions has its

Figure 1: Complete occlusion happens frequently in video,
but no existing solution addresses the problem efficiently.
own merits and applications. However, inherent ambiguities exist, particularly in the definition of what is an object
in video. One could identify a man wearing a suit and belt as
a consistently moving object and segment him using motion
segmentation. Alternatively, his belt and suit could each independently be an object of interest. There are also some
objects that do not move but are still of interest in a video,
e.g., a person leaning against a wall. A further complication
is occlusion: a person can enter the scene, be occluded by
others for a significant amount of time, and then re-appear
in the middle of the scene without changing his or her identity (see Figure 1). In the face of this complexity, should
video segmentation methods maintain persistent identities,
and how can they do so?
In order to handle the diverse video segmentation needs
of different applications, we argue that a stage for creating
video segment proposals is necessary, where a pool of overlapping volumetric segments is generated, including segments that satisfy requirements for different applications.
There have been some previous frameworks for creating
video segmentation proposals, e.g., [3,28,31,45]. However,
they all have different restrictions, such as objects have to be
moving independently [28], or segments have to start from
the first frame [31]. Importantly, none of them handles the
complete occlusion problem where a segment is fully occluded and then re-enters the scene. The restrictive assumptions of these previous methods make them unsuitable for a
broad spectrum of applications.
In this paper, we introduce a new method which targets
the limitations of existing approaches. We propose an ap-

