Curriculum Learning of Multiple Tasks
Anastasia Pentina, Viktoriia Sharmanska, Christoph H. Lampert
IST Austria, Am Campus 1, 3400 Klosterneuburg, Austria
{apentina,vsharman,chl}@ist.ac.at

Abstract

Pointy ?
High heel ?

Sharing information between multiple tasks enables algorithms to achieve good generalization performance even
from small amounts of training data. However, in a realistic
scenario of multi-task learning not all tasks are equally related to each other, hence it could be advantageous to transfer information only between the most related tasks.
In this work we propose an approach that processes multiple tasks in a sequence with sharing between subsequent
tasks instead of solving all tasks jointly. Subsequently, we
address the question of curriculum learning of tasks, i.e.
finding the best order of tasks to be learned. Our approach
is based on a generalization bound criterion for choosing
the task order that optimizes the average expected classification performance over all tasks. Our experimental results show that learning multiple related tasks sequentially
can be more effective than learning them jointly, the order
in which tasks are being solved affects the overall performance, and that our model is able to automatically discover
a favourable order of tasks.

Feminine ?

Shiny ?

Formal ?

Open ?

prototype

Figure 1. Schematic illustration of the proposed multi-task learning approach. If each task is related to some other task but not
equally much to all others, learning tasks in a sequence (blue arrows) can be beneficial to classical multi-task learning based on
sharing information from a single prototype (green arrows).

the models is measured by the Euclidean distance between
the corresponding weight vectors [35]. In a multi-task setting this idea was introduced by Evgeniou and Pontil in [9].
There the authors propose an SVM-based algorithm that enforces the weight vectors corresponding to different tasks
to lie close to some common prototype, and they show its
effectiveness on several datasets. However, this algorithm
treats all the tasks symmetrically, which might not be optimal in more realistic scenarios. There might be some outlier
tasks or groups of tasks such that there is no similarity between the tasks from different groups. Hence, more flexible
models are needed that are able to exploit the structure underlying tasks relations and avoid negative consequences of
transferring information between unrelated tasks.

1. Introduction
Multi-task learning [6] studies the problem of solving
several prediction tasks. While traditional machine learning algorithms can be applied to solve each task independently, they usually need significant amounts of labelled
data to achieve generalization of reasonable quality. However, in many cases it is expensive and time consuming to
annotate large amounts of data, especially in computer vision applications such as object categorization. An alternative approach is to share information between several related learning tasks and this has been shown experimentally
to allow better generalization from fewer training points per
task [26].
In this work we focus on the parameter transfer approach
to multi-task learning that rests on the idea that models corresponding to related tasks are similar to each other in terms
of their parameter representations. We concentrate on the
case of linear predictors and assume that similarity between

The idea of regularizing by Euclidean distance between
the weight vectors of different tasks is also commonly used
in domain adaptation scenario where the learner has access
to two or more prediction tasks but is interested in performing well only on one of them. All other tasks serve only
as sources of additional information. This setup has been
shown to lead to effective algorithms in various computer
vision applications: object detection [2], personalized image search [17], hand prosthetics [25] and image categorization [33, 34]. Its modification that transfers correlation patterns between the features was used for object detection [11]
and recognition [13]. Though the domain adaptation sce1

