High-speed Hyperspectral Video Acquisition with a Dual-camera Architecture
Lizhi Wang1∗ Zhiwei Xiong2 Dahua Gao3 Guangming Shi1 Wenjun Zeng2 Feng Wu4
1
Xidian Univ. 2 Microsoft Research 3 Air Force Eng. Univ. 4 Univ. of Sci. & Tech. of China

Abstract
We propose a novel dual-camera design to acquire 4D
high-speed hyperspectral (HSHS) videos with high spatial
and spectral resolution. Our work has two key technical
contributions. First, we build a dual-camera system that
simultaneously captures a panchromatic video at a high
frame rate and a hyperspectral video at a low frame rate,
which jointly provide reliable projections for the underlying HSHS video. Second, we exploit the panchromatic video
to learn an over-complete 3D dictionary to represent each
band-wise video sparsely, and a robust computational reconstruction is then employed to recover the HSHS video
based on the joint videos and the self-learned dictionary.
Experimental results demonstrate that, for the first time to
our knowledge, the hyperspectral video frame rate reaches
up to 100fps with decent quality, even when the incident
light is not strong.

Figure 1. Dual-camera architecture for HSHS video acquisition.

reconstruction. Techniques in this category, including computed tomographic imaging spectrometry (CTIS) [29, 12],
coded aperture snapshot spectral imager (CASSI) [3, 34],
and hybrid spectral video imaging system (HVIS) [10, 25],
have the ability to recover a full hyperspectral image with
a single shot. Nevertheless, these systems need to employ
additional optical elements to encode and/or disperse the
scene information. Inevitably, the incident light will go
through a long optical path and certain light-blocking elements, leading to considerable light intensity attenuation.
As a result, the video frame rate that can be achieved with
these snapshot spectral imagers is usually limited compared
to the RGB/panchromatic cameras equipped with the same
detector, especially when the incident light is not strong. So
far, the highest frame rate reported in the literature is 30fps
by CASSI, for a bright scene with burning candles [35].
In this paper, we propose a novel dual-camera design
to acquire 4D high-speed hyperspectral (HSHS) videos,
which leverages the high spatial and spectral resolution of
the compressive spectral imaging and high light efficiency
of the panchromatic camera (PanCam for short hereafter).
This new design, as shown in Fig. 1, comprises a beam
splitter, a high-speed PanCam, a suite of CASSI (inside the
CASSI there is an objective lens, a coded aperture, a relay lens, a dispersive prism, and a detector). Specifically,
the incident light from the scene is equally divided by the
beam splitter into two parts, which are then captured by the
PanCam and the CASSI, respectively. Light in the PanCam
branch will go through a shorter path and less optical elements compared with the CASSI branch. Therefore, the

1. Introduction
Hyperspectral imaging, which collects and processes
scene information by dividing the whole spectrum into tens
or hundreds of bands, has gained increasing attention from
both academic and industrial communities. Thanks to its
capability for detailed scene representation, this technique
has been widely adopted in many fields, including medical
diagnosis, health care, remote sensing, and military operations [17, 24]. Recently, it is found that various computer
vision tasks, e.g., recognition, classification, and tracking,
can benefit from incorporating the spectral information in
tens or hundreds of bands [11, 20, 28].
Unfortunately, conventional spectrometers have to confront a tradeoff between spatial/spectral and temporal resolution, as they need to scan the scene along either spatial
or spectral dimension to capture a full hyperspectral image [19, 31, 7, 26]. Therefore, conventional spectrometers
are not suitable for measuring dynamic scenes. To enable
hyperspectral video acquisition, snapshot spectral imagers
have been developed thanks to the flourish of computational
∗ This work was performed at Microsoft Research.

1

