Deep Correlation for Matching Images and Text
Fei Yan Krystian Mikolajczyk
Centre for Vision, Speech and Signal Processing, University of Surrey
Guildford, Surrey, United Kingdom. GU2 7XH
{f.yan, k.mikolajczyk}@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of matching images
and captions in a joint latent space learnt with deep canonical correlation analysis (DCCA). The image and caption
data are represented by the outputs of the vision and text
based deep neural networks. The high dimensionality of
the features presents a great challenge in terms of memory
and speed complexity when used in DCCA framework. We
address these problems by a GPU implementation and propose methods to deal with overfitting. This makes it possible to evaluate DCCA approach on popular caption-image
matching benchmarks. We compare our approach to other
recently proposed techniques and present state of the art results on three datasets.

1. Introduction
Automatically describing (resp. synthesising) visual
data using (resp. from) natural language [5, 6, 11, 15, 16,
23, 25, 26, 29, 34, 35, 36, 42, 52] is one of the ultimate
goals of computer vision (CV), natural language processing
(NLP) and machine learning (ML). However, besides being
extremely ambitious, this goal is also practically problematic due to the lack of means for quantifying progress with
objective evaluation.
With the image-text parallel corpora that have become
available recently [2, 14, 18, 31, 41, 53], the evaluation
issue has been alleviated by changing the goal of description and synthesis to a cross-modal retrieval one. In such
a scenario, given an image, the goal is to retrieve the gold
textual description, and vice versa. Following this setting,
various techniques have been proposed recently to learn a
latent joint space for image and text. The majority of these
techniques optimise either the canonical correlation objective [13, 18] or a structured objective [48] over typically
shallowly learnt features, i.e., the features and the objective are decoupled. In contrast, the very recent work of [21]
integrates into the deep learning [24, 28] framework an objective that maximises the alignment between fragments of

the image and those of the text.
In this paper, we propose an alternative end-to-end learning scheme based on the deep canonical correlation analysis
(DCCA) [1]. Our contributions can be summarised as follows:
First, we make non-trivial extensions to [1]. [1] evaluates DCCA on medium-sized problems with low feature
dimensionalities, allowing training in a full batch mode using the L-BFGS method. Our feature dimensionalities are
two orders of magnitude higher, which can better represent
the data but limits the training to small batches and imposes
overfitting problems. We propose specific steps to address
these issues. The higher dimensionalities also make the singular value decomposition (SVD) required by DCCA much
more computationally intensive. To address this problem
we propose and discuss details of a GPU implementation
with CULA libraries. The efficiency of our implementation
is several orders of magnitude higher than CPU implementations.
Secondly, we advance the state of the art on the widely
used benchmarks for image-text matching. The performance of the proposed learning scheme outperforms, or is
on par with prior art[13, 21]. Our results show that canonical correlation is a very competitive objective, not only for
shallowly learnt features, but also in the context of deep
learning.
The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. In
Section 2 we briefly review related work in the literature. In
Section 3 the proposed end-to-end learning scheme is presented, where we discuss the overall architecture, the trace
norm objective, as well as how to address complexity and
overfitting issues. We then provide experimental evaluation
on three benchmarks in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper.

2. Related Work
In this section, we review the existing work on sentence
generation for visual data, and its proxy task of matching
images and text, followed by a brief introduction to deep
CCA.

