Camera Intrinsic Blur Kernel Estimation: A Reliable Framework
Ali Mosleh1
1

Paul Green2

Emmanuel Onzon2

École Polytechnique de Montreál, Montréal, QC, Canada

Isabelle Begin2
2

J.M. Pierre Langlois1

Algolux Inc., Montreál, QC, Canada

{ali.mosleh,pierre.langlois}@polymtl.ca
{paul.green,emmanuel.onzon,isabelle.begin}@algolux.com

Abstract
This paper presents a reliable non-blind method to measure intrinsic lens blur. We first introduce an accurate
camera-scene alignment framework that avoids erroneous
homography estimation and camera tone curve estimation.
This alignment is used to generate a sharp correspondence
of a target pattern captured by the camera. Second, we introduce a Point Spread Function (PSF) estimation approach
where information about the frequency spectrum of the target image is taken into account. As a result of these steps
and the ability to use multiple target images in this framework, we achieve a PSF estimation method robust against
noise and suitable for mobile devices. Experimental results
show that the proposed method results in PSFs with more
than 10 dB higher accuracy in noisy conditions compared
with the PSFs generated using state-of-the-art techniques.

1. Introduction
The quality of images formed by lenses is limited by the
blur generated during the exposure. Blur most often occurs
on out of focus objects or due to camera motion. While
these kinds of blur can be prevented by adequate photography skills, there is a permanent intrinsic blur caused by
the optics of image formation e.g. lens aberration and light
diffraction. Image deconvolution can reduce this intrinsic
blur if the lens PSF is precisely known. The PSF can be
measured directly using laser and precision collimator or
pinhole image analysis. However, these approaches require
sophisticated and expensive equipment. Modeling the PSF
by means of camera lens prescription [19] or parameterized
techniques [21] is also possible. However, these techniques
are often applicable only for certain camera configurations
and need fundamental adjustments for various configurations. Hence, there is a requirement to measure the blur
function by analyzing the captured images. Such a PSF estimation is an ill-posed problem that can be approached by
blind and non-blind methods. This problem is even more

challenging for mobile devices since they have very small
sensor area that typically creates a large amount of noise.
Blind PSF estimation is performed on a single observed
image [4, 8, 9, 11, 14, 17, 23, 25, 28] or a set of observed
images [6, 16, 27]. The features of the latent sharp image
are modeled, and then the model is employed in an optimization process to estimate a PSF. Given the knowledge
that the gradient of sharp images generally follows a heavytailed distribution [20], Gaussian [26], Laplacian [3], and
hyper-Laplacian [15] priors over image derivatives are used
in many techniques such as [14, 8, 18, 13]. In addition to
these general priors, local edges and a Gaussian prior on
the PSF are used in edge-based PSF estimation techniques
[4, 5, 11, 25]. In general, blind PSF estimation methods are
suitable to measure the extrinsic camera blur function rather
than the intrinsic one.
Non-blind PSF estimation techniques assume that given
a known target and its captured image the lens PSF can be
accurately estimated. Zandhuis et al. [29] propose to use
slanted edges in the calibration pattern. Several one dimensional responses are required that are based on a symmetry
assumption for the kernel. A checkerboard pattern is used as
the calibration target by Trimeche et al. in [24], and the PSF
is estimated by inverse filtering given the sharp checkerboard pattern and its photograph. Joshi et al.’s non-blind
PSF estimation [11] relies on an arc-shaped checkerboardlike pattern. The PSF is estimated by introducing a penalty
term on its gradient’s norm. In a similar scheme, Heide
et al. estimate the PSF using the norm of PSF’s gradient
in the optimization process [10]. They propose to use a
white-noise pattern rather than regular checkerboard image
or Joshi’s arc-shaped pattern as the calibration target. This
method also constrains the energy of the PSF by introducing a normalization prior to the PSF estimation function.
Kee et al. propose a test chart that consists of a checkerboard pattern with complement black and white circles in
each block [12]. The PSF estimation problem is solved using least squares minimization and thresholding out negative values generated in the result. A random noise target is
also used in Brauers et al.’s PSF estimation technique [1].

