Metric imitation by manifold transfer for efficient vision applications
Dengxin Dai1
Till Kroeger1
Radu Timofte1
Luc Van Gool1,2
1
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich 2 VISICS, ESAT/PSI, KU Leuven
{dai, kroegert, timofter, vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract

metrics for cheap features without using human annotation. We draw inspiration from transfer learning and propose a novel approach, coined Metric Imitation (MI). MI
takes state-of-the-art, off-the-shelf features as source features (SFs) and cheap features as target features (TFs) to
learn good metrics for the TFs by imitating the metrics computed over the SFs. MI is a general framework and can at
least be applied to: 1) efficiently learning good TF metrics
when SFs are more powerful than TFs, but are computationally more expensive and/or more memory-hungry; and
2) creating good metrics for TFs when SFs contain privileged information but are not available at testing time.

Metric learning has proved very successful. However,
human annotations are necessary. In this paper, we propose
an unsupervised method, dubbed Metric Imitation (MI),
where metrics over cheap features (target features, TFs)
are learned by imitating the standard metrics over more
sophisticated, off-the-shelf features (source features, SFs)
by transferring view-independent property manifold structures. In particular, MI consists of: 1) quantifying the properties of source metrics as manifold geometry, 2) transferring the manifold from source domain to target domain, and
3) learning a mapping of TFs so that the manifold is approximated as well as possible in the mapped feature domain.
MI is useful in at least two scenarios where: 1) TFs are
more efficient computationally and in terms of memory than
SFs; and 2) SFs contain privileged information, but are not
available during testing. For the former, MI is evaluated
on image clustering, category-based image retrieval, and
instance-based object retrieval, with three SFs and three
TFs. For the latter, MI is tested on the task of example-based
image super-resolution, where high-resolution patches are
taken as SFs and low-resolution patches as TFs. Experiments show that MI is able to provide good metrics while
avoiding expensive data labeling efforts and that it achieves
state-of-the-art performance for image super-resolution. In
addition, manifold transfer is an interesting direction of
transfer learning.

MI comes out of a marriage of advances in metric learning and transfer learning. On the one hand, metric learning
now is able to learn good metrics over general features for
specific tasks [30], with human supervision. On the other
hand, transfer learning can now transfer knowledge (often
classifiers) learned in one domain to another [41], for which
no further human supervision is necessary. Observing both
developments then begs the question whether metrics can
be computed over one feature (i.e. SFs) to then be transferred to the domain of another feature (i.e. TFs) and automatically supervise the metric learning process there. In
this paper, we demonstrate this for several vision tasks. The
main advantages of the method are: 1) it performs in an
unsupervised manner, i.e. without human annotation; 2) it
can be efficient as only TFs are needed during test time; 3)
it can inject domain knowledge carried through SFs to TFs
for metric computation.
The metric is learned in the framework of Mahalanobis
distance learning, i.e. a linear mapping function of TFs is
learned and applied prior to performing the Euclidean distance metric. Specifically, the method works as follows:
1) it translates the properties of metrics computed over SFs
into manifold geometries; 2) it transfers the manifold to the
domain of the TFs as view-independent properties; and 3) it
learns a mapping function of the TFs so that the transferred
manifold is approximated as well as possible in the transformed space. By doing this, the neighborhood properties
of data computed over the SFs are preserved in the transformed space of TFs, i.e. close neighbors are still close. The

1. Introduction
The problem of computing good metrics is of great theoretical and practical interest in information processing. Applications include clustering [52,53], image annotation [24],
retrieval [19, 31], classification [2, 19, 51], among others.
It is often addressed by metric learning [1, 24, 28, 42, 51],
with great success in the past years. The drawback of metric learning is that it requires some form of human annotation (e.g. full category labels [2, 19, 37, 51], pairwise constraints [1, 28, 31, 44]), which is expensive to acquire.
To address this problem, this paper aims to learn good
1

