Single target tracking using adaptive clustered decision trees and dynamic
multi-level appearance models
Jingjing Xiao
School of EESE
University of Birmingham

Rustam Stolkin
School of Mechanical Engineering
University of Birmingham

Aleš Leonardis
School of Computer Science
University of Birmingham

shine636363@sina.com

r.stolkin@cs.bham.ac.uk

a.leonardis@cs.bham.ac.uk

Abstract
This paper presents a method for single target tracking
of arbitrary objects in challenging video sequences. Targets
are modeled at three different levels of granularity (pixel
level, parts-based level and bounding box level), which are
cross-constrained to enable robust model relearning. The
main contribution is an adaptive clustered decision tree
method which dynamically selects the minimum combination of features necessary to sufficiently represent each target part at each frame, thereby providing robustness with
computational efficiency. The adaptive clustered decision
tree is implemented in two separate parts of the tracking
algorithm: firstly to enable robust matching at the partsbased level between successive frames; and secondly to select the best superpixels for learning new parts of the target. We have tested the tracker using two different tracking benchmarks (VOT2013-2014 and CVPR2013 tracking
challenges), based on two different test methodologies, and
show it to be significantly more robust than the best stateof-the-art methods from both of those tracking challenges,
while also offering competitive tracking precision.

1. Introduction
After several decades of visual tracking research, even
the most sophisticated trackers are still prone to failure in
challenging scenarios, including clutter and camouflage in
one or more feature modalities, rapid and erratic target motion, occlusions, and targets which change their shape and
appearance over time. These problematic tracking conditions predominantly lead to failures in three fundamental
parts of the tracking algorithm: 1) the model of the target
object’s visual appearance; 2) the mechanism for matching
model parts to image regions at each frame; 3) the mechanism for continuously relearning or updating models of targets which change their appearance over time.
This paper presents a target tracking algorithm which

achieves state-of-the-art robustness by addressing each of
these three fundamental areas. We propose a flexible target representation which can adaptively exploit an arbitrary
number of different image features. Targets are modelled
at three different levels of granularity, including the level
of individual pixels, the level of parts, and a bounding box
level which encodes overall information about the target as
a whole. Cross-constraints between these different levels
during updates, enable continuous target model relearning
which is robust and stable.
The main contribution of the paper is an adaptive clustered decision tree approach which dynamically selects the
minimum combination of features necessary to sufficiently
represent each target part at each frame, thereby providing robustness without sacrificing computational efficiency.
We show how this adaptive clustered decision tree can be
utilised in two separate parts of the tracking algorithm:
firstly to enable robust matching at the part-based level at
every frame; and secondly to select the best superpixels for
learning new parts of the target. During matching, the adaptive clustered decision tree is used to search the set of superpixels in the current frame, to find the best match to a target
part in the previous frame. During model updating, the decision tree is used to search for the most suitable superpixel
from which to model a new target part, in order to replace
an old target part which has been detected as drifting.
We have carried out a principled evaluation using the latest benchmarks, and comparing against the best other stateof-the-art trackers. Results show that the proposed method
outperforms the best 4 trackers on both VOT 2013 and 2014
benchmark sets. It also significantly outperforms the 7 best
available methods on the CVPR2013 dataset wrt robustness,
while also achieving competitive tracking accuracy.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Related work is discussed in Sec. 2. The multi-level target model, and its initialisation, is introduced in Sec. 3.
Sec. 4 explains the adaptive clustered decision tree, and
shows how it is used for both target matching and model
updating at each successive frame. Sec. 5 presents and

