Transformation of Markov Random Fields for Marginal Distribution Estimation
Masaki Saito
Takayuki Okatani
Tohoku University, Japan
{msaito, okatani}@vision.is.tohoku.ac.jp

Abstract

ertheless important, as it needs to be solved for MPM (maximum posterior marginal) inference [15, 10, 13], learning
parameters of conditional random fields (CRFs) [21], and
Boltzmann machines [19, 5].

This paper presents a generic method for transforming
MRFs for the marginal inference problem. Its major application is to downsize MRFs to speed up the computation.
Unlike the MAP inference, there are only classical algorithms for the marginal inference problem such as BP etc.
that require large computational cost. Although downsizing
MRFs should directly reduce the computational cost, there
is no systematic way of doing this, since it is unclear how
to obtain the MRF energy for the downsized MRFs and also
how to translate the estimates of their marginal distributions to those of the original MRFs. The proposed method
resolves these issues by a novel probabilistic formulation
of MRF transformation. The key idea is to represent the
joint distribution of an MRF with that of the transformed
one, in which the variables of the latter are treated as latent variables. We also show that the proposed method can
be applied to discretization of variable space of continuous MRFs and can be used with Markov chain Monte Carlo
methods. The experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method.

The goal of this study is to provide methods for solving
the marginal inference problem more efficiently. As for the
MAP inference, a mainstream approach to reduce computational cost is to transform an MRF into a smaller, simpler one. The energy function of the MRF is transformed
accordingly and is minimized to find the MAP solution.
This approach has been successful in practice, resulting in
a number of efficient algorithms. However, the same approach cannot be directly used for the marginal inference
problem. In this problem, we are interested in the probabilistic structure (given by the Boltzmann distribution) of
the MRF, which needs to be preserved as much as possible
before and after transforming the MRF. Otherwise, there is
no guarantee that the estimates of the marginal distributions
obtained for the transformed MRF well approximate those
of the original MRF. Furthermore, it is even unclear how the
estimates of the marginal distributions of the transformed
MRF can be translated to those of the original MRF. Suppose an image segmentation problem for example. How
can we obtain pixel-level marginal distributions from the
estimates of the marginal distributions at superpixels? Note
that these are not the case with the MAP inference, as it is
basically point estimation that can be performed using the
energy function alone.

1. Introduction
Markov Random Fields (MRFs) have been used for a
wide range of problems in computer vision, such as optical
flow estimation [6, 26, 25], image restoration [17], bundle
adjustment [4, 22], object segmentation [9, 13] etc. There
are two types of inference problems for MRFs. One is the
MAP (Maximum a Posteriori) inference and the other is
the marginal inference problem. In this study we consider
the latter, which is to estimate the marginal distributions of
MRF variables.
As for the MAP inference problem, there exists many
sophisticated algorithms such as sequential tree-reweighted
message passing (TRW-S) [11] and FastPD [12]. On the
other hand, there are only classical methods for the marginal
inference problem, such as mean field (MF) approximation
and belief propagation (BP), which usually require a large
computational cost. The marginal inference problem is nev-

To deal with these difficulties, we propose a novel
generic method for transforming MRFs. The key idea is
to use the variables of the transformed MRF as latent variables and then represent the joint distribution of the target
MRF with them. To be specific, the representation consists of a conditional distribution of the original variables
conditioned on the latent variables and their joint distribution. The former conditional distribution is determined by
the selected MRF transformation. This formulation enables
the direct computation of the energy function of the transformed MRF, which we call the augmented energy; this new
energy gives the joint distribution of the transformed MRF
as its Boltzmann distribution. Then, the marginal distribu1

