Saliency Detection by Multi-Context Deep Learning
Rui Zhao1,2

Wanli Ouyang 2

Hongsheng Li 2,3

Xiaogang Wang1,2

1

Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Department of Electronic Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
School of Electronic Scicence, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
{rzhao, wlouyang, hsli, xgwang}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk
2

Abstract
Low-level saliency cues or priors do not produce good
enough saliency detection results especially when the
salient object presents in a low-contrast background with
confusing visual appearance. This issue raises a serious
problem for conventional approaches. In this paper, we
tackle this problem by proposing a multi-context deep learning framework for salient object detection. We employ deep
Convolutional Neural Networks to model saliency of objects
in images. Global context and local context are both taken
into account, and are jointly modeled in a unified multicontext deep learning framework.
To provide a better initialization for training the deep
neural networks, we investigate different pre-training
strategies, and a task-specific pre-training scheme is designed to make the multi-context modeling suited for
saliency detection. Furthermore, recently proposed contemporary deep models in the ImageNet Image Classification
Challenge are tested, and their effectiveness in saliency detection are investigated. Our approach is extensively evaluated on five public datasets, and experimental results show
significant and consistent improvements over the state-ofthe-art methods.

Image

GT

Ours

DRFI

GBMR

HS

PCAS

SF

Figure 1. Examples to show problems in conventional approaches.
From top left to bottom right: image, groundtruth mask, our
saliency maps, and saliency maps of other five latest approaches,
including DRFI [25], HS [56], GBMR [57], PCAS [41], and
SF[44].

priors. There are noticeable problems in these methods. 1)
Computational saliency models need effective feature representations to estimate saliency, but sometimes the contrast
between hand-crafted low-level features cannot help salient
objects stand out from context. 2) Moreover, contrast is not
only in terms of difference between visual cues, but also
relates to high-level cognition and understanding. For example in Figure 1, a dark gray house appears in dark yellow
bush. Objects like the house cannot be classified as salient
objects from the low-contrast background either based on
low-level saliency cues or background priors, but they are
semantically salient in high-level cognition, i.e. they are distinct in object categories. Therefore, saliency detection is
considered as a high-level task in our work.
The deep Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) [30],
which recently showed its powerfulness in extracting highlevel feature representations [16], can well solve aforementioned problems. From another perspective, saliency detection is a task to simulate the mechanism of human attention, which is a neurocognitive reaction controlled by
human brains. Deep CNN aims to mimic the functions of
neocortex in human brain as a hierarchy of filters and nonlinear operations. For better detecting semantically salient
objects, high-level knowledge on object categories becomes
important. Suppose that if the deep model can recognize
the gray house, then the problems in Figure 1 can be easily solved. As indicated in [49], pre-training can provide

1. Introduction
Saliency detection, aiming at highlighting visually
salient regions or objects in an image, has been a fundamental problem drawing extensive attentions in recent years. It
has a wide range of applications in computer vision and image processing tasks, such as image/video compression and
summarization [38], content-aware image resizing [6], and
photo collage [53]. Saliency information has also been exploited in high-level vision tasks, such as object detection
[37], and person re-identification [62, 61]. A large number
of approaches [63, 52, 40, 39, 32, 35, 60, 57, 56, 47, 41,
31, 27, 25, 24, 23, 11, 44, 17, 8, 13, 1, 21] are proposed to
capture different saliency cues.
Many conventional saliency detection methods focus on
design of low-level saliency cues, or modeling background
1

