Shape-based Automatic Detection of a Large Number of 3D Facial Landmarks
Syed Zulqarnain Gilani Faisal Shafait Ajmal Mian
School of Computer Science and Software Engineering,
The University of Western Australia
{zulqarnain.gilani,faisal.shafait,ajmal.mian}@uwa.edu.au

Abstract
We present an algorithm for automatic detection of a
large number of anthropometric landmarks on 3D faces.
Our approach does not use texture and is completely shape
based in order to detect landmarks that are morphologically
significant. The proposed algorithm evolves level set curves
with adaptive geometric speed functions to automatically
extract effective seed points for dense correspondence. Correspondences are established by minimizing the bending energy between patches around seed points of given faces to
those of a reference face. Given its hierarchical structure,
our algorithm is capable of establishing thousands of correspondences between a large number of faces. Finally, a
morphable model based on the dense corresponding points
is fitted to an unseen query face for transfer of correspondences and hence automatic detection of landmarks. The
proposed algorithm can detect any number of pre-defined
landmarks including subtle landmarks that are even difficult to detect manually. Extensive experimental comparison on two benchmark databases containing 6, 507 scans
shows that our algorithm outperforms six state of the art
algorithms.

Figure 1. Our algorithm automatically detects an arbitrarily large
number of facial landmarks by establishing dense correspondences
between 3D faces. The figure shows 85 landmarks detected
(red) on neutral and extreme anger expression of a subject from
BU3DFE database [43]. The ground truth is represented by blue
dots.

A major bottleneck in large-scale 3D facial morphometric analysis is the manual annotation of biologically significant landmarks [15], which is not feasible because of three
reasons: 1) it is a laborious and time consuming process,
2) it requires training to master annotation and the annotations may still contain inter and intra operator errors, 3)
soft tissue biological landmarks are quite subtle and almost
impossible to accurately annotate manually on the 3D scan.
These factors are limiting research on huge datasets [23,26],
or where the number of required landmarks is large. Thus,
there is an urgent need for a robust technique that is able to
automatically detect a large number of biologically significant landmarks.
Current landmarking techniques have focused on a
sparse set of facial landmarks and detect these landmarks
by exploiting their intrinsic characteristics. Nair and Cavallaro [29] created a Point Distribution Model (PDM) from
49 manually annotated points on 150 scans of BU3DFE [43]
database. The statistical model was then fitted on the rest of
the faces of the same database to detect these landmarks.
Although the method works well in the presence of noisy
data, the mean error in the localization of landmarks was

1. Introduction
Due to the non-invasive nature of shape acquisition, 3D
morphometric analysis based on facial landmarks is becoming a tool of choice in the fields of anthropometry, human
biology and medicine [21]. Scientists have used manually
annotated landmarks to ascribe an objective score to the
facial gender [17], for syndrome delineation [3, 5, 19, 30],
craniofacial analysis for sleep apnoea [2, 14, 24] and many
related fields. Scanners are being installed at many hospitals and medical research centers to routinely collect 3D
face scans of patients [30]. For example, the Facebase Consortium [23] contains thousands of 3D face scans. Similarly,
the Raine database [26] contains hundreds of 3D face scans
of individuals with different syndromes as well as controls.
Both of these databases are under active development with
new scans being constantly added.
1

