On the Minimal Problems of Low-Rank Matrix Factorization
Fangyuan Jiang Magnus Oskarsson Kalle Åström
Centre for Mathematical Sciences
Lund University, Sweden
{fangyuan,magnuso,kalle}@maths.lth.se

Abstract
Low-rank matrix factorization is an essential problem in
many areas including computer vision, with applications in
e.g. affine structure-from-motion, photometric stereo, and
non-rigid structure from motion. However, very little attention has been drawn to minimal cases for this problem or
to using the minimal configuration of observations to find
the solution. Minimal problems are useful when either outliers are present or the observation matrix is sparse. In this
paper, we first give some theoretical insights on how to generate all the minimal problems of a given size using Laman
graph theory. We then propose a new parametrization and
a building-block scheme to solve these minimal problems by
extending the solution from a small sized minimal problem.
We test our solvers on synthetic data as well as real data
with outliers or a large portion of missing data and show
that our method can handle the cases when other iterative
methods, based on convex relaxation, fail.

1. Introduction
Assume that we have a matrix X ∈ Rm×n of rank r <
min(m, n). Low-rank matrix factorization aims at finding
two matrices U ∈ Rr×m and V ∈ Rr×n , such that X can
be written as
X = U T V.

(1)

In geometric computer vision, several problems can be
formulated as low-rank matrix factorization. For example,
for affine structure-from-motion (SfM), the observation matrix containing feature tracks can be factorized into the camera motions and the 3D structure. For photometric stereo,
the directions of light sources and the surface normals are
separated by factorizing the measurement matrix composed
of pixel intensities under a Lambertian model. More examples of applications can be found in [2, 3, 11, 30].
For real data, with noise or outliers, the observation matrix will in general not have the exact rank as given. So the

problem is usually formulated as minimizing the following
cost function,
min kX − U T V k,
(2)
U,V

where k.k is a matrix norm – typically the L1 - or L2 norm. This is under the assumption that all entries in X
are known. When missing data is present, a binary matrix
W ∈ {0, 1}m×n is used to indicate if a certain entry X(i, j)
is present (W (i, j) = 1) or missing (W (i, j) = 0). In this
case, the problem is formulated as
min kW
U,V

(X − U T V )k,

(3)

where is the Hadamard product, that is, the element-wise
product.
Related work Early work on low-rank matrix factorization solve (2) using the L2 -norm. Truncating the singular
value decomposition of X has been shown to give the optimal solution under the L2 -norm when X is complete, see
[9]. The work in [29] was the first to consider missing data.
However, the L2 -norm is sensitive to outliers. An early
work that aims for robustness to outliers is [1]. Here they
use an iteratively re-weighted least squares approach to optimize the objective function. In [4], a damped Newton
method is proposed to handle the missing data. Since [16],
more robust norms have been considered. In [16], algorithms based on alternating optimization are introduced under the Huber-norm and the L1 -norm. In [10], the Wiberg
algorithm [29] is generalized from the L2 -norm to the L1 norm. A number of recent works put extra constraints on
the factor matrices U and V . In [5], the constraints that
the matrix U should lie on a certain manifold for different
applications are considered and incorporated in the formulation. In [31], orthogonal constraints on the columns of U
and a nuclear norm regularizer on V are incorporated.
Most methods mentioned above are based on alternating optimization and are prone to get trapped in local minima. Recently, several works [8, 7, 21, 11, 25] re-formulate
the problem to minimize the convex surrogate of the rank

