Embedded Phase Shifting:
Robust Phase Shifting with Embedded Signals
Daniel Moreno
Kilho Son
Gabriel Taubin
Brown University, Providence, RI, USA
{daniel moreno, kilho son, gabriel taubin}@brown.edu

Abstract
We introduce Embedded PS, a new robust and accurate phase shifting algorithm for 3D scanning. The method
projects only high frequency sinusoidal patterns in order
to reduce errors due to global illumination effects, such as
subsurface scattering and interreflections. The frequency
set for the projected patterns is specially designed so that
our algorithm can extract a set of embedded low frequency
sinusoidals with simple math. All the signals, patterns
high and embedded low frequencies, are used with temporal phase unwrapping to compute absolute phase values
in closed-form, without quantization or approximation via
LUT, resulting in fast computation. The absolute phases
provide correspondences from projector to camera pixels
which enable to recover 3D points using optical triangulation. The algorithm estimates multiple absolute phase values per pixel which are combined to reduce measurement
noise while preserving fine details. We prove that embedded periodic signals can be recovered from any periodic
signal, not just sinusoidal signals, which may result in further improvements for other 3D imaging methods. Several
experiments are presented showing that our algorithm produces more robust and accurate 3D scanning results than
state-of-the-art methods for challenging surface materials,
with an equal or smaller number of projected patterns and
at lower computational cost.

Figure 1. Embedded PS. Models generated from 9 images with
no post processing such as filtering or mesh reconstruction. Fine
structures below 1mm depth in a 180mm object are correctly measured. Total decoding time with a single thread Matlab implementation takes about 1.2s, image resolution is 1600x1200.

scanning process usually requires a relatively small number
of projected patterns and corresponding captured images (a
minimum of five in our method). As a comparison, laser
based scanners, comprising a digital camera and a laser line
projector, also need a mechanism to adjust the location and
orientation of the projected line with respect to the object after each image is captured. And since a single line is recovered from each image, they need to capture hundreds of images to build a dense 3D model. In this paper we present the
Embedded Phase Shifting (Embedded PS) method for structured light 3D scanning. Embedded PS generates very accurate high resolution dense 3D point cloud models projecting
only high spatial frequency sinusoidal patterns. Different
from alternative prior-art methods, Embedded PS embeds
a low frequency signal in the phase of the high frequency
patterns. The method is robust to global illumination effects because its pattern frequencies are constrained to a
small range. Its computational complexity is low because
decoding the embedded low frequencies reduces to a simple

1. Introduction
The need for better 3D scanners that simplify the creation of high quality 3D models from everyday physical
objects, is driven nowadays in a good measure by recent
improvements in 3D printing technologies, and the increasing availability of low cost 3D printers. Structured light 3D
scanners, comprising a digital camera and a digital projector, are well suited for this task because they can produce
dense 3D point cloud models with as many points as camera
pixels, the 3D scanning device has no moving parts, and the
1

