Protecting Against Screenshots: An Image Processing Approach
Alex Yong-Sang Chia 1,2 Udana Bandara 1 Xiangyu Wang 2 Hiromi Hirano 1
1
Rakuten Institute of Technology, Tokyo, Japan
2
Institute of Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Singapore

Abstract

a multilevel security operating environment is developed
either with dedicated hardware or virtual machines to forbid the saving of screenshots. While this protects against
screenshots, it is unrealistic to expect users to modify their
hardware architecture or use virtualization technology when
viewing copyright data. Hence, such approaches are limited to on-site viewing of data. Other methods [17, 10] install
software on users’ machines to continually poll for screenshots events, and remove the screen dump bitmap when
such events are detected. Such methods do not require expensive changes to system architecture of users’ machines.
A key issue is on the prevention of the installed software
from being overridden by third party drivers. A mobile application that was recently developed to support secure exchange of messages/images is SnapChat [1] which delivers
more than 150 million messages/images daily. SnapChat
automatically notifies the sender if a screenshot event is detected at the recipient’s mobile device.

Motivated by reasons related to data security and privacy, we propose a method to limit meaningful visual contents
of a display from being captured by screenshots. Traditional methods take a system architectural approach to protect
against screenshots. We depart from this framework, and instead exploit image processing techniques to distort visual
data of a display and present the distorted data to the viewer. Given that a screenshot captures distorted visual contents, it yields limited useful data. We exploit the human visual system to empower viewers to automatically and mentally recover the distorted contents into a meaningful form
in real-time. Towards this end, we leverage on findings from
psychological studies which show that blending of visual information from recent and current fixations enables human
to form meaningful representation of a scene. We model
this blending of information by an additive process, and exploit this to design a visual contents distortion algorithm
that supports real-time contents recovery by the human visual system. Our experiments and user study demonstrate
the feasibility of our method to allow viewers to readily interpret visual contents of a display, while limiting meaningful contents from being captured by screenshots.

In this paper, we exploit image processing techniques,
coupled with human biological vision, to limit meaningful
contents of data presented on a display from being captured
by screenshots. Our method takes visual data of the display
as input, distorts the visual data, and then presents the distorted data back to the viewer. Given that visual data shown
on the display is distorted, screenshots yield little meaningful visual information. A novelty here is that rather than using dedicated hardware or software to recover the distorted
contents into a meaningful form, we instead rely solely on
human biological vision for direct and automatic recovery.

1. Introduction
Print-screen key and screen grabber tools (e.g. Windows
snipping tool) present a convenient way to capture a bitmap
of the contents displayed on a computer monitor. Taking a
screenshot of contents seen on a mobile device (e.g. smartphone) can also be readily achieved. As enterprises exploit
electronic devices to share documents/images, there is an
increasing need from business and social domains for technologies which protect documents/images (especially those
whose contents are sensitive e.g. business plans and private
chat messages) from being illegally copied by screenshots
and thereby comprising the privacy of the data.
Traditional methods to protect against screenshots take a
system architectural approach. In methods like [18, 15],

The underlying idea of our method lies in the findings
that humans process visual data as a series of visual snapshots [3, 5]. More importantly, pioneering works on visual
scene memory by Pottet et al. [13, 12] showed that there
is a brief persistence of visual information in the short-term
memory of a viewer, in which the viewer exploits carryover information from recent fixations to construct a coherent representation of the current scene. Similar conclusions have also been reported by other psychological studies [7, 11, 6]. In this aspect, what we see at an instance
in time is a subtle blend of the preceding and present fixa1

