Approximate Nearest Neighbor Fields in Video
Nir Ben-Zrihem
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technion, Israel

Lihi Zelnik-Manor
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technion, Israel

bentzinir@gmail.com

lihi@ee.technion.ac.il

Abstract
We introduce RIANN (Ring Intersection Approximate
Nearest Neighbor search), an algorithm for matching
patches of a video to a set of reference patches in real-time.
For each query, RIANN finds potential matches by intersecting rings around key points in appearance space. Its search
complexity is reversely correlated to the amount of temporal change, making it a good fit for videos, where typically
most patches change slowly with time. Experiments show
that RIANN is up to two orders of magnitude faster than
previous ANN methods, and is the only solution that operates in real-time. We further demonstrate how RIANN can
be used for real-time video processing and provide examples for a range of real-time video applications, including
colorization, denoising, and several artistic effects.

1. Introduction
The Approximate Nearest Neighbor (ANN) problem
could be defined as follows: given a set of reference points
and incoming query points, quickly report the reference
point closest to each query. Approximate solutions perform
the task fast, but do not guarantee the exact nearest neighbor will be found. The common solutions are based on data
structures that enable fast search such as random projections [20, 19], or kd-trees [3, 27].
When the set of queries consists of all patches of an image the result is an ANN-Field (ANNF). Barnes et al. [4] developed the PatchMatch approach for ANNF, which shows
that spatial coherency can be harnessed to obtain fast computation. Algorithms that integrate traditional ANN methods with PatchMatch’ spatial coherency yield even faster
runtimes [16, 21]. It is thus not surprising that patchmatching methods have become very popular and now lie in
the heart of many computer vision applications, e.g., texture
synthesis [12], image denoising [9], super-resolution [13],
and image editing [4, 5, 28] to name a few.
In this paper we present an efficient ANNF algorithm
for video. The problem setup we address is matching all

Figure 1. Video ANN Fields: (a) Input: Live stream of video
frames. (b) A reference set of image patches. (c) For each frame,
a dense ANN Field is produced by matching patches from the reference set. This is done in realtime.

patches of a video to a set of reference patches, in real-time,
as illustrated in Figure 1. In our formulation the reference
set is fixed for the entire video. In fact, we could use the
same reference set for different videos. Additionally, our
reference set of patches is not restricted to originate from a
single image or a video frame, as is commonly assumed for
image PatchMatching. Instead, it consists of a non-ordered
collection of patches, e.g., a dictionary [2, 15]. This setup
enables real-time computation of the ANN Fields for video.
We show empirically, that it does not harm accuracy.
Our algorithm is designed to achieve low run-time by relying on two key ideas. First, we leverage the fact that the
reference set is fixed, and hence moderate pre-processing is
acceptable. At pre-processing we construct a data structure
of the reference set, that enables efficient indexing during
run-time. Second, we rely on temporal-coherency to adapt
our hashing functions to the data. The hashing we use is
not fixed a-priori as in previous works [4, 21, 18, 16], but
rather it is tuned per query patch during runtime. In regions
with high temporal change the hashing is tuned to be coarse,
which leads to higher computation times (larger bins translate to checking out more candidate matches). On the contrary, in regions with low change, the hashing is finer and
hence the computation time is lower. We refer to this approach as “query-sensitive hashing”. Our hashing is generic
to any distance metric. We show examples for working

