Detector Discovery in the Wild:
Joint Multiple Instance and Representation Learning
Judy Hoffman, Deepak Pathak, Trevor Darrell
UC Berkeley

Kate Saenko
UMass Lowell

{jhoffman, pathak, trevor}@eecs.berkeley.edu

saenko@cs.uml.edu

Abstract
We develop methods for detector learning which exploit joint training over both weak (image-level) and strong
(bounding box) labels and which transfer learned perceptual representations from strongly-labeled auxiliary tasks.
Previous methods for weak-label learning often learn detector models independently using latent variable optimization, but fail to share deep representation knowledge across
classes and usually require strong initialization. Other previous methods transfer deep representations from domains
with strong labels to those with only weak labels, but do not
optimize over individual latent boxes, and thus may miss
specific salient structures for a particular category. We
propose a model that subsumes these previous approaches,
and simultaneously trains a representation and detectors
for categories with either weak or strong labels present.
We provide a novel formulation of a joint multiple instance
learning method that includes examples from classificationstyle data when available, and also performs domain transfer learning to improve the underlying detector representation. Our model outperforms known methods on ImageNet200 detection with weak labels.

Figure 1: We learn detectors for categories with only weak
labels (bottom row), by jointly transferring a representation
from auxiliary categories with available strong annotations
(top row) and solving an MIL problem on the weakly annotated data (green box).

provides a key source of automatic and accurate initialization for latent variable optimization, which has heretofore
been unavailable in such methods.
Previous methods employ varying combinations of weak
and strong labels of the same object category to learn a
detector. Such methods seldom exploit available stronglabeled data of different, auxiliary categories, despite the
fact that such data is very often available in many practical scenarios. Deselaers et al. [10] uses auxiliary data to
learn generic objectness information just as an initial step,
but doesn’t optimize jointly for weakly labeled data.
We introduce a new model for large-scale learning of detectors that can jointly exploit weak and strong labels, perform inference over latent regions in weakly labeled training examples, and can transfer representations learned from
related tasks (see Figure 1). In practical settings, such as
learning visual detector models for all available ImageNet
categories, or for learning detector versions of other defined
categories such as Sentibank’s adjective-noun-phrase mod-

1. Introduction
It is well known that contemporary visual models thrive
on large amounts of training data, especially those that directly include labels for desired tasks. Many real world settings contain labels with varying specificity, e.g., “strong”
bounding box detection labels, and “weak” labels indicating
presence somewhere in the image. We tackle the problem
of joint detector and representation learning, and develop
models which cooperatively exploit heterogeneous sources
of training data, where some classes have no “strong” annotations. Our model optimizes a latent variable multiple
instance learning model over image regions while simultaneously transferring a shared representation from detectiondomain models to classification-domain models. The latter
1

