A Metric Parametrization for Trifocal Tensors with Non-Colinear Pinholes
Spyridon Leonardos, Roberto Tron and Kostas Daniilidis
GRASP Laboratory, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
{spyridon,tron}@seas.upenn.edu, kostas@cis.upenn.edu

Abstract

a filtering problem on the essential manifold. Later, Ma et
al. [15] proposed a Riemannian Newton algorithm on the
essential manifold for the problem of structure and motion
estimation which was later generalized by Vidal et al. [31]
for multiple views. To the best of our knowledge, analogous representations and manifold structures for the space of
calibrated trifocal tensors have not been investigated before.
In this work, we propose a parametrization of the trifocal tensor for calibrated cameras with non-colinear pinholes
based on a quotient Riemannian manifold. This parametrization is almost symmetric (we use a preferred camera only
for the translations), and is derived from a particular choice
of the global reference frame. We show how it can be used
for refining estimates of the tensor from image data through
state-of-the-art techniques for optimization on manifolds [1].
In addition, the Riemannian structure provides a notion of
distance between trifocal tensors. We show that this distance
can be computed efficiently, and that it produces meaningful
results in a sample Structure from Motion problem.

The trifocal tensor, which describes the relation between
projections of points and lines in three views, is a fundamental entity of geometric computer vision. In this work,
we investigate a new parametrization of the trifocal tensor
for calibrated cameras with non-colinear pinholes obtained
from a quotient Riemannian manifold. We incorporate this
formulation into state-of-the art methods for optimization on
manifolds, and show, through experiments in pose averaging, that it produces a meaningful way to measure distances
between trifocal tensors.

1. Introduction
The trifocal tensor was first introduced in the context of
calibrated geometry to describe relations between projections of lines by Spetsakis and Aloimonos [25] and Weng et
al. [32]. Later, Hartley [9, 10] generalized the trifocal tensor
for the uncalibrated case and Shashua [23] investigated trilinear relations of matched points in three perspective views.
There has been numerous works on minimal parametrizations of the projective trifocal tensor [4, 16, 18, 20, 22, 28]. In
most formulations, one of the three cameras local reference
frame is chosen as the global reference frame. A symmetric
formulation (where every camera has a similar role) was
recently proposed by Ponce and Hebert [20] who minimally
parametrized the trifocal tensor by providing necessary and
sufficient conditions for three visual rays to converge in
terms of three epipolar and one or two trifocal constraints.
Symmetric trilinear constraints were also introduced in [21].
Symmetric representations for the two view counterpart
of the trifocal tensor, the essential matrix, have been introduced in [7, 12, 27] and are based on the singular value
decomposition (SVD) of essential matrices. Geometric insights and further properties of symmetric representations
for the space of essential matrices endowed with a Riemannian manifold structure were recently presented by Tron and
Daniilidis [29]. However, the study of the space of essential
matrices as a Riemannian manifold can be traced back to
Soatto et al. [24] who formulated structure from motion as

2. Definitions and notation
In this section, we briefly review several elementary facts
from group theory and differential geometry. For a more
detailed and rigorous treatment, we refer the reader to the
standard texts [1, 5, 14, 19].
A d-dimensional manifold M can be informally defined
as a set M that is locally homeomorphic to the Euclidean
space Rd . The tangent space Tx M at a point x ∈ M is
the vector space consisting of all the tangents of all smooth
curves in M passing through x. A Riemannian manifold is a
manifold whose tangent spaces are equipped with a smoothly
varying inner product, which is called a Riemannian metric.
We use the notation g(ξ, ζ) to denote the inner product of
two elements ξ, ζ ∈ Tx M (where the point x will be clear
from the
context). The metric naturally induces a norm
. p
kξk = g(ξ, ξ).
A geodesic curve on M is the generalization of a straight
line (that is, a curve with zero acceleration). We denote as
γx,ξ (t) the geodesic emanating from x in the direction of
ξ ∈ Tx M. The exponential map expx : Tx M → M is de.
fined as expx ξ = γx,ξ (1). The logarithm map logx : M →
1

