A Dynamic Convolutional Layer for Short Range Weather Prediction
Benjamin Klein, Lior Wolf and Yehuda Afek
The Blavatnik School of Computer Science
Tel Aviv University
beni.klein@gmail.com, wolf@cs.tau.ac.il, afek@post.tau.ac.il

Abstract

the sequence according to the motion behavior of the all sequence.
Motivated by this observation, we present a new deep
network layer called the ”Dynamic Convolutional Layer”,
which generalizes the conventional convolutional layer.
Similar to the convolutional layer, the dynamic convolutional layer takes the feature maps from the previous layer
and convolves them with ﬁlters. The novelty lies in that the
ﬁlters of the dynamic convolutional layer are not the parameters of the layer, rather they are obtained as the output of a
subnetwork of arbitrary depth that maps the input to a set of
ﬁlters (Figure 3).
In this work, we present the dynamic convolutional layer
and use it for the task of short range weather prediction.
We compare the results to other baselines, including Convolutional Neural Network that does not use the dynamic
convolutional layer. We show that by using the new layer,
we gain improvement in performance compared to the other
baselines, including the conventional CNN.

We present a new deep network layer called “Dynamic
Convolutional Layer” which is a generalization of the convolutional layer. The conventional convolutional layer uses
ﬁlters that are learned during training and are held constant
during testing. In contrast, the dynamic convolutional layer
uses ﬁlters that will vary from input to input during testing.
This is achieved by learning a function that maps the input
to the ﬁlters. We apply the dynamic convolutional layer to
the application of short range weather prediction and show
performance improvements compared to other baselines.

1. Introduction
Deep learning and speciﬁcally Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs) [16] are becoming increasingly popular
in solving various computer vision applications. What sets
CNNs apart from other neural networks is the use of the
convolutional layer. This layer computes the output feature
maps by convolving the feature maps of the previous layer
with a set of ﬁlters. These ﬁlters are the only parameters
of the convolutional layer and are learned during training,
typically by using the back-propagation algorithm.
In recent years, CNNs have achieved state-of-the-art results on a variety of challenging problems such as: object
recognition, objection localization, cancer detection, face
recognition and scene labelling. [15, 5, 24, 25, 26, 11].
Motivated by the success of CNNs, we decided to examine
their performance in the task of short range weather prediction. In this task, one receives a sequence of rain radar
images (Figure 1), one image taken every 10 minutes, and
the goal is to predict the next image in the sequence. While
we understand the critical role of the convolutional layer in
recognition problems, we think that a different network architecture could be more suitable for the task of short range
weather prediction. Speciﬁcally, observing that a radar image in the sequence can be usually approximated as a translation of the previous image in the sequence, suggested the
need for a new layer that will translate the last image in

2. Related Work
In recent years, a number of papers suggested adaptations to the convolutional layer. In [17], Lin et al. suggested a novel deep network structure called ”Network In
Network” (NIN). This structure replaces the linear ﬁlters in
the conventional convolutional layer with a multilayer perceptron. Using this novel structure, they achieved state-ofthe-art performance on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100. This
work differs from ours in two major ways: ﬁrst, it replaces
the convolutions with a multilayer perceptron. Second, the
new blocks are entered sequentially to replace the convolutional layers, i.e., the new block has the same input layer
and the same output layer as the convolutional layer it replaces. In our case, we adhere to the convolution operator,
which is suitable to the image synthesis tasks that we focus
on (NIN is employed for classiﬁcation). The dynamic convolutions are computed using separate subnetworks that can
take the output of the arbitrary previous layer as input.
In parallel to our work, Cohen et al. [6] present a generalization of CNNs. This generalization adds masking weights
1

