Watch and Learn: Semi-Supervised Learning of Object Detectors from Videos
Ishan Misra
Abhinav Shrivastava
Martial Hebert
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
{imisra,ashrivas,hebert}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Watch

We present a semi-supervised approach that localizes
multiple unknown object instances in long videos. We start
with a handful of labeled boxes and iteratively learn and
label hundreds of thousands of object instances. We propose criteria for reliable object detection and tracking for
constraining the semi-supervised learning process and minimizing semantic drift. Our approach does not assume
exhaustive labeling of each object instance in any single
frame, or any explicit annotation of negative data. Working
in such a generic setting allow us to tackle multiple object
instances in video, many of which are static. In contrast,
existing approaches either do not consider multiple object
instances per video, or rely heavily on the motion of the
objects present. The experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach by evaluating the automatically labeled data on a variety of metrics like quality, coverage (recall), diversity, and relevance to training an object detector.

Unlabeled Videos
Sparse labeled examples

Learn

Label

Automatically labeled examples

Learned Examples

Figure 1: We present a novel formulation of semisupervised learning for automatically learning object detectors from videos. Our method works with long video
to automatically learn bounding box level annotations for
multiple object instances. It does not assume exhaustive labeling of every object instance in the input videos, and from
a handful of labeled instances can automatically label hundreds of thousands of instances.
large video recognition datasets are hard to find. In fact, the
available video datasets [28, 29, 37, 39] lack the kind of annotations offered by benchmark image datasets [11, 13, 34].

1. Introduction
The availability of large labeled image datasets [11, 13]
has been one of the key factors for advances in recognition. These datasets, which have been largely curated
from internet images, have not only helped boost performance [14, 19], but have also fostered the development of
new techniques [19, 30]. However, compared to images,
videos seem like a more natural source of training data because of the additional temporal continuity they offer for
both learning and labeling. So ideally we should have large
labeled internet video datasets. In general, the human effort
required for labeling these vision datasets is huge, e.g., ImageNet [11] required 19 man-years to label bounding boxes
in the 1.2 million images harvested from the internet. Consider the scale of internet videos – YouTube has 100 hours
of video (10 million frames) uploaded every minute. It
seems unlikely that human per-image labeling will scale to
this amount of data. Given this scale of data and the associated annotation problems [39, 55], which are more pronounced in videos, it is no surprise that richly annotated

One way to tackle the labeling problem is using semisupervised learning (SSL). Starting with only a few annotated examples, the algorithm can label more examples automatically. However, a major challenge for any kind of
SSL technique is to constrain the learning process to avoid
semantic drift, i.e., added noisy samples cause the learner to
drift away from the true concept. Recent work [7, 8, 12, 46]
has shown ways to constrain this learning process for images. In this paper, we present an approach to constrain the
semi-supervised learning process [46] in videos. Our technique constrains the SSL process by using multiple weak
cues - appearance, motion, temporal etc., in video data and
automatically learns diverse new examples.
Intuitively, algorithms dealing with videos should use
appearance and temporal cues using detection and tracking, respectively. One would expect a simple combination
of detection and tracking to constitute a semi-supervised
1

