Dense, Accurate Optical Flow Estimation with Piecewise Parametric Model
Jiaolong Yang 1,2 and Hongdong Li 2,3
1

2

Beijing Lab of Intelligent Information Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology
Research School of Engineering, The Australian National University (ANU) and NICTA
3
ARC Centre of Excellence for Robotic Vision (ACRV)

Abstract
This paper proposes a simple method for estimating
dense and accurate optical flow field. It revitalizes an early
idea of piecewise parametric flow model. A key innovation
is that, we fit a flow field piecewise to a variety of parametric models, where the domain of each piece (i.e., each
piece’s shape, position and size) is determined adaptively,
while at the same time maintaining a global inter-piece flow
continuity constraint. We achieve this by a multi-model
fitting scheme via energy minimization. Our energy takes
into account both the piecewise constant model assumption
and the flow field continuity constraint, enabling the proposed method to effectively handle both homogeneous motions and complex motions. The experiments on three public
optical flow benchmarks (KITTI, MPI Sintel, and Middlebury) show the superiority of our method compared with
the state of the art: it achieves top-tier performances on all
the three benchmarks.

1. Introduction
As a classic topic in computer vision, optical flow computation has attracted considerable attentions from the community. Remarkable progresses have been made in the past
decades, with high performance optical flow algorithms
available nowadays [11, 48, 37, 46, 25]. Despite these successes, to obtain dense and accurate flow field remains challenging, especially for general dynamic scenes containing
multiple complex, non-rigid objects,and/or large motions.
This paper revisits the idea of piecewise parametric optical flow estimation popularized by Black etc. researchers in
the 1990s [7, 6, 23]. Unlike most modern optical flow techniques which capitalize on dense per-pixel flow vector estimation, these piecewise parametric flow methods assume a
low-order parametric motion models within each segmented
image piece. Using parametric models to represent a flow

Overlay of two frames

Ground-truth flow

Estimated pieces

Estimated flow

Result of [12]

Result of [46]

Figure 1: The proposed method estimates optical flow using
piecewise parametric (homography) models. In this example it yields accurate motion estimate on the actor’s shoulder
and back compared to LDOF [12] and MDP-OF [46] .
field, while is compact, can be rather restrictive. When the
motion field is very complex, or when image segments do
not conform well to motion segments, the parametricallyfitted flow field can be inaccurate or erroneous. Partly
due to this reason, piecewise parametric models are seldom
adopted by modern optical flow methods [37].
In this paper, we advocate that, equipped with a carefully
devised energy function and modern minimization techniques, the piecewise parametric model can be revitalized to
achieve highly-accurate optical flow estimation with stateof-the-art performance.
Our motivation is described as follows. As in previous
work [7, 23], we assume that a flow field can be jointly represented by multiple parametric motion models in a piecewise fashion. To ease description, the 8-dof homography
transformation model is used in this paper. To achieve accurate model fitting or approximation, we allow the size

