Sense Discovery via Co-Clustering on Images and Text
Xinlei Chen†
Alan Ritter‡
†
Carnegie Mellon University

Abhinav Gupta†
Tom Mitchell†
‡
Ohio State University

{xinleic,abhinavg,tom.mitchell}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

ritter.1492@osu.edu

net [31], Freebase [25] and even Wikipedia [11]. These
broad-coverage knowledge bases suffer from the problem
of missing information. For example, WordNet has good
coverage of common nouns, however it has been criticized
for being too fine-grained [41]. In addition it contains
very few named entities (people, locations, organizations,
etc.); Wikipedia and Freebase help to bridge this gap, but a
great deal of information is still missing [36]. Furthermore,
WordNet or Freebase have little or no information related
to visual senses and still require extensive manual labeling
to create mappings between semantic and visual senses. In
contrast, unstructured data sources such as images and text
from the web are much larger and more diverse; which can
be readily used to discover both semantic and visual senses.
Instead of relying on manually-compiled resources, we
focus on automatically discovering multiple senses of a NP
in an unsupervised manner. The common unsupervised
paradigm is to represent each noun phrase in terms of text
features or image features and then cluster these instances
to obtain multiple semantic and visual senses of the NP respectively. Since the semantic and visual senses of a NP
are closely related, recent approaches have also attempted
jointly clustering images and text. Most joint clustering approaches make the simplifying assumption that there exists
a one-to-one mapping between semantic and visual senses
of a word. This assumption rarely holds in practice, however. For example, while there are two predominant semantic senses of the word “Apple”, there exist multiple visual
senses due to appearance variation (green vs. red apples),
viewpoint changes, etc.
We present a generalized co-clustering algorithm that
jointly discovers both semantic and visual senses for a given
NP . For a given NP (such as “Apple”), we first download
webpages which contain both image and text references to
the NP. Each webpage is treated as a datapoint and represented in terms of image and text features. We then use
our co-clustering algorithm which clusters data points in
image and text feature space separately and learns a one-tomany mapping between the clusters in two feature spaces 2
(See Figure 1). We demonstrate the effectiveness of our ap-

We present a co-clustering framework that can be used
to discover multiple semantic and visual senses of a
given Noun Phrase (NP). Unlike traditional clustering approaches which assume a one-to-one mapping between the
clusters in the text-based feature space and the visual space,
we adopt a one-to-many mapping between the two spaces.
This is primarily because each semantic sense (concept)
can correspond to different visual senses due to viewpoint
and appearance variations. Our structure-EM style optimization not only extracts the multiple senses in both semantic and visual feature space, but also discovers the
mapping between the senses. We introduce a challenging
dataset (CMU Polysemy-30) for this problem consisting of
30 NPs (⇠5600 labeled instances out of ⇠22K total instances). We have also conducted a large-scale experiment
that performs sense disambiguation for ⇠2000 NPs.

1. Introduction
Knowledge representation is a classical problem in AI.
There have been mammoth efforts such as CYC1 to build
these knowledge bases using human intelligence. Unfortunately, effective construction of broad-coverage knowledge
bases still remains an unsolved problem, as manual labeling lacks the richness and scalability required for this task.
In recent years, the focus has shifted to building knowledge bases automatically by learning knowledge from free
text [8, 1] and images on the internet [9, 17]. While these
systems have shown much promise, one issue that limits
their performance is the problem of semantic and “visual”
polysemy. Polysemy is the capacity for a word or Noun
Phrase (NP) to have multiple semantic meanings and visual
meanings as well. For example, the noun phrase Apple can
refer to both the company and the fruit. Similarly, in the visual world, Apple can refer to images of the fruit, the company logo, and even iPhones and iPads. Therefore, handling
polysemy by extracting multiple senses of a word/NP is an
important problem that needs to be addressed.
One obvious way to handle semantic polysemy is to fall
back to human developed knowledge bases such as Word-

2 This can also be formulated as hierarchical clustering where higher
level nodes correspond to clusters in text space and lower level nodes correspond to clusters in visual space

1 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cyc

1

