Filtered Channel Features for Pedestrian Detection
Shanshan Zhang

Rodrigo Benenson

Bernt Schiele

Max Planck Institute for Informatics
Saarbrücken, Germany
firstname.lastname@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract
This paper starts from the observation that multiple top
performing pedestrian detectors can be modelled by using
an intermediate layer filtering low-level features in combination with a boosted decision forest. Based on this observation we propose a unifying framework and experimentally
explore different filter families. We report extensive results
enabling a systematic analysis.
Using filtered channel features we obtain top performance on the challenging Caltech and KITTI datasets, while
using only HOG+LUV as low-level features. When adding
optical flow features we further improve detection quality
and report the best known results on the Caltech dataset,
reaching 93% recall at 1 FPPI.

Figure 1: Filtered feature channels illustration, for a single
weak classifier reading over a single feature channel.
Integral channel features detectors pool features via sums
over rectangular regions [8, 1]. We can equivalently rewrite this operation as convolution with a filter bank followed by single pixel reads (see §2). We aim to answer:
What is the effect of selecting different filter banks?

1. Introduction
Pedestrian detection is an active research area, with
1000+ papers published in the last decade1 , and well established benchmark datasets [9, 13]. It is considered a canonical case of object detection, and has served as playground
to explore ideas that might be effective for generic object
detection.
Although many different ideas have been explored, and
detection quality has been steadily improving [2], arguably
it is still unclear what are the key ingredients for good pedestrian detection; e.g. it remains unclear how effective parts,
components, and features learning are for this task.
Current top performing pedestrian detection methods all
point to an intermediate layer (such as max-pooling or filtering) between the low-level feature maps and the classification layer [42, 45, 29, 25]. In this paper we explore
the simplest of such intermediary: a linear transformation
implemented as convolution with a filter bank. We propose a framework for filtered channel features (see figure 1)
that unifies multiple top performing methods [8, 1, 45, 25],
and that enables a systematic exploration of different filter
banks. Our experiments show that, with the proper filter
bank, filtered channel features reach top detection quality.

It has been shown that using extra information at test
time (such as context, stereo images, optical flow, etc.) can
boost detection quality. In this paper we focus on the “core”
sliding window algorithm using solely HOG+LUV features
(i.e. oriented gradient magnitude and colour features). We
consider context information and optical flow as add-ons,
included in the experiments section for the sake of completeness and comparison with existing methods. Using
only HOG+LUV features we already reach top performance on the challenging Caltech and KITTI datasets, matching results using optical flow and significantly more features
(such as LBP and covariance [42, 29]).

1.1. Related work
Recent survey papers discuss the diverse set of ideas explored for pedestrian detection [10, 14, 9, 2]. The most
recent survey [2] indicates that the classifier choice (e.g.
linear/non-linear SVM versus decision forest) is not a clear
differentiator regarding quality; rather the features used
seem more important.
Creativity regarding different types of features has not

1 Papers from 2004 to 2014 with "pedestrian detection" in the title, according to Google Scholar.

1

