Ranking and Retrieval of Image Sequences from Multiple Paragraph Queries
Gunhee Kim
Seoul National University

Seungwhan Moon
Carnegie Mellon University

Leonid Sigal
Disney Research Pittsburgh

gunhee@cs.cmu.edu

seungwhm@cs.cmu.edu

lsigal@disneyresearch.com

Abstract
We propose a method to rank and retrieve image sequences from a natural language text query, consisting of
multiple sentences or paragraphs. One of the method’s
key applications is to visualize visitors’ text-only reviews
on T RIPA DVISOR or Y ELP, by automatically retrieving the
most illustrative image sequences. While most previous
work has dealt with the relations between a natural language sentence and an image or a video, our work extends
to the relations between paragraphs and image sequences.
Our approach leverages the vast user-generated resource
of blog posts and photo streams on the Web. We use blog
posts as text-image parallel training data that co-locate informative text with representative images that are carefully
selected by users. We exploit large-scale photo streams to
augment the image samples for retrieval. We design a latent
structural SVM framework to learn the semantic relevance
relations between text and image sequences. We present
both quantitative and qualitative results on the newly created D ISNEYLAND dataset.

Figure 1. A depiction of our problem statement with Disneyland
examples. We leverage (a) blog posts to learn the mapping between sentences and images, and (b) photo streams to augment the
image samples. (c) Our objective is to rank and retrieve image sequences that best describe a given text query consisting of multiple
sentences or paragraphs.

however, is obtaining appropriate text-image parallel corpus
from which semantic relationships between text and images
can be learned.
As social media sites continue to proliferate, a growing
number of individuals willingly share their own experiences
in the form of images, videos, or text, over a multitude of
Web platforms. For example, many people who visit Disneyland take large streams of photos about their unique experience, and upload them onto photo hosting sites such as
F LICKR. Some of more enthusiastic users also craft blog
posts to document their trips on weblog publishing sites
such as BLOGGER or WORDPRESS, or evaluate their experiences on review sites like T RIPA DVISOR or Y ELP.
In this paper, we address a problem of ranking and retrieval of image sequences for a natural language query of
multiple sentences, by leveraging a large corpus of online
images and text that describe common events or activities in
different forms. Fig.1 illustrates an intuition of our problem
statement with an example of tourism (e.g. visiting Disneyland). Given a text query consisting of multiple sentences or
paragraphs, our goal is to automatically retrieve image se-

1. Introduction
Textual and visual forms of communication are complementary and synergetic in many aspects (e.g. news articles, blogs). A system that can take passages of free
form text and automatically illustrate them with relevant
imagery would constitute a significant step forward toward
joint understanding of natural language descriptions and visual content of images. Recently there has been steady
progress of chipping away at this challenging problem by
either one-sentence (i.e. subject-verb-object style) text generation methods [7, 8, 9, 17, 24, 29] for image description,
or image/video retrieval from sentence queries [10, 37]. In
this paper, we make the next leap towards retrieving a sequence of images (as opposed to a single image) to illustrate much longer in terms of content, passages of text,
that may consist of multiple sentences or even paragraphs
(as opposed to a single sentence). One of the challenges,
∗ This work has been done when Gunhee Kim was a postdoctoral researcher, and Seungwhan Moon was an intern at Disney Research.

1

