Making Better Use of Edges via Perceptual Grouping
Yonggang Qi† Yi-Zhe Song? Tao Xiang? Honggang Zhang†
Timothy Hospedales? Yi Li? Jun Guo†
†
?
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
Queen Mary University of London
{qiyg,zhhg,guojun}@bupt.edu.cn

{yizhe.song,t.xiang,t.hospedales,yi.li}@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract

tours [18, 1, 53] and organizing them hierarchically in terms
of probabilistic edge maps [3, 2]. These advances have
led to successful application of edges in higher-level vision tasks such as object detection [40, 55], object proposal
generation [2, 54] and sketch-based image retrieval (SBIR)
[16, 25]. All of these studies either implicitly or explicitly utilize perceptual grouping. However, most are limited
to just one Gestalt principle locally and relies on additional
features/cues (e.g., color and texture) to alleviate the limitation.

We propose a perceptual grouping framework that organizes image edges into meaningful structures and demonstrate its usefulness on various computer vision tasks. Our
grouper formulates edge grouping as a graph partition
problem, where a learning to rank method is developed to
encode probabilities of candidate edge pairs. In particular,
RankSVM is employed for the first time to combine multiple
Gestalt principles as cue for edge grouping. Afterwards,
an edge grouping based object proposal measure is introduced that yields proposals comparable to state-of-the-art
alternatives. We further show how human-like sketches can
be generated from edge groupings and consequently used
to deliver state-of-the-art sketch-based image retrieval performance. Last but not least, we tackle the problem of freehand human sketch segmentation by utilizing the proposed
grouper to cluster strokes into semantic object parts.

In this paper, we propose a grouper that utilizes multiple Gestalt principles synergistically, and works with edges
alone. More specifically, a novel multi-label graph-cut algorithm is used to group edges according to two key Gestalt
principles, i.e. continuity and proximity. This is realized by
a novel strategy of computing relative penalties between labels and edges using a learning to rank algorithm. Our new
perceptual edge grouping framework produces better edge
groups which can be used to improve a variety of higherlevel tasks including: (i) object proposal generation, where
multi-cue edge grouping is exploited for the first time, (ii)
SBIR, where the proposed edge grouping helps in generating more human-like edge maps and (iii) free-hand human
sketch segmentation, where the grouper is directly used to
group strokes to form object parts. All three applications
benefits significantly from the unique characteristic of perceptual grouping – it generates object-like structures, which
is the ultimate goal of object proposal algorithms and reason
behind better SBIR and sketch segmentation.

1. Introduction
The human visual system is so powerful that we can easily derive structure from chaos. The Gestalt school of psychologists refer to this phenomenon as perceptual organization [49, 50], where visual elements are grouped based
on a set of simple rules, such as proximity and continuity [52]. It is commonly acknowledged that early human
visual processing operates by first performing edge detection followed by perceptual organization to group edges into object-like structures [7, 41].
Inspired by these psychological discoveries, extracting
edges has long been regarded as key to solving the vision
problem. This motivation has resulted in extensive prior art,
from the simple gradient-driven Canny edges [8] to more
sophisticated methods [30, 38, 27, 29, 33] that exploit multiple features and more elaborate algorithms. Despite these
great strides, the produced edges remain noisy and therefore
can not be directly used in higher-level applications.
In order to better exploit noisy edges, researchers have
investigated means of grouping edges into continuous con-

Our contributions are summarized as follows: (i) A novel perceptual edge grouping algorithm is introduced by embedding learning to rank into a multi-label graph-cut framework. (ii) We propose a novel object proposal generation
method based on our perceptual edge grouping framework
that improves over existing approaches. (iii) Our grouper
facilitates a novel SBIR system that outperforms existing
alternatives. (iv) We demonstrate a novel human free-hand
sketch segmentation algorithm that breaks sketches into semantic parts.
1

