Efficient Label Collection for Unlabeled Image Datasets
Maggie Wigness, Bruce A. Draper and J. Ross Beveridge
Colorado State University
Fort Collins, CO
mwigness,draper,ross@cs.colostate.edu

Abstract

example, military robots may be constantly moving to new
domains where new training data must be collected (see
Section 5). Fortunately, efficient labeling schemes have
emerged to help alleviate some of the labeling workload,
while still producing sets of labeled data capable of training high performing classifiers. In the context of this paper,
efficiency is defined relative to the workload required from
a fully supervised system, i.e., hand labeling each image in
the training set individually.
Active learning [9, 10, 11, 12, 15] reduces the workload
by requiring only a subset of the most informative images
in the training data to be labeled. The label collection process and classifier performance are tightly coupled in these
frameworks since classifiers are re-trained on each iteration
to help select the next samples to label. Like a fully supervised approach, active learning applies labels at the level of
individual data samples (seen in Figure 1(a)). Thus, these
frameworks are only efficient if a subset of the unlabeled
images can sufficiently train classifiers.
Group-based labeling [4, 14, 16, 18, 19] is potentially
more efficient than instance-based labeling because a single label is assigned to a group of images simultaneously
(as in Figure 1(b)). Unlike active learning, group labeling
can be a noisy strategy if a group contains data from multiple visual concepts. This may occur when data are grouped
using feature patterns that represent a concept broader than
the classifier label set. Assigning the dominating class label
trades some label accuracy for efficiency, but some techniques avoid label noise all together. Examples include collecting binary constraints to iteratively improve clustered
output [2, 22], removing images from a group that do not
match the dominating label [7] or only collecting labels
from groups that represent exactly one concept [21]. All of
these approaches result in more effort or latency to assign
noise-free labels.
This paper introduces a group-based labeling technique
that balances the trade-off between efficiency and label accuracy more effectively than previous techniques. Our approach uses hierarchical clustering to establish a space of
groupings across a spectrum of visual concept granulari-

Visual classifiers are part of many applications including surveillance, autonomous navigation and scene understanding. The raw data used to train these classifiers is
abundant and easy to collect but lacks labels. Labels are
necessary for training supervised classifiers, but the labeling process requires significant human effort. Techniques
like active learning and group-based labeling have emerged
to help reduce the labeling workload. However, the possibility of collecting label noise affects either the efficiency
of these systems or the performance of the trained classifiers. Further, many introduce latency by iteratively retraining classifiers or re-clustering data. We introduce a
technique that searches for structural change in hierarchically clustered data to identify a set of clusters that span a
spectrum of visual concept granularities. This allows us to
efficiently label clusters with less label noise and produce
high performing classifiers. The data is hierarchically clustered only once, eliminating latency during the labeling process. Using benchmark data we show that collecting labels
with our approach is more efficient than existing labeling
techniques, and achieves higher classification accuracy. Finally, we demonstrate the speed and efficiency of our system
using real-world data collected for an autonomous navigation task.

1. Introduction
Classification is an important task for many visually intelligent systems, but there are a variety of challenging
properties associated with visual data that make it difficult.
Some of these challenges include changes in illumination,
scale, perspective, color and background clutter. Classifiers
try to account for these factors, but often need large amounts
of training data to learn these variations. While collecting
visual data is a trivial task, the raw data itself contains no
label information for training supervised classifiers.
Label collection is a burdensome task for human annotators, and unfortunately may not be a one time event. For
1

