From Dictionary of Visual Words to Subspaces: Locality-constrained Affine
Subspace Coding ∗
Peihua Li, Xiaoxiao Lu, Qilong Wang
School of Information and Communication Engineering, Dalian University of Technology
peihuali@dlut.edu.cn, shaw,qlwang@mail.dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
The locality-constrained linear coding (LLC) is a very
successful feature coding method in image classification. It
makes known the importance of locality constraint which
brings high efficiency and local smoothness of the codes.
However, in the LLC method the geometry of feature space
is described by an ensemble of representative points (visual words) while discarding the geometric structure immediately surrounding them. Such a dictionary only provides a
crude, piecewise constant approximation of the data manifold. To approach this problem, we propose a novel feature
coding method called locality-constrained affine subspace
coding (LASC). The data manifold in LASC is characterized
by an ensemble of subspaces attached to the representative
points (or affine subspaces), which can provide a piecewise
linear approximation of the manifold. Given an input descriptor, we find its top-k neighboring subspaces, in which
the descriptor is linearly decomposed and weighted to form
the first-order LASC vector. Inspired by the success of usage
of higher-order information in image classification, we propose the second-order LASC vector based on the Fisher information metric for further performance improvement. We
make experiments on challenging benchmarks and experiments have shown the LASC method is very competitive.

1. Introduction
Encoding methods as one key component of Bag of Visual Words (BoVW) model [34] have made great progress
in the past years. Such coding methods achieve impressive results in many computer vision tasks, such as object recognition, image retrieval, and texture classification.
From the hard-assignment approaches [34, 6, 22] to the softassignment ones [42, 36, 24], and then to those based on local constraints [45, 38] and the methods using higher order
information [18, 47, 44, 31], the advance of encoding methods has been playing a great role in improving the classifica∗ The work was supported by the NSFC (61471082).

tion performance [16]. This is mainly due to consideration
of the algebraic and geometric structure of data manifold
and utilization of high-order information.
The sparsity of coding vector is an inherent property in
the BoVW model. The hard-assignment methods [34, 6, 22]
allocate each feature to the nearest word in the dictionary,
producing extremely sparse vector which has only one nonzero component. The sparse coding (SC) method [42] representing each feature as a sparse, linear combination of visual words, having smaller reconstruction error and achieving better performance than the hard-assignment methods. However, the SC method is computationally demanding;
moreover, the non-smooth `1 regularizer introduces the negative effect [38] that quite different words may be selected
for similar patches to favor sparsity, leading to loss of correlation between the corresponding coding vectors.
Recent research has observed and validated that locality
is more essential than sparsity [38, 45, 24]. The localityconstrained linear coding (LLC) [38] is a great advance
in this aspect, achieving state-of-the-art recognition performance. The LLC method imposes the weighted `2 regularizer in the least square-based cost function where the
weights are proximity measures of the feature to individual
words. The LLC method yields the local smooth sparsity
which ensures similar patches have similar encoding vectors. In addition, it has closed-form solution such that it is
faster than the SC methods. A most often used form of LLC
is to explicitly represent the feature as a linear combination
of the most nearby visual words, and by doing so the LLC
method becomes much more efficient.
In the BoVW methods we usually face high-dimensional
feature space (e.g. the dimension of SIFT features is 128
[25]). It is known that the feature data are often located on
some low-dimensional manifold and leveraging the geometry of the manifold may bring benefits [30]. As shown in
Figure 1 (a), the LLC method characterizes the geometry of
feature space by some representative points (visual words),
obtained by either k-means or dictionary learning methods
[42, 38]. The dictionary thus obtained only provides crude,
piecewise constant approximation of the manifold [3]. Be-

