Large-Scale Damage Detection Using Satellite Imagery
Lionel Gueguen
Raffay Hamid
DigitalGlobe Inc.
12076 Grant Street, Thornton, Colorado, USA
{lgueguen, mhamid}@digitalglobe.com

Abstract
Satellite imagery is a valuable source of information
for assessing damages in distressed areas undergoing a
calamity, such as an earthquake or an armed conflict. However, the sheer amount of data required to be inspected for
this assessment makes it impractical to do it manually. To
address this problem, we present a semi-supervised learning framework for large-scale damage detection in satellite
imagery. We present a comparative evaluation of our framework using over 88 million images collected from 4, 665
KM2 from 12 different locations around the world. To enable accurate and efficient damage detection, we introduce
a novel use of hierarchical shape features in the bags-ofvisual words setting. We analyze how practical factors such
as sun, sensor-resolution, satellite-angle, and registration
differences impact the effectiveness our proposed representation, and compare it to five alternative features in multiple learning settings. Finally, we demonstrate through a
user-study that our semi-supervised framework results in a
ten-fold reduction in human annotation time at a minimal
loss in detection accuracy compared to manual inspection.

1. Introduction
Each year, hundreds of catastrophic events impact vulnerable areas around the world. Assessing the extent of damage
caused by these crises is crucial in the timely allocation of
resources to help the affected populations. Since disasterlocations are usually not readily accessible, the use of satellite imagery has emerged as a valuable source of information for estimating the impact of catastrophic events.
However, currently these assessments are mostly done
by analyzing the pre- and post-event images of distressed areas by human photo-interpreters, making it a labor-intensive
and expensive process. It is therefore important to scale-up
damage detection to larger areas accurately and efficiently.
Our work is a step towards solving this problem.
In the following, we summarize some of the key challenges that need to be addressed in this regard, and how our
work contributes towards them:

1-a

2-a

3-a

4-a

1-b

2-b

3-b

4-b

Figure 1: (Top) Areas of interest shown with red dots. Each area
represents multiple local regions. We considered 12 local regions,
spanning 4, 665 KM2 . (Bottom) Before and after imagery for different events shown in the two rows. These include (1) Typhoon
(Phillipines, Oct. 2013), (2) Armed conflict (Central African Republic, Dec. 2013), (3) Earthquake (Pakistan, Sept. 2013), and (4)
Internally displaced people’s shelters (Somalia, May 2013).

1- Comprehensive Data-Set: Thus far, there has been a
lack of comprehensive labeled data-set that could be used
to explore automatic damage detection at scale. To this
end, we present a benchmark data-set of 86 pairs of preand post-event satellite imagery of distressed areas covering
4, 665 KM2 with the associated ground truth of damaged
regions acquired by expert interpreters. This data-set was
collected by using the satellites of DigitalGlobe Inc. Our
data-set covers 12 different regions from around the world,
and spans a wide range of terrains and climates, with a variety of damage types (see Figure 1). This data-set enables us
to rigorously explore and make generalizable conclusions
about the various facets of the problem at hand.
2- Appropriate Feature Choice: The scale of our problem naturally presents an accuracy-efficiency tradeoff for
the features being considered. To this end, we introduce
the use of trees-of-shapes features [28] in the bag-of-visualwords model [16] that focuses more on the shape character-

