CIDEr: Consensus-based Image Description Evaluation
Ramakrishna Vedantam
Virginia Tech

C. Lawrence Zitnick
Microsoft Research

Devi Parikh
Virgnia Tech

vrama91@vt.edu

larryz@microsoft.com

parikh@vt.edu

Abstract

erties may be measured, e.g. on separate one to five [29, 37,
44, 11] or pairwise scales [45]. Unfortunately, combining
these various results into one measure of sentence quality is
difficult. Alternatively, other works [22, 18] ask subjects to
judge the overall quality of a sentence.
An important yet non-obvious property exists when image descriptions are judged by humans: What humans like
often does not correspond to what is human-like.1 We introduce a novel consensus-based evaluation protocol, which
measures the similarity of a sentence to the majority, or consensus of how most people describe the image (Fig. 1). One
realization of this evaluation protocol uses human subjects
to judge sentence similarity between a candidate sentence
and human-provided ground truth sentences. The question
“Which of two sentences is more similar to this other sentence?” is posed to the subjects. The resulting quality score
is based on how often a sentence is labeled as being more
similar to a human-generated sentence. The relative nature
of the question helps make the task objective. We encourage the reader to review how a similar protocol has been
used in [41] to capture human perception of image similarity. These annotation protocols for similarity may be understood as instantiations of 2AFC (two alternative forced
choice) [3], a popular modality in psychophysics.
Since human studies are expensive, hard to reproduce,
and slow to evaluate, automatic evaluation measures are
commonly desired. To be useful in practice, automated
metrics should agree well with human judgment. Some
popular metrics used for image description evaluation are
BLEU [33] (precision-based) from the machine translation community and ROUGE [46] (recall-based) from the
summarization community. Unfortunately, these metrics
have been shown to correlate weakly with human judgment [22, 11, 4, 18]. For the task of judging the overall quality of a description, the METEOR [11] metric has shown
better correlation with human subjects. Other metrics rely
on the ranking of captions [18] and cannot evaluate novel

Automatically describing an image with a sentence is
a long-standing challenge in computer vision and natural language processing. Due to recent progress in object
detection, attribute classification, action recognition, etc.,
there is renewed interest in this area. However, evaluating the quality of descriptions has proven to be challenging. We propose a novel paradigm for evaluating image
descriptions that uses human consensus. This paradigm
consists of three main parts: a new triplet-based method
of collecting human annotations to measure consensus, a
new automated metric that captures consensus, and two
new datasets: PASCAL-50S and ABSTRACT-50S that contain 50 sentences describing each image. Our simple metric
captures human judgment of consensus better than existing metrics across sentences generated by various sources.
We also evaluate five state-of-the-art image description approaches using this new protocol and provide a benchmark
for future comparisons. A version of CIDEr named CIDErD is available as a part of MS COCO evaluation server to
enable systematic evaluation and benchmarking.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in object recognition [15], attribute
classification [23], action classification [26, 9] and crowdsourcing [40] have increased the interest in solving higher
level scene understanding problems. One such problem is
generating human-like descriptions of an image. In spite
of the growing interest in this area, the evaluation of novel
sentences generated by automatic approaches remains challenging. Evaluation is critical for measuring progress and
spurring improvements in the state of the art. This has
already been shown in various problems in computer vision, such as detection [13, 7], segmentation [13, 28], and
stereo [39].
Existing evaluation metrics for image description attempt to measure several desirable properties. These include grammaticality, saliency (covering main aspects), correctness/truthfulness, etc. Using human studies, these prop-

1 This is a subtle but important distinction. We show qualitative examples of this in [42]. That is, the sentence that is most similar to a typical
human generated description is often not judged to be the “best” description. In this paper, we propose to directly measure the “human-likeness”
of automatically generated sentences.

1

