Understanding image representations
by measuring their equivariance and equivalence
Karel Lenc

Andrea Vedaldi

Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford

Conv1

Conv2

Orig.

Abstract

Rot90 VFlip

HFlip

Despite the importance of image representations such as
histograms of oriented gradients and deep Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNN), our theoretical understanding of
them remains limited. Aiming at filling this gap, we investigate three key mathematical properties of representations:
equivariance, invariance, and equivalence. Equivariance
studies how transformations of the input image are encoded
by the representation, invariance being a special case where
a transformation has no effect. Equivalence studies whether
two representations, for example two different parametrisations of a CNN, capture the same visual information or not.
A number of methods to establish these properties empirically are proposed, including introducing transformation
and stitching layers in CNNs. These methods are then applied to popular representations to reveal insightful aspects
of their structure, including clarifying at which layers in
a CNN certain geometric invariances are achieved. While
the focus of the paper is theoretical, direct applications to
structured-output regression are demonstrated too.

Figure 1: Equivariant transformation of CNN filters. Top:
Conv1 and Conv2 filters of a convolutional neural network visualised with the method of [23]. Other rows: geometrically warped
filters reconstructed from an equivariant transformation of the network output learned using the method of Sect. 2 for Horizontal
flip, Vertical flip and Rotation 90◦ .

of this function. We focus in particular on three such properties (Sect. 2). The first one is equivariance, which looks
at how the representation changes upon transformations of
the input image. We demonstrate that most representations,
including HOG and most of the layers in deep neural networks, change in a easily predictable manner with the input
(Fig. 1). We show that such equivariant transformations can
be learned empirically from data (Sect. 2.1) and that, importantly, they amount to simple linear transformations of
the representation output (Sect. 3.1 and 3.2). In the case
of convolutional networks, we obtain this by introducing
and learning a new transformation layer. By analysing the
learned equivariant transformations we are also able to find
and characterise the invariances of the representation, our
second property. This allows us to quantify invariance and
show how it builds up with depth in deep models.

1. Introduction
Image representations have been a key focus of the research in computer vision for at least two decades. Notable
examples include textons [11], histogram of oriented gradients (SIFT [14] and HOG [4]), bag of visual words [3][24],
sparse [32] and local coding [31], super vector coding [35],
VLAD [9], Fisher Vectors [17], and the latest generation
of deep convolutional networks [10, 21, 33]. However, despite their popularity, our theoretical understanding of representations remains limited. It is generally believed that
a good representation should combine invariance and discriminability, but this characterisation is rather vague; for
example, it is often unclear what invariances are contained
in a representation and how they are obtained.
In this work, we propose a new approach to study image
representations. We look at a representation φ as an abstract function mapping an image x to a vector φ(x) ∈ Rd
and we empirically establish key mathematical properties

The third property, equivalence, looks at whether the information captured by heterogeneous representations is in
fact the same. CNN models, in particular, contain millions
of redundant parameters [5] that, due to non-convex optimisation in learning, may differ even when retrained on the
same data. The question then is whether the resulting differences are genuine or just apparent. To answer this question
we learn stitching layers that allow swapping parts of different networks. Equivalence is then obtained if the result1

