Learning to Segment Under Various Forms of Weak Supervision
Jia Xu1
Alexander G. Schwing2
Raquel Urtasun2
1
University of Wisconsin-Madison 2 University of Toronto
jiaxu@cs.wisc.edu

{aschwing, urtasun}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
Despite the promising performance of conventional
fully supervised algorithms, semantic segmentation has remained an important, yet challenging task. Due to the limited availability of complete annotations, it is of great interest to design solutions for semantic segmentation that take
into account weakly labeled data, which is readily available
at a much larger scale. Contrasting the common theme to
develop a different algorithm for each type of weak annotation, in this work, we propose a uniﬁed approach that incorporates various forms of weak supervision – image level
tags, bounding boxes, and partial labels – to produce a
pixel-wise labeling. We conduct a rigorous evaluation on
the challenging Siftﬂow dataset for various weakly labeled
settings, and show that our approach outperforms the stateof-the-art by 12% on per-class accuracy, while maintaining
comparable per-pixel accuracy.

Figure 1. Our semantic segmentation algorithm learns from various forms of weak supervision (image level tags, bounding boxes,
partial labels), and produces pixel-wise labels.

reason for this difference is rather obvious: for almost any
given image we are quickly able to decide whether an object is illustrated in a scene, but careful delineation is tedious. Therefore, certainly image tags, but sometimes even
bounding boxes, and occasionally partial labels in the form
of user scribbles are either easily collected or are even readily available in large photo collections of websites such as
Flickr and Facebook.
In the absence of large pixel-wise annotated datasets, development of visual parsing algorithms that beneﬁt from
weakly labeled data is key to further improve the performance of semantic segmentation. Supervision in the
form of partial labels has been effectively utilized in interactive object segmentation via graph-cuts [3], random
walks [12], geodesic shortest path [2], and geodesic star
convexity [15]. Recursive propagation of segmentations
from labeled masks to unlabeled images has also been investigated [14]. An alternative form of weak supervision are
bounding boxes. Grabcut [27] has been a great success for
binary object segmentation, taking advantage of a bounding box around the foreground object. Recent research has
extended this idea to semantic segmentation by building object detectors from bounding boxes [41]. A more challenging setting is inference of a pixel-wise labeling, given only
image level tags. Encouraging results have been presented
for this weakly supervised semantic segmentation task by
connecting super-pixels across images, and jointly inferring pixel labels for all images [38, 39, 37]. An alternative are Markov random ﬁelds with latent variables denoting
the super-pixels, and observed variables representing image
tags [43, 30].

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is one of the most fundamental challenges in computer vision, and conventional fully
supervised algorithms have demonstrated promising results [21, 10, 8, 33, 35, 36, 44, 19, 20, 45, 31]. However,
in order to train fully supervised systems, a set of training
examples with semantic labels for each pixel in an image
is required. Considering the recent performance improvements obtained when employing millions of data points, it
is obvious that the size of the training data is one of the bottlenecks for semantic segmentation. This is not astonishing
since labeling each pixels with a semantic category is a very
expensive and time-consuming process, even when utilizing
crowd-sourcing platforms such as MTurk.
Compared to the massive size of modern visual data – everyday, more than 300 million images are uploaded to Facebook – only a tiny fraction is assigned accurate pixel-wise
annotations. For instance, in the ImageNet dataset [7], 14
million images are assigned with scene categories; 500,000
images are annotated with object bounding boxes; but only
4, 460 images are segmented at the pixel level [14]. The
1

