Deep Sparse Representation for Robust Image Registration
Yeqing Li∗ 1 , Chen Chen∗1 , Fei Yang2 , and Junzhou Huang1
1
University of Texas at Arlington
2
Facebook Inc.
Abstract

liable features is still an open problem and an active topic
of research [20]. In this paper, we are interested in image
registration by directly using their pixel values. In addition,
we wish to successfully register the images from a variety
of applications in subpixel-level accuracy, as precisely as
possible.

The deﬁnition of the similarity measure is an essential
component in image registration. In this paper, we propose
a novel similarity measure for registration of two or more
images. The proposed method is motivated by that the optimally registered images can be deeply sparsiﬁed in the gradient domain and frequency domain, with the separation of
a sparse tensor of errors. One of the key advantages of the
proposed similarity measure is its robustness to severe intensity distortions, which widely exist on medical images,
remotely sensed images and natural photos due to the difference of acquisition modalities or illumination conditions.
Two efﬁcient algorithms are proposed to solve the batch image registration and pair registration problems in a uniﬁed
framework. We validate our method on extensive challenging datasets. The experimental results demonstrate the robustness, accuracy and efﬁciency of our method over 9 traditional and state-of-the-art algorithms on synthetic images
and a wide range of real-world applications.

One key component for image registration is the energy
function to measure (dis)similarity. The optimized similarity should lead to the correct spatial alignment. However,
ﬁnding a reliable similarity measure is quite challenging
due to the unpredicted variations of the input images. In
many real-world applications, the images to be registered
may be acquired at different times and locations, under various illumination conditions and occlusions, or by different acquisition modalities. As a result, the intensity ﬁelds
of the images may vary signiﬁcantly. For instance, slowvarying intensity bias ﬁelds often exist in brain magnetic
resonance images [22]; the remotely sensed images may
even have inverse contrast for the same land objects, as multiple sensors have different sensitivities to wavelength spectrum [24]. Unfortunately, many existing pixel-based similarity measures are not robust to these intensity variations,
e.g., the widely used sum-of-squared-difference (SSD) [23].

1. Introduction
Image registration is a fundamental task in image processing and computer vision [29, 23, 20]. It aims to align
two or more images into the same coordinate system, and
then these images can be processed or compared. Accuracy and robustness are two of the most important metrics
to evaluate a registration method. It has been shown that
a mean geometric distortion of only 0.3 pixel will result
in noticeable effect on a pixel-to-pixel image fusion process [3]. Robustness is deﬁned as the ability to get close
to the accurate results on different trials under diverse conditions. Based on the feature used in registration, existing methods can be classiﬁed into feature-based registration (e.g., [28, 16, 15]) and pixel-based registration (e.g.,
[10, 6, 26, 25]). Feature-based methods rely on the landmarks extracted from the images. However, extracting re-

Recently, the sparsity-inducing similarity measures have
been repeatedly successful in overcoming such registration
difﬁculties [17, 19, 27, 9]. In RASL [19] (robust alignment
by sparse and low-rank decomposition), the images are vectorized to form a data matrix. The transformations are estimated to seek a low rank and sparse representation of the
aligned images. Two online alignment methods, ORIA [27]
(online robust image alignment) and t-GRASTA [9] (transformed Grassmannian robust adaptive subspace tracking algorithm), are proposed to improve the scalability of RASL.
All of these methods assume that the large errors among the
images are sparse (e.g., caused by shadows, partial occlusions) and separable. However, as we will show later, many
real-world images contain severe spatially-varying intensity
distortions. These intensity variations are not sparse and
therefore difﬁcult to be separated by these methods. As a
result, the above measures may fail to ﬁnd the correct alignment and thus are less robust in these challenging tasks.

∗ indicates equal contributions. Corresponding author: Junzhou Huang.
Email: jzhuang@uta.edu. This work was partially supported by NSF IIS1423056, CMMI-1434401, CNS-1405985.

1

