GMMCP Tracker: Globally Optimal Generalized Maximum Multi Clique
Problem for Multiple Object Tracking
Afshin Dehghan
Shayan Modiri Assari
Mubarak Shah
Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida
{adehghan, smodiri, shah}@cs.ucf.edu

GMMCP without ADN

Data association is the backbone to many multiple object tracking (MOT) methods. In this paper we formulate
data association as a Generalized Maximum Multi Clique
problem (GMMCP). We show that this is the ideal case of
modeling tracking in real world scenario where all the pairwise relationships between targets in a batch of frames are
taken into account. Previous works assume simplified version of our tracker either in problem formulation or problem optimization. However, we propose a solution using
GMMCP where no simplification is assumed in either steps.
We show that the NP hard problem of GMMCP can be formulated through Binary-Integer Program where for small
and medium size MOT problems the solution can be found
efficiently. We further propose a speed-up method, employing Aggregated Dummy Nodes for modeling occlusion and
miss-detection, which reduces the size of the input graph
without using any heuristics. We show that, using the speedup method, our tracker lends itself to real-time implementation which is plausible in many applications. We evaluated
our tracker on six challenging sequences of Town Center,
TUD-Crossing, TUD-Stadtmitte, Parking-lot 1, Parking-lot
2 and Parking-lot pizza and show favorable improvement
against state of art.

GMMCP with ADN

Abstract

Figure 1. The two versions of the input graph used in our tracking. The graph on the left uses regular dummy nodes (shown with
triangles) for occlusion handling and the speed-up version of our
tracker uses only one dummy node per cluster called aggregateddummy-node (shown with stars). Our method finds all the cliques
in a graph that maximize the score function simultaneously. In this
example 4 cliques are found, each shown in a different color. Each
circle represents one tracklet.

used to generate the input to data-association based tracking algorithms. Reviewing the literature, most data association methods have considered a simplified version of the
problem and focused on approximate inference methods
which can be solved efficiently. On the other side, those
algorithms which incorporate more accurate formulation of
tracking scenario in real world suffer from greedy optimizations and local minima.
In this paper we take a different direction and propose a
method which does not involve any simplification in problem formulation nor in optimization. Our method has several advantages: First, it mimics the real world tracking scenario precisely by incorporating all temporal pairwise relationship in a batch of frames, i.e the graph is k-partite complete. Second, we formulate the proposed graph theoretic
problem using Binary-integer Program without simplifying
the original problem. Third, it allows including high-order
relationship between targets in our cost function. Fourth, it
can robustly handle short/long-term occlusion. And, finally
it lends itself to real-time implementation on a desktop computer. Next we shall critique some important previous data
association methods in more detail and highlight how the
proposed method differs from them.
Data association is the core of multiple object tracking

1. Introduction
Tracking is a fundamental problem in computer vision
and for decades researchers have tried to solve this problem. Every year many trackers are proposed and results in
many dataset have already reached their ceilings. The big
question is: ”Do we need yet another tracker?”. Looking
back at recent tracking papers, despite great performance
reported on specific scenarios, still many challenges remain
unsolved including occlusion, abrupt motion, appearance
changes and, etc. This leaves the room open for new trackers which can better deal with tracking challenges in various
scenarios. The aforementioned aspects mostly affect the
performance of the pre-trained object detectors which are
1

