Learning To Look Up:
Realtime Monocular Gaze Correction Using Machine Learning
Daniil Kononenko
Victor Lempitsky
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology (Skoltech)
Novaya Street 100, Skolkovo, Moscow Region, Russia
{daniil.kononenko,lempitsky}@skoltech.ru

Abstract

Most successful solutions to gaze correction have been
so far relying on additional hardware such as semitransparent mirrors/screens [16, 12], stereocameras [23, 5],
or RGB-D cameras [26, 14]. Because of the extra hardware dependence, such solutions mostly remain within the
realm of high-end conferencing systems and/or research
prototypes. Despite decades of research, finding a monocular solution that would rely on the laptop/portable device
camera as the only image acquisition hardware remains an
open question. The challenge is to meet the requirements
of (a) realism, (b) having gaze direction/viewpoint position
altered sufficiently for reestablishing the gaze contact, (c)
real-time performance.

We revisit the well-known problem of gaze correction
and present a solution based on supervised machine learning. At training time, our system observes pairs of images,
where each pair contains the face of the same person with
a fixed angular difference in gaze direction. It then learns
to synthesize the second image of a pair from the first one.
After learning, the system gets the ability to redirect the
gaze of a previously unseen person by the same angular
difference as in the training set. Unlike many previous solutions to gaze problem in videoconferencing, ours is purely
monocular, i.e. it does not require any hardware apart from
an in-built web-camera of a laptop. Being based on efficient
machine learning predictors such as decision forests, the
system is fast (runs in real-time on a single core of a modern laptop). In the paper, we demonstrate results on a variety of videoconferencing frames and evaluate the method
quantitatively on the hold-out set of registered images. The
supplementary video shows example sessions of our system
at work.

Meeting the first requirement (realism) is particularly
difficult due to the well-known uncanny valley effect [20],
i.e. the sense of irritation evoked by realistic renderings of
humans with noticeable visual artifacts, which stems from
the particular acuteness of the human visual system towards
the appearance of other humans and human faces in particular.
Here, we revisit the problem of monocular gaze correction using machine learning techniques, and present a new
system for monocular gaze correction. The system synthesizes realistic views with a gaze systematically redirected
upwards (10 or 15 degrees in our experiments). The synthesis is based on supervised machine learning, for which a
large number of image pairs describing the gaze redirection
process is collected and processed. The more advanced version of the system is based on a special kind of randomized
decision tree ensembles called eye flow forests. At test-time,
the system accomplishes gaze correction using simple pixel
replacement operations that are localized to the vicinity of
person’s eyes, thus achieving high computational efficiency.
Our current implementation runs in real-time on a single
core of a laptop with a clear potential for a real-time performance on tablet computers.

1. Introduction
The problem of gaze in videoconferencing has been attracting researchers and engineers for a long time. The
problem manifests itself as the inability of the people engaged into a videoconferencing (the proverbial “Alice” and
“Bob”) to maintain gaze contact. The lack of gaze contact
is due to the disparity between Bob’s camera and the image
of Alice’s face on Bob’s screen (and vice versa). As long as
Bob is gazing towards the eyes of Alice on his screen, Alice
perceives Bob’s gaze directed down (assuming the camera
is located above the screen). Gaze correction then refers to
the process of altering Bob’s videostream in a realistic and
real-time way, so that the apparent Bob’s gaze direction is
changed (e.g. redirected upwards) and the gaze contact can
be established.

Below, we review the related works on gaze correction
and randomized trees (Section 2), and then introduce our
1

