Pairwise Geometric Matching for Large-scale Object Retrieval
Xinchao Li, Martha Larson, Alan Hanjalic
Multimedia Computing Group, Delft University of Technology
Delft, The Netherlands
{x.li-3,m.a.larson,a.hanjalic}@tudelft.nl

Abstract
Spatial verification is a key step in boosting the performance of object-based image retrieval. It serves to eliminate unreliable correspondences between salient points in a
given pair of images, and is typically performed by analyzing the consistency of spatial transformations between the
image regions involved in individual correspondences. In
this paper, we consider the pairwise geometric relations between correspondences and propose a strategy to incorporate these relations at significantly reduced computational
cost, which makes it suitable for large-scale object retrieval.
In addition, we combine the information on geometric relations from both the individual correspondences and pairs
of correspondences to further improve the verification accuracy. Experimental results on three reference datasets
show that the proposed approach results in a substantial
performance improvement compared to the existing methods, without making concessions regarding computational
efficiency.

1. Introduction
In this paper we address the challenge of improving the
efficiency and reliability of image matching in an objectbased image retrieval scenario. Under object-based image
retrieval, further referred simply to as “object retrieval”,
we understand the problem of finding images that contain the same object(s) or scene elements as in the query
image, however, possibly captured under different conditions in terms of rotation, viewpoint, zoom level, occlusion or blur. Many object retrieval approaches and methods [9, 22, 13, 1, 27] have been proposed in recent literature,
largely inspired by the pioneering work of Sivic and Zisserman [24] and built on the bag-of-features (BOF) principle
for image representation. An analysis of the state-of-the-art
reveals that these approaches and methods are typically centered around the idea of detecting and verifying correspondences between salient points in a given pair of images. The
initial set of correspondences are detected based on matches

Figure 1: (a) Three correspondences found for two images,
(b) global rotation and scale relations between images encoded in the transformation of the matched salient points
from individual correspondences, (c) rotation and scale relations between vectors formed by pairwise salient points
involved in the correspondences. Transformations in cases
(b) and (c) are closely related to each other and can be used
to emphasize each other for spatial verification.

between visual feature statistics measured in different images around found salient points. The correspondence verification step then serves to filter out unreliable correspondences. This verification is typically a spatial (geometric)
one and involves geometric constraints to secure consistency of transformation of different image points. Spatial
verification is the key to achieve high precision for object
retrieval, especially when searching in large, heterogeneous
image collections [24, 21].
A common way of verifying the initial correspondences
is to apply a geometric matching. Geometric matching
can be done either explicitly, by iteratively building an optimized transformation model and fitting it to the initial
correspondences (e.g., RANSAC-based model fitting ap-

