Depth Image Enhancement Using Local Tangent Plane Approximations
Kiyoshi Matsuo†
†Hokuyo Automatic Co., LTD.

Yoshimitsu Aoki‡
‡Keio University

k-matsuo@hokuyo-aut.co.jp

aoki@elec.keio.ac.jp

Abstract
This paper describes a depth image enhancement
method for consumer RGB-D cameras. Most existing methods use the pixel-coordinates of the aligned color image.
Because the image plane generally has no relationship to
the measured surfaces, the global coordinate system is not
suitable to handle their local geometries. To improve enhancement accuracy, we use local tangent planes as local
coordinates for the measured surfaces. Our method is composed of two steps, a calculation of the local tangents and
surface reconstruction. To accurately estimate the local
tangents, we propose a color heuristic calculation and an
orientation correction using their positional relationships.
Additionally, we propose a surface reconstruction method
by ray-tracing to local tangents. In our method, accurate
depth image enhancement is achieved by using the local geometries approximated by the local tangents.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method using
synthetic and real sensor data. Our method has a high completion rate and achieves the lowest errors in noisy cases
when compared with existing techniques.

Figure 1. Top row: original sensor data (left) and aligned color
image (right) captured by a consumer RGB-D camera [2]. Bottom
row: 3D point clouds of a doll head that visualizes the difference
between the enhanced data using the Markov random field (MRF)
[6] (left) and our method (right). The granular noise was reduced
by our method.

The goal of this paper is to enhance both the accuracy
and resolution of a noisy low-resolution depth image captured by a consumer RGB-D camera. To achieve this twofold enhancement, we use the aligned high resolution color
image. Although the aligned pixel-coordinates are widely
used in this problem setting [6, 7, 12, 13, 16, 18, 20, 26, 34],
these global coordinates are not suitable for handling the geometry of the measured shapes. For example, for a depth
image, general smoothing/upsampling filters smooth the
surfaces to be parallel to the image plane [13, 18, 20, 34].
Because the image plane has no geometric relationship with
the measured surfaces, the geometries of the surfaces are
not taken into account, and are sometimes corrupted by
these filters.
In this paper, to reconstruct accurate surfaces, we introduce local tangent planes as local linear approximations of
the measured surfaces. Our method is composed of two
steps, a step that estimates the local tangent planes of the
uncorrupted surfaces from a noisy low-resolution depth im-

1. Introduction
Accurate and high-resolution shape measurement is required in many application fields such as autonomous
grasping [25], autonomous navigation [9], and building information modeling (BIM) [17]. Although three dimensional (3D) measurement has become generally available
after the release of many consumer RGB-D cameras such
⃝ DS311 [2], and
as Microsoft KinectTM [3], SoftKinetic R
ASUS Xtion PRO LIVE [1], challenges for computer vision in this area still remain [12, 16, 22, 23, 30]. Because these RGB-D cameras were primarily designed for
human interaction applications, the acquired depth images
are of low-resolution and corrupted by noise. However,
if these popular devices could capture accurate and dense
shapes, other exciting applications, such as fine-grained object recognition, precise indoor navigation, and fine manipulation, could become practical.
1

