Supervised Mid-Level Features for Word Image Representation
Albert Gordo
Computer Vision Group
Xerox Research Centre Europe
albert.gordo@xrce.xerox.com

Abstract

tated individual characters can obtain impressive accuracy if
large volumes of training data are available. However, these
approaches are not exempt from problems. First, to obtain
a high accuracy, one needs to annotate very large amounts
of words (in the order of millions) with character bounding
boxes for training purposes, as done by Bissaco et al. [5].
When limited training data is available, the recognition accuracy of these approaches is much lower [19, 20]. Then, at
testing time, one needs to localize the individual characters
of the word image, which is slow and error prone. Also,
these approaches do not lead to a final signature of the word
image that can be used for other tasks such as word image
matching and retrieval.

This paper addresses the problem of learning word image representations: given the cropped image of a word, we
are interested in finding a descriptive, robust, and compact
fixed-length representation. Machine learning techniques
can then be supplied with these representations to produce
models useful for word retrieval or recognition tasks. Although many works have focused on the machine learning
aspect once a global representation has been produced, little work has been devoted to the construction of those base
image representations: most works use standard coding and
aggregation techniques directly on top of standard computer vision features such as SIFT or HOG.
We propose to learn local mid-level features suitable for
building word image representations. These features are
learnt by leveraging character bounding box annotations
on a small set of training images. However, contrary to
other approaches that use character bounding box information, our approach does not rely on detecting the individual characters explicitly at testing time. Our local midlevel features can then be aggregated to produce a global
word image signature. When pairing these features with
the recent word attributes framework of [4], we obtain results comparable with or better than the state-of-the-art on
matching and recognition tasks using global descriptors of
only 96 dimensions.

Rather than localizing and classifying the individual
characters in a word, a new trend in word image recognition and retrieval has been to describe word images with
global representations using standard computer vision features (e.g. HOG [8], or SIFT [17] features aggregated with
bags of words [7] or Fisher vector [24] encodings) and apply different frameworks and machine learning techniques
(such as using attribute representations, metric learning, or
exemplar SVMs) on top of these global representations to
learn models to perform tasks such as recognition, retrieval,
or spotting [26, 30, 2, 1, 3, 29, 4]. The global approaches
have important advantages: they do not require that words
be annotated with character bounding boxes for training and
they do not require that the characters forming a word be
explicitly localized at testing time. They can also produce
compact signatures which are faster to compute, store and
index, or compare, while still obtaining very competitive
results in many tasks. The use of off-the-shelf computer
vision features and machine learning techniques also makes
them very attractive. Yet, one may argue that not using character bounding box annotations during training, although
very convenient, may be a limiting factor for their accuracy.

1. Introduction
In recent years there has been an increasing interest in
tasks related to text understanding in natural scenes, and,
amongst them, in word recognition: given a cropped image
of a word, one is interested in obtaining its transcription.
The most popular approaches to address this task involve
detecting and localizing individual characters in the word
image and using that information to infer the contents of
the word, using for example conditional random fields and
language priors [39, 19, 20, 5, 22]. As shown by Bissacco
et al. [5], such approaches that learn directly from the anno-

The main contribution of this paper is an approach to
construct a global word image representation that unites the
best properties of both main trends by leveraging character bounding boxes information at training time. This is
achieved by learning mid-level local features that are cor1

