Photometric Stereo with Near Point Lighting: A Solution by Mesh Deformation
Wuyuan Xie, Chengkai Dai, and Charlie C. L. Wang∗
Department of Mechanical and Automation Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Shatin, N.T., Hong Kong
cwang@mae.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
We tackle the problem of photometric stereo under near
point lighting in this paper. Different from the conventional formulation of photometric stereo that assumes parallel lighting, photometric stereo under the near point lighting condition is a nonlinear problem as the local surface
normals are coupled with its distance to the camera as well
as the light sources. To solve this non-linear problem of PS
with near point lighting, a local/global mesh deformation
approach is developed in our work to determine the position and the orientation of a facet simultaneously, where
each facet is corresponding to a pixel in the image captured
by the camera. Unlike nonlinear optimization schemes, the
mesh deformation in our approach is decoupled into an iteration of interlaced steps of local projection and global
blending. Experimental results verify that our method can
generate accurate estimation of surface shape under near
point lighting in a few iterations. Besides, this approach is
robust to errors on the positions of light sources and is easy
to be implemented.

1. Introduction
Photometric stereo (PS) [1] estimates a dense field of
normals from a set of 2D images captured by a fix camera
under different illumination conditions. In the framework
of PS, it is assumed that objects to be reconstructed all have
a Lambertian surface and are illuminated by at least three
known lighting directions. As a result, the normal vector at
each pixel can be determined from the captured image intensities uniquely (or by a least-square solution when more
than three images are taken). Such a simple principle makes
PS as an old but distinctive topic in computer vision developed for decades. Different from other approaches based
on the triangulation theorem, PS has advantage on capturing the geometry details in high frequency but has defects
in reconstructing good overall shapes in low frequency.
Therefore, PS technique has been employed to reconstruct
geometric textures together with other triangulation-based

Figure 1. An illustration for the near point lighting (NPL) model:
different from the parallel lighting, the lighting direction in NPL
varies with the change of positions.

methods (e.g., [2]). The shape distortions generated by PS
in low frequency is mainly caused by the following three
assumptions in the framework of conventional PS computation:
• First, to make the problem simple, camera sensor is
assumed to use orthogonal projection in the framework
of PS.
• Second, to avoid considering shadow and specularity
in the radiance equation, all interested points are assumed to obey Lambertian reflection ideally.
• Last but not least, light sources are assumed to be located at infinite positions so that the illumination can
be regarded as parallel lighting.
Based on these three assumptions, the lighting model of PS
problem can be linearized into a set of linear equations to be
solved by the least-square solution. A lot of effort has been
conducted in prior research to make the real condition under illumination to approach these assumptions. For example, the projection of camera sensor can be assumed as orthogonal when distance between the camera and the object
under acquisition is small. Approaches have been investigated to recover the regions with shadow and/or specularity
(e.g., [3, 4]). To achieve parallel lighting condition, existing
approaches usually place light sources far away from the
object. However, this will make the luminance attenuate

