Coarse-to-Fine Region Selection and Matching
Yanchao Yang1,2,∗ , Zhaojin Lu1,3,∗, and Ganesh Sundaramoorthi1
1

KAUST, Saudi Arabia

2

University of California, Los Angeles, USA

3

Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences

{yanchao.yang, zhaojin.lu, ganesh.sundaramoorthi}@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract

of one pixel in image 1 to multiple neighborhoods at every
pixel in image 2. While in principle this naive method is
foolproof, it is obviously computationally intractable.

We present a new approach to wide baseline matching.
We propose to use a hierarchical decomposition of the image domain and coarse-to-fine selection of regions to match.
In contrast to interest point matching methods, which sample salient regions to reduce the cost of comparing all regions in two images, our method eliminates regions systematically to achieve efficiency. One advantage of our approach is that it is not restricted to covariant salient regions,
which is too restrictive under large viewpoint and leads to
few corresponding regions. Affine invariant matching of regions in the hierarchy is achieved efficiently by a coarse-tofine search of the affine space. Experiments on two benchmark datasets shows that our method finds more correct
correspondence of the image (with fewer false alarms) than
other wide baseline methods on large viewpoint change.

Interest point matching methods (see [29] for a survey) address the computational cost of this naive approach. These methods sample interesting neighborhoods
from both images, reducing the number of comparisons
between neighborhoods. Neighborhoods that are salient
and not unlikely to match are chosen using detectors (e.g.,
[14, 17, 18, 2]). Corners and blobs are typical choices.
Constant neighborhoods, unlikely to find unique correspondence, are eliminated. Neighborhood comparison must be
invariant to possible transformations. This is accomplished
efficiently by comparing low-dimensional descriptor vectors of neighborhoods (e.g., [3, 14, 19, 2, 28, 6]) that are
invariant to basic transformations.
Interest point methods have had tremendous success.
However, existing methods are unable to find correspondence under large viewpoint change of non-planar objects
[21]. One reason for this is that detectors select only salient
regions, discarding much of the image. While the detector scale parameter may be increased so that the regions’
union covers the entire image, large regions typically fail to
find correspondence under viewpoint change of non-planar
scenes. This is because existing detectors are at most covariant to affine transformations, and large regions, which
likely undergo complex transformations, do not have corresponding detections in image 2.

1. Introduction
Determining correspondence in images of a scene under wide baseline is a fundamental problem in computer vision. Applications include 3D reconstruction, motion estimation, and recognition. Although much research has been
performed, nuisances in image formation such as viewpoint
pose difficulties to existing methods [21].
The simplest method to establish correspondence under
wide baseline uses many neighborhoods around each pixel
in both images. Image data in all neighborhoods in image
1 are matched against image data in all neighborhoods of
image 2. Best matches form pixel correspondences. One
considers a neighborhood around each pixel since pixel values are not discriminative enough to establish unique correspondence. Multiple neighborhoods around the pixel are
chosen since it is unknown a-priori what neighborhood size
to choose. Small neighborhoods are not discriminative, establishing multiple matches, while large neighborhoods are
subject to occlusions and may not find correspondence. Due
to scale changes, one must match multiple neighborhoods

In this paper, we propose a new approach to wide baseline matching that addresses the limitations of interest point
methods and the cost of the naive approach. We use a hierarchical decomposition of the first image’s domain. Large
regions are arranged at the top of the hierarchy and smaller
regions are at lower levels. The union of all regions at each
level covers the entire domain. Regions are not limited to
salient regions. The hierarchical decomposition enables efficient coarse-to-fine traversal through regions. Our method
starts with regions at the top of the hierarchy (likely most
discriminative) and proceeds to regions at lower levels of
the hierarchy, which are less discriminative but more likely
to match. A child region is only matched to the second im-

∗ Joint first authors

1

