Modeling Local and Global Deformations in Deep Learning: Epitomic
Convolution, Multiple Instance Learning, and Sliding Window Detection
George Papandreou
Google

Iasonas Kokkinos and Pierre-André Savalle
CentraleSupélec and INRIA

gpapan@google.com

[iasonas.kokkinos,pierre-andre.savalle]@ecp.fr

Abstract
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (DCNNs) achieve
invariance to domain transformations (deformations) by
using multiple ‘max-pooling’ (MP) layers. In this work
we show that alternative methods of modeling deformations can improve the accuracy and efficiency of DCNNs.
First, we introduce epitomic convolution as an alternative to the common convolution-MP cascade of DCNNs,
that comes with the same computational cost but favorable
learning properties. Second, we introduce a Multiple Instance Learning algorithm to accommodate global translation and scaling in image classification, yielding an efficient
algorithm that trains and tests a DCNN in a consistent manner. Third we develop a DCNN sliding window detector that
explicitly, but efficiently, searches over the object’s position,
scale, and aspect ratio.
We provide competitive image classification and localization results on the ImageNet dataset and object detection
results on Pascal VOC2007.

1. Introduction
Over the last few years Deep Learning has been the
method of choice for image classification [24, 26, 40, 41],
attaining even super-human performance levels [16, 20],
while a host of other works have shown that the features
learned by deep neural networks can be successfully employed in other tasks [4, 11, 31, 37, 39, 45]. The key building blocks of deep neural networks for images have been
around for many years [25]: (1) Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (DCNNs) with small receptive fields that spatially share parameters within each layer, and (2) gradual
abstraction and spatial resolution reduction along the network hierarchy, typically via max-pooling [21, 38]. The recent success of DCNNs can be mostly attributed to large
datasets, GPU computing and well-engineered choices.
In this work we aim at enriching the set of tools used
to model deformations in DCNNs, by exploiting estab-

Figure 1. Image deformations can challenge high-level vision, but
modeling their effects can lead to simple and accurate recognition
algorithms. Here we show how our object detection system performs scale, position and aspect ratio search: scaled and squeezed
versions of an image are fed to a fully convolutional DCNN, until
at some point the object can be contained in a square of fixed size.
At that point the detector’s score (shown on the right) is maximized, providing a tight bounding box around the object. Our
detector only has to consider normalized object instances.

lished computer vision techniques, such as image epitomes,
multi-scale pyramids and Procrustes analysis. We combine
these techniques with ideas from machine learning (backpropagation, multiple-instance learning), object recognition
(image patchworks, sliding window detection), and signal
processing (the à trous algorithm) and develop algorithms
of higher accuracy and/or efficiency than the ones obtained
using more standard deformation modeling tools.
In Section 2 we deal with the modeling of local deformations in image classification. For this we introduce
the epitomic image representation [23] into the setting of
DCNNs. While originally developed for generative image
modeling, we show here that the epitome data structure can
be used to train DCCNs discrimatively; we show that while
coming at the exact same computation cost, epitomic convolution allows for faster convergence during training and
higher classification accuracy when compared to its maxpooled counterpart.
In Section 3 we address to the modeling of global transformations in image classification. Our goal is to explicitly deal with object scale and position when applying
DCNNs to image classification. While a standard practice
is to fuse classification results extracted from multiple im-

