Single Image Super-resolution from Transformed Self-Exemplars
Jia-Bin Huang, Abhishek Singh, and Narendra Ahuja
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
{jbhuang1,asingh18,n-ahuja}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Self-similarity based super-resolution (SR) algorithms
are able to produce visually pleasing results without extensive training on external databases. Such algorithms exploit
the statistical prior that patches in a natural image tend to
recur within and across scales of the same image. However,
the internal dictionary obtained from the given image may
not always be sufficiently expressive to cover the textural
appearance variations in the scene. In this paper, we extend
self-similarity based SR to overcome this drawback. We expand the internal patch search space by allowing geometric
variations. We do so by explicitly localizing planes in the
scene and using the detected perspective geometry to guide
the patch search process. We also incorporate additional
affine transformations to accommodate local shape variations. We propose a compositional model to simultaneously
handle both types of transformations. We extensively evaluate the performance in both urban and natural scenes. Even
without using any external training databases, we achieve
significantly superior results on urban scenes, while maintaining comparable performance on natural scenes as other
state-of-the-art SR algorithms.

Figure 1. Examples of self-similar patterns deformed due to local
shape variation, orientation change, or perspective distortion.

tionary. For every new scale factor by which the resolution
has to be increased, or SR factor, these methods need to retrain the model using sophisticated learning algorithms on
large external datasets.
To avoid using external databases and their associated
problems, several approaches exploit internal patch redundancy for SR [10, 15, 13, 28]. These methods are based on
the fractal nature of images [3], which suggests that patches
of a natural image recur within and across scales of the same
image. An internal LR-HR patch database can be built using the scale-space pyramid of the given image itself. Internal dictionaries have been shown to contain more relevant
training patches, as compared to external dictionaries [44].
While internal statistics have been successfully exploited
for SR, in most algorithms the LR-HR patch pairs are found
by searching only for “translated” versions of patches in
the scaled down images. This effectively assumes that an
HR version of a patch appears in the same image at the
desired scale, orientation and illumination. This amounts
to assuming that the patch is planar and the images of the
different assumed occurences of the patch are taken by a
camera translating parallel to the plane of the patch. This
fronto-parallel imaging assumption is often violated due to
the non-planar shape of the patch surface, common in both
natural and man-made scenes, as well as perspective distortion. Fig. 1 shows three examples of such violations, where
self-similarity across scales will hold better if suitable geometric transformation of patches is allowed
In this paper, we propose a self-similarity driven SR algorithm that expands the internal patch search space. First,
we explicitly incorporate the 3D scene geometry by localizing planes, and use the plane parameters to estimate the
perspective deformation of recurring patches. Second, we
expand the patch search space to include affine transfor-

1. Introduction
Most modern single image super-resolution (SR) methods rely on machine learning techniques. These methods
focus on learning the relationship between low-resolution
(LR) and high-resolution (HR) image patches. A popular
class of such algorithms uses an external database of natural images as a source of LR-HR training patch pairs. Existing methods have employed various learning algorithms for
learning this LR to HR mapping, including nearest neighbor
approaches [14], manifold learning [6], dictionary learning
[41], locally linear regression [38, 33, 34], and convolutional networks [9].
However, methods that learn LR-HR mapping from external databases have certain shortcomings. The number
and type of training images required for satisfactory levels
of performance are not clear. Large scale training sets are
often required to learn a sufficiently expressive LR-HR dic1

