Exploiting Uncertainty in Regression Forests
for Accurate Camera Relocalization
Julien Valentin
University of Oxford

Matthias Nießner
Stanford University

Jamie Shotton
Microsoft Research

Andrew Fitzgibbon
Microsoft Research

Shahram Izadi
Microsoft Research

Philip Torr
University of Oxford

Abstract
Recent advances in camera relocalization use predictions from a regression forest to guide the camera pose optimization procedure. In these methods, each tree associates
one pixel with a point in the scene’s 3D world coordinate
frame. In previous work, these predictions were point estimates and the subsequent camera pose optimization implicitly assumed an isotropic distribution of these estimates. In
this paper, we train a regression forest to predict mixtures
of anisotropic 3D Gaussians and show how the predicted
uncertainties can be taken into account for continuous pose
optimization. Experiments show that our proposed method
is able to relocalize up to 40% more frames than the state
of the art.

Tree 1

Regression Forest

Tree T

…
RANSAC optimization
Rank and discard
half the hypotheses

Predicted Modes
and Uncertainties

Camera
Hypotheses

Continuous Pose
Optimization

1. Introduction and Related Work
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) systems such as [14, 15, 17, 7] and commercial systems such as
HoloLens or Project Tango demonstrate that visual SLAM
is a maturing technology. Given new measurements, visual
SLAM systems build and update a map of an unknown environment while keeping track of the position of the camera
within it. There are two predominant scenarios in which
it is usually not possible for the system to estimate a correctly updated camera pose. In the first scenario, the camera
moves significantly between consecutive frames. In such
cases, generic pose optimization routines such as ICP or
the minimization of reprojection error can get stuck in local
minima due to the non-convex nature of their energy landscapes. In the second scenario, the user acquires a map of
the environment and switches the reconstruction system off.
When the SLAM system is turned on again, it is unable to
recover the camera pose with respect to the previously acquired environment again for reasons of convergence. The
task of camera relocalization is to tackle both scenarios by
providing an estimate of the camera pose relative to an ex-

Figure 1. Camera Relocalization Pipeline. As a new frame arrives (top left), pixels are sparsely sampled (top right) and passed
down a regression forest (middle). The forest predicts a series
of candidate locations in the scene as well as the uncertainty associated with each prediction (bottom left). Given these predictions, camera pose hypotheses are robustly sampled (bottom middle) and continuously optimized over iterations of RANSAC (bottom right).

isting model, ideally from a single frame.
Camera relocalization has mainly been studied and developed for SLAM applications; however, this technology
could be applicable in a wide range of use cases. For instance, one can imagine scenarios where the user is in a
large environment (shopping mall, exhibition, etc.) and
queries the location of a destination such as ‘Exit’, ‘Mona
Lisa’, or the name of a specific shop, and takes a snapshot
of her immediate environment. Given this information, an
on-site service could precisely localize the user and guide
her to the desired destination.

