A MRF Shape Prior for Facade Parsing with Occlusions
Mateusz Koziński, Raghudeep Gadde, Sergey Zagoruyko, Guillaume Obozinski and Renaud Marlet
Université Paris-Est, LIGM (UMR CNRS 8049), ENPC, F-77455 Marne-la-Vallée, e-mail: {name.surname}@enpc.fr
Abstract

ples’: some elements are given rectangular shapes; rectangles, boundaries of which are sufﬁciently close, are aligned;
doors are inserted into the lower parts of facades. However, the set of ‘architectural principles’ is different for each
dataset and no formal way of specifying them has been proposed. Moreover, applying local corrections to a segmentation (e.g., aligning lines that are close enough) does not
necessarily yield a semantically correct segmentation.
The structural constraints can also be hard-coded in the
parsing algorithm. In the work by Cohen et al. [1] a sequence of dynamic programs (DPs) is run on an input image, each of which makes the current labeling more detailed. The ﬁrst DP operates along the vertical axis and
identiﬁes the ﬂoors. The following ones identify window
columns, the boundary between the sky and roof, the doors,
etc. However the algorithm is limited to segmentations that
assume the hierarchical structure encoded in the dynamic
programs. Besides, the approach neither enforces nor favors simultaneous alignment of shapes in two dimensions.
Teboul et al. introduced split grammars as shape priors
for facade segmentation [15]. Shape derivation with a split
grammar is analogous to string derivation in formal languages, except that the symbols correspond to rectangular
image regions and productions split them along one of the
coordinate axes. The advantage of this framework is the
simplicity and the expressive power of split grammars. The
disadvantage is that approximating the optimal segmentation requires randomly generating a large number of shapes
and keeping the best one as the ﬁnal result. Even with robust
strategies of data driven exploration of the space of grammar derivations [14, 11, 8], the method still cannot be relied
on to repeatedly produce optimal results.
Riemenschneider et al. have shown that parsing an image
with a two-dimensional grammar can be performed using a
variant of the CYK algorithm for parsing string grammars
[9]. They also introduced production rules modeling symmetry in facade layouts. However, the high computational
complexity of the algorithm makes its direct application on
the input image impractical. Instead, the authors subsample
images forming irregular grids of approximately 60 by 60
cells and run the algorithm on the subsampled images.
Koziński et al. [5] proposed a shape prior formalism

We present a new shape prior formalism for the segmentation of rectiﬁed facade images. It combines the simplicity of split grammars with unprecedented expressive power:
the capability of encoding simultaneous alignment in two
dimensions, facade occlusions and irregular boundaries between facade elements. We formulate the task of ﬁnding the
most likely image segmentation conforming to a prior of the
proposed form as a MAP-MRF problem over a 4-connected
pixel grid, and propose an efﬁcient optimization algorithm
for solving it. Our method simultaneously segments the visible and occluding objects, and recovers the structure of the
occluded facade. We demonstrate state-of-the-art results on
a number of facade segmentation datasets.

1. Introduction
The goal of facade parsing is to segment a rectiﬁed image
of a building facade into regions corresponding to architectural elements, like windows, balconies and doors. Applications of facade parsing include creating 3D models of buildings for games, thermal simulations, or architectural design.
A speciﬁcity of facade parsing as compared to general image segmentation, is that we have strong prior knowledge
on which combinations of facade elements are semantically
valid. For example, windows in a given ﬂoor are usually
aligned and a balcony needs to be adjacent to the lower part
of at least one window. We consider that the set of semantic
constraints on the layout of facade elements is speciﬁed by
the user for a given dataset. The quality of facade segmentation, as perceived by a human, suffers a lot if these semantic
constraints are not satisﬁed.

1.1. Related work
One possible approach to the problem is to enforce the
structural constraints on results of a general-purpose segmentation algorithm. Martinović et al. [7] combine results
of a Recursive Neural Network with object detections to
form unary potentials of a Markov Random Field encoding
an initial image segmentation. The initial segmentation is
modiﬁed to satisfy a number of ‘weak architectural princi1

