Segment Based 3D Object Shape Priors
Rabeeh Karimi Mahabadi, Christian Häne, Marc Pollefeys
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zürich, Switzerland
rabeehk@student.ethz.ch, {christian.haene, marc.pollefeys}@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Dense 3D reconstruction still remains a hard task for a
broad number of object classes which are not sufficiently
textured or contain transparent and reflective parts. Shape
priors are the tool of choice when the input data itself is not
descriptive enough to get a faithful reconstruction. We propose a novel shape prior formulation that splits the object
into multiple convex parts. The reconstruction problem is
posed as a volumetric multi-label segmentation. Each of the
transitions between labels is penalized with its individual
anisotropic smoothness term. This powerful formulation allows us to represent a descriptive shape prior. For the object
classes used in this paper the individual segments naturally
correspond to different semantic parts of the object. This
leads to a semantic segmentation as a side product of our
shape prior formulation. We evaluate our method on several challenging real-world datasets. Our results show that
we can resolve issues such as undesired holes and disconnected parts. Taking into account a segmentation of the free
space, we show that we are able to reconstruct concavities,
such as the interior of a mug.

Figure 1. Top: Example input image and depth map. Bottom:
Standard volumetric fusion result (left) and our result using the
proposed segment based shape prior (right).

anisotropic regularization. This leads to a very descriptive
prior, for example a tabletop is always horizontal, but has
the drawback that the object needs to be exactly aligned
with the bounding box. In this work, we propose an alternative approach to get strong priors, namely splitting the
object into multiple simpler parts which we call segments.
To motivate our work we describe the example of a table
and observe that a prior based on a single spatially homogeneous anisotropic regularization does not lead to a descriptive shape prior. First, we observe that the main surface
area on the top is horizontal and also there is large surface
area on the legs which is predominantly vertical. Hence
a prior on the surface orientation of a table should penalize those mostly observed directions less than others. In
terms of dense volumetric 3D reconstruction the main difficulties in reconstructing a table are the thin leg structures
that easily get disconnected and holes appearing in the often
texture-less top surfaces. The single anisotropic prior would
not help in either of these cases. It would penalize holes in
the top and disconnected legs less and therefore make them

1. Introduction
Despite the continuous advances in dense 3D surface reconstruction there are still many object classes which are
a challenge for current algorithms. To tackle such classes
shape priors have been proposed. One approach to shape
priors is anisotropic surface regularization based on prior
knowledge about the shape. Convex multi-label segmentation has been used in dense volumetric reconstruction to
jointly infer semantic labels and geometry [10] and to define
per object shape priors for challenging classes [9]. The first
work uses priors on the directions of transitions between
semantic classes, such as a preference of a ground ↔ building transition to be horizontal. This leads to a prior on the
shape of semantic classes, which can be weak for general
shapes, as we will see later. The latter work defines a shape
prior for a given object class by having a spatially varying
1

