Saturation-preserving Specular Reflection Separation
Yuanliu Liu † , Zejian Yuan † , Nanning Zheng† , Yang Wu ‡
†
‡
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics
Center for Frontier Science and Technology
Xi’an Jiaotong University
Nara Institute of Science and Technology
liuyuanliu88@gmail.com, {yuan.ze.jian, nnzheng}@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, yangwu@rsc.naist.jp

Abstract
Specular reflection generally decreases the saturation of
surface colors, which will be possibly confused with other
colors that have the same hue but lower saturation. Traditional methods for specular reflection separation suffer
this problem of hue-saturation ambiguity, producing oversaturated specular-free images quite often. We proposed a
two-step approach to solve this problem. In the first step, we
produce an over-saturated specular-free image by global
chromaticity propagation from specular-free pixels to highlighted ones. Then we recover the saturation based on priors of the piecewise constancy of diffuse chromaticity as
well as the spatial sparsity and smoothness of specular reflection. We achieve this through increasing the achromatic component of diffuse chromaticity, while the magnitudes
of increments are determined by linear programming under the constraints derived from the priors. Experiments on
both laboratory and natural images show that our method
can separate the specular reflection while preserving the
saturation of the underlying surface colors.

Figure 1. Specular reflection separation. (a) Input image. (b)
Ground-truth specular-free image. (c-d) The recovered specularfree image and specular reflection by our method. (e) The result of
[19]. (f) The result of [21].(g-h) The result of the first stage of our
method: global propagation of diffuse chromaticity among pixels
with the same hue.

from the specular-free regions to the isolated highlights, so
there will be residual specular reflection left in the recovered specular-free image. See the green patch in the middle
of Fig. 1 (e) for an example. Instead we propose to transfer
the chromaticity of specular-free pixels to highlighted ones
with the same hue. Since the specular reflection retains the
hue of the surface color, our global propagation can reach
highlighted pixels all over the image including those in isolated regions (e.g., the green and blue patches in the middle
of Fig 1 (g)).
When there are surface colors with the same hue but
different saturation in the same image, the less saturated
ones may be mistaken to be highlighted during hue-based
chromaticity propagation. This problem is called the huesaturation ambiguity [6]. See the right half of the ball in
Fig. 1 (h) for an example. Accordingly, these pseudo highlight regions will get higher saturations than the groundtruth in the specular-free image as shown in Fig. 1 (d)-(f).
We compensate the increments of saturation through raising the achromatic component of the diffuse chromaticity,
making sure that the recovered specular reflection is spatially sparse and smooth (as shown in Fig. 1 (d)) while the

1. Introduction
Highlights are combinations of diffuse and specular reflection components. They are often observable in dielectric
inhomogeneous objects [16]. Removing specular component benefits computer vision tasks such as image segmentation and object recognition. In addition, identifying the
specular component reveals the roughness of the surface.
In this paper, we address the problem of separating the
specular reflection from the diffuse reflection of a single
image. This is essentially an under-constrained problem.
A typical way is transferring the chromaticity of specularfree pixels to the highlighted pixels [3][19][21], which
makes the under-constrained problem solvable. Traditional
methods propagate the chromaticity between adjacent pixels [19]. These local propagations will be blocked by color discontinuities. The chromaticity cannot be transferred
1

