Constrained Planar Cuts - Object Partitioning for Point Clouds
Markus Schoeler, Jeremie Papon and Florentin Wörgötter
Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience (BCCN)
III Physikalisches Institut - Biophysik, Georg-August University of Göttingen
{mschoeler,jpapon,worgott}@gwdg.de

ples [5, 9, 15, 18].
In this work, we aim to partition objects from the bottomup using a purely geometric approach that generalizes to
most object types. This is in stark contrast to recent
learning-based methods, which achieve good performance
by training separate classifiers for each object class [9, 15].
While such methods do perform well on benchmarks, they
are severely restricted in that one must know the object class
a-priori, and they do not generalize to new objects at all.
With unsupervised methods, such as the one presented in
this work, there is no need to create new training data and
annotated ground truth, allowing them to be employed as an
off-the-shelf first step in object partitioning.
While many bottom-up approaches [8, 10, 13] have been
tested on the Princeton Segmentation Benchmark [5], none
of them are able to achieve results comparable to human
segmentations. The recent learning-free approach of Zheng
et al. [18] manages results closer to the human baseline,
but only by making strong assumptions about the underlying skeleton of objects. This means that the method does
not work for objects where skeletonization is uninformative, and thus does not generalize well to all object classes
in the benchmark.
Psycho-physical studies [2, 4] suggest that the decomposition of objects into parts is closely intertwined with local
3D concave/convex relationships. It is readily observable
that objects and object-parts tend to be isolated by concave
boundaries. Stein et al. [14] used this idea in a bottomup segmentation algorithm LCCP, which showed state-ofthe-art performance in several popular object segmentation
benchmarks. In that work, they make a strong assumption
about local concavities, namely, that they completely isolate objects. While effective for object segmentation, this is
problematic for more subtle part-segmentation where interpart connections may not be strongly (and/or completely)
concave. For instance, in Fig.1, the shoulder only has concave connections on the underside, so a strict partitioning
criterion which only cuts concave edges will not separate
the arm from the torso.
While it is clear that a strict partitioning will often fail

Abstract
While humans can easily separate unknown objects
into meaningful parts, recent segmentation methods can
only achieve similar partitionings by training on humanannotated ground-truth data. Here we introduce a bottomup method for segmenting 3D point clouds into functional
parts which does not require supervision and achieves
equally good results. Our method uses local concavities
as an indicator for inter-part boundaries. We show that this
criterion is efficient to compute and generalizes well across
different object classes. The algorithm employs a novel locally constrained geometrical boundary model which proposes greedy cuts through a local concavity graph. Only
planar cuts are considered and evaluated using a cost function, which rewards cuts orthogonal to concave edges. Additionally, a local clustering constraint is applied to ensure the partitioning only affects relevant locally concave
regions. We evaluate our algorithm on recordings from
an RGB-D camera as well as the Princeton Segmentation
Benchmark, using a fixed set of parameters across all object classes. This stands in stark contrast to most reported
results which require either knowing the number of parts
or annotated ground-truth for learning. Our approach outperforms all existing bottom-up methods (reducing the gap
to human performance by up to 50 %) and achieves scores
similar to top-down data-driven approaches.

1. Introduction and State-of-the-Art
Segmentation of 3D objects into functional parts - forming a visual hierarchy - is a fundamental task in computer vision. Visual hierarchies are essential for many higher level
tasks such as activity recognition [6, 12], semantic segmentation [1, 17], object detection [7], and human pose recognition [3, 16]. Nevertheless, part segmentation, particularly
of 3D point clouds, remains an open area of research - as
demonstrated by the inability of state-of-the-art methods to
match human performance on existing benchmarks without
excessive fitting to particular ground-truth training exam1

