Co-saliency Detection via Looking Deep and Wide
Dingwen Zhang1, Junwei Han1*, Chao Li1 and Jingdong Wang2
1
Northwestern Polytechnical University, P.R. China
2
Microsoft Research, P.R. China
{zhangdingwen2006yyy,junweihan2010,lllcho1314}@gmail.com, jingdw@microsoft.com

Abstract
With the goal of effectively identifying common and
salient objects in a group of relevant images, co-saliency
detection has become essential for many applications such
as video foreground extraction, surveillance, image
retrieval, and image annotation. In this paper, we propose
a unified co-saliency detection framework by introducing
two novel insights: 1) looking deep to transfer higher-level
representations by using the convolutional neural network
with additional adaptive layers could better reflect the
properties of the co-salient objects, especially their
consistency among the image group; 2) looking wide to
take advantage of the visually similar neighbors beyond a
certain image group could effectively suppress the
influence of the common background regions when
formulating the intra-group consistency. In the proposed
framework, the wide and deep information are explored for
the object proposal windows extracted in each image, and
the co-saliency scores are calculated by integrating the
intra-image contrast and intra-group consistency via a
principled Bayesian formulation. Finally the window-level
co-saliency scores are converted to the superpixel-level
co-saliency maps through a foreground region agreement
strategy. Comprehensive experiments on two benchmark
datasets have demonstrated the consistent performance
gain of the proposed approach.1

1. Introduction
With the growing popularity of photo-sharing website
like Flickr and Facebook, it has been found that people love
taking photographs and there is a rich collection of related
pictures sharing the common foreground regions of same
object or event [1]. Humans have an extraordinary ability to
rapidly scan such a collection of related images or fames
and fixate their attention on the most valuable information
(i.e. the co-salient regions). According to [2], the humans’
fixation ability can be viewed as visual co-attention which
is usually driven by bottom-up visual co-saliency. Thus,
with the goal of effectively identifying common and salient
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1: Examples illustrating the motivation of looking deep
and wide for co-saliency detection. The images in the same row
belong to the same group, while the images in different rows are
cross different groups. 1) The co-salient objects in an image
group share different low-level features, such as colors, textures,
and some local descriptors, are more consistency in higher-level
concepts; 2) The images cross different groups share similar
backgrounds, which is useful to suppress the common background
in one image group.

objects among images within a same group, co-saliency
detection has emerged to be an interesting research topic in
recent years. Compared with traditional saliency detection
[3-9], co-saliency detection additionally explore the mutual
information among multiple images/frames. Thus it can
provide more useful information and generate more precise
prediction for real-world applications, such as segmenting
out common objects [10, 11], capturing informative image
structures for image matching [12, 13], or discovering
human actions and poses in video sequences [14, 15].
In order to detect co-saliency precisely, one needs to
solve two key problems: i) extract effective features to
represent the image and, ii) explore useful information to
formulate the properties of the co-salient regions over the
extracted features. Inspired by the traditional saliency
detection algorithms, a variety of hand-crafted features,
such as the texture descriptors [16], color histogram [2, 17],
and Gabor filter [18], are applied in the existing co-saliency
detection approaches. As illustrated in [2, 16], these
low-level features can only work with the assumption that
the co-salient regions or objects should exhibit high
similarity with respect to these features. However, this
assumption is neither reasonable in the co-saliency datasets
nor in the real-world images, because this kind of low-level

