Scene Classification with Semantic Fisher Vectors
Mandar Dixit† , Si Chen† , Dashan Gao‡ , Nikhil Rasiwasia§ and Nuno Vasconcelos†
†
University of California, San Diego
‡
Qualcomm Inc., San Diego
§
SnapDeal.com, India
{mdixit, sic046, nvasconcelos}@ucsd.edu, dgao@qti.qualcomm.com,
nikhil.rasiwasia@gmail.com

Abstract
With the help of a convolutional neural network (CNN)
trained to recognize objects, a scene image is represented
as a bag of semantics (BoS). This involves classifying image patches using the network and considering the class
posterior probability vectors as locally extracted semantic
descriptors. The image BoS is summarized using a Fisher
vector (FV) embedding that exploits the properties of the
space of these descriptors. The resulting representation is
referred to as a semantic Fisher vector. Two implementations of a semantic FV are investigated. First involves modeling the BoS with a Dirichlet Mixture and computing the
Fisher gradients for this model. Due to the difficulty of mixture modeling on a non-Euclidean probability simplex, this
approach is shown to be unsuccessful. A second implementation is derived using the interpretation of semantic descriptors as parameters of a multinomial distribution. Like
the parameters of any exponential family, these can be projected into their natural parameter space. For a CNN, this
is shown equivalent to using inputs of its soft-max layer as
patch descriptors. A semantic FV is then computed as a
Gaussian Mixture FV in the space of these natural parameters. This representation is shown to outperform other alternatives such as FVs of features from the intermediate CNN
layers or a classifier obtained by adapting (fine-tuning) the
CNN. The proposed FV represents an embedding for object classification probabilities. As an image representation, therefore, it is complementary to the features obtained
from a scene classification CNN. A combination of the two
representations is shown to achieve state-of-the-art results
on MIT Indoor scenes and SUN datasets.

1. Introduction
Natural scene classification is a challenging problem for
computer vision, since most scenes are collections of entities (e.g. objects) organized in a highly variable layout.
This high variability in appearance has made flexible visual representations quite popular for this problem. Many

works have proposed to represent scene images as orderless
collections, or “bags,” of locally extracted visual features,
such as SIFT or HoG [23, 5]. This is known as the bag-offeatures (BoF) representation. For the purpose of classification, these features are pooled into an invariant image representation known as the Fisher vector (FV) [12, 25], which
is then used for discriminant learning. Until very recently,
bag-of-SIFT FV achieved state-of-the-art results for scene
classification [30].
Recently, there has been much excitement about alternative image representations, learned with convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) [19], which have demonstrated
impressive results on large scale object recognition [16].
This has prompted many researchers to extend CNNs to
problems such as action recognition [15], object localization [9], scene classification [10, 39] and domain adaptation [8]. Current multi-layer CNNs can be decomposed
into a first stage of convolutional layers, a second fullyconnected stage, and a final classification stage. The convolutional layers perform pixel wise transformations, followed
by localized pooling, and can be thought of as extractors of
visual features. Hence, the convolutional layer outputs are
a BoF representation. The fully connected layers then map
these features into a vector amenable to linear classification.
This is the CNN analog of a Fisher vector mapping.
Beyond SIFT Fisher vectors and CNN layers, there exists a different class of image mappings known as semantic
representations. These mappings require vectors of classifier outputs, or semantic descriptors, extracted from an
image. Several authors have argued for the potential of
such representations [35, 27, 33, 17, 18, 3, 20]. For example, semantic representations have been used to describe
objects by their attributes [18], represent scenes as collections of objects [20] and capture contextual relations between classes [29]. For some visual tasks, such as hashing
or large scale retrieval, a global semantic descriptor is usually preferred [34, 4]. Proposals for scene classification,
on the other hand, tend to rely on a collection of locally extracted semantic image descriptors, which we refer to as bag
of semantics (BoS) [33, 17, 20]. While a BoS based scene
representation has outperformed low-dimensional BoF rep-

