Deep Neural Networks are Easily Fooled:
High Confidence Predictions for Unrecognizable Images
Anh Nguyen
University of Wyoming

Jason Yosinski
Cornell University

Jeff Clune
University of Wyoming

anguyen8@uwyo.edu

yosinski@cs.cornell.edu

jeffclune@uwyo.edu

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have recently been
achieving state-of-the-art performance on a variety of
pattern-recognition tasks, most notably visual classification
problems. Given that DNNs are now able to classify objects
in images with near-human-level performance, questions
naturally arise as to what differences remain between computer and human vision. A recent study [30] revealed that
changing an image (e.g. of a lion) in a way imperceptible to
humans can cause a DNN to label the image as something
else entirely (e.g. mislabeling a lion a library). Here we
show a related result: it is easy to produce images that are
completely unrecognizable to humans, but that state-of-theart DNNs believe to be recognizable objects with 99.99%
confidence (e.g. labeling with certainty that white noise
static is a lion). Specifically, we take convolutional neural networks trained to perform well on either the ImageNet
or MNIST datasets and then find images with evolutionary
algorithms or gradient ascent that DNNs label with high
confidence as belonging to each dataset class. It is possible to produce images totally unrecognizable to human eyes
that DNNs believe with near certainty are familiar objects,
which we call “fooling images” (more generally, fooling examples). Our results shed light on interesting differences
between human vision and current DNNs, and raise questions about the generality of DNN computer vision.

Figure 1. Evolved images that are unrecognizable to humans,
but that state-of-the-art DNNs trained on ImageNet believe with
≥ 99.6% certainty to be a familiar object. This result highlights
differences between how DNNs and humans recognize objects.
Images are either directly (top) or indirectly (bottom) encoded.

1. Introduction

A recent study revealed a major difference between DNN
and human vision [30]. Changing an image, originally correctly classified (e.g. as a lion), in a way imperceptible to
human eyes, can cause a DNN to label the image as something else entirely (e.g. mislabeling a lion a library).
In this paper, we show another way that DNN and human
vision differ: It is easy to produce images that are completely unrecognizable to humans (Fig. 1), but that state-ofthe-art DNNs believe to be recognizable objects with over
99% confidence (e.g. labeling with certainty that TV static

Deep neural networks (DNNs) learn hierarchical layers of representation from sensory input in order to perform pattern recognition [2, 14]. Recently, these deep architectures have demonstrated impressive, state-of-the-art,
and sometimes human-competitive results on many pattern
recognition tasks, especially vision classification problems
[16, 7, 31, 17]. Given the near-human ability of DNNs to
classify visual objects, questions arise as to what differences
remain between computer and human vision.
1

