Temporally Coherent Interpretations for Long Videos Using Pattern Theory
Fillipe Souza, Sudeep Sarkar
University of South Florida
Tampa, FL USA

Anuj Srivastava
Florida State University
Tallahassee, FL USA

Jingyong Su
Texas Tech University
Lubbock, TX USA

fillipe@mail.usf.edu,sarkar@cse.usf.edu

anuj@stat.fsu.edu

jingyong.su@ttu.edu

Abstract

main advantage of this framework is that one can naturally
associate probability models with such graphs, thus providing statistical interpretations to solutions. Also, one can use
both prior knowledge and the current data to deduce optimal interpretations in a coherent way. The main limitation
in the current graph-theoretical solutions has been the rigidity of graph structures. In most cases, the graph geometries
(connectivities, neighborhoods, etc) are pre-determined and
only the node values are allowed to be variable. Even when
the edges are allowed to change, they are usually based on a
simple thresholding, or decisions that are spatio-temporally
local, i.e. isolated from other nodes.

Graph-theoretical methods have successfully provided
semantic and structural interpretations of images and
videos. A recent paper introduced a pattern-theoretic approach that allows construction of flexible graphs for representing interactions of actors with objects and inference
is accomplished by an efficient annealing algorithm. Actions and objects are termed generators and their interactions are termed bonds; together they form high-probability
configurations, or interpretations, of observed scenes. This
work and other structural methods have generally been limited to analyzing short videos involving isolated actions.
Here we provide an extension that uses additional temporal
bonds across individual actions to enable semantic interpretations of longer videos. Longer temporal connections
improve scene interpretations as they help discard (temporally) local solutions in favor of globally superior ones.
Using this extension, we demonstrate improvements in understanding longer videos, compared to individual interpretations of non-overlapping time segments. We verified
the success of our approach by generating interpretations
for more than 700 video segments from the YouCook data
set, with intricate videos that exhibit cluttered background,
scenarios of occlusion, viewpoint variations and changing
conditions of illumination. Interpretations for long video
segments were able to yield performance increases of about
70% and, in addition, proved to be more robust to different
severe scenarios of classification errors.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Overview of the pattern theoretic framework proposed in [1]. (a) shows basic elements of this framework:
a generator space containing basic ontological elements of
representation called generators, machine learning-based
concept classifiers and prior knowledge in terms of frequency tables of concept co-occurrences. (b) shows a pattern theoretic video interpretation that is a combination of
generators. Connections between generators that represent
ontological concepts indicate occurrence of certain interactions. Features are connected to ontological generators to
support their semantic value in the interpretation.

1. Introduction
The problem of understanding activities in video data
and providing meaningful semantic interpretations is very
important. In recent years, a variety of solutions have been
proposed and, among other ideas, the techniques based on
encoding scene structure using graphs have shown promise
in this problem area. These approaches represent items of
interest – objects, actors, actions, etc. – as nodes in graphs
and ascertain their interactions through graph edges. The

Souza et al. [1] recently introduced a flexible graphtheoretical approach that is based on Grenander’s pattern
theory [2]. Here the flexibility comes from the fact that both
1

