Multispectral Pedestrian Detection: Benchmark Dataset and Baseline
Soonmin Hwang Jaesik Park Namil Kim Yukyung Choi In So Kweon
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Republic of Korea
[smhwang,jspark,nikim,ykchoi]@rcv.kaist.ac.kr, iskweon77@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
With the increasing interest in pedestrian detection,
pedestrian datasets have also been the subject of research
in the past decades. However, most existing datasets focus
on a color channel, while a thermal channel is helpful for
detection even in a dark environment. With this in mind,
we propose a multispectral pedestrian dataset which provides well aligned color-thermal image pairs, captured by
beam splitter-based special hardware. The color-thermal
dataset is as large as previous color-based datasets and
provides dense annotations including temporal correspondences. With this dataset, we introduce multispectral ACF,
which is an extension of aggregated channel features (ACF)
to simultaneously handle color-thermal image pairs. Multispectral ACF reduces the average miss rate of ACF by 15%,
and achieves another breakthrough in the pedestrian detection task.

1. Introduction
Pedestrian detection is an active research area in the field
of computer vision, since it is an essential and significant
task for a surveillance or tracking system [6, 14, 24, 27, 28],
as well as for pedestrian safety [9, 13, 15]. Although many
researchers have studied various methods for a long time,
pedestrian detection is still regarded as a challenging problem, limited by tiny and occluded appearances, cluttered
backgrounds, and bad visibility at night. In particular, even
though color cameras have difficulty getting useful information at night, most of the current pedestrian detectors are
based on color images.
To address these challenges for automobile applications,
generally two types of infrared sensors are used: near infrared (0.75 ∼ 1.3µm) cameras or long-wavelength infrared
(7.5 ∼ 13µm, also known as the thermal band) cameras.
Physically, pedestrians are more visible in thermal cameras than in near infrared cameras. This is because longwavelength infrared cameras are more robust to the interferences produced by headlights and traffic signals. Even more
importantly, a human body radiates in the long-wavelength

Figure 1. Examples of our multispectral pedestrian dataset. It has
aligned pair of color (left column) and thermal (right column) images captured from day/night traffic scenes. The dense annotations
provided with the dataset such as green, yellow, and red boxes
indicate no-occlusion, partial occlusion, and heavy occlusion respectively. Images are cropped for better visualization.

infrared light wavelength of 9.3µm [25], which supports the
suitability of thermal cameras for capturing humans.
Based on these facts, in this paper we introduce a multispectral pedestrian dataset1 which provides thermal image sequences of regular traffic scenes as well as color image sequences. This work is motivated by other computer
vision datasets such as Caltech 101 [19], Oxford buildings [23], Caltech pedestrian [10], and so on. These datasets
have been contributed to stimulate their respective research
fields. Likewise, our multispectral dataset designed to sup1 Our multispectral pedestrian dataset is available online:
http://rcv.kaist.ac.kr/multispectral-pedestrian/

1

