Learning Multiple Visual Tasks while Discovering their Structure

Carlo Ciliberto, Lorenzo Rosasco and Silvia Villa
Laboratory for Computational and Statistical Learning, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Genova, Italy
Poggio Lab, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA
DIBRIS, Universita’ degli studi di Genova, Genoa, Italy
cciliber@mit.edu, lrosasco@mit.edu, silvia.villa@iit.it

Abstract
Multi-task learning is a natural approach for computer
vision applications that require the simultaneous solution of
several distinct but related problems, e.g. object detection,
classification, tracking of multiple agents, or denoising, to
name a few. The key idea is that exploring task relatedness
(structure) can lead to improved performances.
In this paper, we propose and study a novel sparse, nonparametric approach exploiting the theory of Reproducing
Kernel Hilbert Spaces for vector-valued functions. We develop a suitable regularization framework which can be formulated as a convex optimization problem, and is provably
solvable using an alternating minimization approach. Empirical tests show that the proposed method compares favorably to state of the art techniques and further allows to
recover interpretable structures, a problem of interest in its
own right.

1. Introduction
Several problems in computer vision and image processing, such as object detection/classification, image denoising, inpainting etc., require solving multiple learning tasks
at the same time. In such settings a natural question is to ask
whether it could be beneficial to solve all the tasks jointly,
rather than separately. This idea is at the basis of the field
of multi-task learning, where the joint solution of different problems has the potential to exploit tasks relatedness
(structure) to improve learning. Indeed, when knowledge
about task relatedness is available, it can be profitably incorporated in multi-task learning approaches for example
by designing suitable embedding/coding schemes, kernels
or regularizers, see [20, 10, 1, 11, 19].
The more interesting case, when knowledge about the
tasks structure is not known a priori, has been the subject
of recent studies. Largely influenced by the success of spar-

sity based methods, a common approach has been that of
considering linear models for each task coupled with suitable parameterization/penalization enforcing task relatedness, for example encouraging the selection of features simultaneously important for all tasks [2] or for specific subgroups of related tasks [13, 14, 29, 15, 12, 16]. Other linear
methods adopt hierarchical priors or greedy approaches to
recover the taxonomy of tasks [22, 24]. A different line
of research has been devoted to the development of nonlinear/non-parametric approaches using kernel methods –
either from a Gaussian process [1, 29] or a regularization
perspective [1, 8].
This paper follows this last line of research, tackling
in particular two issues only partially addressed in previous works. The first is the development of a regularization
framework to learn and exploit the tasks structure, which
is not only important for prediction, but also for interpretation. Towards this end, we propose and study a family
of matrix-valued reproducing kernels, parametrized so to
enforce sparse relations among tasks. A novel algorithm
dubbed Sparse Kernel MTL is then proposed considering
a Tikhonov regularization approach. The second contribution is to provide a sound computational framework to
solve the corresponding minimization problem. While we
follow a fairly standard alternating minimization approach,
unlike most previous work we can exploit results in convex optimization to prove the convergence of the considered procedure. The latter has an interesting interpretation
where supervised and unsupervised learning steps are alternated: first, given a structure, multiple tasks are learned
jointly, then the structure is updated. We support the proposed method with an experimental analysis both on synthetic and real data, including classification and detection
datasets. The obtained results show that Sparse Kernel MTL
can achieve state of the art performances while unveiling the
structure describing tasks relatedness.
The paper is organized as follows: in Sec. 2 we provide
some background and notation in order to motivate and in-

