Fisher Vectors Meet Neural Networks: A Hybrid Classification Architecture
Florent Perronnin and Diane Larlus
Computer Vision Group, Xerox Research Centre Europe

Abstract

training data, their high computational cost which makes
training on GPUs [28] or on very large clusters [29] a necessity, or their lack of geometric invariance [17]. This explains why the FV is still very competitive for certain tasks
– see e.g. the winning system [19] at the Fine-Grained Visual Competition 2013 [3]. Hence, several works [47, 49]
have started exploring the combination of FVs and CNNs.
Our first contribution is a novel hybrid architecture that
combines the best of both worlds – see Fig. 1. Its first layers are unsupervised and involve the computation and dimensionality reduction of high-dimensional FVs. This is
followed by a set of supervised fully connected Neural Network (NN) layers – akin to a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP)
– trained through back-propagation.
The motivation behind our hybrid architecture is threefold. First, since the convolutional layers of the CNN share
much with the coding/aggregation steps of the FV (see section 3.3), we wanted to understand whether FVs were competitive with representations learned by the convolutional
layers of the CNN. Our experiments show that the accuracy
of our architecture comes close to that of the CNN model of
Krizhevsky et al. [28]. Second, while FVs are designed to
work well with linear classifiers (because they correspond
to the explicit feature map of the Fisher Kernel), we wanted
to understand whether FV classification could be improved
with non-linear classifiers. Our work is the first to provide
a positive answer thus showing that much still needs to be
learned about the FV. Third, in speech recognition MLPs on
top of “handcrafted” features were the state-of-the-art until
recently [55, 9]. Hence, we wanted to understand how such
a combination performed on image classification.
Because it is unpractical to collect large amounts of labeled data for each new task, we are also interested in transferring the mid-level features learned by our architecture.
Transferring features derived from image classifiers either
to different class sets or even to new tasks (e.g. image retrieval or object detection) has been a very active research
topic [51, 50, 18, 13, 34, 1, 16]. Our second contribution is
to show that the mid-level features derived from our hybrid
architecture are competitive with those derived from CNNs.
The remainder of the article is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews related works. In section 3 we describe the

Fisher Vectors (FV) and Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNN) are two image classification pipelines with different
strengths. While CNNs have shown superior accuracy on
a number of classification tasks, FV classifiers are typically
less costly to train and evaluate. We propose a hybrid architecture that combines their strengths: the first unsupervised
layers rely on the FV while the subsequent fully-connected
supervised layers are trained with back-propagation. We
show experimentally that this hybrid architecture significantly outperforms standard FV systems without incurring
the high cost that comes with CNNs. We also derive competitive mid-level features from our architecture that are readily applicable to other class sets and even to new tasks.

1. Introduction
The goal of image classification is to tag an image with
one or multiple class names based on its content. Our primary focus in this work is on learning classifiers on a large
scale, i.e. when many classes and images are involved. This
topic has received much attention [10, 53, 43, 31, 28, 47, 11]
thanks in large part to the release of datasets such as ImageNet [12] and to the organization of public competitions
such as the ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge (ILSVRC) [42] since 2010.
In 2010-2011, the leading approaches to ILSVRC [43,
31] were based on the Fisher Vector [38, 39] (FV) or the
closely related Super Vector (SV) [57]. These pipelines involve extracting local descriptors, encoding them with highorder statistics, aggregating them, and feeding them to kernel classifiers (e.g. SVMs). However, in 2012 it was shown
that Convolutional Neural Networks [30] (CNNs) trained in
a supervised fashion with large amounts of labeled data outperformed the FV [28]. CNNs are feed-forward architectures involving multiple computational layers that alternate
linear operations such as convolutions and non-linear operations such as max-pooling. Since then CNNs have consistently led the classification task at ILSVRC [28, 56, 46, 48].
Despite their success, deep architectures come with challenges. This includes the requirement for large amounts of
1

