Fast and Accurate Image Upscaling with Super-Resolution Forests
Samuel Schulter†

Christian Leistner‡

†

Graz University of Technology
Institute for Computer Graphics and Vision
{schulter,bischof}@icg.tugraz.at

Horst Bischof†
‡

Microsoft Photogrammetry
Austria

christian.leistner@microsoft.com

Abstract
The aim of single image super-resolution is to reconstruct a high-resolution image from a single low-resolution
input. Although the task is ill-posed it can be seen as finding a non-linear mapping from a low to high-dimensional
space. Recent methods that rely on both neighborhood embedding and sparse-coding have led to tremendous quality
improvements. Yet, many of the previous approaches are
hard to apply in practice because they are either too slow
or demand tedious parameter tweaks. In this paper, we propose to directly map from low to high-resolution patches
using random forests. We show the close relation of previous work on single image super-resolution to locally linear regression and demonstrate how random forests nicely
fit into this framework. During training the trees, we optimize a novel and effective regularized objective that not only
operates on the output space but also on the input space,
which especially suits the regression task. During inference, our method comprises the same well-known computational efficiency that has made random forests popular for
many computer vision problems. In the experimental part,
we demonstrate on standard benchmarks for single image
super-resolution that our approach yields highly accurate
state-of-the-art results, while being fast in both training and
evaluation.

1. Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SISR) [18, 22] is an important computer vision problem with many interesting applications, ranging from medical and astronomical imaging
to law enforcement. The task in SISR is to generate a visually pleasing high-resolution output from a single lowresolution input image. Although the problem is inherently
ambiguous and ill-posed, simple linear, bicubic or Lanzcos
interpolations [15] are often used to reconstruct the highresolution image. These methods are extremely fast but typically yield poor results as they rely on simple smoothness
assumptions that are rarely fulfilled in real images.

(a) Original

(b) Bicubic: 38.33, 4.61

(c) BPJDL [23]: 40.79, 4.57

(d) RFL: 41.55, 5.77

Figure 1: Our super-resolution approach (RFL) compares
favorably with related work (upscaling factor is 3). The values define the PSNR and IFC scores, respectively.

More powerful methods rely on statistical image priors [17, 18] or use sophisticated machine learning techniques [14, 37] to learn a mapping from low- to highresolution patches. Among the best performing algorithms
are sparse-coding or dictionary learning approaches, which
assume that natural patches can be represented using sparse
activations of dictionary atoms. In particular, coupled dictionary learning approaches [35, 38, 39] achieved state-ofthe-art results for SISR. Recently, Timofte et al . [32] highlighted the computational bottlenecks of these methods and
proposed to replace the single dictionary with many smaller
ones, thus avoiding the costly sparse-coding step during inference. This leads to a vast computational speed-up while
keeping the same accuracy as previous methods.

