3D ShapeNets: A Deep Representation for Volumetric Shapes
Zhirong Wu† Shuran Song† Aditya Khosla‡ Fisher Yu† Linguang Zhang† Xiaoou Tang Jianxiong Xiao†
†

‡
Princeton University
Chinese University of Hong Kong
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Input Depth Map
(back of a sofa)

Abstract
3D shape is a crucial but heavily underutilized cue in today’s computer vision systems, mostly due to the lack of a
good generic shape representation. With the recent availability of inexpensive 2.5D depth sensors (e.g. Microsoft
Kinect), it is becoming increasingly important to have a
powerful 3D shape representation in the loop. Apart from
category recognition, recovering full 3D shapes from viewbased 2.5D depth maps is also a critical part of visual understanding. To this end, we propose to represent a geometric 3D shape as a probability distribution of binary variables on a 3D voxel grid, using a Convolutional Deep Belief
Network. Our model, 3D ShapeNets, learns the distribution
of complex 3D shapes across different object categories and
arbitrary poses from raw CAD data, and discovers hierarchical compositional part representation automatically. It
naturally supports joint object recognition and shape completion from 2.5D depth maps, and it enables active object
recognition through view planning. To train our 3D deep
learning model, we construct ModelNet – a large- scale 3D
CAD model dataset. Extensive experiments show that our
3D deep representation enables significant performance improvement over the- state- of- the- arts in a variety of tasks.

Volumetric
Representation

3D ShapeNets
sofa?
dresser?
bathtub?

Shape Completion

Next-Best-View
Recognition
http://3DShapeNets.cs.princeton.edu

Figure 1: Usages of 3D ShapeNets. Given a depth map
of an object, we convert it into a volumetric representation
and identify the observed surface, free space and occluded
space. 3D ShapeNets can recognize object category, complete full 3D shape, and predict the next best view if the initial recognition is uncertain. Finally, 3D ShapeNets can integrate new views to recognize object jointly with all views.

Intel RealSense, Google Project Tango, and Apple PrimeSense, has led to a renewed interest in 2.5D object recognition from depth maps (e.g. Sliding Shapes [30]). Because
the depth from these sensors is very reliable, 3D shape can
play a more important role in a recognition pipeline. As
a result, it is becoming increasingly important to have a
strong 3D shape representation in modern computer vision
systems.
Apart from category recognition, another natural and
challenging task for recognition is shape completion. Given
a 2.5D depth map of an object from one view, what are the
possible 3D structures behind it? For example, humans do
not need to see the legs of a table to know that they are there
and potentially what they might look like behind the visible
surface. Similarly, even though we may see a coffee mug
from its side, we know that it would have empty space in
the middle, and a handle on the side.
In this paper, we study generic shape representation

1. Introduction
Since the establishment of computer vision as a field five
decades ago, 3D geometric shape has been considered to
be one of the most important cues in object recognition.
Even though there are many theories about 3D representation (e.g. [5, 22]), the success of 3D-based methods has
largely been limited to instance recognition (e.g. modelbased keypoint matching to nearest neighbors [24, 31]). For
object category recognition, 3D shape is not used in any
state-of-the-art recognition methods (e.g. [11, 19]), mostly
due to the lack of a good generic representation for 3D geometric shapes. Furthermore, the recent availability of inexpensive 2.5D depth sensors, such as the Microsoft Kinect,
† This work was done when Zhirong Wu was a VSRC visiting student
at Princeton University.

1

