Discriminative and Consistent Similarities
in Instance-Level Multiple Instance Learning

1

Mohammad Rastegari1 , Hannaneh Hajishirzi2 , Ali Farhadi2,3
University of Maryland, 2 University of Wasington, 3 Allen Institute for AI
mrastega@cs.umd.edu, hannaneh,ali@washington.edu

Not discrim

+	
  

Abstract
In this paper we present a bottom-up method to instancelevel Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) that learns to discover positive instances with globally constrained reasoning about local pairwise similarities. We discover positive
instances by optimizing for a ranking such that positive (top
rank) instances are highly and consistently similar to each
other and dissimilar to negative instances. Our approach
takes advantage of a discriminative notion of pairwise similarity coupled with a structural cue in the form of a consistency metric that measures the quality of each similarity.
We learn a similarity function for every pair of instances
in positive bags by how similarly they differ from instances
in negative bags, the only certain labels in MIL. Our experiments demonstrate that our method consistently outperforms state-of-the-art MIL methods both at bag-level and
instance-level predictions in standard benchmarks, image
category recognition, and text categorization datasets.

inative

+	
  

_
Similarity
Pattern

+	
  

Similarity
Pattern

+	
  

_
+	
  

Not co

_

_	
  

nsisten
t

Figure 1. Discriminative and Consistent Similarities are shown by
green cliques. Orange similarities are consistent but not discriminative (similar to negatives). Purple similarity is discriminative
but not consistent.

soning where most methods either use standard similarity
functions (e.g., [48]) or learn a global similarity function
for all instances (e.g., [43]). Standard similarity functions
are not necessarily discriminative (orange dashed links in
Fig. 1) and cannot discover common properties among positive instances. Globally learned similarity functions cannot
encode different types of similarities that tie together positive instances within groups (Fig. 1).
In this paper, we introduce a new method for the problem of instance-level MIL with globally-constrained reasoning about local pairwise discriminative similarities. We
introduce a novel approach that learns similarity functions
specific to each instance and reasons about the underlying structure of similarities between positive instances using our notion of consistent similarities (Green cliques in
Fig. 1). We introduce a discriminative notion of similarity that enables learning a similarity function for each pair
of instances in positive bags (similarity patterns in Fig. 1).
Typically, learning a similarity function requires training labels for similar instances. However, instance-level labels
are not available in MIL. We use negative bag labels as the
only certain labels in MIL to learn our discriminative similarity function. Instances in positive bags are similar if they
are similarly different form instances in negative bags.
Pairwise similarities are not always transitive and can be

1. Introduction
Multiple-instance learning (MIL) [13] addresses a variation of classification problems where complete labels of
training examples are not available. In the MIL setup, training labels are assigned to bags of instances rather than individual instances. In most standard MIL setups, a bag is
positive if it contains at least one positive instance, and is
negative if all of its instances are negative. The standard
task in MIL is to classify unknown bags of instances (e.g.,
[31, 48]). However, several application domains require
instance-level predictions (e.g., [43]). For example, in image segmentation (instances are superpixels, bags are images) the main goal is to find the exact regions of an image
that correspond to the objects of interest.
Instance-level MIL has been approached either by a
complex joint optimization over bag and instance classifiers (e.g., [1]) or by identifying positive instances followed
by bag classification. Latter involves similarity-based rea1

