Ontological Supervision for Fine Grained Classification of Street View
Storefronts
Yair Movshovitz-Attias* , Qian Yu† , Martin C. Stumpe† , Vinay Shet† , Sacha Arnoud† , Liron Yatziv†
*

†

Carnegie Mellon University
yair@cs.cmu.edu

Google

{qyu,mstumpe,vinayshet,sacha,lirony}@google.com

Abstract
Modern search engines receive large numbers of business related, local aware queries. Such queries are best
answered using accurate, up-to-date, business listings, that
contain representations of business categories. Creating
such listings is a challenging task as businesses often
change hands or close down. For businesses with street
side locations one can leverage the abundance of street
level imagery, such as Google Street View, to automate the
process. However, while data is abundant, labeled data is
not; the limiting factor is creation of large scale labeled
training data. In this work, we utilize an ontology of geographical concepts to automatically propagate business
category information and create a large, multi label, training dataset for fine grained storefront classification. Our
learner, which is based on the GoogLeNet/Inception Deep
Convolutional Network architecture and classifies 208 categories, achieves human level accuracy.

Figure 1. The multi label nature of business classification is clear
in the image on the left; the main function of this establishment is
to sell fuel, but it also serves as a convenience store. The remaining
images show the fine grained differences one expects to find in
businesses. The shop in the middle image is a grocery store, the
one on the right sells plumbing supplies; visually they are similar.

The turnover rate makes a compelling case for automating the creation of business listings. For businesses with a
physical presence, such as restaurants and gas stations, it is
a natural choice to use data from a collection of street level
imagery. Probably the most recognizable such collection is
Google Street View which contains hundreds of millions of
360◦ panoramic images, with geolocation information.
In this work we focus on business storefront classification from street level imagery. We view this task as a form
of multi-label fine grained classification. Given an image
of a storefront, extracted from a Street View panorama, our
system is tasked with providing the most relevant labels for
that business from a large set of labels. To understand the
importance of associating a business with multiple labels,
consider the gas station shown in Figure 1 (left). While its
main purpose is fueling vehicles, it also serves as a convenience or grocery store. Any listing that does not capture
this subtlety will be of limited value to its users. Similarly,
stores like Target or Walmart sell a wide variety of products
from fruit to home furniture, all of which should be reflected
in their listings. The problem is fine grained as business of
different types can differ only slightly in their visual appearance. An example of such a subtle difference is shown
in Figure 1. The middle image shows the front of a grocery
store, while the image on the right is of a plumbing supply
store. Visually they are similar. The discriminative infor-

1. Introduction
Following the popularity of smart mobile devices, search
engine users today perform a variety of locality-aware
queries, such as Japanese restaurant near me, Food nearby
open now, or Asian stores in San Diego. With the help of
local business listings, these queries can be answered in a
way that is tailored to the user’s location.
Creating accurate listings of local businesses is time consuming and expensive. To be useful for the search engine,
the listing needs to be accurate, extensive, and importantly,
contain a rich representation of the business category. Recognizing that a JAPANESE RESTAURANT is a type of A SIAN
STORE that sells F OOD , is essential in accurately answering
a large variety of queries. Listing maintenance is a never
ending task as businesses often move or close down. In fact
it is estimated that 10% of establishments go out of business
every year, and in some segments of the market, such as the
restaurant industry, the rate is as high as 30% [24].
1

