Unsupervised Object Discovery and Localization in the Wild:
Part-based Matching with Bottom-up Region Proposals
Minsu Cho1,∗
1

Inria

Suha Kwak1,∗
2

Cordelia Schmid1,†

Jean Ponce2,∗

École Normale Supérieure / PSL Research University

Abstract
This paper addresses unsupervised discovery and localization of dominant objects from a noisy image collection
with multiple object classes. The setting of this problem
is fully unsupervised, without even image-level annotations
or any assumption of a single dominant class. This is far
more general than typical colocalization, cosegmentation,
or weakly-supervised localization tasks. We tackle the discovery and localization problem using a part-based region
matching approach: We use off-the-shelf region proposals
to form a set of candidate bounding boxes for objects and
object parts. These regions are efficiently matched across
images using a probabilistic Hough transform that evaluates the confidence for each candidate correspondence considering both appearance and spatial consistency. Dominant objects are discovered and localized by comparing the
scores of candidate regions and selecting those that stand
out over other regions containing them. Extensive experimental evaluations on standard benchmarks demonstrate
that the proposed approach significantly outperforms the
current state of the art in colocalization, and achieves robust object discovery in challenging mixed-class datasets.

1. Introduction
Object localization and detection is highly challenging
because of intra-class variations, background clutter, and
occlusions present in real-world images. While significant
progress has been made in this area over the last decade, as
shown by recent benchmark results [11, 16], most state-ofthe-art methods still rely on strong supervision in the form
of manually-annotated bounding boxes on target instances.
Since those detailed annotations are expensive to acquire
and also prone to unwanted biases and errors, recent work
has explored the problem of weakly-supervised object dis∗ WILLOW project-team, Département d’Informatique de l’Ecole Normale Supérieure, ENS/Inria/CNRS UMR 8548.
† LEAR project-team, Inria Grenoble Rhône-Alpes, LJK, CNRS, Univ.
Grenoble Alpes, France.

Figure 1. Unsupervised object discovery in the wild. We tackle
object localization in an unsupervised scenario without any type of
annotations, where a given image collection may contain multiple
dominant object classes and even outlier images. The proposed
method discovers object instances (red bounding boxes) with their
distinctive parts (smaller boxes). (Best viewed in color.)

covery where instances of an object class are found in a collection of images without any box-level annotations. Typically, weakly-supervised localization [9, 35, 36, 43, 45, 56]
requires positive and negative image-level labels for a target
object class. On the other hand, cosegmentation [25, 29, 40]
and colocalization [12, 27, 51] assume less supervision and
only require the image collection to contain a single dominant object class, allowing noisy images to some degree.
This paper addresses unsupervised object localization in
a far more general scenario where a given image collection
contain multiple dominant object classes and even noisy images without any target objects. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the
setting of this problem is fully unsupervised, without any
image-level annotations, an assumption of a single dominant class, or even a known number of object classes. In
spite of this generality, the proposed method markedly outperforms the state of the arts in colocalization [27, 51] on
standard benchmarks [16, 40], and closely competes with
current weakly-supervised localization [9, 43, 56].
We advocate a part-based matching approach to unsupervised object discovery using bottom-up region proposals.
Multi-scale region proposals have been widely used before
to restrict the search space for object bounding boxes in ob-

