A Mixed Bag of Emotions: Model, Predict, and Transfer Emotion Distributions
Kuan-Chuan Peng, Tsuhan Chen
Cornell University

Amir Sadovnik
Lafayette College

Andrew Gallagher
Google Inc.

{kp388, tsuhan}@cornell.edu

sadovnia@lafayette.edu

agallagher@google.com

Abstract
This paper explores two new aspects of photos and
human emotions. First, we show through psychovisual
studies that different people have different emotional reactions to the same image, which is a strong and novel departure from previous work that only records and predicts a
single dominant emotion for each image. Our studies also
show that the same person may have multiple emotional
reactions to one image. Predicting emotions in “distributions” instead of a single dominant emotion is important for
many applications. Second, we show not only that we can
often change the evoked emotion of an image by adjusting
color tone and texture related features but also that we can
choose in which “emotional direction” this change occurs
by selecting a target image. In addition, we present a new
database, Emotion6, containing distributions of emotions.

Figure 1. An example of transferring evoked emotion distribution. We transform the color tone and texture related features
of the source to those of the target. The ground truth probability distribution of the evoked emotion is shown under each
image, supporting that the color modification makes the source
image more joyful. A quantitative evaluation measuring the similarity of two probability distributions with four metrics M (M ∈
{KLD, BC, CD, EM D}) (see Sec. 5) is shown on the right,
where DMs is the distance between source and target distributions, and DMtr is the distance between transformed and target
distributions. For each metric, the better number is displayed in
bold. By any of the 4 measures, the transformed image evokes
more similar emotions to the target image versus the source image.

1. Introduction
Images are emotionally powerful. An image can evoke a
strong emotion in the viewer. In fact, photographers often
construct images to elicit a specific response by the viewer.
By using different filters and photographing techniques,
photographs of the same scene may elicit very different
emotions. Motivated by this fact, we aim to mimic this
process after the image was taken. That is, we wish to
change an image’s original evoked emotion to a new one
by changing its low-level properties.
Further, the viewer’s emotion may be sometimes affected
in a way that was unexpected by the photographer. For
example, an image of a hot air balloon may evoke feelings
of joy to some observers (who crave adventure), but fear in
others (who have fear of heights). We address the fact that
people have different evoked emotions by collecting and
predicting the distributions of emotional responses when an
image is viewed by a large population. We also address
the fact that the same person may have multiple emotions
evoked by one image by allowing the subjects to record
multiple emotional responses to one image.
This paper proposes a framework for transferring the

distribution of evoked emotion of an input image without
severely interfering with the high-level semantic content of
the original image. Since we work with emotion distributions, we propose a novel approach for emotion transfer that
includes choosing an image representing the target emotion
distribution. Using a target image for emotion transfer is
intuitive and allows an operator to change multiple emotion
dimensions simultaneously. Figure 1 shows an example of
transferring evoked emotion distribution, where the transformed image evokes (versus the source) emotions more
similar to those of the target image. Further, we build a
model to predict the evoked emotion that a population of
observers has when viewing a particular image.
We make the following contributions: 1) We show
that different people have different emotional reactions to
an image and that the same person may have multiple
emotional reactions to an image. Our proposed database,
Emotion6, addresses both findings by modeling emotion
distributions. 2) We use a convolutional neural network
(CNN) to predict emotion distributions, rather than simply
1

