Dataset Fingerprints: Exploring Image Collections Through Data Mining
Konstantinos Rematas1 , Basura Fernando1 , Frank Dellaert2 , and Tinne Tuytelaars1
1

Image Collection

KU Leuven, ESAT-PSI, iMinds
2
Georgia Tech

Discriminative Tiles

Tile support

Tile graph

Figure 1: Given an image collection, our system extracts patterns of discriminative mid level features and uses the connection
between them to enable structure specific browsing.

Abstract

to make decisions after it has been processed. It is hard to
understand data in bulk. Thus, it’s best if data gets summarized. In recent years, the amount of visual data has
increased tremendously and computer vision is one of the
research fields that benefited from this. Datasets used for
object recognition, detection etc. have increased not only
in size (e.g. Pascal VOC[6], ImageNet[3], COCO[15]) but
also in the extend of the visual world that they capture. As
the amount of visual data increases, there is an increased
demand to summarize visual archives, so that stakeholders
can be guided to interesting aspects of the data quickly. A
nice example is The New York Times fashion week browser,
which it shows highlights of the event through thumbnails
reminiscent of slit-scans [23]. These so called fingerprints
are the zoomed out view of pixels and most dominant colors
of each piece and designer. It gives a quick sense of what
each designer showed off this year. More recently, another
data summarization called ”Flickr Clock” has been introduced. It arranges videos as slices of time. These examples
require manual effort or semi-automated processes to summarize visual archives.
The benefit of summarization is that it not only reduces
the amount of data that needs to be digested, but it also
increases the ability to interpret the data. If there is a
small amount of data, this can be done by hand or one can

As the amount of visual data increases, so does the need
for summarization tools that can be used to explore large
image collections and to quickly get familiar with their
content. In this paper, we propose dataset fingerprints, a
new and powerful method based on data mining that extracts meaningful patterns from a set of images. The discovered patterns are compositions of discriminative midlevel features that co-occur in several images. Compared
to earlier work, ours stands out because i) it’s fully unsupervised, ii) discovered patterns cover large parts of the
images,often corresponding to full objects or meaningful
parts thereof, and iii) different patterns are connected based
on co-occurrence, allowing a user to “browse” the images
from one pattern to the next and to group patterns in a semantically meaningful manner.

1. Introduction
Information is the result of data processing. Said another way, data only becomes information that you can use
Project: http://homes.esat.kuleuven.be/˜krematas/
DatasetFingerprints/

1

