Long-term Correlation Tracking
Chao Ma1,2 , Xiaokang Yang1 , Chongyang Zhang1 , and Ming-Hsuan Yang2
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 University of California at Merced
{chaoma,xkyang,sunny zhang}@sjtu.edu.cn, mhyang@ucmerced.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we address the problem of long-term visual tracking where the target objects undergo significant
appearance variation due to deformation, abrupt motion,
heavy occlusion and out-of-view. In this setting, we decompose the task of tracking into translation and scale estimation of objects. We show that the correlation between
temporal context considerably improves the accuracy and
reliability for translation estimation, and it is effective to
learn discriminative correlation filters from the most confident frames to estimate the scale change. In addition, we
train an online random fern classifier to re-detect objects
in case of tracking failure. Extensive experimental results
on large-scale benchmark datasets show that the proposed
algorithm performs favorably against state-of-the-art methods in terms of efficiency, accuracy, and robustness.

1. Introduction
Object tracking is one of the most fundamental problems
in computer vision with numerous applications. A typical
scenario of visual tracking is to track an unknown object
initialized by a bounding box in subsequent image frames.
In this paper, we focus on the problem of long-term visual
tracking, where target objects undergo significant appearance change due to deformation, abrupt motion, heavy occlusion and out-of-view.
Our approach builds on two major observations based
on prior work. First, there is little change between two consecutive frames as the time interval is small (less than 0.04
second)1 and the context around the target remains possibly
unchanged even if the object is heavily occluded. Hence,
it is important to model the temporal relationship of appearance consisting of a target object and its context. We
develop a kernel ridge regression method based on correlation filters to encode the appearance template consisting of a
target object and its surrounding context. The adaptive templates constructed by the proposed features are resistant to
1 Most videos have more than 25 frames per second.

#210

#230

#350

#380

Ours

KCF

STC

×

Struck

TLD

Figure 1. Comparisons of our approach with state-of-the-art trackers in challenging situations of fast motion, significant deformation and long-term occlusion on the Lemming sequence [24]. Our
tracker takes temporal context into account for translation estimation, and performs robustly to abrupt motion and significant deformation in the 230th frame than the Struck [9] and TLD [14]
methods. Our tracker is more effective in re-detecting the target in
the 380th frame after long-term occlusion than the KCF [11] and
STC [28] methods with the use of an online detector.

heavy occlusion, fast motion, and large deformation. This
method differs significantly from existing correlation filters
based tracking algorithms, which are prone to drifting in
long-term tracking. Figure 1 shows one example where the
proposed algorithm performs well against the KCF [11] and
STC [28] methods. Our main contribution is an algorithm
that efficiently models the temporal context information using correlation filters for long-term visual tracking.
Second, it is critical to enhance the detection module of a
long-term tracker to (i) estimate the scale change and (ii) redetect the object in case of tracking failure when long-term
occlusion or out-of-view occurs. For scale estimation, we
train another correlation filter for a target from the most reliable frames. We use the histogram of orientation gradients
(HOG) [4] as features to construct a multi-scale target pyramid and search for the optimal scale exhaustively. For object re-detection, we do not apply the target correlation filter

