SALICON: Saliency in Context
Ming Jiang†

Shengsheng Huang†

Juanyong Duan†

Qi Zhao∗

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore
mjiang@nus.edu.sg

shane.huang@nus.edu.sg

j.duan@u.nus.edu

eleqiz@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Saliency in Context (SALICON) is an ongoing effort that
aims at understanding and predicting visual attention. This
paper presents a new method to collect large-scale human
data during natural explorations on images. While current
datasets present a rich set of images and task-specific annotations such as category labels and object segments, this
work focuses on recording and logging how humans shift
their attention during visual exploration. The goal is to offer new possibilities to (1) complement task-specific annotations to advance the ultimate goal in visual understanding,
and (2) understand visual attention and learn saliency models, all with human attentional data at a much larger scale.
We designed a mouse-contingent multi-resolutional
paradigm based on neurophysiological and psychophysical
studies of peripheral vision, to simulate the natural viewing
behavior of humans. The new paradigm allowed using a
general-purpose mouse instead of an eye tracker to record
viewing behaviors, thus enabling large-scale data collection. The paradigm was validated with controlled laboratory as well as large-scale online data. We report in this
paper a proof-of-concept SALICON dataset of human “freeviewing” data on 10,000 images from the Microsoft COCO
(MS COCO) dataset with rich contextual information. We
evaluated the use of the collected data in the context of
saliency prediction, and demonstrated them a good source
as ground truth for the evaluation of saliency algorithms.

1. Introduction
Motivation One of the ultimate goals in computer vision
is to describe the contents of an image. Humans are known
to perform better than their machine counterparts in telling
a story from an image, and we aim to leverage human intelligence and computer vision algorithms to bridge the gap
† The three authors contribute equally to this work.
∗ Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Contextual information is crucial in image understanding (image examples from MS COCO). We propose a new method
to collect large-scale attentional data (SALICON, 1st row) for in
visual understanding. With the annotated object segments, our
attentional data naturally highlights key components in an image
(ranked object segments in the 2nd row, with key objects outlined
in yellow) to (a) rank object categories, (b) suggest new categories
important to characterize a scene (text in this example), (c-e) convey social cues, and (f) direct to places designed for attention in
advertisement.

between humans and computers in visual understanding.
In the recent years, several datasets have been constructed with unprecedented numbers of images and annotations [32, 6, 34, 19], enabling breakthroughs in visual scene
understanding, especially goal-specific tasks like object
classification and segmentation. In the recently published
MS COCO dataset [19], non-iconic images and objects in
context are emphasized to understand natural scenes. On
top of annotations for the conventional computer vision

