Simulating Makeup through Physics-based
Manipulation of Intrinsic Image Layers
Chen Li1∗
1

Kun Zhou1

State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University

Abstract

Stephen Lin2
2

Microsoft Research

faces and reflectance models of skin and makeup to compute a realistic result. While impressive renderings have
been produced in this manner, they may be slow to compute and require detailed data such as the user’s face geometry and skin reflectance, which are impractical to obtain in many settings. The other approach is image based,
where the appearance of makeup on one person’s face in a
reference image is transferred to the user’s face in a target
image [5, 16]. These methods are much more convenient
to apply than rendering-based techniques. However, they
require restrictive assumptions such as similar lighting conditions in both the reference and target images. In addition
to transferring makeup, these techniques may also transfer
personal features such as wrinkles and blemishes from the
reference to the target. Furthermore, they do not realistically model the shading effects of cosmetics, such as the
reduction of subsurface light scattering in the skin when it
is covered with foundation.
In this work, we present a technique that overcomes
these limitations of prior image-based methods without
requiring the heavier computation and detailed user data
needed by rendering-based approaches. Our method accomplishes this through decomposing the target image into
reflectance layers that can be efficiently transformed into
their makeup equivalents using proposed adaptations of
physically-based reflectance models. The decomposition
makes use of recent advances in intrinsic image estimation [9, 20] to separate the target image into albedo, diffuse
shading, and specular highlight layers. For each of these
layers, we present transformations which alter them in a
way that preserves the identity of the user while conveying
the appearance of makeup based on its optical properties.
The layers are then combined to form the final makeup result, without requiring more than an ordinary image from
the user.
Since this method applies makeup properties to a target
image instead of transferring appearance data from a reference image, constraints on lighting and artifacts due to
transmitted personal features are both avoided. Through the
use of physically-based reflectance models, the shading effects of cosmetics are more realistically simulated as well.

We present a method for simulating makeup in a face
image. To generate realistic results without detailed geometric and reflectance measurements of the user, we propose to separate the image into intrinsic image layers and
alter them according to proposed adaptations of physicallybased reflectance models. Through this layer manipulation,
the measured properties of cosmetic products are applied
while preserving the appearance characteristics and lighting conditions of the target face. This approach is demonstrated on various forms of cosmetics including foundation,
blush, lipstick, and eye shadow. Experimental results exhibit a close approximation to ground truth images, without artifacts such as transferred personal features and lighting effects that degrade the results of image-based makeup
transfer methods.

1. Introduction
A common way to alter or improve one’s facial appearance is through the application of makeup. Not only can it
be used for beautification purposes, but studies have shown
that appropriate use of makeup can make a woman appear
more competent and trustworthy than without it [13]. The
key to a flawless finish that looks light and natural is to use
cosmetic products well-suited for the particular face, as well
as to master the application skills. Determining the suitability of a particular makeup product requires a person to try it
and view the result. While this may be easy to do at a cosmetics counter, it cannot conveniently be done, for example,
at home when making an online purchase.
To address this problem, several techniques have been
proposed for simulating the appearance of makeup in an
image of the user. These techniques can generally be categorized into two approaches. The first approach is to synthesize makeup effects through computer graphics rendering [6, 3, 12, 14]. These methods use geometric models of
∗ This work was done while Chen Li was an intern at Microsoft Research.

4321

