Automatically Discovering Local Visual Material Attributes
Gabriel Schwartz
Ko Nishino
Department of Computer Science, Drexel University
{gbs25,kon}@drexel.edu
Accuracy vs. Patch Size

Abstract

Cimpoi et al. [5]

1. Introduction
Computer vision has relied heavily on shape cues. Popular image features, including HoG [7] and SIFT [13],
essentially encode object shapes for recognition. Images,
however, capture much more than merely the shape of objects in a scene. Real-world images capture the appearance
of materials, such as fabric, plastic, and wood, even when
the complete shape of the object is not discernible. The
recognition of these materials in images can provide crucial
information for scene understanding. Recognizing that a
cup is made of glass and not plastic, for example, can be
used to inform a robot how to properly grasp it.
Recognizing real-world materials has proven challenging. Materials exhibit a wide variety of appearances, particularly at a local (image-patch) level. Current methods [5, 12, 18] for material recognition address this challenge by making single image-wide material predictions or
by using very large image patches that in fact contain all or
most of the object extents. These approaches inevitably use

Sharan et al. [18]
Proposed Method

Accuracy (%)

Shape cues play an important role in computer vision,
but shape is not the only information available in images.
Materials, such as fabric and plastic, are discernible in
images even when shapes, such as those of an object, are
not. We argue that it would be ideal to recognize materials
without relying on object cues such as shape. This would
allow us to use materials as a context for other vision tasks,
such as object recognition. Humans are intuitively able to
find visual cues that describe materials. Previous frameworks attempt to recognize these cues (as visual material
traits) using fully-supervised learning. This requirement is
not feasible when multiple annotators and large quantities
of images are involved. In this paper, we derive a framework
that allows us to discover locally-recognizable material attributes from crowdsourced perceptual material distances.
We show that the attributes we discover do in fact separate
material categories. Our learned attributes exhibit the same
desirable properties as material traits, despite the fact that
they are discovered using only partial supervision.

Patch Size (px)

Figure 1. Local material recognition is challenging. When adapted
to use aggregated features from local image patches, methods that
perform well on full images quickly lose accuracy. Previous work
has shown that using material traits as an intermediate representation addresses this issue [17]. We propose a method for weaklysupervised discovery of such traits.

object cues (i.e., their shapes) to recognize materials. It is
unclear whether plastic is recognized because it looks like
a cup, or because of its characteristic material appearance.
This is undesirable, as it will prevent the use of material
information for scene understanding tasks including object
recognition. Why would knowing that an object is made of
plastic help recognize that it is a cup if recognition of plastic
relies on knowing that it is a cup?
We argue that material recognition should be performed
without relying on object cues such as shape. We would
instead like to be able to locally recognize characteristic
material appearance. If we could do that, we could aggregate local information inside an object region to predict
what material the object is made of. This is a challenging
task, and all previous methods essentially rely on object
cues. Figure 1 clearly shows that when existing methods1
1 We implement the Improved Fisher Vectors of [5] and all features of
Sharan et al. [18] and aggregate them across local patches within object
regions to generate the results in Figure 1.

