EgoSampling: Fast-Forward and Stereo for Egocentric Videos
Yair Poleg
The Hebrew University
Jerusalem, Israel

Tavi Halperin
The Hebrew University
Jerusalem, Israel

Chetan Arora
IIIT
Delhi, India

Shmuel Peleg
The Hebrew University
Jerusalem, Israel

Abstract
While egocentric cameras like GoPro are gaining popularity, the videos they capture are long, boring, and difficult
to watch from start to end. Fast forwarding (i.e. frame sampling) is a natural choice for faster video browsing. However, this accentuates the shake caused by natural head motion, making the fast forwarded video useless.
We propose EgoSampling, an adaptive frame sampling
that gives more stable fast forwarded videos. Adaptive frame sampling is formulated as energy minimization,
whose optimal solution can be found in polynomial time.
In addition, egocentric video taken while walking suffers
from the left-right movement of the head as the body weight
shifts from one leg to another. We turn this drawback into a
feature: Stereo video can be created by sampling the frames
from the left most and right most head positions of each
step, forming approximate stereo-pairs.

1. Introduction
With the increasing popularity of GoPro [10] and the introduction of Google Glass [9] the use of head worn egocentric cameras is on the rise. These cameras are typically
operated in a hands-free, always-on manner, allowing the
wearers to concentrate on their activities. While more and
more egocentric videos are being recorded, watching such
videos from start to end is difficult due to two aspects: (i)
The videos tend to be long and boring; (ii) Camera shake
induced by natural head motion further disturbs viewing.
These aspects call for automated tools to enable faster access to the information in such videos. An exceptional tool
for this purpose is the “Hyperlapse” method recently proposed by [15]. While our work was inspired by [15], we
take a different, lighter, approach to address this problem.
Fast forward is a natural choice for faster browsing of
egocentric videos. The speed factor depends on the cognitive load a user is interested in taking. Naı̈ve fast forward
uses uniform sampling of frames, and the sampling density depends on the desired speed up factor. Adaptive fast
forward approaches [25] try to adjust the speed in differ-

Walking Direction

(a)

Walking Direction

(b)

Figure 1. Frame sampling for Fast Forward. A view from above on
the camera path (the line) and the viewing directions of the frames
(the arrows) as the camera wearer walks forward during a couple
of seconds. (a) Uniform 5× frames sampling, shown with solid arrows, gives output with significant changes in viewing directions.
(b) Our frame sampling, represented as solid arrows, prefers forward looking frames at the cost of somewhat non uniform sampling.

ent segments of the input video so as to equalize the cognitive load. For example, sparser frame sampling giving
higher speed up is possible in stationary scenes, and denser
frame sampling giving lower speed ups is possible in dynamic scenes. In general, content aware techniques adjust
the frame sampling rate based upon the importance of the
content in the video. Typical importance measures include
scene motion, scene complexity, and saliency. None of
the aforementioned methods, however, can handle the challenges of egocentric videos, as we describe next.
Most egocentric videos suffer from substantial camera
shake due to natural head motion of the wearer. We borrow the terminology of [26] and note that when the camera wearer is “stationary” (e.g, sitting or standing in place),
head motions are less frequent and pose no challenge to
traditional fast-forward and stabilization techniques. However, when the camera wearer is “in transit” (e.g, walking,
cycling, driving, etc), existing fast forward techniques end
up accentuating the shake in the video. We therefore focus
on handling these cases, leaving the simpler cases of a stationary camera wearer for standard methods. We use the

