Defocus Deblurring and Superresolution for Time-of-Flight Depth Cameras
Lei Xiao2,1

Felix Heide2,1 Matthew O’Toole3 Andreas Kolb4
Kyros Kutulakos3 Wolfgang Heidrich1,2
1
2
KAUST University of British Columbia 3 University of Toronto
5
University of Bonn

Matthias B. Hullin5
4

University of Siegen

Abstract
Continuous-wave time-of-flight (ToF) cameras show
great promise as low-cost depth image sensors in mobile
applications. However, they also suffer from several challenges, including limited illumination intensity, which mandates the use of large numerical aperture lenses, and thus
results in a shallow depth of field, making it difficult to capture scenes with large variations in depth. Another shortcoming is the limited spatial resolution of currently available ToF sensors.
In this paper we analyze the image formation model for
blurred ToF images. By directly working with raw sensor measurements but regularizing the recovered depth and
amplitude images, we are able to simultaneously deblur
and super-resolve the output of ToF cameras. Our method
outperforms existing methods on both synthetic and real
datasets. In the future our algorithm should extend easily to
cameras that do not follow the cosine model of continuouswave sensors, as well as to multi-frequency or multi-phase
imaging employed in more recent ToF cameras.

(a) Amplitude a

(b) Depth z

(c) HSV map

Figure 1: Simulated Buddha scene. The HSV map uses a
as value and z as hue. The value and hue visualizes the
magnitude and scaled phase of the complex-valued a ◦ g(z)
in Eq. (1), respectively.

integration time must be short enough to allow real-time operation. Consequently, ToF systems typically use imaging
optics with large numerical aperture to make the best use
of available light. However, this also comes at a cost; large
apertures have a shallow depth of field and hence introduce
defocus blur in the raw ToF images. Due to the non-linear
image formation model of these cameras (see below), the
depth of field blur presents a significant problem for ToFcameras, generating artifacts such as “flying pixels” around
depth discontinuities as well as loss of texture detail.
In this paper, we address this problem by introducing a new computational method to simultaneously remove
defocus blur and increase the resolution of off-the-shelf
ToF cameras. We do this by solving a semi-blind deconvolution problem, where prior knowledge of the blur kernel
is available. Unlike past ToF deblurring techniques, our approach applies sparse regularizers directly to the latent amplitude and depth images, and supports deblurring ToF images captured with multiple frequencies, phases or exposures.
Continuous-wave ToF sensors are designed to have an
image formation model that is linear in amplitude a, but
non-linear in depth z, such that the captured raw sensor data

1. Introduction
Fast and high-quality depth-sensing cameras are highly
desirable in mobile robotics, human-machine interfaces,
quality control and inspection, and advanced automotive applications. Among the wide variety of depth-sensing technologies available (depth from stereo, structured lighting,
Lidar scanning, etc.), continuous-wave time-of-flight (ToF)
cameras have emerged as an efficient, low-cost, compact,
and versatile depth imaging solution.
The active light source required to produce these ToF images presents significant drawbacks, however. To create a
ToF image with high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), the light
signal must be sufficiently intense to overcome sensor noise
and quantization effects. Factors determining the signal
strength include light source power, integration time, imaging range, and lens aperture. In practice, light power is often limited for eye safety and energy considerations, and the
1

