Statistical Inference Models for Image Datasets with Systematic Variations
Won Hwa Kim†¶ Barbara B. Bendlin∗¶ Moo K. Chung§ Sterling C. Johnson∗¶ Vikas Singh§†¶
†

Dept. of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI
Dept. of Biostatistics & Med. Informatics, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI
¶
Wisconsin Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI
∗
GRECC, William S. Middleton VA Hospital, Madison, WI
§

Abstract

perform a hypothesis test (e.g., Student’s t-test) to ask if
the distribution of intensities at that voxel across the two
distinct groups are the same [10]. If there is sufficient evidence to reject the null hypothesis, we can conclude with
some confidence (0.05 α level) that the voxel is relevant for
the disease. By repeating this procedure across all voxels,
we can obtain a heat map of p-values to identify potential
regions affected by the disease.
There are two basic but important issues we should emphasize here. First, our ability to conclude that (at a specific
voxel) the observed empirical intensity distributions are different across groups depends on the sample size and how
distinct the distributions are (i.e., the effect size). Second,
this analysis assumes that the absolute image intensity measurements are meaningful. In other words, we assume that
the only differences between the groups is due to the effect of the clinical phenomena under study (i.e., age, disease and so on), and not other global systematic variations
coming from modifications in acquisition parameters. Generally, in small to medium sized studies where the data is
acquired at a single site (with the same scanner), this is not
a problem. But as scientific studies investigate more subtle
scientific questions where the group differences are weaker,
we need larger sample sizes — logistic constraints necessitate multi-site studies. Changes in the hardware and pulse
sequences (and many other factors) across sites introduce
systematic variations in the dataset. In fact, even in small
studies, a hardware upgrade (between baseline and followup acquisitions) may be a nuisance for analysis, requiring
ad-hoc normalization which may affect statistical power of
detecting true group effects. When the effect sizes are poor,
performing inference on the data without appropriate adjustments could affect the success or failure of the scientific
hypothesis under investigation.
The above problem is common across various imaging
modalities in medical imaging. For instance, in neuroimaging uses of positron emission tomography (PET), a nuclear
imaging modality (where an injected radiotracer binds to

Statistical analysis of longitudinal or cross sectional
brain imaging data to identify effects of neurodegenerative
diseases is a fundamental task in various studies in neuroscience. However, when there are systematic variations in
the images due to parameter changes such as changes in the
scanner protocol, hardware changes, or when combining
data from multi-site studies, the statistical analysis becomes
problematic. Motivated by this scenario, the goal of this paper is to develop a unified statistical solution to the problem
of systematic variations in statistical image analysis. Based
in part on recent literature in harmonic analysis on diffusion maps, we propose an algorithm which compares operators that are resilient to the systematic variations. These
operators are derived from the empirical measurements of
the image data and provide an efficient surrogate to capturing the actual changes across images. We also establish a
connection between our method to the design of wavelets in
non-Euclidean space. To evaluate the proposed ideas, we
present various experimental results on detecting changes
in simulations as well as show how the method offers improved statistical power in the analysis of real longitudinal
PIB-PET imaging data acquired from participants at risk
for Alzheimer’s disease (AD).

1. Introduction
Statistical analysis of a cohort of brain imaging scans to
assess the long term effects of trauma/stress and identify genetic, demographic and lifestyle factors for neurodegenerative diseases is a cornerstone of current research in neuroscience. Typically, the population will consist of two clinically disparate groups/classes: say, diseased and healthy
(cross-sectional) or a set of subjects imaged several years
apart (longitudinal). Once all images are ‘registered’ to a
common template space, the statistical analysis can proceed
in a number of ways. For instance, at each voxel one may
1

