Ego-Surfing First Person Videos
Ryo Yonetani
The University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan

Kris M. Kitani
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, USA

Yoichi Sato
The University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan

yonetani@iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp

kkitani@cs.cmu.edu

ysato@iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
We envision a future time when wearable cameras (e.g.,
small cameras in glasses or pinned on a shirt collar) are
worn by the masses and record first-person point-of-view
(POV) videos of everyday life. While these cameras can
enable new assistive technologies and novel research challenges, they also raise serious privacy concerns. For example, first-person videos passively recorded by wearable
cameras will necessarily include anyone who comes into the
view of a camera – with or without consent. Motivated by
these benefits and risks, we develop a self-search technique
tailored to first-person POV videos. The key observation
of our work is that the egocentric head motions of a target
person (i.e., the self) are observed both in the POV video of
the target and observer. The motion correlation between the
target person’s video and the observer’s video can then be
used to uniquely identify instances of the self. We incorporate this feature into our proposed approach that computes
the motion correlation over supervoxel hierarchies to localize target instances in observer videos. Our proposed approach significantly improves self-search performance over
several well-known face detectors and recognizers. Furthermore, we show how our approach can enable several
practical applications such as privacy filtering, automated
video collection and social group discovery.

1. Introduction
New technologies for image acquisition, such as wearable eye glass cameras or lapel cameras, can enable new assistive technologies and novel research challenges but may
also come with latent social consequence. Around the world
hundreds of millions of camera-equipped mobile phones
can be used to capture special moments in life. By the
same token, a mobile phone image containing a GPS position embedded EXIF tag can also be used to determine
where and when you captured that image and could be used
as a means of violating one’s privacy. Novel wearable camera technologies (e.g., the Google Glass or the Narrative

Figure 1. Robust self-search results. Self instances (yellow arrows) are detected (unmasked regions) despite heavy occlusion
(bottom-left), motion blur (top-right) and extreme pose (bottomright), where face recognition fails (green rectangles).

lapel camera) also offer a new paradigm for keeping a visual
record of everyday life in the form of first-person point-ofview (POV) videos, and can be used to aid human productivity, such as automatic activity summarization [4, 14, 16]
and assistive systems [15, 25, 27]. But as in the case of mobile phone cameras, wearable cameras also come with hidden social implications and the inevitable risk of unintended
use. For example, wearable cameras which passively capture everyday life will necessarily include videos of people
– with or without consent. Without the proper mechanisms
and technologies to preserve privacy, wearable cameras run
the risk of inadvertently capturing sensitive information.
Keeping in mind both the benefits and risks of using
wearable cameras, we argue that one important technology

