Encoding based Saliency Detection for Videos and Images
Thomas Mauthner, Horst Possegger, Georg Waltner, Horst Bischof
Institute for Computer Graphics and Vision, Graz University of Technology
{mauthner,possegger,waltner,bischof}@icg.tugraz.at

Abstract
We present a novel video saliency detection method to
support human activity recognition and weakly supervised
training of activity detection algorithms. Recent research
has emphasized the need for analyzing salient information
in videos to minimize dataset bias or to supervise weakly labeled training of activity detectors. In contrast to previous
methods we do not rely on training information given by either eye-gaze or annotation data, but propose a fully unsupervised algorithm to find salient regions within videos. In
general, we enforce the Gestalt principle of figure-ground
segregation for both appearance and motion cues. We introduce an encoding approach that allows for efficient computation of saliency by approximating joint feature distributions. We evaluate our approach on several datasets,
including challenging scenarios with cluttered background
and camera motion, as well as salient object detection in
images. Overall, we demonstrate favorable performance
compared to state-of-the-art methods in estimating both
ground-truth eye-gaze and activity annotations.

1. Introduction
Estimating saliency maps or predicting human gaze in
images or videos recently attracted much research interest. By selecting interesting information based on saliency
maps, irrelevant image or video regions can be filtered.
Thus, saliency estimation is a valuable preprocessing step
for a large domain of applications, including activity recognition, object detection and recognition, image compression, and video summarization. Salient regions contain per
definition important information which in general is contrasted with its arbitrary surrounding. For example, searching the web for the tag ”horse riding” returns images and
videos which all share the same specific appearance (someone on a horse) and motion (riding), within whatever context or background. Therefore, the region containing the
horse is the eponymous region, and in general the horse
should be at least part of the most salient region.
As a consequence of evolution, the human visual sys-

tem has evolved towards an eclectic system, capable to recognize and analyze complex scenes in a fraction of a second. Therefore, much effort in computer vision research has
been put on predicting human eye-gaze. Capturing fixation
points and saccadic movements via eye-tracking [19, 21] allows us to create training data and analyze spatial and temporal attention shifts. It is well known that humans are attracted by motion [12] or other human subjects, respectively
their faces [13] if the resolution is high enough. Furthermore, human saliency maps are sparse and change if content is analyzed per image or embedded within a video [28].
Besides the drawback that a sufficient number of individuals
have to observe the same image or video to obtain expressive saliency maps, above mentioned human preferences
may even be misleading for general salient object detection
tasks.
These considerations lead us to the goal of this work:
finding eponymous and therefore salient video or image regions. In contrast to estimating human gaze, these salient
regions are not required to overlap with human fixation
points but must identify the eponymous regions. Within
our saliency estimation method we enforce the Gestalt principle of figure-ground segregation, i.e. visually surrounded
regions are more likely to be perceived as distinct objects.
In contrast to previous approaches which globally enforce
objects to be segregated from the image border, e.g. [32],
we require no such assumption but find visually segregated
regions by a local search over several scales.
Our contributions are as follows. We propose an encoding method to approximate the joint distribution of feature
channels (color or motion) based on analyzing the image
or video content, respectively. This efficient representation allows us to scan images on several scales, estimating foreground distributions locally instead of relying on
global statistics only. Finally, we propose a saliency quality measurement that allows for dynamically weighting and
combining the results of different maps, e.g. appearance and
motion. We evaluate the proposed encoding based saliency
estimation (EBS) on challenging activity videos and salient
object detection tasks, benchmarking against a variety of
state-of-the-art video and image saliency methods.

