Gaze-enabled Egocentric Video Summarization via
Constrained Submodular Maximization
Jia Xu† , Lopamudra Mukherjee§ , Yin Li‡ , Jamieson Warner† , James M. Rehg‡ , Vikas Singh†
†
University of Wisconsin-Madison, § University of Wisconsin-Whitewater
‡
Georgia Institute of Technology
http://pages.cs.wisc.edu/˜jiaxu/projects/ego-video-sum/
Abstract

body of work on video summarization provides a meaningful starting point, but egocentric videos still pose unique
challenges. We want to support continuous egocentric video
capture, which will result in long segments, only a few subsets of which will actually contain ‘memorable’ or ‘interesting’ content. Further, simple measures of diversity among
frames and low-level appearance or ﬂow cues which are
useful modules of a classical approach to video summarization may not be informative at all, in fact, even misleading.
For example, strong motion cues and potentially strong differences among frames due to background clutter will show
up prominently in a sequence of a long walk back from
campus. The ideal solution would be to compress such redundant periods but also not leave out anomalies or shorter
segments that may be interesting to the camera wearer.
The description above suggests that egocentric video
summarization is an ill-posed problem. Indeed, these
videos may have poor illumination, camera shake, rapidly
changing background, and a spectrum of other confounding
factors. Nonetheless, given that the proliferation of wearable image-capture systems will only increase, there is a
need for systems that take a long egocentric video and distill it down to its informative parts. They offer the camera wearer the ability to browse/archive his/her daily activities (life log), and review (or search) it in the future. The
last two years have seen a number of interesting strategies
for this problem. For instance, [17] observed that canonical viewpoints of objects that are relevant for representation in a egocentric summary can be identiﬁed by mining
large collections of images on the Internet. Very recently,
[31] proposed regularizing the summarization process with
a so-called “storyline narrative”: a coherent (chronological)
set of video subshots. Both approaches have been shown
to work well but need a nominal amount of training data,
which can be very expensive to collect and limited at scale.
Despite the advances described above, the literature on
this problem is still in its developmental phase. Approaches
so far have not attempted to personalize the summary. But,
egocentric video summarization is subjective and its utility

With the proliferation of wearable cameras, the number
of videos of users documenting their personal lives using
such devices is rapidly increasing. Since such videos may
span hours, there is an important need for mechanisms that
represent the information content in a compact form (i.e.,
shorter videos which are more easily browsable/sharable).
Motivated by these applications, this paper focuses on the
problem of egocentric video summarization. Such videos
are usually continuous with signiﬁcant camera shake and
other quality issues. Because of these reasons, there is
growing consensus that direct application of standard video
summarization tools to such data yields unsatisfactory performance. In this paper, we demonstrate that using gaze
tracking information (such as ﬁxation and saccade) significantly helps the summarization task. It allows meaningful
comparison of different image frames and enables deriving
personalized summaries (gaze provides a sense of the camera wearer’s intent). We formulate a summarization model
which captures common-sense properties of a good summary, and show that it can be solved as a submodular function maximization with partition matroid constraints, opening the door to a rich body of work from combinatorial optimization. We evaluate our approach on a new gaze-enabled
egocentric video dataset (over 15 hours), which will be a
valuable standalone resource.

1. Introduction
The advent of wearable cameras and the ability to record
visual data from a ﬁrst person point of view (namely, egocentric video) has opened the door to a rich trove of computer vision problems. These range from socio-behavioral
modeling to analyzing recurring patterns in a person’s daily
life. Such a wealth of data poses an interesting scientiﬁc
question — how should one compactly summarize continuous video streams acquired over many hours? A mature
1

