Aligning 3D Models to RGB-D Images of Cluttered Scenes
Saurabh Gupta
UC Berkeley

Pablo Arbeláez
Universidad de los
Andes, Colombia

Ross Girshick

Jitendra Malik

Microsoft Research

UC Berkeley

sgupta@

pa.arbelaez@

rbg@

malik@

eecs.berkeley.edu

uniandes.edu.co

microsoft.com

eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
The goal of this work is to represent objects in an RGB-D
scene with corresponding 3D models from a library. We approach this problem by first detecting and segmenting object
instances in the scene and then using a convolutional neural
network (CNN) to predict the pose of the object. This CNN
is trained using pixel surface normals in images containing
renderings of synthetic objects. When tested on real data,
our method outperforms alternative algorithms trained on
real data. We then use this coarse pose estimate along with
the inferred pixel support to align a small number of prototypical models to the data, and place into the scene the
model that fits best. We observe a 48% relative improvement in performance at the task of 3D detection over the
current state-of-the-art [34], while being an order of magnitude faster.

1. Introduction
Truly understanding a scene involves reasoning not just
about what is visible but also about what is not visible. Consider for example the images in Figure 1. After we recognize an object as a chair, we have a pretty good sense of
how far it extends in depth and what it might look like from
another viewpoint. One way of achieving this kind of understanding in a computer vision system would be by ‘replacing in-place’ the chair pixels by the rendering of a 3D
CAD model of the chair. This explicit correspondence to
a 3D CAD model leads to a richer representation than output from traditional computer vision algorithms like object
detection, semantic or instance segmentation, fine-grained
categorization and pose estimation. Each of these tasks by
themselves is insufficient from a robotics perspective for
tasks like trajectory optimization, motion planning or grasp
estimation. Our proposed system starts from a single RGBD image of a cluttered indoor scene and produces the output
visualized in Figure 1. Our approach is able to successfully

Figure 1: Output of our system: Starting from an RGB-D
image, we produce a 3D scene where each object has been
replaced by a 3D model.

retrieve relevant models and align them with the data. We
believe such an output representation will enable the use of
perception in fields like robotics.
Figure 2 describes our approach. We use the output of
the detection and segmentation system [13], and first infer
the pose of each detected object using a neural network.
We train this CNN on synthetic data using surface normal
images instead of depth images as input. We show that this
CNN trained on synthetic data works better than one trained
on real data. We then use the top k inferred pose hypotheses to initialize a search over a small set of 3D models,
their scales and exact placements. We use a modified iterative closest point (ICP) algorithm for this task and show
that, when initialized properly, it provides reasonable results even when working at the level of object categories
rather than exact instances (the setting in which ICP is typically used). In doing so we only use 2D annotations on the
image for training all our models, and at test time, are able
to generate a rich 3D representation of the scene.
Our final output is a set of 3D model that have been
aligned to the objects present in the image. The richness
and quality of the output from our system becomes manifest
when we compare against current state-of-the-art methods

