Self Scaled Regularized Robust Regression∗
Yin Wang

Caglayan Dicle
Mario Sznaier
Octavia Camps
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115

wang.yin@husky.neu.edu,cdicle@gmail.com,{msznaier,camps}@coe.neu.edu

Abstract

model, LSR can result in very poor fitting models [13].
The goal of robust regression is to find good fitting models in spite of the presence of outliers. Robust algorithms
for linear regression include least median squares regression
(LMedS) [22] and random sample consensus type methods
(RANSAC) [8]. While these methods perform well, they
are inherently combinatorial.
Alternative approaches exploit recent advances in compressive sensing [3, 6] by reformulating robust linear regression as an optimization problem with sparse regularizations [4, 14, 12, 19]. The advantage of these methods is that
they admit convex relaxations which can be solved using
polynomial-time algorithms. In [19], Mitra et al. derived
conditions under which these relaxations solve the robust
regression problem, which depend on the smallest principal
angle between the regressor subspace and all outlier subspaces, in the case of noiseless inliers.
A drawback of the sparsity-based approaches is that the
presence of a few gross outliers, outliers which are very
far from the inlier data, can poison the optimization problem and lead to ill fitting models. Another limitation of
the current sparsity-based methods is that they cannot accommodate a-priori semi-supervised knowledge such as cooccurrence information when it is known that a subset of
points should have a single label – i.e. they are all inliers or
all outliers. Thus, to address the above limitations, we propose a new formulation for robust linear regression which
can handle gross outliers and a priori information.
The contributions of this paper are as follows:

Linear Robust Regression (LRR) seeks to find the parameters of a linear mapping from noisy data corrupted from
outliers, such that the number of inliers (i.e. pairs of points
where the fitting error of the model is less than a given
bound) is maximized. While this problem is known to be NP
hard, several tractable relaxations have been recently proposed along with theoretical conditions guaranteeing exact
recovery of the parameters of the model. However, these
relaxations may perform poorly in cases where the fitting
error for the outliers is large. In addition, these approaches
cannot exploit available a-priori information, such as cooccurrences. To circumvent these difficulties, in this paper
we present an alternative approach to robust regression.
Our main result shows that this approach is equivalent to
a “self-scaled” `1 regularized robust regression problem,
where the cost function is automatically scaled, with scalings that depend on the a-priori information. Thus, the proposed approach achieves substantially better performance
than traditional regularized approaches in cases where the
outliers are far from the linear manifold spanned by the inliers, while at the same time exhibits the same theoretical recovery properties. These results are illustrated with several
application examples using both synthetic and real data.

1. Introduction
Many computer vision problems involve finding a linear
regression model relating a set of input and output variables.
Examples, illustrated in Fig. 1, include line extraction from
2D images, planar surface fitting in range images, and classification using linear discriminant analysis (LDA), among
others. When all the available data are inliers, least squares
regression (LSR) provides good fitting regression parameters [9]. However, it is well known that in the presence of
outlier data points, i.e. data points that do not fit the sought

• We provide a new sparsity-based formulation to maximize the number of inlier data points.
• We show that this new approach is equivalent to a
“self-scaled” `1 regularized robust regression problem, where the cost function is automatically scaled
and the scalings capture a-priori information. Hence,
we have called the proposed method a “Self-Scaled
Regularized Robust Regression” (S2 R3 ) algorithm.

∗ This work was supported in part by NSF grants IIS–1318145 and
ECCS–1404163; AFOSR grant FA9550-12-1-0271, and the Alert DHS
Center of Excellence under Award Number 2008-ST-061-ED0001.

• We show that the self-scaling property of the proposed
1

