Burst Deblurring: Removing Camera Shake
Through Fourier Burst Accumulation
Mauricio Delbracio Guilermo Sapiro
ECE, Duke University
{mauricio.delbracio, guillermo.sapiro}duke.edu

Abstract

be modeled mathematically as a convolution,
v = u ? k + n,

Numerous recent approaches attempt to remove image blur due to camera shake, either with one or multiple input images, by explicitly solving an inverse and
inherently ill-posed deconvolution problem. If the photographer takes a burst of images, a modality available
in virtually all modern digital cameras, we show that
it is possible to combine them to get a clean sharp
version. This is done without explicitly solving any
blur estimation and subsequent inverse problem. The
proposed algorithm is strikingly simple: it performs a
weighted average in the Fourier domain, with weights
depending on the Fourier spectrum magnitude. The
method’s rationale is that camera shake has a random
nature and therefore each image in the burst is generally blurred differently. Experiments with real camera
data show that the proposed Fourier Burst Accumulation algorithm achieves state-of-the-art results an order
of magnitude faster, with simplicity for on-board implementation on camera phones.

(1)

where v is the noisy blurred observation, u is the latent
sharp image, k is an unknown blurring kernel and n is
additive white noise. For this model to be accurate, the
camera movement has to be essentially a rotation in its
optical axis with negligible in-plane rotation, e.g., [26].
The kernel k results from several blur sources: light
diffraction due to the finite aperture, out-of-focus, light
integration in the photo-sensor, and relative motion between the camera and the scene during the exposure.
To get enough photons per pixel in a typical low light
scene, the camera needs to capture light for a period
of tens to hundreds of milliseconds. In such a situation (and assuming that the scene is static and the
user/camera has correctly set the focus), the dominant
contribution to the blur kernel is the camera shake —
mostly due to hand tremors.
Current cameras can take a burst of images, this being popular also in camera phones. This has been exploited in several approaches for accumulating photons
in the different images and then forming an image with
less noise (mimicking a longer exposure time a posteriori, see e.g., [2]). However, this principle is disturbed if
the images in the burst have blur. The classical mathematical formulation as a multi-image deconvolution,
seeks to solve an inverse problem where the unknowns
are the multiple blurring operators and the underlying sharp image. This procedure, although produces
good results [30], is computationally very expensive,
and very sensitive to a good estimation of the blurring
kernels. Furthermore, since the inverse problem is illposed it relies on priors either or both for the calculus
of the blurs and the latent sharp image.
Camera shake originated from hand tremor vibrations is essentially random [4, 11, 27]. This implies
that the movement of the camera in an individual image of the burst is independent of the movement in
another one. Thus, the blur in one frame will be differ-

1. Introduction
One of the most challenging experiences in photography is taking images in low-light environments. The
basic principle of photography is the accumulation of
photons in the sensor during a given exposure time. In
general, the more photons reach the surface the better
the quality of the final image, as the photonic noise
is reduced. However, this basic principle requires the
photographed scene to be static and that there is no relative motion between the camera and the scene. Otherwise, the photons will be accumulated in neighboring pixels, generating a loss of sharpness (blur). This
problem is significant when shooting with hand-held
cameras, the most popular photography device today,
in dim light conditions.
Under reasonable hypotheses, the camera shake can
1

