Matching-CNN Meets KNN: Quasi-Parametric Human Parsing
Si Liu1,2
Xiaodan Liang2,4
Luoqi Liu2
Xiaohui Shen3
Jianchao Yang3
5
4
1
Changsheng Xu
Liang Lin
Xiaochun Cao
Shuicheng Yan2
1

SKLOIS, IIE, Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 National University of Singapore 3 Adobe Research
4

Sun Yat-sen University

5

IA, Chinese Academy of Sciences

liusi@iie.ac.cn, xdliang328@gmail.com

KNN images

Abstract
Both parametric and non-parametric approaches have
demonstrated encouraging performances in the human
parsing task, namely segmenting a human image into several semantic regions (e.g., hat, bag, left arm, face). In this
work, we aim to develop a new solution with the advantages of both methodologies, namely supervision from annotated data and the ﬂexibility to use newly annotated (possibly uncommon) images, and present a quasi-parametric
human parsing model. Under the classic K Nearest Neighbor (KNN)-based nonparametric framework, the parametric Matching Convolutional Neural Network (M-CNN) is
proposed to predict the matching conﬁdence and displacements of the best matched region in the testing image for
a particular semantic region in one KNN image. Given a
testing image, we ﬁrst retrieve its KNN images from the
annotated/manually-parsed human image corpus. Then
each semantic region in each KNN image is matched with
conﬁdence to the testing image using M-CNN, and the
matched regions from all KNN images are further fused,
followed by a superpixel smoothing procedure to obtain the
ultimate human parsing result. The M-CNN differs from the
classic CNN [12] in that the tailored cross image matching ﬁlters are introduced to characterize the matching between the testing image and the semantic region of a KNN
image. The cross image matching ﬁlters are deﬁned at different convolutional layers, each aiming to capture a particular range of displacements. Comprehensive evaluations
over a large dataset with 7,700 annotated human images
well demonstrate the signiﬁcant performance gain from the
quasi-parametric model over the state-of-the-arts [29, 30],
for the human parsing task.

Input

Bag

R-arm

L-arm

R-leg

L-leg

Face

R-shoe

L-shoe

Belt

Skirt

U-cloth

Hair

Hat

Null

Image
Corpus

…

M-CNN

M-CNN

M-CNN

…

M-CNN

Combination

M-CNN

M-CNN

Combination

…
Hat

M-CNN

M-CNN

Combination

Superpixel
Smoothing

…
Skirt

M-CNN

Pants

Parsing Result

Figure 1. Illustration of our quasi-parametric human parsing
framework. Given a testing image, its K Nearest Neighbour
(KNN) images are retrieved from the manually-annotated image
corpus. Then the input image is paired with each semantic region
(e.g., hat, skirt and pants) of its KNN images and each pair is fed
into the M-CNN individually. The M-CNN predicts the matching conﬁdence and displacements between the input image pair.
Then the corresponding label maps are transferred from the KNN
region to the testing image. All transferred label maps from different KNN images are combined to produce a probability map for
each label. The probability map is further reﬁned by superpixel
smoothing to generate the ﬁnal parsing result. The color legend is
shown in the top. For better viewing of all ﬁgures in this paper,
please refer to the original zoomed-in color pdf ﬁle.

and upper-body clothes), has drawn much attention in recent years [29, 30, 4, 3] and serves as the basis for many
high-level applications, such as clothing classiﬁcation [1]
and retrieval [20].
Several parametric and non-parametric human parsing
methods are proposed and show very promising perfor-

1. Introduction
Human parsing, namely partitioning the human body
into several semantic regions (e.g., hat, left/right leg, glasses
4321

