Heat Diffusion Over Weighted Manifolds: A New Descriptor for Textured 3D
Non-Rigid Shapes
Mostafa Abdelrahman1,2 , Aly Farag2 , David Swanson3 , and Moumen T. El-Melegy1
1
Electrical Engineering Department, Assiut University, Assiut 71516, Egypt
2
CVIP Lab, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY 40292, USA
3
Department of Mathematics, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY 40292, USA
mostafa.abdelrahman@aun.edu.eg, {aly.farag, david.swanson}@louisville.edu, moumen@aun.edu.eg

Abstract
This paper proposes an approach for modeling textured 3D non-rigid models based on Weighted Heat Kernel
Signature(W-HKS). As a first contribution, we show how to
include photometric information as a weight over the shape
manifold, we also propose a novel formulation for heat diffusion over weighted manifolds. As a second contribution
we present a new discretization method for the proposed
equation using finite element approximation. Finally, the
weighted heat kernel signature is used as a shape descriptor. The proposed descriptor encodes both the photometric, and geometric information based on the solution of one
equation. We also propose a new method to introduce the
scale invariance for the weighted heat kernel signature. The
performance is tested on two benchmark datasets. The results have indeed confirmed the high performance of the
proposed approach on the textured shape retrieval problem,
and showed that the proposed method is useful in coping
with different challenges of shape analysis where pure geometric and pure photometric methods fail.

1. Introduction
The emergence of 3D scanners, multi-view stereo techniques and more recently consumer depth cameras have
made the acquisition of 3D models easier than before. This
led to a dramatic increase in the amount of 3D data available. As such the need to develop a 3D search engines has
become more important. And accordingly, developing a
shape search and retrieval algorithms attracted a lot of research to be able to organize and retrieve the 3D content, by
using 3D descriptors and similarity measures. Several techniques and algorithms have been developed over the years
for that goal. One of the key aspects of these techniques
is constructing an efficient shape descriptor which is by no
means a trivial task.

Recently, many sensors are able to acquire the color information besides the 3D shape, also multiple-view stereo
techniques are able to recover both geometric and photometric information. These photometric features can play
an important role in many shape analysis applications, such
as shape matching and correspondence because it contains
rich information about the visual appearance of real objects.
This new requirement and its important applications adds
another, new dimension to the problem difficulty. Most descriptors proposed so far are confined to shape, that is, they
analyze only geometric and/or topological properties of 3D
models. Therefore more efforts need to be done to consider
color in addition to shape in object representation and description. The domain of research in this paper is the representation of textured shapes in order to develop an efficient
descriptor that combines the color information as well as
the geometric shape information. The sought representation should cope with non-rigid transformations, which is a
key requirement for many target applications.
Some trials has been done to use the photometric information by the fusion of geometric and photometric information in a shape descriptors. Evaluation of 3D shape retrieval
methods with respect to other several requirements can be
found in [28].

1.1. Review of Related Work
There has been an extensive work on constructing descriptors for 3D shapes (e.g., [9, 26, 17, 11, 17, 16, 29, 2]).
One of the challenging issues in that regard is how to handle non-rigid transformation. The problem of non-rigid
shape deformation needs more work to compensate for the
degrees of freedom resulting from local deformations. In
the past decade, significant effort has been invested in extending the invariance properties to non-rigid deformations.
Elad and Kimmel [10] proposed modeling shapes as metric spaces with the geodesic distances as an intrinsic metric, which are invariant to inelastic deformations. Bronstein

