Generalized Tensor Total Variation Minimization for Visual Data Recovery⇤
Xiaojie Guo1 and Yi Ma2
1
State Key Laboratory of Information Security, IIE, CAS, Beijing, 100093, China
2
School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, 200031, China
xj.max.guo@gmail.com | mayi@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract

N 2 RD1 ⇥D2 ⇥···⇥Dn by solving the following problem:

In this paper, we propose a definition of Generalized
Tensor Total Variation norm (GTV) that considers both the
inhomogeneity and the multi-directionality of responses to
derivative-like filters. More specifically, the inhomogeneity
simultaneously preserves high-frequency signals and suppresses noises, while the multi-directionality ensures that,
for an entry in a tensor, more information from its neighbors is taken into account. To effectively and efficiently seek
the solution of the GTV minimization problem, we design a
novel Augmented Lagrange Multiplier based algorithm, the
convergence of which is theoretically guaranteed. Experiments are conducted to demonstrate the superior performance of our method over the state of the art alternatives
on classic visual data recovery applications including completion and denoising.

min (T ) +

T ,N

(N ) s. t. P⌦ (O) = P⌦ (T + N ), (1)

where P⌦ (·) is the orthogonal projection operator on the
support ⌦ 2 {0, 1}D1 ⇥D2 ⇥···⇥Dn that indicates which elements are observed. (N ) is a penalty with respect to
noise, which usually adopts `1 norm that is optimal for
Laplacian noise, or Frobenius norm for Gaussian noise. The
non-negative parameter provides a trade-off between the
noise sensitivity and closeness to the observed signal. And
(T ) stands for the assumption to make the ill-posed tensor recovery problem well-defined. In literature, there are
mainly two lines about the assumption, i.e. the low rankness and the low total variation.
The low-rank nature of visual data, say (T ) :=
rank(T ), has been focus of considerable research in past
years, the effectiveness of which has been witnessed by numerous applications, such as image colorization [15], rectification [18], denoising [5], depth enhancement [10] and
subspace learning [13]. As for the tensor recovery task,
specifically, Liu et al. [9] first introduce the trace norm
for tensors to achieve the goal. More recently, Wang et
al. [14] simultaneously impose the low rank prior and the
spatial-temporal consistency for completing videos. Zhang
et al. [17] design a hybrid singular value thresholding strategy for enhancing the low rankness of the underlying
tensors. Although these methods produce very promising
results on the visual data with strong global structure, the
performance of which would degrade on general tensors of
visual data. To mitigate the over-strict constraint, [3] uses factor priors to simultaneously decompose and complete
tensors, which follows the tensor factorization framework
proposed in [11]. Actually, [3] instead enforces the low
rank constraint on the low dimensional representation (submanifold) of the data.
Alternatively, the visual tensor to be recovered should
be piece-wise smooth, that is (T ) := kT kT V . In last
decades, the advances in matrix Total Variation (TV) minimization have demonstrated its significance as a theoretic

1. Introduction
In real data analysis applications, we often have to face
handling dirty observations, say incomplete or noisy data.
Recovering the missing or noise-free data from such observations thus becomes crucial to provide us more precise
information to refer to. Besides, compared to 1-D vectors
and 2-D matrices, the data encountered in real world applications is more likely to be high order, for instance a multispectral image is a 3-D tensor and a color video is a 4-D
tensor. This work concentrates on the problem of visual
data recovery, i.e. restoring tensors of visual data from polluted observations. However, without additional priors, the
problem is intractable as it usually has infinitely many solutions and thus, it is apparently impossible to identify which
of these candidate solutions is indeed the “correct” one.
Mathematically, under some assumptions, one would
want to recover a n-order tensor T 2 RD1 ⇥D2 ⇥···⇥Dn from
an observation O 2 RD1 ⇥D2 ⇥···⇥Dn in presence of noise
⇤ This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (No. 61402467) and in part by the Excellent Young
Talent Programme through the Institute of Information Engineering, CAS.

1

