Social Saliency Prediction
Hyun Soo Park
Jianbo Shi
University of Pennsylvania
{hypar,jshi}@seas.upenn.edu

Social saliency

Abstract
This paper presents a method to predict social saliency,
the likelihood of joint attention, given an input image or
video by leveraging the social interaction data captured by
first person cameras. Inspired by electric dipole moments,
we introduce a social formation feature that encodes the
geometric relationship between joint attention and its social formation. We learn this feature from the first person
social interaction data where we can precisely measure the
locations of joint attention and its associated members in
3D. An ensemble classifier is trained to learn the geometric
relationship. Using the trained classifier, we predict social
saliency in real-world scenes with multiple social groups
including scenes from team sports captured in a third person view. Our representation does not require directional
measurements such as gaze directions. A geometric analysis of social interactions in terms of the F-formation theory
is also presented.

Points on
humans Camera

Social saliency

Figure 1. We present a method to estimate the likelihood of joint
attention called social saliency from a spatial distribution of social
members. The inset image shows the top view of the reconstructed
scene. The blue points are the points belonging to humans. The
heat map shows the predicted social saliency and we overlay this
map by projecting onto the ground plane in the image.

sion solutions can provide a large scale measurement for developing a computational representation of joint attention.
The challenges are: (1) human detection and tracking failure in the presence of occlusions, (2) scene variability, e.g.,
the different number, scale, and orientation of social groups,
and (3) inaccurate measurements of gaze directions.
While there are many factors involved in joint attention,
our main question is: can one predict joint attention using
social formation information alone, without the gaze information of each member?
In this paper, we show that it is possible to empirically
learn the likelihood of joint attention called social saliency
as a function of a social formation, a spatial distribution
of social members, using data from first person cameras.
Three key properties of our predictive joint attention model
are: a) it is scale and orientation invariant to social formations; b) it is invariant to scene context, both indoors and
outdoors; c) it is robust to missing data. Once this model
is constructed, a sparse point cloud representation of humans can be used to predict the locations of joint attention
as shown in the inset image of Figure 1, without any directional measurement such as gaze directions—we measure
and learn this predictive model in the first person view, and
apply in the third person view.
To construct such joint attention model, we use first person cameras. With multiple first person cameras, joint attention can be precisely measured in 3D since the ego-

1. Introduction
Imagine an artificial agent such as a service robot operating in a social scene as shown in Figure 1. It would detect
obstacles such as humans in the scene and plan its trajectory to avoid collisions with the obstacles. It may plan a
trajectory that passes through the empty space between the
audiences and performer. This trajectory intrudes on the social space created by their interactions, e.g., occluding the
sight of the audiences, and thus, it is socially inappropriate.
We expect the artificial agent to respect our social space although the boundary of the social space does not physically
exist. This requires social intelligence [31]—an ability to
perceive, model, and predict social behaviors—to be integrated into its functionality.
Joint attention is the primary basis of social intelligence
as it serves as a medium of social interactions; we interact with others via joint attention1 . Understanding joint attention, specifically knowing where it is and knowing how
it moves, provides a strong cue to analyze and recognize
group behaviors. It has been recognized that computer vi1 Gaze directions are correlated with joint attention in quasi-static social
interactions while motion becomes a dominant factor in rapid dynamic
interactions as shown in Figure 3(b).

1

