Handling Motion Blur in Multi-Frame Super-Resolution
Ziyang Ma1

Renjie Liao2

Xin Tao2

1

Li Xu2

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences &
State Key Lab. of Computer Science, Inst. of Software, CAS

Jiaya Jia2
2

Enhua Wu1,3

The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
FST, University of Macau

Abstract
Ubiquitous motion blur easily fails multi-frame superresolution (MFSR). Our method proposed in this paper
tackles this issue by optimally searching least blurred pixels
in MFSR. An EM framework is proposed to guide residual
blur estimation and high-resolution image reconstruction.
To suppress noise, we employ a family of sparse penalties as
natural image priors, along with an effective solver. Theoretical analysis is performed on how and when our method
works. The relationship between estimation errors of motion blur and the quality of input images is discussed. Our
method produces sharp and higher-resolution results given
input of challenging low-resolution noisy and blurred sequences.

Figure 1. Multi-frame super-resolution (SR) results on a real video
sequence. Green box: Input frames (150 × 120) directly cropped
from a video captured by an iPhone. Three clearest frames are
shown. Motion blur and compression artifacts are present. (a)
Result of single image deblurring [30]. (b) Result of video deblurring [7]. (c) Result of video upsampling [19]. (d) MFSR result [16]. (e) Our result (×3).

1. Introduction
Multi-frame super-resolution (MFSR) refers to the process of estimating a high-res image from a sequence of lowres observations. It is a fundamental task in computer vision
and image processing. It is also of great value in revealing important information, such as text or fine details, from
low-quality surveillance or mobile phone videos.
Most previous MFSR methods made assumptions on
noise and point spread function (PSF), and may not handle
well images under severe quality degradation. One important type of degradation is motion blur caused by camera
shake or fast object motion especially in dim light. When
the region of interest (ROI), e.g., text and logo, is with a
small size, even slight motion blur can be sufficiently influential. An example is shown in Fig. 1.
Albeit common in videos, motion blur has not been sufficiently discussed for MFSR in literatures. Straightforward preprocessing of each input image using existing single/multiple image deblurring techniques [19, 14, 6, 7, 32,
30] could introduce visual artifacts (Fig. 1(a)) and/or yield
incomplete blur removal (Fig. 1(b)). Further, the low resolution of input images makes blind deconvolution [5, 28, 30]
hardly find enough strong edges for its kernel estimation, as

illustrated in Fig. 1(a). Therefore, image deblurring strategies do not directly suit MFSR.
In addition, state-of-the-art MFSR methods [26, 16]
model blurriness for anti-aliasing, but not the inherent motion blur. Most SR methods, either single- or multipleimage ones, also assume that the underlying blur kernel is
known, or has a simple analytic form, which is hardly satisfied in real-world cases. In Fig. 1(d), when motion blur
is not well handled, the result is accordingly blurred, and
contains false edges near the leaf.
To deal with motion blur, another intuitive option is to
run MFSR only on manually selected ‘clear’ frames. We
produce the result in Fig. 1(d) where false edges still exist
because there is no completely motion-blur-free frame in
the sequence.
Our solution Our technical contribution is threefold. First,
we propose a system to estimate motion blur and the highres image with quality feedback and control. Second, based
on the observation that in typical motion blurred videos, the
1

