On Pairwise Costs for
Network Flow Multi-Object Tracking
Visesh Chari∗

Simon Lacoste-Julien†

Ivan Laptev∗

Josef Sivic∗

INRIA and Ecole Normale Supérieure, Paris, France
Abstract
Multi-object tracking has been recently approached with
the min-cost network flow optimization techniques. Such
methods simultaneously resolve multiple object tracks in a
video and enable modeling of dependencies among tracks.
Min-cost network flow methods also fit well within the
“tracking-by-detection” paradigm where object trajectories are obtained by connecting per-frame outputs of an object detector. Object detectors, however, often fail due to
occlusions and clutter in the video. To cope with such situations, we propose to add pairwise costs to the min-cost
network flow framework. While integer solutions to such a
problem become NP-hard, we design a convex relaxation
solution with an efficient rounding heuristic which empirically gives certificates of small suboptimality. We evaluate two particular types of pairwise costs and demonstrate
improvements over recent tracking methods in real-world
video sequences.

(a) No overlap term

(b) With overlap term

(c) No co-occurrence term

(d) With co-occurrence term

Figure 1: Results of network flow tracking using cost functions
with/without pairwise terms. (a)-(b): a pairwise term that penalizes the overlap between different tracks helps resolving ambiguous tracks (shown in red) in crowded scenes. (c)-(d): a pairwise
term that encourages the consistency between two signals (here
head detections and body detections) helps eliminating failures
(shown in red) of object detectors.

1. Introduction
The task of visual multi-object tracking is to recover
spatio-temporal trajectories for a number of objects in a
video sequence. Tracking multiple objects, like people or
vehicles, has a wide range of applications from Robotics
to video surveillance [28]. Despite recent progress in the
field [3, 5, 8, 20, 21, 22, 27], tracking remains a challenging
problem especially in crowded and cluttered scenes.
With the advances in object detection, “tracking-bydetection” have recently become a popular paradigm for
object tracking [5, 8, 13, 17]. Given object detections in
every frame of a video sequence, the tracking is formulated
as selection and clustering of corresponding object detections over time. Such selection and clustering problems can
be solved in an optimization framework using carefully designed cost functions. Given an appropriate cost function,
tracking-by-detection is typically setup as a MAP estimation problem [29]. Among different formulations of this

problem, min-cost network flow [2] is particularly attractive as it allows for optimal and efficient solutions [22].
The energy minimization approach to tracking enables
global solutions to track selection and avoids early and
error-prone local decisions. Moreover, it also enables
for a principled modeling of interactions among different
tracks. In the past, models of track interactions have been
shown to improve human tracking in crowds [21], to identify unusual behavior [15] as well as to resolve ambiguous
tracks [20, 22]. Such previous methods, however, either resort to local non-convex optimization [21, 15, 20], or use
greedy methods to enforce interactions [22].
Unlike previous work, we here propose to model track
interactions within the min-cost network flow tracking approach. We introduce pairwise costs to the objective function and design a convex relaxation solution with an efficient
rounding heuristic. Although our final integer solution can
be suboptimal, our method is generic and empirically pro-

∗ WILLOW project-team, Départment d’Informatique de l’Ecole Normale Supérieure, ENS/INRIA/CNRS UMR 8548, Paris, France
† SIERRA project-team, Départment d’Informatique de l’Ecole Normale Supérieure, ENS/INRIA/CNRS UMR 8548, Paris, France

1

