Jointly Learning Heterogeneous Features for RGB-D Activity Recognition
∗

Jian-Fang Hu† , Wei-Shi Zheng‡⋆ , Jianhuang Lai‡ , and Jianguo Zhang⋄
†
School of Mathematics and Computational Science, Sun Yat-sen University, China
‡
School of Information Science and Technology, Sun Yat-sen University, China
⋆
Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Computational Science, Guangzhou, China
⋄
School of Computing, University of Dundee, United Kingdom
hujianf@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, wszheng@ieee.org, stsljh@mail.sysu.edu.cn, jgzhang@computing.dundee.ac.uk

Abstract
In this paper, we focus on heterogeneous feature learning
for RGB-D activity recognition. Considering that features
from different channels could share some similar hidden
structures, we propose a joint learning model to simultaneously explore the shared and feature-specific components as
an instance of heterogenous multi-task learning. The proposed model in an unified framework is capable of: 1) jointly mining a set of subspaces with the same dimensionality to
enable the multi-task classifier learning, and 2) meanwhile,
quantifying the shared and feature-specific components of
features in the subspaces. To efficiently train the joint model, a three-step iterative optimization algorithm is proposed,
followed by two inference models. Extensive results on three
activity datasets have demonstrated the efficacy of the proposed method. In addition, a novel RGB-D activity dataset
focusing on human-object interaction is collected for evaluating the proposed method, which will be made available to
the community for RGB-D activity benchmarking and analysis.

1. Introduction
The emergence of low-cost depth sensors (e.g., the Microsoft Kinect) opens a new dimension to address the challenge of human activity recognition. Compared to the conventional use of RGB videos, the information from depth
channel is insensitive to illumination variations, invariant to
color and texture changes, and more importantly reliable
for estimating body silhouette and skeleton (human posture) [24]. Bearing on these merits, there are two emerging branches of activity recognition work: 1) depth-based
representation and 2) RGB-D based development.
On building depth-based representation, a straightfor∗ corresponding author

Figure 1. Visualization of HOG features from two activity snapshots in RGB (gray) and depth channel respectively. As shown,
the HOG features from both channels of the same activity unveils
similar “gist” structure of that activity, e.g., the“gist” of looking
down in reading, and cup-to-mouth in drinking.

ward way is to generalize the descriptors developed for RGB channel to depth channel, typically for describing the
shape geometry [13, 28, 16, 41, 22, 36, 16], where Depth
HOG [22, 36] is one representative. Due to the development of realtime human skeleton tracker from single depth
image [24], motion information could be effectively encoded using the positional dynamics of each individual skeletal
joints [9, 33, 18] or relationship of joint pairs [35, 17, 21] or
even their combination [40, 14, 27]. Recently, local depth
patterns around each key joint of human skeleton are also
found to be useful in [29, 30, 10].
Depth does not necessarily mean discriminant. Albeit invariant to appearance changes, it does lose some useful information such as texture context, which is critical to distinguish some activities involving human-object interactions.
Therefore, the RGB-D approach becomes an effective way
to describe activities of interactions [30, 10, 15, 23, 4, 11].
For instance, Liu and Shao [15] simultaneously fused the
RGB and depth information using a deep architecture; Zhu
et al. [40] employed a set of random forests to fuse spatiotemporal and joints features; Shahroudy et al. [23] selected to fuse the RGB information and skeleton cues using

