Time-to-Contact from Image Intensity
Yukitoshi Watanabe
Fumihiko Sakaue
Jun Sato
Nagoya Institute of Technology
Gokiso, Showa, Nagoya, 466-8555, Japan
{yukitoshi@cv.,sakaue@,junsato@}nitech.ac.jp

Abstract

ness in images. However, their method is based on the constant brightness assumption, and thus once this assumption
breaks, it cannot be used. For example, if a light source
moves in the 3D scene, their method cannot be applied at
all.
In this paper, we propose a method for computing the
time-to-contact from image intensity. Our method is very
different from the traditional methods, and it measures the
time-to-contact of a light source motion. It is known that the
brightness of a surface illuminated by a light source changes
according to the motion of the light source. For example,
the brightness of a road surface illuminated by the head
lamp of a vehicle changes according to the motion of the
vehicle as shown in Fig.1. The brightness becomes higher
when the distance from the light source becomes smaller.
Thus, the distance can be computed from the brightness, if
the radiance of the light source, surface reflectance and surface orientation are known. However, it is very difficult to
estimate these parameters accurately. Thus, we in this paper propose a method for estimating time-to-contact from
changes in image intensity without knowing radiance of the
light source, surface orientation and reflectance.
We first derive a basic method for estimating time-tocontact from image intensity. Then, we extend our method,
so that we can estimate time-to-contact even if the surface
is illuminated by not only a single light source but also
ambient lights. Furthermore, we propose a computational
method which is less sensitive to image noise, hence it is
more practical.

It is known that time-to-contact toward objects can be
estimated just from changes in the object size in camera images, and we do not need any additional information, such
as camera parameters and motions. However, the existing
methods for measuring the time-to-contact are based on geometric image features, such as corners and edge lines, and
thus they cannot be used when there are no geometric features in images. In this paper, we propose a new method for
computing the time-to-contact from photometric information in images. When a light source moves in the 3D scene,
an observed intensity changes according to the motion of
the light source. In this paper, we analyze the change in
photometric information in images, and show that the timeto-contact can be estimated just from the changes in intensity in images. Our method does not need any additional
information, such as radiance of light source, reflectance
of object and orientation of object surface. The proposed
method can be used in various applications, such as vehicle
driver assistance.

1. Introduction
The time-to-contact is very useful for measuring the danger of collision of objects [3], and has been studied extensively [1, 2, 6, 8, 7, 4, 9]. It is invariant under camera parameters and structure of the scene, and thus we do not need to
estimate camera parameters and scene structures for computing the time-to-contact.
The time-to-contact has been studied as differential geometric properties in images, and thus the change in apparent
size of objects or the optic flow fields in images have been
used for estimating the time-to-contact [10, 7]. For example, Cipolla et al. [1] proposed a method for computing the
time-to-contact from changes in the area of closed contours
in images. However, these methods require extraction of
geometric image features, such as corners, closed contours,
etc. For relaxing this problem, Horn et al [4] proposed a
method for estimating the time-to-contact from the bright-

2. Time to Contact from Geometric Information
We first consider traditional method for estimating timeto-contact from geometric information in images[1, 8].
Let us consider a camera, which moves toward an object
with a constant velocity. Then, the apparent size of the object in an image changes according to the distance from the
object to the camera. Suppose the apparent size of the object in the image is 𝑦 at time 𝑡, and it changes to 𝑦 ′ at time
𝑡 + 1. If the real size of the object is 𝑌 and the distance
4321

