Multi-instance Object Segmentation with Occlusion Handling
Yi-Ting Chen1 Xiaokai Liu1,2 Ming-Hsuan Yang1
University of California at Merced1 Dalian University of Technology2

Abstract
We present a multi-instance object segmentation algorithm to tackle occlusions. As an object is split into two
parts by an occluder, it is nearly impossible to group the
two separate regions into an instance by purely bottomup schemes. To address this problem, we propose to incorporate top-down category specific reasoning and shape
prediction through exemplars into an intuitive energy minimization framework. We perform extensive evaluations of
our method on the challenging PASCAL VOC 2012 segmentation set. The proposed algorithm achieves favorable results on the joint detection and segmentation task against
the state-of-the-art method both quantitatively and qualitatively.
Figure 1: Segmentation quality comparison. Given an
image (a), our method (d) can handle occlusions caused by
the leg of the person while MCG [5] (c) includes the leg
of the person as part of the motorbike. Note that our result has an IoU of 0.85 and the MCG result has an IoU of
0.61. Moreover, the segment in (c) is classified as a bicycle
using class-specific classifiers whereas our segment can be
classified correctly as a motorbike.

1. Introduction
Object detection and semantic segmentation are core
tasks in computer vision. Object detection aims to localize and recognize every instance marked by a bounding box.
However, bounding boxes can only provide coarse positions
of detected objects. On the other hand, semantic segmentation assigns a category label to each pixel in an image,
which provides more accurate locations of objects. However, semantic segmentation does not provide the instance
information (e.g., number of instances). Intuitively, it is
beneficial to jointly tackle the object detection and semantic segmentation. However, this is challenging due to occlusions, shape deformation, texture and color within one
object and obscured boundaries with respect to other image
parts in real-world scenes.
Occlusion is the main challenge in providing accurate segmentation results. A typical semantic segmentation [3, 6, 10] starts with generating segmentation hypotheses by a category-independent bottom-up segmentation algorithm [5, 7, 4] followed by class-specific classifiers. In
many cases, bottom-up object segmentation algorithms cannot correctly handle occlusions where an object is spilt
into two separate regions since they lack top-down information. Figure 1(a) shows such an example where a motorbike is occluded by the leg of a person and is split into

two parts. Here, the best hypothesis (with respect to highest
intersection-over-union (IoU) score) generated by the top
performing segmentation algorithm (Multiscale Combinatorial Grouping, MCG [5]) fails to parse the motorbike correctly as shown in Figure 1(c).
In this work, we address this issue by developing an algorithm suited to handle occlusions. To tackle occlusions,
we incorporate both top-down and bottom-up information
to achieve accurate segmentations under occlusions. We
start by finding the occluding regions (i.e., the overlap between two instances). In case of Figure 1, finding the overlap between the person and motorbike gives the occluding
region, i.e., leg of the person. To find these regions, we need
to parse and categorize the two overlapping instances. Recently, a large scale convolutional neural network (CNN) is
applied to obtain highly discriminative features for training
class-specific classifiers [16] (i.e., R-CNN). The classifiers
can categorize the object in a bounding box with a high
1

