Fast and Robust Hand Tracking Using Detection-Guided Optimization
Srinath Sridhar1 , Franziska Mueller1,2 , Antti Oulasvirta3 , Christian Theobalt1
1
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, 2 Saarland University, 3 Aalto University
{ssridhar,frmueller,theobalt}@mpi-inf.mpg.de, antti.oulasvirta@aalto.fi

Abstract
Markerless tracking of hands and fingers is a promising
enabler for human-computer interaction. However, adoption has been limited because of tracking inaccuracies, incomplete coverage of motions, low framerate, complex camera setups, and high computational requirements. In this
paper, we present a fast method for accurately tracking
rapid and complex articulations of the hand using a single depth camera. Our algorithm uses a novel detectionguided optimization strategy that increases the robustness
and speed of pose estimation. In the detection step, a randomized decision forest classifies pixels into parts of the
hand. In the optimization step, a novel objective function
combines the detected part labels and a Gaussian mixture
representation of the depth to estimate a pose that best fits
the depth. Our approach needs comparably less computational resources which makes it extremely fast (50 fps without GPU support). The approach also supports varying
static, or moving, camera-to-scene arrangements. We show
the benefits of our method by evaluating on public datasets
and comparing against previous work.

1. Introduction
There is increasing interest in using markerless hand
tracking in human-computer interaction, for instance when
interacting with 3D applications, augmented reality, smart
watches, and for gestural input [11, 13, 30]. However, flexible, realtime markerless tracking of hands presents several
unique challenges. First, natural hand movement involves
simultaneous control of several (≥ 25) degrees-of-freedom
(DOFs), fast motions with rapid changes in direction, and
self-occlusions. Tracking fast and complex finger articulations combined with global motion of the hand at high
framerates is critical but remains a challenging problem.
Second, many methods use dense camera setups [16, 22]
or GPU acceleration [15], i.e. have high setup costs which
limits deployment. Finally, applications of hand tracking
demand tracking across many camera-to-scene configurations including desktop, egocentric and wearable settings.

This paper presents a novel method for hand tracking
with a single depth camera that aims to address these challenges. Our method is extremely fast (nearly equalling the
capture rate of the camera), reliable, and supports varying
close-range camera-to-hand arrangements including desktop, and moving egocentric (camera mounted to the head).
The main novelty in our work is a new detectionguided optimization strategy that combines the benefits
of two common strands in hand tracking research—modelbased generative tracking and discriminative hand pose
detection—into a unified framework that yields high efficiency and robust performance and minimizes their mutual
failures (see Figure 1). The first contribution in this strategy
is a novel, efficient representation of both the input depth
and the hand model shape as a mixture of Gaussian functions. While previous work used primitive shapes like cylinders [15, 16] or spheres [19] to represent the hand model,
we use Gaussian mixtures for both the depth data and the
model. This compact, mathematically smooth representation allows us to formulate pose estimation as a 2.5D generative optimization problem in depth. We define a new
depth-only energy, that optimizes for the similarity of the
input depth with the hand model. It uses additional prior
and data terms to avoid finger collisions and preserve the
smoothness of reconstructed motions. Importantly, since
the energy is smooth, we can obtain analytic gradients and
perform rapid optimization. While pose tracking on this
energy alone could run in excess of 120 fps using gradientbased local optimization, this often results in a wrong local
pose optimum.
The second contribution in our strategy is thus to incorporate evidence from trained randomized decision forests
that label depth pixels into predefined parts of the hand.
Unlike previous purely detection-based approaches [6, 20],
we use the part labels as additional constraints in an augmented version of the aforementioned depth-only energy,
henceforth termed detection-guided energy. The part labels include discriminative detection evidence into generative pose estimation. This enables the tracker to better recover from erroneous local pose optima and prevents temporal jitter common to detection-only approaches. The pre-

