Joint Tracking and Segmentation of Multiple Targets
Anton Milan1
1

Laura Leal-Taixé2

University of Adelaide, Australia

2

Konrad Schindler2

Ian Reid1

Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing Group, ETH Zürich

Abstract
Tracking-by-detection has proven to be the most successful strategy to address the task of tracking multiple targets in
unconstrained scenarios [e.g. 40, 53, 55]. Traditionally, a
set of sparse detections, generated in a preprocessing step,
serves as input to a high-level tracker whose goal is to correctly associate these “dots” over time. An obvious shortcoming of this approach is that most information available
in image sequences is simply ignored by thresholding weak
detection responses and applying non-maximum suppression. We propose a multi-target tracker that exploits low
level image information and associates every (super)-pixel
to a specific target or classifies it as background. As a result, we obtain a video segmentation in addition to the classical bounding-box representation in unconstrained, realworld videos. Our method shows encouraging results on
many standard benchmark sequences and significantly outperforms state-of-the-art tracking-by-detection approaches
in crowded scenes with long-term partial occlusions.

1. Introduction
Despite remarkable progress, automated tracking of multiple targets in unconstrained, crowded environments remains to a large degree unsolved. Noisy and imprecise
measurements, long-term occlusions, complicated dynamics and target interactions all contribute to its complexity.
Tracking-by-detection has become the method of choice for
approaching this problem [40, 55, 56] as it is able to reduce the complexity dramatically by only taking a restricted
set of measurements – namely non-maxima suppressed object detections – into account. An obvious downside of
this approach is that most of the information available in
a video sequence is simply ignored. While state-of-the-art
object detectors have reached acceptable performance, both
in terms of accuracy [16] and in terms of speed [4, 46], they
still consistently fail in cases of occlusion where only a part
of the entire object is visible.
We argue that it is beneficial to consider all image evidence to handle tracking in crowded scenarios. In contrast
to many previous approaches, we aim to assign a unique

Figure 1: An example of our instance-based segmentation.
target ID not only to each individual detection, but to every
(super-)pixel in the entire video (cf . Fig. 1). This low-level
information enables us to recover trajectories of largely occluded targets since the partial image evidence of the superpixels often persists even in the absence of detections.
In common with some other approaches [37, 40, 41, 43]
we formulate the problem as one of finding a set of continuous trajectory hypotheses that best explains the data, but our
approach differs in that we take account of the low-level
information in scoring the trajectory hypotheses. We do
this by modelling the problem as a multi-label conditional
random field (CRF). We show how through judicious and
justifiable modelling choices, the CRF energy is submodular and so can be addressed with well-studied optimization
techniques such as α-expansion. Our main contributions
are:
• a new CRF model that exploits a lot more of the image
evidence, including high-level detector responses and
low-level superpixel information;
• fully automated segmentation and tracking of an unknown number of targets;
• a complete state representation at every time step that
naturally handles occlusions (as opposed to [13, 22]).
Our experimental evaluation on a set of standard, publicly
available sequences confirms the advantage of exploiting
partial evidence. We are able to improve the recall by 10%
on average, while reducing the number of ID switches.

2. Related Work
Multi-target tracking has been and still is an extremely
popular research field in computer vision [39]. In this

