Show and Tell: A Neural Image Caption Generator
Oriol Vinyals
Google

Alexander Toshev
Google

Samy Bengio
Google

Dumitru Erhan
Google

vinyals@google.com

toshev@google.com

bengio@google.com

dumitru@google.com

Abstract
Vision!
Deep CNN

Automatically describing the content of an image is a
fundamental problem in artificial intelligence that connects
computer vision and natural language processing. In this
paper, we present a generative model based on a deep recurrent architecture that combines recent advances in computer vision and machine translation and that can be used
to generate natural sentences describing an image. The
model is trained to maximize the likelihood of the target description sentence given the training image. Experiments
on several datasets show the accuracy of the model and the
fluency of the language it learns solely from image descriptions. Our model is often quite accurate, which we verify
both qualitatively and quantitatively. For instance, while
the current state-of-the-art BLEU-1 score (the higher the
better) on the Pascal dataset is 25, our approach yields 59,
to be compared to human performance around 69. We also
show BLEU-1 score improvements on Flickr30k, from 56 to
66, and on SBU, from 19 to 28. Lastly, on the newly released
COCO dataset, we achieve a BLEU-4 of 27.7, which is the
current state-of-the-art.

Language !
Generating!
RNN

A group of people
shopping at an
outdoor market.
!

There are many
vegetables at the
fruit stand.

Figure 1. NIC, our model, is based end-to-end on a neural network consisting of a vision CNN followed by a language generating RNN. It generates complete sentences in natural language
from an input image, as shown on the example above.

existing solutions of the above sub-problems, in order to go
from an image to its description [6, 16]. In contrast, we
would like to present in this work a single joint model that
takes an image I as input, and is trained to maximize the
likelihood p(S|I) of producing a target sequence of words
S = {S1 , S2 , . . .} where each word St comes from a given
dictionary, that describes the image adequately.
The main inspiration of our work comes from recent advances in machine translation, where the task is to transform
a sentence S written in a source language, into its translation T in the target language, by maximizing p(T |S). For
many years, machine translation was also achieved by a series of separate tasks (translating words individually, aligning words, reordering, etc), but recent work has shown that
translation can be done in a much simpler way using Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) [3, 2, 30] and still reach
state-of-the-art performance. An “encoder” RNN reads the
source sentence and transforms it into a rich fixed-length
vector representation, which in turn in used as the initial
hidden state of a “decoder” RNN that generates the target
sentence.
Here, we propose to follow this elegant recipe, replacing the encoder RNN by a deep convolution neural network
(CNN). Over the last few years it has been convincingly
shown that CNNs can produce a rich representation of the
input image by embedding it to a fixed-length vector, such
that this representation can be used for a variety of vision

1. Introduction
Being able to automatically describe the content of an
image using properly formed English sentences is a very
challenging task, but it could have great impact, for instance
by helping visually impaired people better understand the
content of images on the web. This task is significantly
harder, for example, than the well-studied image classification or object recognition tasks, which have been a main
focus in the computer vision community [27]. Indeed, a
description must capture not only the objects contained in
an image, but it also must express how these objects relate
to each other as well as their attributes and the activities
they are involved in. Moreover, the above semantic knowledge has to be expressed in a natural language like English,
which means that a language model is needed in addition to
visual understanding.
Most previous attempts have proposed to stitch together
1

