TILDE: A Temporally Invariant Learned DEtector
Yannick Verdie1,∗
Kwang Moo Yi1,∗
Pascal Fua1
Vincent Lepetit2
1
Computer Vision Laboratory, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
2
Institute for Computer Graphics and Vision, Graz University of Technology
{yannick.verdie, kwang.yi, pascal.fua}@epfl.ch, lepetit@icg.tugraz.at

Abstract
We introduce a learning-based approach to detect
repeatable keypoints under drastic imaging changes of
weather and lighting conditions to which state-of-the-art
keypoint detectors are surprisingly sensitive. We first identify good keypoint candidates in multiple training images
taken from the same viewpoint. We then train a regressor to
predict a score map whose maxima are those points so that
they can be found by simple non-maximum suppression.
As there are no standard datasets to test the influence of
these kinds of changes, we created our own, which we will
make publicly available. We will show that our method significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art methods in such
challenging conditions, while still achieving state-of-the-art
performance on untrained standard datasets.

1. Introduction
Keypoint detection and matching is an essential tool to
address many Computer Vision problems such as image retrieval, object tracking, and image registration. Since the
introduction of the Moravec, Förstner, and Harris corner
detectors [27, 11, 15] in the 1980s, many others have been
proposed [41, 10, 31]. Some exhibit excellent repeatability when the scale and viewpoint change or the images are
blurred [26]. However, their reliability degrades significantly when the images are acquired outdoors at different
times of day and in different weathers or seasons, as shown
in Fig. 1. This is a severe handicap when attempting to
match images taken in fair and foul weather, in the morning
and evening, in winter and summer, even with illumination
invariant descriptors [13, 39, 14, 43].
In this paper, we propose an approach to learn a keypoint
detector that extracts keypoints which are stable under such
challenging conditions and allow matching in situations as
difficult as the one depicted by Fig. 1. To this end, we first

(a) With SURF [3] keypoints

(b) With our keypoints

Figure 1: Image matching example using Speeded-Up Robust Features (SURF) [3] and our method. Same number of
keypoints and descriptor [23] was used for both keypoint detectors. Detected keypoints are shown in the third row, with
the repeated ones in green. For SURF, only one keypoint
detected in the daytime image was detected in the nighttime
image. Our method on the other hand returns many common keypoints regardless of the drastic lighting change. 1

introduce a simple but effective method to identify potentially stable points in training images. We then use them to
train a regressor that produces a score map whose values are
local maxima at these locations. By running it on new images, we can extract keypoints with simple non-maximum
suppression. Our approach is inspired by a recently proposed algorithm [34] that relies on regression to extract cen-

∗ First two authors contributed equally
1 Figures are best viewed in color.

1

