Learning to Segment Moving Objects in Videos
Katerina Fragkiadaki
University of California, Berkeley

Pablo Arbeláez
Universidad de los Andes, Colombia

katef@berkeley.edu

pa.arbelaez@uniandes.edu.co

Panna Felsen
University of California, Berkeley

Jitendra Malik
University of California, Berkeley

panna@eecs.berkeley.edu

malik@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract

that do not consider motion boundaries or moving objectness as described in this work.

We segment moving objects in videos by ranking spatiotemporal segment proposals according to “moving objectness”; how likely they are to contain a moving object. In
each video frame, we compute segment proposals using
multiple figure-ground segmentations on per frame motion
boundaries. We rank them with a Moving Objectness Detector trained on image and motion fields to detect moving objects and discard over/under segmentations or background
parts of the scene. We extend the top ranked segments
into spatio-temporal tubes using random walkers on motion
affinities of dense point trajectories. Our final tube ranking consistently outperforms previous segmentation methods in the two largest video segmentation benchmarks currently available, for any number of proposals. Further, our
per frame moving object proposals increase the detection
rate up to 7% over previous state-of-the-art static proposal
methods.

We propose a method that segments moving objects in
monocular uncalibrated videos by object proposal generation from multiple segmentations on motion boundaries
and ranking with a “moving objectness” detector. In each
frame, we extract motion boundaries by applying a learning based boundary detector on the magnitude of optical
flow. The extracted motion boundaries establish pixel affinities for multiple figure-ground segmentations that generate
a pool of segment proposals, which we call per frame Moving Object Proposals (MOPs). MOPs increase the object detection rate by 7% over state-of-the-art static segment proposals and demonstrate the value of motion for object detection in videos. We extend per frame MOPs and static
proposals into space-time tubes using constrained segmentation on dense point trajectories. The set of proposals is
ranked with a “Moving Objectness” Convolutional Neural
Network Detector (MOD) trained from image and optical
flow fields to detect moving objects and discard over/under
segmentations and static parts of the scene. This ranking
ensures good object coverage even with a very small number of proposals. An overview of our approach is shown in
Figure 1.

1. Introduction
Proposal of regions likely to contain objects and clasification using convolutional neural networks [15] is currently
the dominant paradigm for object detection in static images.
Empirically, this region-CNN paradigm has shown excellent performance against sliding window classifiers [19]
that often cannot afford to enumerate all possible bounding boxes in an image, or Markov Random Field pixel classifiers that make independence assumptions regarding the
organization of pixel labels, and cannot distinguish closeby
instances of the same object class [9, 16]. In this paper, we
propose a similar paradigm for detecting moving objects in
videos by introducing motion based object proposals and a
moving objectness ranker. We present large quantitative advances over previous multiscale segmentation and trajectory
clustering methods, as well as proposal generation methods

We use optical optical flow boundaries directly as input to segmentation, without combining them with static
boundaries; we obtain a diverse set of object proposals
by computing grouping from RGB and motion edges separately. In contrast, many researchers have tried combining optical flow with static boundaries in order to improve
boundary detection [34, 37], with only moderate success so
far [11, 37]. This is primarily due to optical flow misalignments with true object boundaries: flow “bleeds” across
occluding contours to the background [38] because background pixels mimic the motion of the nearby foreground,
as shown in Figure 2. Works of [29, 34, 37] attempt to handle bleeding by changing the strength of static boundary

