Local High-order Regularization on Data Manifolds
Kwang In Kim
Lancaster University

James Tompkin
Harvard SEAS

Abstract
The common graph Laplacian regularizer is well-established
in semi-supervised learning and spectral dimensionality reduction.
However, as a first-order regularizer, it can lead to degenerate
functions in high-dimensional manifolds. The iterated graph
Laplacian enables high-order regularization, but it has a high
computational complexity and so cannot be applied to large problems. We introduce a new regularizer which is globally high order
and so does not suffer from the degeneracy of the graph Laplacian regularizer, but is also sparse for efficient computation in
semi-supervised learning applications. We reduce computational
complexity by building a local first-order approximation of the
manifold as a surrogate geometry, and construct our high-order
regularizer based on local derivative evaluations therein. Experiments on human body shape and pose analysis demonstrate the
effectiveness and efficiency of our method.

1. Introduction
The graph Laplacian regularizer is established as one of
the most popular regularizers for semi-supervised learning [5],
spectral clustering [20, 13], and dimensionality reduction [3]. The
underlying assumption for using the graph Laplacian regularizer
is that data lie on a low-dimensional sub-manifold, and the object
(e.g., a function) of interest should be regularized as defined on
the manifold rather than as defined on the entire ambient space.
By measuring local pairwise deviations of the function values in
the ambient space, the graph Laplacian regularizer approximates
the first-order variations on the manifold, thereby enabling us
to regularize the function based on its first-order energy without
having to know the manifold analytically.
Despite its solid theoretical background [4, 9] and success
in many applications, the graph Laplacian regularizer has an
important shortcoming that makes its usage less favorable on
data lying in high-dimensional manifolds: as we will discuss,
as a first-order regularizer, the null space of the graph Laplacian
regularizer contains discontinuous functions on manifolds with
dimensionality larger than 2 [15, 24].
Recently, Zhou and Belkin [24] proposed an iterated graph
Laplacian approach that avoids this degeneracy and enables
regularization on high-dimensional manifolds. The price for
the non-degeneracy and the resulting simplicity of the algorithm
is high computational complexity: the iterated graph Laplacian

Hanspeter Pfister
Harvard SEAS

Christian Theobalt
MPI for Informatics

regularizer is constructed by taking powers of the graph Laplacian
matrix, which makes the original matrix denser and, accordingly,
for large-scale problems (e.g., O(100,000)) it cannot be directly
applied efficiently.
We propose an empirical regularizer which avoids degeneracy
and leads to a sparse matrix. Our algorithm is based on the
local linear approximation of the manifold: At each point, the
corresponding neighborhood is projected onto its tangent space,
where the high-order derivatives of the function are defined in this
surrogate geometry. Instead of explicitly calculating high-order
derivatives and measuring the corresponding complexity of
the function, we measure its reproducing kernel Hilbert space
(RKHS) norm. Similar to the graph Laplacian, its sparsity is
explicitly controlled based on the local neighborhood structure.
We present experimental results on human body shape and
pose datasets, which show that our method is superior to graph
Laplacian and iterated graph Laplacian techniques in terms of
accuracy and computational complexity.
As this paper is equation and symbol rich, we summarize
all symbols and notation conventions on the first page of the
supplemental material.

2. Problem statement
While our proposed regularizer can be used in clustering and
dimensionality reduction, as with the graph Laplacian and iterated
graph Laplacian regularizers, we focus on semi-supervised learning which enables us to compare numerically the performance
of each algorithm.
For a set of data points X = {X1,...,Xu} ⊂ Rn plus the
corresponding labels {Y1,...,Yl } ⊂ R for the first l points in X
where l u, the goal of semi-supervised learning is to infer the
labels of the remaining u−l data points in X . Our approach is
based on regularized empirical risk minimization:
l
X
argmin (Yi −f(Xi))2 +λR(f),

(1)

f:Rn →R i=1

where R(·) is the regularization functional. Here, we use the
standard squared loss function for simplicity, though our framework is applicable to any convex loss function. This problem
can be solved either by reconstructing the underlying function f
or by identifying its evaluation f|X on X . In this paper, we focus
on the second case, which is often called transductive learning.
Most semi-supervised learning algorithms can be characterized
by how the unlabeled data points of X are used to construct a

