Robust Multiple Homography Estimation: An Ill-Solved Problem
Zygmunt L. Szpak, Wojciech Chojnacki, Anton van den Hengel
School of Computer Science, The University of Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia
{zygmunt.szpak,wojciech.chojnacki,anton.vandenhengel}@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
The estimation of multiple homographies between two
piecewise planar views of a rigid scene is often assumed
to be a solved problem. We show that contrary to popular
opinion various crucial aspects of the task have not been
adequately emphasised. We are motivated by a growing
body of literature in robust multi-structure estimation that
purports to solve the multi-homography estimation problem but in fact does not. We demonstrate that the estimation of multiple homographies is an ill-solved problem by
deriving new constraints that a set of mutually compatible
homographies must satisfy, and by showing that homographies estimated with prevailing methods fail to satisfy the
requisite constraints on real-world data. We also explain
why incompatible homographies imply inconsistent epipolar geometries. The arguments and experiments presented
in this paper signal the need for a new generation of robust
multi-structure estimation methods that have the capacity
to enforce constraints on projective entities such as homography matrices.

1. Introduction
Images in two views of world points lying on a planar
surface are related by a homography matrix. Since planar surfaces are ubiquitous in urban environments, estimating multiple homography matrices from image measurements between two views is an important step in many applications such as augmenting reality, stitching and warping images, calibrating cameras, finding a metric reconstruction, and detecting non-rigid motion. Because of the
diverse utility of homography matrices, the task of estimating multiple homographies is often used to demonstrate the merits of robust multi-structure estimation methods [6,7,12,13,19,29,30,34,35]. In fact, some robust multistructure estimation methods, such as multiRANSAC [39],
were specifically designed to address the multi-homography
estimation problem. However, an inadvertent oversight has
crept into multi-structure estimation methods, one that persists in all state-of-the-art methods that we are familiar with,

namely the failure to recognise that a set of homographies
that each of these schemes produces is actually not a genuine set of homographies between two views of the same
scene. A collection of homography matrices forms a valid
set only if the matrices satisfy consistency constraints implied by the rigidity of the motion and the scene. If the
constraints are not deliberately enforced, they are not satisfied in typical scenarios. Hence, one of the fundamental problems in estimating multiple homography matrices
is to find a way to enforce the consistency constraints—a
task reminiscent of that of enforcing the rank-two constraint
in the case of the fundamental matrix estimation [17, Sect.
11.1.1].
Explicit formulae for all constraints that must be satisfied
have eluded the vision community. It was only as recently
as 2011 that a decisive answer pertaining to even just the
number of constraints was given [10, 11]. Over the years
various researchers have managed to identify and enforce a
reduced set of constraints. For example, Shashua and Avidan [31] found that homography matrices induced by four
or more planes in a 3D scene appearing in two views span
a four-dimensional linear subspace. Chen and Suter [5] derived a set of strengthened constraints for the case of three
or more homographies in two views. Zelnik-Manor and
Irani [36] have shown that another rank-four constraint applies to a set of so-called relative homographies generated
by two planes in four or more views. These latter authors
also derived constraints for larger sets of homographies and
views.
Once isolated, the constraints are typically put to use
in a procedure whereby first individual homography matrices are estimated from image data, and then the resulting estimates are upgraded to matrices satisfying the constraints. Following this pattern, Shashua and Avidan as
well as Zelnik-Manor and Irani used low-rank approximation under the Frobenius norm to enforce the rank-four constraint. Chen and Suter enforced their set of constraints also
via low-rank approximation, but then employed the Mahalanobis norm with covariances of the input homographies.
All of these estimation procedures produce matrices that
satisfy only incomplete constraints so their true consistency

