Line-Based Multi-Label Energy Optimization for Fisheye Image Rectiﬁcation
and Calibration
Mi Zhang Jian Yao† Menghan Xia Kai Li Yi Zhang Yaping Liu
School of Remote Sensing and Information Engineering, Wuhan University, Hubei, China
†

EMail:

jian.yao@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Fisheye image rectiﬁcation and estimation of intrinsic
parameters for real scenes have been addressed in the literature by using line information on the distorted images.
In this paper, we propose an easily implemented ﬁsheye image rectiﬁcation algorithm with line constrains in the undistorted perspective image plane. A novel Multi-Label Energy Optimization (MLEO) method is adopted to merge short
circular arcs sharing the same or the approximately same
circular parameters and select long circular arcs for camera rectiﬁcation. Further we propose an efﬁcient method to
estimate intrinsic parameters of the ﬁsheye camera by automatically selecting three properly arranged long circular
arcs from previously obtained circular arcs in the calibration procedure. Experimental results on a number of real
images and simulated data show that the proposed method
can achieve good results and outperforms the existing approaches and the commercial software in most cases.

1. Introduction
As a basic step for higher level tasks, such as structure
from motion [17], visual navigation and SLAM [16], active research work has been carried out on automatic rectiﬁcation and calibration for metric information from ﬁsheye
images in recent years. Their efforts have led to a remarkable improvements in this ﬁeld. For example, various opensource omni-directional camera calibration toolboxes have
been released123 since the launch of the unifying theory for
the central panoramic system [15]. These toolboxes are either based on 2D or 3D calibration patterns [1, 20] with
prior knowledge or the line features manually selected from
the ﬁsheye image [4]. Recently, some automatic rectiﬁcation and calibration algorithms for the single ﬁsheye image
have been proposed [5, 9], which mainly focus on the usage
1 http://www.robots.ox.ac.uk/ cmei/Toolbox.html

˜
˜
3 http://www.isr.uc.pt/ jpbar/CatPack/main.htm
˜

2 http://webdiis.unizar.es/ lpuig/DLTOmniCalibration

Web:

http://cvrs.whu.edu.cn

of line information from the distorted image.
It has been a trend that a variety of features on the ﬁsheye image plane are taken into account for rectiﬁcation and
calibration, which introduce an additional challenge for automatic rectiﬁcation and calibration of the omni-directional
camera. A dominant paradigm in rectiﬁcation and calibration for ﬁsheye images is to use line features extracted from
distorted ﬁsheye images [3, 18]. These approaches compute
the image of absolute conic from which the intrinsic parameters of the omni-directional camera are recovered. Generally speaking, given at least three conics on the ﬁsheye image, the camera intrinsic parameters, consisting of the focal
length, the image center and the aspect ratio, can be recovered from the decomposition of absolute conics. However,
despite its geometric success, the rectiﬁcation and calibration techniques still suffer from the problem of automatic
extraction of conics from the ﬁsheye image. In order to
address the conic extraction issue, Burchardt and Voss [10]
proposed to simplify the conic extraction problem as the circle extraction problem by assuming that the edge segmentations belonging to the same circle have the same distance
to the center of the circle. Still a huge number of small arcs
that are consistent with the same circle could not be correctly merged.
Some approaches try to make full use of the characteristic of lines on the unit sphere [6, 23]. These methods ﬁrst
detect the connected edge pixels and then project them on
the sphere to verify whether they are restrained by the same
great circle. Ying and Hu proposed to use the hough transform to detect line images which are then reﬁned by minimizing the orthogonal distances to the conic [23]. However,
these approaches suffer from the common limitation as perspective cases such as the expensive computation and importance of parameters sampling [6]. The conic detection
algorithm proposed by Bukhari and Dailey [9] avoids the
expensive computation and detects the circular arcs from
the ﬁsheye image directly. Their proposed algorithm extracts the connected components from the edge image and
then ﬁnds the maximum pixels belonging to the same circle
deﬁned by three randomly selected points on the contour.

