Fast Bilateral-Space Stereo for Synthetic Defocus
Jonathan T. Barron

Andrew Adams

YiChang Shih

Carlos Hernández

barron@google.com

abadams@google.com

yichang@mit.edu

chernand@google.com

Abstract
Given a stereo pair it is possible to recover a depth map
and use that depth to render a synthetically defocused image. Though stereo algorithms are well-studied, rarely are
those algorithms considered solely in the context of producing these defocused renderings. In this paper we present
a technique for efficiently producing disparity maps using a novel optimization framework in which inference is
performed in “bilateral-space”. Our approach produces
higher-quality “defocus” results than other stereo algorithms while also being 10 − 100× faster than comparable
techniques.

(a) Input stereo pair with cropped subregions of the right image

(b) Our algorithm’s disparity and defocused image / subregions

1. Introduction
Expensive DSLR cameras are capable of producing
shallow-depth-of-field images — objects at a certain distance from the camera are in focus, while nearer or farther
objects are out of focus. This is due to the large apertures
(and equally-large lenses) of DSLRs. Cellphone cameras,
in contrast, have small apertures and therefore deep depthsof-field; in most non-macro cellphone camera images, the
entire scene is in focus. Because consumers and photographers generally prefer shallow-depth-of-field images, companies such as HTC [15] have begun producing devices
with two rear-facing cameras to enable this “defocus” effect. With two or more images of a subject, stereo techniques can be used to estimate a per-pixel disparity map,
which can then be used to render synthetically defocused
shallow-depth-of-field images.
Accomplishing this defocus effect requires a stereo algorithm with a number of distinct properties. Because consumer cameras have high resolutions (4-16 megapixel resolutions are common), the stereo algorithm must be tractable
at high resolutions1 . The algorithm must produce good
depth maps, both in terms of accurate depth estimates and
1 Of course, one can downsample a stereo pair, produce a low-resolution
depth map, and then upsample that depth, but this discards depth information and (unless the upsampling is edge-aware) produces a blurry depth
map. It is also possible to produce low-resolution defocused images, but
consumers generally prefer high-resolution images.

(c) SGM’s [14] disparity and defocused image / subregions

Figure 1: Given the 4-megapixel stereo pair in Fig. 1a, we
produce the disparity map shown in Fig. 1b and then render a synthetically defocused image. Though our depths are
sometimes incorrect, they are incorrect in ways that tend to
not matter for the defocus task, and so our defocused images look natural even upon close inspection. Images produced using other stereo algorithms (such as Fig. 1c) tend
to have artifacts that render then unacceptable to photographers. The reader is encouraged to zoom in and inspect the
images closely.

in terms of localization — edges in the depth map must
closely track edges in the image to avoid rendering artifacts. And due to the time and power required to transfer high-resolution images between a mobile device and a
server (and because users expect their cameras to be responsive, even without internet access) the stereo algorithm
should be tractable even on a mobile platform. In this pa-

