Deep Multiple Instance Learning
for Image Classification and Auto-Annotation

1

Jiajun Wu1 , Yinan Yu2,3 , Chang Huang2 , Kai Yu2
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2 Institute of Deep Learning, Baidu

Abstract

3

Tsinghua University

very nature of large-scale web or real-world data — namely,
big data is largely data with no labels or noisy labels. The
emergence of image search engines like Google, social network sites like Facebook, and photo and video sharing sites
like Flickr provides vision researchers with abundant visual
data; unfortunately, strong labels for these images are in
much shorter supply. Therefore, unsupervised or weaklysupervised methods are particularly favored as they can better utilize the available large-scale web resources.
Weakly supervised learning can in general be viewed
as mechanisms to learn from sparse or noisy labels. As
web data usually comes with high diversity but much noise,
these weakly supervised methods have been successfully
applied to learn effective visual representations for classification [27], detection [27, 11], and segmentation [11], all
using weak labels alone.
In terms of visual recognition, people have recently proposed a number of techniques to generate object proposals for higher level tasks, apart from traditional exhaustive searches. These approaches either adopt saliency information [13], train generic object models to harvest “objectness” [4], or turn to more adaptive segmentation systems [33, 41], all of which can be viewed as effective ways
of reducing the search space.
These proposal generating algorithms usually have very
high recalls but adequate precisions, which indicates that
although proposals may be noisy, there is almost always an
object of interest within a number of most likely proposals [4]. We observe that this property actually corresponds
to the assumption in multiple instance learning, which states
that there must be at least one positive instance within each
positive bag. Therefore, we attempt to incorporate multiple
instance learning into a deep learning framework and apply the learned visual knowledge to assist the task of image
classification.
We also notice that the multiple instance assumption
widely exists in other domains, e.g., image annotation (tagging), a task which both vision and natural language processing communities are interested in. Modern search engines like Google, Bing, and Baidu can already perform
image keywording in a fully unsupervised way, though the

The recent development in learning deep representations
has demonstrated its wide applications in traditional vision
tasks like classification and detection. However, there has
been little investigation on how we could build up a deep
learning framework in a weakly supervised setting. In this
paper, we attempt to model deep learning in a weakly supervised learning (multiple instance learning) framework.
In our setting, each image follows a dual multi-instance assumption, where its object proposals and possible text annotations can be regarded as two instance sets. We thus
design effective systems to exploit the MIL property with
deep learning strategies from the two ends; we also try
to jointly learn the relationship between object and annotation proposals. We conduct extensive experiments and
prove that our weakly supervised deep learning framework
not only achieves convincing performance in vision tasks
including classification and image annotation, but also extracts reasonable region-keyword pairs with little supervision, on both widely used benchmarks like PASCAL VOC
and MIT Indoor Scene 67, and also a dataset for imageand patch-level annotations.

1. Introduction
Deep learning, as a recent breakthrough in artificial intelligence, has been successfully applied to multiple fields including speech recognition [12] and visual recognition [16,
19, 15, 18], mostly with full supervision. A typical deep
learning architecture for visual recognition builds upon convolutional neural network (CNN) [17, 19, 16, 38]. Given
large-scale training data and the power of high-performance
computational infrastructure, deep learning has achieved
tremendous improvement in visual recognition with thousands of categories [6].
While deep learning shows superior performance on
fully supervised learning tasks, research on learning deep
representations with weak supervision is still in its early
stage; i.e., human labels still play a key role in these popular frameworks [12, 16]. This is in a sense anathema to the
1

