Zero-Shot Object Recognition by Semantic Manifold Distance
Zhenyong Fu, Tao Xiang, Elyor Kodirov, Shaogang Gong
Queen Mary, University of London
London E1 4NS, UK
{z.fu, t.xiang, e.kodirov, s.gong}@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract
Object recognition by zero-shot learning (ZSL) aims to
recognise objects without seeing any visual examples by
learning knowledge transfer between seen and unseen object classes. This is typically achieved by exploring a semantic embedding space such as attribute space or semantic word vector space. In such a space, both seen and unseen class labels, as well as image features can be embedded (projected), and the similarity between them can thus
be measured directly. Existing works differ in what embedding space is used and how to project the visual data into
the semantic embedding space. Yet, they all measure the
similarity in the space using a conventional distance metric
(e.g. cosine) that does not consider the rich intrinsic structure, i.e. semantic manifold, of the semantic categories in
the embedding space. In this paper we propose to model the
semantic manifold in an embedding space using a semantic
class label graph. The semantic manifold structure is used
to redefine the distance metric in the semantic embedding
space for more effective ZSL. The proposed semantic manifold distance is computed using a novel absorbing Markov
chain process (AMP), which has a very efficient closedform solution. The proposed new model improves upon and
seamlessly unifies various existing ZSL algorithms. Extensive experiments on both the large scale ImageNet dataset
and the widely used Animal with Attribute (AwA) dataset
show that our model outperforms significantly the state-ofthe-arts.

1. Introduction
Zero-shot learning (ZSL) for large scale visual object
recognition has received increasing attention recently [9,
16, 23, 26, 25, 21, 17, 11]. This is because although virtually unlimited images are available via social media sharing
websites such as Flickr, there are still not enough annotated
images for building a model for recognising a large number of visual object classes. ZSL aims to imitate humans’
ability to recognise a new class without seeing any visual

examples. A human has that ability because one is able to
relate an unseen object class with the seen classes based on
its semantic description. For example, assuming a child can
recognise a horse; having been told that a zebra is more-orless like a horse but with black-and-white stripes, the child
has a good chance of recognising a zebra the first time it is
seen. Similarly a zero-shot learning method for visual classification relies on the existence of a labelled training set
of seen classes and the knowledge about how each unseen
class is semantically related to the seen classes.
The seen and unseen object classes can be related in a
semantic embedding space where each class label/name is
represented as a high dimensional vector. The spaces used
by most early works are based on semantic attributes [16].
Given a defined attribute ontology, each class name can be
converted to a binary attribute vector. More recently, embedding based on semantic word space has started to gain
popularity [10, 21, 29]. Better scalability is typically the
motivation for this approach as no manually defined ontology is required and the space is learned using a vast unannotated text corpus by natural language processing. Such
an approach can embed any class name for free (vs. costly
labelling of attributes and ontology thereof). Regardless the
space used, the embedded class name (a vector) is called a
prototype of that class [11].
Given a semantic embedding space and a set of seen and
unseen class prototypes, the semantic relatedness between
an unseen class and each seen class can be measured as a
distance between the two class prototypes. However, an
image of a visual object is represented by a visual feature
vector; its distance to the unseen class prototypes in the semantic embedding space cannot be measured directly. Existing methods for solving this problem fall into two categories. The first category (Fig. 1(a)) relies on learning a
n-way discrete classifier for the seen classes in the visual
feature space, which is then used to compute the visual similarity between an image of unseen class to those of the seen
classes. These seen classes serve as the mediators for the
unseen classes and the test images [2]. Specifically, the semantic relatedness between the seen and unseen classes is

