Elastic-Net Regularization of Singular Values for Robust Subspace Learning
Eunwoo Kim†
Minsik Lee‡
Songhwai Oh†
†
Department of ECE, ASRI, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
‡
Division of EE, Hanyang University, Korea
kewoo15@snu.ac.kr

mleepaper@hanyang.ac.kr

Abstract
Learning a low-dimensional structure plays an important role in computer vision. Recently, a new family of
methods, such as l1 minimization and robust principal component analysis, has been proposed for low-rank matrix approximation problems and shown to be robust against outliers and missing data. But these methods often require
heavy computational load and can fail to find a solution
when highly corrupted data are presented. In this paper,
an elastic-net regularization based low-rank matrix factorization method for subspace learning is proposed. The proposed method finds a robust solution efficiently by enforcing
a strong convex constraint to improve the algorithm’s stability while maintaining the low-rank property of the solution. It is shown that any stationary point of the proposed
algorithm satisfies the Karush-Kuhn-Tucker optimality conditions. The proposed method is applied to a number of lowrank matrix approximation problems to demonstrate its efficiency in the presence of heavy corruptions and to show its
effectiveness and robustness compared to the existing methods.

1. Introduction
Low-rank matrix approximation has attracted much attention in the areas of data reconstruction [10, 12, 32],
image denoising [7, 13, 23], collaborative filtering [25],
background modeling [8, 24, 35], structure from motion
[3, 13, 31, 34], and photometric stereo [4, 20, 33], to name
a few. It is sometimes assumed that the rank of a matrix is
fixed or known beforehand and it is also known as a subspace learning problem.
Although real-world data are usually high dimensional,
they can be well-represented with fewer parameters in many
cases. Hence, reducing the data dimension to a dominating
principal structure is desirable to reduce the computation
time and also to remove unwanted noisy components. A
popular method for addressing this issue is principal component analysis (PCA) [11]. PCA transforms data to a low-

songhwai@snu.ac.kr

dimensional subspace which maximizes the variance of the
data based on the l2 -norm. To handle missing data, [25]
solved a weighted low-rank matrix approximation problem
using the expectation-maximization algorithm. Lin [16]
proposed projected gradient methods to solve nonnegative
matrix factorization problems for image and text data. Mitra et al. [20] presented a matrix factorization technique
which adds regularization terms to prevent data overfitting
and solves the problem using semi-definite programming.
These conventional l2 -norm based approximation methods
have been utilized in many problems but it is known that
they are sensitive to outliers and corruptions because the l2 norm amplifies the negative effects of corrupted data.
As an alternative, low-rank matrix approximation methods using the l1 -norm have been proposed for robustness
against outliers and missing data [7,12–14,21]. In addition,
there have been several probabilistic extensions of low-rank
matrix factorization for robust approximation [6,19,32]. Ke
and Kanade [12] presented a low-rank matrix approximation method by alternatively minimizing an l1 -norm based
cost function using convex programming. Eriksson and
Hengel [7] proposed the l1 -Wiberg method for weighted
low-rank matrix approximation in the presence of missing
data. Kwak [14] proposed an l1 maximization approach
to find successive principal components using a greedy approach in the feature space. Kim et al. [13] proposed two
gradient-based approaches for an l1 minimization problem
using a rectified representation.
Recently, many efficient approaches using augmented
Lagrangian method have been proposed to solve the l1 minimization problem [4, 23, 34]. Shen et al. [23] proposed a
low-rank matrix approximation method using the l1 -norm
based on the augmented Lagrangian alternating direction
method (ALADM). Zheng et al. [34] proposed a practical
weighted low-rank approximation method using nuclearnorm regularized l1 cost function and orthogonality constraint (Regl1 -ALM). Cabral et al. [4] proposed a unifying approach, which combines nuclear-norm minimization
and bilinear factorization using an alternative definition of
the nuclear-norm [22]. Their approach leads to an efficient

