Parsing Occluded People by Flexible Compositions
Xianjie Chen
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095

Alan Yuille
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095

cxj@ucla.edu

yuille@stat.ucla.edu

Abstract
This paper presents an approach to parsing humans
when there is significant occlusion. We model humans using a graphical model which has a tree structure building
on recent work [32, 6] and exploit the connectivity prior
that, even in presence of occlusion, the visible nodes form a
connected subtree of the graphical model. We call each connected subtree a flexible composition of object parts. This
involves a novel method for learning occlusion cues. During inference we need to search over a mixture of different
flexible models. By exploiting part sharing, we show that
this inference can be done extremely efficiently requiring
only twice as many computations as searching for the entire
object (i.e., not modeling occlusion). We evaluate our model
on the standard benchmarked “We Are Family” Stickmen
dataset and obtain significant performance improvements
over the best alternative algorithms.

Full Graph

Flexible Compositions

Figure 1: An illustration of the flexible compositions. Each connected subtree of the full graph (include the full graph itself) is a
flexible composition. The flexible compositions that do not have
certain parts are suitable for the people with those parts occluded.

nodes form a connected subtree of the full graphical model
(following current models, for simplicity, we assume that
the graphical model is treelike). This connectivity prior is
not always valid (i.e., the visible parts of humans may form
two or more connected subsets), but our analysis (see Section 6.4) suggests it’s often true. In any case, we will restrict
ourselves to it in this paper, since verifying that some isolated pieces of body parts belong to the same person is still
very difficult for vision methods, especially in challenging
scenes where multiple people occlude one another (see Figure 2).

1. Introduction
Parsing humans into parts is an important visual task
with many applications such as activity recognition [31, 33].
A common approach is to formulate this task in terms of
graphical models where the graph nodes and edges represent human parts and their spatial relationships respectively. This approach is becoming successful on benchmarked datasets [32, 6]. But in many real world situations
many human parts are occluded. Standard methods are partially robust to occlusion by, for example, using a latent
variable to indicate whether a part is present and paying
a penalty if the part is not detected, but are not designed
to deal with significant occlusion. One of these models [6]
will be used in this paper as a base model, and we will compare to it.
In this paper, we observe that part occlusions often occur in regular patterns. The visible parts of a human tend
to consist of a subset of connected parts even when there is
significant occlusion (see Figures 1 and 2(a)). In the terminology of graphical models, the visible (non-occluded)

To formulate our approach we build on the base
model [6], which is the state of the art on several benchmarked datasets [22, 27, 14], but is not designed for dealing with significant occlusion. We explicitly model occlusions using the connectivity prior above. This means that
we have a mixture of models where the number of components equals the number of all the possible connected subtrees of the graph, which we call flexible compositions, see
Figure 1. The number of flexible compositions can be large
(for a simple chain like model consisting of N parts, there
are N (N + 1)/2 possible compositions). Our approach
exploits the fact there is often local evidence for the presence of occlusions, see Figure 2(b). We propose a novel
approach which learns occlusion cues, which can break the
1

