Unconstrained 3D Face Reconstruction
Joseph Roth, Yiying Tong, and Xiaoming Liu
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Michigan State University
{rothjos1, ytong, liuxm}@msu.edu

Abstract

...

This paper presents an algorithm for unconstrained 3D
face reconstruction. The input to our algorithm is an “unconstrained” collection of face images captured under a
diverse variation of poses, expressions, and illuminations,
without meta data about cameras or timing. The output of
our algorithm is a true 3D face surface model represented
as a watertight triangulated surface with albedo data or texture information. 3D face reconstruction from a collection
of unconstrained 2D images is a long-standing computer vision problem. Motivated by the success of the state-of-theart method, we developed a novel photometric stereo-based
method with two distinct novelties. First, working with a
true 3D model allows us to enjoy the benefits of using images from all possible poses, including profiles. Second,
by leveraging emerging face alignment techniques and our
novel normal field-based Laplace editing, a combination
of landmark constraints and photometric stereo-based normals drives our surface reconstruction. Given large photo
collections and a ground truth 3D surface, we demonstrate
the effectiveness and strength of our algorithm both qualitatively and quantitatively.

Figure 1. Given Tom Hanks’ photo collection with pose, expression, and illumination variations, our system performs surface reconstruction, shown along with a real photo at the same viewpoint.

tracked across the face. If the input is a collection of unconstrained face photos, photometric stereo works across areas
of consistent albedo and estimates fine surface details.
Among the aforementioned scenarios, this paper targets
the case of the unconstrained photo collection. As shown
in Fig. 1, given a collection of unconstrained face photos of
one subject, we would like to reconstruct the 3D face surface model, despite the diverse variations in Pose, Illumination, and Expression (PIE). This is certainly a very challenging problem, as we do not have access to stereo imaging [36] or video [35, 12]. Kemelmacher-Shlizerman and
Seitz developed an impressive photometric stereo-based
method to produce high-quality face models from photo
collections [23], where the recovering of a locally consistent shape was intelligently achieved by using a different
subset of images. However, there are still two limitations
in [23]. One is that mainly near-frontal images are selected
to contribute to the reconstruction, while the consensus is
that non-frontal, especially profile, images are highly useful for 3D reconstruction. The other is that due to surface
reconstruction on a 2D grid, a 2.5D height field, rather than
a full 3D model, is produced.
Motivated by the state-of-the-art results of photometric
stereo-based methods, as well as amendable limitations, this
paper proposes a novel approach to 3D face reconstruction.
Our approach is also motivated by the recent explosion of
face alignment techniques [27, 39, 21, 31], where the preci-

1. Introduction
Obtaining a user-specific 3D face surface model is useful
for a variety of applications, such as 3D-assisted face recognition [7, 19, 28], 3D expression recognition [37], and facial
animations [9]. Despite emerging 3D sensors to acquire 3D
faces, accurately reconstructing the 3D surface model from
2D images is a long-standing computer vision problem.
There are numerous scenarios for face reconstruction.
With access to the subject and a controlled environment,
many techniques provide highly detailed models. For example, stereo imaging is applicable when two calibrated cameras capture images simultaneously, or photometric stereo
with a controlled lighting array. The task becomes more
difficult given unconstrained face images captured in an
unstructured scenario. If the images are from a video sequence, structure from motion is useful when key points are
1

