Image partitioning into convex polygons
Liuyun DUAN
Florent LAFARGE
INRIA Sophia Antipolis, France
firstname.lastname@inria.fr

Abstract
The over-segmentation of images into atomic regions has
become a standard and powerful tool in Vision. Traditional
superpixel methods, that operate at the pixel level, cannot directly capture the geometric information disseminated
into the images. We propose an alternative to these methods by operating at the level of geometric shapes. Our algorithm partitions images into convex polygons. It presents
several interesting properties in terms of geometric guarantees, region compactness and scalability. The overall strategy consists in building a Voronoi diagram that conforms to
preliminarily detected line-segments, before homogenizing
the partition by spatial point process distributed over the
image gradient. Our method is particularly adapted to images with strong geometric signatures, typically man-made
objects and environments. We show the potential of our approach with experiments on large-scale images and comparisons with state-of-the-art superpixel methods.

Figure 1. Our algorithm partitions images into regular convex
polygons. Three different polygon sizes are displayed. The use of
floating polygons allow for the preservation of object boundaries
at a subpixelic scale (close-up).

1.1. Related works
Our review of previous work covers three main facets
of our problem statement: segmentation into superpixels,
shape detection, and object polygonalization.
Segmentation into superpixels. Methods partitioning
images into superpixels are usually evaluated on five
criteria: (i) adherence to boundaries, (ii) low running time,
(iii) compactness of regions, (iv) memory efficiency and
(v) simplicity of use. Among the numerous algorithms
proposed in the literature, the most popular strategy consists in iteratively refining superpixels from an initial rough
partitioning of pixels. These methods, eg [1, 13, 25, 28, 29],
are usually time and memory efficient and capture well
boundaries. Some methods address the problem with more
global strategies, in particular with energy minimization
on graph, eg [15, 20]. Results are usually of higher quality
but require more algorithmic efforts. Globally speaking,
each method has its own advantages and drawbacks, and
scores differently on the five criteria mentioned above.
Nevertheless, adherence to boundaries is usually favored at
the expense of region compactness by a large majority of
methods [21]. Apart from certain algorithms as SLIC [1],
no control on the shape of regions is possible.

1. Introduction
The partitioning of images into meaningful atomic regions is very popular to address vision problems. When
used as pre-processing for image segmentation [14], stereo
matching [32] or object boundary extraction [12] for instance, such an image decomposition offers very interesting
advantages in terms of algorithmic complexity and spatial
consistency. Traditional methods create image partitions at
the pixel level, atomic regions being commonly called superpixels. Each region is delimited by a set of pixels forming a free-form contour. This representation brings high
flexibility, but is free of higher level information. In particular, it does not exploit geometric information disseminated
into images, which can be a precious source of knowledge
to analyze scenes and objects, especially in man-made environments.
In this paper, we address the problem of partitioning images into atomic regions with convex polygons while imposing geometric guarantees on the shape and connection
of these regions. Figure 1 illustrates our goal.

Geometric shape detection. The automated detection
of geometric shapes is an instance of the general problem
1

