Maximum Persistency via Iterative Relaxed Inference with Graphical Models
Alexander Shekhovtsov
TU Graz, Austria

Paul Swoboda
Heidelberg University, Germany

Bogdan Savchynskyy∗
TU Dresden, Germany

shekhovtsov@icg.tugraz.at

swoboda@math.uni-heidelberg.de

bogdan.savchynskyy@tu-dresden.de

Abstract
We consider the NP-hard problem of MAP-inference for
graphical models. We propose a polynomial time practically efficient algorithm for finding a part of its optimal
solution. Specifically, our algorithm marks each label in
each node of the considered graphical model either as (i)
optimal, meaning that it belongs to all optimal solutions of
the inference problem; (ii) non-optimal if it provably does
not belong to any solution; or (iii) undefined, which means
our algorithm can not make a decision regarding the label.
Moreover, we prove optimality of our approach: it delivers
in a certain sense the largest total number of labels marked
as optimal or non-optimal. We demonstrate superiority of
our approach on problems from machine learning and computer vision benchmarks.

1. Introduction
We consider the energy minimization problem, known
also as inference of maximum a posteriori (MAP) or maximum likelihood estimate (MLE) for graphical models. In
the most common pairwise case this problem reads1
X
X
min Ef (x) := f0 +
fv (xv ) +
fuv (xu , xv ) . (1)
x∈X

v∈V

uv∈E

The problem has numerous applications in computer
vision, machine learning, communication theory, signal
processing, information retrieval and statistical physics,
see [10, 9, 33, 16] for an overview of applications. Problem (1) can be represented as an integer linear program and
is known to be NP-hard in general. Approximative algorithms do not guarantee optimality of the found solution
and moreover, apart from the roof dual relaxation [3, 17],
they do not guarantee optimality of any part of the found
solution. In this paper we show how some of these approximative methods (addressing convex relaxations of the
problem (1)) can be used to identify a part of a provably
optimal solution or to decrease the state space of variables.
Such a reduction of the original problem is often sufficient
∗ Work mostly done when author was with Heidelberg University
1 We introduce all notations in §2.

(a)

(b)

TRW-S [12] solution,
670 iterations (10s).

Proofs of optimality (99.93%),
75 additional iterations (6s).

Figure 1. Given an approximate solution to a graphical model in
(a), our method provides proofs of optimality and uniqueness for a
part of the solution (a) shown in (b) and constructs the reminder of
the optimization problem consisting of red pixels with a reduced
number of labels. The result (b) approximates well the maximum
persistency of [25] and is computed in a comparable time (often a
small fraction) of the initial solution in (a). The graphical model
is from OpenGM benchmark [10, 9]. It is more difficult than the
model studied in [2, 7] for the same imagery. In particular, method
of Kovtun [15] performing well there determines only 0.26% of
the optimal solution for our model.

to make it solvable exactly by (non-polynomial) combinatorial solvers.
States of variables, e.g. xv = i, are called labels. Labels
identified as provably belonging (resp. not belonging) to
some (resp. any) optimal solution are called persistent optimal (resp. non-optimal) or shortly persistencies. We show
that in a certain class of methods our algorithm identifies
the largest total number of persistent labels.
Related Work. All existing methods identifying persistency are based on tractable sufficient conditions in order
to avoid solving the NP-hard problem (1). Dead-end elimination methods (DEE) [4] verify local sufficient conditions
by inspecting a given node and its immediate neighbors
at a time. The roof dual relaxation in quadratic pseudoBoolean Optimization (QPBO, see [3, 17] and references
therein) has the property that all variables that are integer
in the relaxed solution are persistent. Several generalizations of roof duality to higher-order models were proposed
(e.g., [1, 13]). The MQPBO method [11] and generalized
roof duality [35] extend roof duality to the multi-label case

