Mind’s Eye: A Recurrent Visual Representation for Image Caption Generation
Xinlei Chen
Carnegie Mellon University

C. Lawrence Zitnick
Microsoft Research, Redmond

xinleic@cs.cmu.edu

larryz@microsoft.com

Abstract
In this paper we explore the bi-directional mapping between images and their sentence-based descriptions. Critical to our approach is a recurrent neural network that attempts to dynamically build a visual representation of the
scene as a caption is being generated or read. The representation automatically learns to remember long-term visual
concepts. Our model is capable of both generating novel
captions given an image, and reconstructing visual features
given an image description. We evaluate our approach on
several tasks. These include sentence generation, sentence
retrieval and image retrieval. State-of-the-art results are
shown for the task of generating novel image descriptions.
When compared to human generated captions, our automatically generated captions are equal to or preferred by
humans 21.0% of the time. Results are better than or comparable to state-of-the-art results on the image and sentence
retrieval tasks for methods using similar visual features.

Figure 1. Internal visual representations are important for both
generating and understanding semantic descriptions of scenes.
While visual representations may vary due to a description’s ambiguity, a good description conveys the salient aspects of the scene.

common embedding, they are not able to perform the inverse projection. That is, they cannot generate novel sentences or visual depictions from the embedding.
In this paper, we propose a bi-directional representation
capable of generating both novel descriptions from images
and visual representations from descriptions. Critical to
both of these tasks is a novel representation that dynamically captures the visual aspects of the scene that have already been described. That is, as a word is generated or
read the visual representation is updated to reflect the new
information contained in the word. We accomplish this using Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) [9, 29, 32]. One
long-standing problem of RNNs is their weakness in remembering concepts after a few iterations of recurrence.
For instance RNN language models often find difficultly in
learning long distance relations [3, 29] without specialized
gating units [15]. During sentence generation, our novel dynamically updated visual representation acts as a long-term
memory of the concepts that have already been mentioned.
This allows the network to automatically pick salient concepts to convey that have yet to be spoken. As we demonstrate, the same representation may be used to create a visual representation of a written description.
We demonstrate our method on numerous datasets.
These include the PASCAL sentence dataset [36], Flickr
8K [36], Flickr 30K [36], and the Microsoft COCO dataset

1. Introduction
A good image description is often said to “paint a picture
in your mind’s eye.” The creation of a mental image may
play a significant role in sentence comprehension in humans
[18]. In fact, it is often this mental image that is remembered long after the exact sentence is forgotten [34, 26].
As an illustrative example, Figure 1 shows how a mental
image may vary and increase in richness as a description
is read. Could computer vision algorithms that comprehend and generate image captions take advantage of similar
evolving visual representations?
Recently, several papers have explored learning joint feature spaces for images and their descriptions [16, 38, 20].
These approaches project image features and sentence features into a common space, which may be used for image
search or for ranking image captions. Various approaches
were used to learn the projection, including Kernel Canonical Correlation Analysis (KCCA) [16], recursive neural
networks [38], or deep neural networks [20]. While these
approaches project both semantics and visual features to a
1

