Deep Convolutional Neural Fields for Depth Estimation from a Single Image
Fayao Liu, Chunhua Shen, Guosheng Lin
University of Adelaide, Australia; Australian Centre for Robotic Vision

Abstract
We consider the problem of depth estimation from a single monocular image in this work. It is a challenging task
as no reliable depth cues are available, e.g., stereo correspondences, motions etc. Previous efforts have been focusing on exploiting geometric priors or additional sources of
information, with all using hand-crafted features. Recently,
there is mounting evidence that features from deep convolutional neural networks (CNN) are setting new records for
various vision applications. On the other hand, considering
the continuous characteristic of the depth values, depth estimations can be naturally formulated into a continuous conditional random field (CRF) learning problem. Therefore,
we in this paper present a deep convolutional neural field
model for estimating depths from a single image, aiming to
jointly explore the capacity of deep CNN and continuous
CRF. Specifically, we propose a deep structured learning
scheme which learns the unary and pairwise potentials of
continuous CRF in a unified deep CNN framework.
The proposed method can be used for depth estimations
of general scenes with no geometric priors nor any extra information injected. In our case, the integral of the partition
function can be analytically calculated, thus we can exactly
solve the log-likelihood optimization. Moreover, solving the
MAP problem for predicting depths of a new image is highly
efficient as closed-form solutions exist. We experimentally
demonstrate that the proposed method outperforms state-ofthe-art depth estimation methods on both indoor and outdoor scene datasets.

1. Introduction
Estimating depths from a single monocular image depicting general scenes is a fundamental problem in computer vision, which has found wide applications in scene understanding, 3D modelling, robotics, etc. It is a notoriously
ill-posed problem, as one captured image may correspond
to numerous real world scenes [1]. Whereas for humans,
inferring the underlying 3D structure from a single image is
of little difficulties, it remains a challenging task for computer vision algorithms as no reliable cues can be exploited,

such as temporal information, stereo correspondences, etc.
Previous works mainly focus on enforcing geometric assumptions, e.g., box models, to infer the spatial layout of
a room [2,3] or outdoor scenes [4]. These models come
with innate restrictions, which are limitations to model only
particular scene structures and therefore not applicable for
general scene depth estimations. Later on, non-parametric
methods [5] are explored, which consists of candidate images retrieval, scene alignment and then depth infer using
optimizations with smoothness constraints. This is based
on the assumption that scenes with semantic similar appearances should have similar depth distributions when densely
aligned. However, this method is prone to propagate errors
through the different decoupled stages and relies heavily
on building a reasonable sized image database to perform
the candidates retrieval. In recent years, efforts have been
made towards incorporating additional sources of information, e.g., user annotations [6], semantic labellings [7,8].
In the recent work of [8], Ladicky et al. have shown that
jointly performing depth estimation and semantic labelling
can benefit each other. Nevertheless, all these methods use
hand-crafted features.
Different from the previous efforts, we propose to formulate the depth estimation as a deep continuous CRF learning
problem, without relying on any geometric priors nor any
extra information. Conditional Random Fields (CRF) [9]
are popular graphical models used for structured prediction. While extensively studied in classification (discrete)
domains, CRF has been less explored for regression (continuous) problems. One of the pioneering work on continuous
CRF can be attributed to [10], in which it was proposed for
global ranking in document retrieval. Under certain constraints, they can directly solve the maximum likelihood
optimization as the partition function can be analytically
calculated. Since then, continuous CRF has been applied
for solving various structured regression problems, e.g., remote sensing [11,12], image denoising [12]. Motivated by
all these successes, we here propose to use it for depth estimation, given the continuous nature of the depth values, and
learn the potential functions in a deep convolutional neural
network (CNN).
Recent years have witnessed the prosperity of deep con-

