DeepShape: Deep Learned Shape Descriptor for 3D Shape Matching and
Retrieval
Jin Xie† , Yi Fang† , Fan Zhu† , and Edward Wong‡
†

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, New York University Abu Dhabi
‡
Polytechnic School of Engineering, New York University
{jin.xie, yfang, fan.zhu, ewong}@nyu.edu

Abstract
Complex geometric structural variations of 3D model
usually pose great challenges in 3D shape matching and retrieval. In this paper, we propose a high-level shape feature
learning scheme to extract features that are insensitive to
deformations via a novel discriminative deep auto-encoder.
First, a multiscale shape distribution is developed for use
as input to the auto-encoder. Then, by imposing the Fisher
discrimination criterion on the neurons in the hidden layer,
we developed a novel discriminative deep auto-encoder for
shape feature learning. Finally, the neurons in the hidden
layers from multiple discriminative auto-encoders are concatenated to form a shape descriptor for 3D shape matching
and retrieval. The proposed method is evaluated on the representative datasets that contain 3D models with large geometric variations, i.e., Mcgill and SHREC’10 ShapeGoogle
datasets. Experimental results on the benchmark datasets
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method for
3D shape matching and retrieval.

1. Introduction
Nowadays there is an explosive growth of 3D meshed
surface models in a variety of fields, such as engineering,
entertainment and medical imaging [23, 20, 16, 10, 9, 6].
Due to the data-richness of 3D models, shape retrieval for
3D model searching, understanding and analyzing has been
receiving more and more attention. Using a shape as a
query, the shape retrieval algorithm aims to find similar
shapes. The performance of a shape retrieval algorithm
mainly relies on a shape descriptor that can effectively capture the distinctive properties of shape. It is preferably that
a shape descriptor is deformation-insensitive and invariant
to different classes of transformations. Moreover, the shape
descriptor should be insensitive to both topological and nu-

merical noise. Once the shape descriptor is formed, the similarity between two shapes is determined for retrieval.
Shape descriptors for shape matching and retrieval have
been extensively studied in the geometry community [30,
14, 12, 31, 25]. In the past decades, plenty of shape descriptors have been proposed, such as the D2 shape distribution [12], statistical moments of the model [31, 24], Fourier
descriptor [8] and Eigenvalue Descriptor (EVD)[15]. Although these shape descriptors can represent the shape effectively, they are either sensitive to non-rigid transformation or topological changes. To be invariant to isometric
transformation, local geometric features are extracted to
represent the shape, such as spin images [2], shape context [3] and mesh HOG [32]. However, they are sensitive
to local geometric noise and they do not capture the global
structure of the shape well.
Apart from the earlier shape descriptors, another popular
approaches to shape retrieval are diffusion based methods
[27, 7, 23]. Based on the Laplace-Beltrami operator, the
global point signature (GPS) [23] was proposed to represent
shape. Since the eigenfunctions of the Laplace-Beltrami
operator are able to robustly characterize the points on a
meshed surface, each vertex is represented by a high dimensional vector of scaled eigenfunctions of the LaplaceBeltrami operator evaluated at the vertex. The high dimensional vector is called GPS. Another widely used shape signature is heat kernel signature (HKS) [27], where Sun et al.
proposed to use the diagonal of the heat kernel as a local
descriptor to represent shape. HKS is invariant to isometric
deformations, insensitive to the small perturbations on the
surface. Both GPS and HKS are point based signatures, that
characterize each vertex on the meshed surface by using a
vector.
In the aforementioned methods, the shape descriptors
are hand-crafted rather than learned from a set of training shapes. In [5], the authors applied the bag-of-features
(BOF) paradigm to learn the shape descriptor. The dictio-

