Domain-Size Pooling in Local Descriptors: DSP-SIFT
Jingming Dong

Stefano Soatto

UCLA Vision Lab, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095
{dong,soatto}@cs.ucla.edu

escriptor wi
s illustrat

Abstract
We introduce a simple modification of local image descriptors, such as SIFT, based on pooling gradient orientations across different domain sizes, in addition to spatial
locations. The resulting descriptor, which we call DSPSIFT, outperforms other methods in wide-baseline matching
benchmarks, including those based on convolutional neural
networks, despite having the same dimension of SIFT and
requiring no training.

1. Introduction
Local image descriptors, such as SIFT [24] and its variants, are designed to reduce variability due to illumination and vantage point while retaining discriminative power.
This facilitates finding correspondence between different
views of the same underlying scene. In a wide-baseline
matching task on the Oxford benchmark [28, 27], nearestneighbor SIFT descriptors achieve a mean average precision (mAP) of 27.50%, a 71.85% improvement over direct
comparison of normalized grayscale values. Other datasets
yield similar results [29]. Functions that reduce sensitivity to nuisance variability can also be learned from data
[26, 38, 40, 42, 30]. Convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
can been trained to “learn away” nuisance variability while
retaining class labels using large annotated datasets. In particular, [15] uses (patches of) natural images as surrogate
classes and adds transformed versions to train the network
to discount nuisance variability. The activation maps in
response to image values can be interpreted as a descriptor and used for correspondence. [15, 12] show that the
CNN outperforms SIFT, albeit with a much larger dimension. Here we show that a simple modification of SIFT,
obtained by pooling gradient orientations across different
domain sizes (“scales”), in addition to spatial locations, improves it by a considerable margin, also outperforming the
best CNN. We call the resulting descriptor “domain-size
pooled” SIFT, or DSP-SIFT.
Pooling across different domain sizes is implemented in

Scale

ale

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

These are

ach samp
ith

equ

escriptor wi
s illustratwi
escriptor

Domain Size

Figure 1. In SIFT (top, recreated according to [24]) isolated scales
are selected (a) and the descriptor constructed from the image at
the selected scale (b) by computing gradient orientations (c) and
pooling them in spatial neighborhoods (d) yielding histograms that
are concatenated and normalized to form the descriptor (e). In
DSP-SIFT (bottom), pooling occurs across different domain sizes
(a): Patches of different sizes are re-scaled (b), gradient orientation computed (c) and pooled across locations and scales (d), and
concatenated yielding a descriptor (e) of the same dimension of
ordinary SIFT.

few lines of code, can be applied to any histogram-based
method (Sect. 3), and yields a descriptor of the same size
that outperforms the original essentially uniformly (Fig. 4).
Yet combining histograms of images of different sizes is
counterintuitive and seemingly at odds with the teachings
of scale-space theory and the resulting established practice
of scale selection [23] (Sect. 1.1). It is, however, rooted
in classical sampling theory and anti-aliasing. Sect. 2 describes what we do, Sect. 3 how we do it, and Sect. 5 why
we do it. Sect. 4 validates our method empirically.

1.1. Related work
A single, un-normalized cell of the “scale-invariant feature transform” SIFT [24] and its variants [8, 2, 7] can be
written compactly as a formula [41, 10]:
Z
hSIFT (θ|I, σ̂)[x] = Nǫ (θ − ∠∇I(y)) Nσ̂ (y − x)dµ(y)
(1)

