Computing Similarity Transformations from Only Image Correspondences
Chris Sweeney1
1

Laurent Kneip2

Tobias Höllerer1

University of California Santa Barbara

{cmsweeney, holl, mturk}@cs.ucsb.edu

2

Matthew Turk1

Research School of Engineering
Australian National University
laurent.kneip@anu.edu.au

Abstract
We propose a novel solution for computing the relative
pose between two generalized cameras that includes reconciling the internal scale of the generalized cameras. This
approach can be used to compute a similarity transformation between two coordinate systems, making it useful for
loop closure in visual odometry and registering multiple
structure from motion reconstructions together. In contrast
to alternative similarity transformation methods, our approach uses 2D-2D image correspondences thus is not subject to the depth uncertainty that often arises with 3D points.
We utilize a known vertical direction (which may be easily
obtained from IMU data or vertical vanishing point detection) of the generalized cameras to solve the generalized
relative pose and scale problem as an efficient Quadratic
Eigenvalue Problem. To our knowledge, this is the first
method for computing similarity transformations that does
not require any 3D information. Our experiments on synthetic and real data demonstrate that this leads to improved
performance compared to methods that use 3D-3D or 2D3D correspondences, especially as the depth of the scene
increases.

Figure 1. We present a method to solve the generalized relative
pose and scale problem. We first align the generalized cameras to
a common vertical direction then use image rays obtained from 5
2D-2D correspondences to solve for the remaining degrees of freedom. Solving this problem is equivalent to computing a similarity
transformation

the distance between all camera centers within the multicamera system) is known. This limits the use of generalized cameras to cases where scale calibration can be easily
captured. In this paper, we provide a further generalization
of the relative pose problem and remove the requirement of
known scale to solve a new problem: the generalized relative pose and scale problem.
Reconciling the relative pose between two generalized
cameras as well as the unknown scale is equivalent to recovering a 7 degrees-of-freedom (d.o.f.) similarity transformation. This allows for a much broader use of generalized cameras. In particular, similarity transformations can
be used for loop closure in SLAM (where scale drift occurs)
and for merging multiple Structure-from-Motion (SfM) reconstructions when the scale between the reconstructions
is unknown. This problem arises frequently because scale
cannot be explicitly recovered from images alone without
metric calibration, so developing accurate, efficient, and robust methods to solve this problem is of great importance.
Using generalized cameras to compute similarity transformations was recently introduced with the generalized

1. Introduction
Computing the relative pose between two cameras is one
of the most fundamental problems in multi-view geometry.
A generalization of this problem is to compute the relative
pose between two sets of multiple cameras. Each set of multiple cameras may be described by the generalized camera
model which allows a set of image rays that do not necessarily have the same ray origin to be represented in a uniform
expression. Generalized cameras are extremely useful for
many practical applications such as omni-directional camera systems and vehicle-mounted multi-camera systems.
Solutions exist for computing relative pose between generalized cameras [9, 15, 21]; however, these methods require that the internal scale of the multi-camera system (i.e.,
1

