Learning Scene-Specific Pedestrian Detectors without Real Data
Hironori Hattori
Sony Corporation

Vishnu Naresh Boddeti,
Kris Kitani,
Takeo Kanade
The Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University

Hironori.Hattori@jp.sony.com

naresh@cmu.edu, kkitani@cs.cmu.edu, tk@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of designing a scene-specific
pedestrian detector in a scenario where we have zero instances of real pedestrian data (i.e., no labeled real data or
unsupervised real data). This scenario may arise when a
new surveillance system is installed in a novel location and
a scene-specific pedestrian detector must be trained prior
to any observations of pedestrians. The key idea of our approach is to infer the potential appearance of pedestrians
using geometric scene data and a customizable database
of virtual simulations of pedestrian motion. We propose
an efficient discriminative learning method that generates
a spatially-varying pedestrian appearance model that takes
into the account the perspective geometry of the scene. As a
result, our method is able to learn a unique pedestrian classifier customized for every possible location in the scene.
Our experimental results show that our proposed approach
outperforms classical pedestrian detection models and hybrid synthetic-real models. Our results also yield a surprising result, that our method using purely synthetic data
is able to outperform models trained on real scene-specific
data when data is limited.

Figure 1. Scene-specific and location-specific pedestrian detection
results using geometrically consistent computer generated data.

1. Introduction

generated pedestrians) to act as a proxy for the real data.
Moreover, we show that by using this ‘data-free’ technique
(i.e., does not require real pedestrian data), we are still able
to train a scene-specific pedestrian detector that outperforms
baseline techniques.
Our goal is to develop a method for training a ‘datafree’ scene-specific pedestrian detector which outperforms
generic pedestrian detection algorithms (i.e. HOG-SVM,
DPM). Generically trained pedestrian detectors are trained
over large data sets of real data and thus work robustly
across many scenes. However, generic models are not always best-suited for detection in specific scenes. In many
surveillance scenarios, it is more important to have a customized pedestrian detection model that is optimized for a
single scene. Optimizing for a single scene however often requires a labor intensive process of collecting labeled

Consider the scenario in which a new surveillance system is installed in a novel location and an image-based
pedestrian detector must be trained without access to real
scene-specific pedestrian data. A similar situation may arise
when a new imaging system (e.g. a custom camera with
unique lens distortion) has been designed and must be able
to detect pedestrians without the expensive process of collecting data with the new imaging device. Both of these scenarios are ill posed zero-instance learning problems, where
an image-based pedestrian detector must be created without
having access to real data. Fortunately, in these scenarios
we have access to two important pieces of information: (1)
the camera’s calibration parameters, and (2) scene geometry. In this work, we show that with this information, it is
possible to generate synthetic training data (i.e. computer
1

