Probability Occupancy Maps for Occluded Depth Images
Timur Bagautdinov∗1 , François Fleuret2 , and Pascal Fua1
1

École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland
2
IDIAP Research Institute, Switzerland

{timur.bagautdinov, pascal.fua}@epfl.ch, francois.fleuret@idiap.ch

Abstract
We propose a novel approach to computing the probabilities of presence of multiple and potentially occluding
objects in a scene from a single depth map. To this end,
we use a generative model that predicts the distribution of
depth images that would be produced if the probabilities of
presence were known and then to optimize them so that this
distribution explains observed evidence as closely as possible.
This allows us to exploit very effectively the available
evidence and outperform state-of-the-art methods without
requiring large amounts of data, or without using the RGB
signal that modern RGB-D sensors also provide.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. DPOM: generative model for depth maps. (a) Objects
can be thought of as boxes, and images of objects are outlines
within their rectangular projections. (b) Background is modeled
explicitly: for each pixel there is a probability distribution, whose
parameters are estimated from a set of background images.

1. Introduction
The advent of the original Kinect camera [12] and its
sucessors has sparked a tremendous regain of interest for
RGB-D imagers, which were formerly perceived as being
either cumbersone or expensive. They have been used with
great success for motion capture [16, 17] and are becoming
increasingly popular for people detection in robotics applications [13, 18, 14, 10]. However, the former requires the
algorithms to be trained on very large training databases,
which may not always be easy to create, to achieve the desired level of performance while the latter usually do not
make provisions for the fact that people may occlude each
other. This results in failures such as those depicted by
Fig. 2.
In this paper, we propose an approach that relies on a
generative model to evaluate the probability of target objects being present in the scene while explicitly accounting
for occlusions, which prevents such failures. It is inspired
by an earlier approach to estimating these probabilities from

background subtraction results from multiple cameras with
overlapping fields of view [9]. Here, we use instead a single depth-map and approximate probabilities of occupancy
at separate locations by choosing these probabilities so that
the lower bound on the model likelihood is maximized. In
contrast to many other approaches, ours does statistical reasoning jointly, i.e. knowledge about one piece of image evidence helps us to reason about the rest. This allows in particular to properly infer the presence of a severely occluded
target from the presence of a small fragment. The generative process is illustrated by Fig. 1.
We will demonstrate that our approach outperforms [14,
18, 17] for people detection purposes while using only the
depth image, whereas these other approaches also require
either the use of the RGB image and an additional classifier
or extensive training. Furthermore, because we do not require training, it took us very little additional effort to also
detect a completely different kind of objects, that is, flying
drones potentially occluding each other.

∗ This work was supported in part by a Swiss National Science Foundation grant.

1

