An Approximate Shading Model for Object Relighting
Zicheng Liao?†
Zhejiang University?

Kevin Karsch†
David Forsyth†
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign†

Figure 1. Given an existing 3D scene (left), our method builds approximate object models from image fragments (two teapots and an
ostrich) and inserts them in the scene (right). Lighting and shadowing of the inserted objects appear consistent with the rest of the scene.
Our method also captures complex reflection (front teapot), refraction (back teapot) and depth-of-field of effects (ostrich). None of these
rendering effects can be achieved by image-based editing tools, while our hybrid approach avoids the pain of accurate 3D or material
modeling. 3D scene modeling credit to: Jason Clarke.

Abstract
effects that achieve realism in a data-driven manner (Fig. 1).
Relighting is generally necessary in the process. To relight an object from an image fragment, we need to know its
shape and material properties. Alternatively, Image-based
composition methods [6, 24, 1] skips the relighting process,
relying on the artist’s discretion for determining shadingcompatible image fragments. This limits the range of data
that can be used for a particular scene. Despite the limitations, image-based methods have been widely used, because
shape estimation (required in the other approach) remains a
very challenging task. State-of-the-art algorithms, such as
the SIRFS method of Barron et al. [2], still produce weak
shapes and do not work well for complex materials on real
world data. Is there a compromise between the two spaces?
We propose such an approach by exploring an approximate shading model. The model circumvents the
formidable 3D reconstruction problem, yet is reflexible and
can adapt to various target scenes lighting condition.
The model is inspired by two lines of work. First, it is not
currently possible to produce veridical reconstructions from
single images; but studies show the human visual system is
tolerant of renderings that are not physical ([23, 26, 9, 7]
give some rules that must apply to an image for it to be
seen as accurate). Our model attempts to exploit this fact to
conceal weak reconstructions, following the spirit of work
in material editing [18] and illumination estimation [16].
Second, illumination cone theory [5] suggests an accurate

We propose an approximate shading model for imagebased object modeling and insertion. Our approach is a
hybrid of 3D rendering and image-based composition. It
avoids the difficulties of physically accurate shape estimation from a single image, and allows for more flexible image
composition than pure image-based methods. The model
decomposes the shading field into (a) a rough shape term
that can be reshaded, (b) a parametric shading detail that
encodes missing features from the first term, and (c) a geometric detail term that captures fine-scale material properties. With this object model, we build an object relighting system that allows an artist to select an object from an
image and insert it into a 3D scene. Through simple interactions, the system can adjust illumination on the inserted
object so that it appears more naturally in the scene. Our
quantitative evaluation and extensive user study suggest our
method is a promising alternative to existing methods of object insertion.

1. Introduction
An important task of image composition is to take an existing image fragment and insert it into another scene. This
approach is appealing because 3D models are difficult to
build, and image fragments carry real texture and material
1

