Watch-n-Patch: Unsupervised Understanding of Actions and Relations
Chenxia Wu1,2 , Jiemi Zhang1 , Silvio Savarese2 , and Ashutosh Saxena1,2
1

Department of Computer Science, Cornell University
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
{chenxiawu,asaxena}@cs.cornell.edu, jmzhang10@gmail.com, ssilvio@stanford.edu
2

Abstract
We focus on modeling human activities comprising multiple actions in a completely unsupervised setting. Our
model learns the high-level action co-occurrence and temporal relations between the actions in the activity video.
We consider the video as a sequence of short-term action
clips, called action-words, and an activity is about a set
of action-topics indicating which actions are present in the
video. Then we propose a new probabilistic model relating the action-words and the action-topics. It allows us to
model long-range action relations that commonly exist in
the complex activity, which is challenging to capture in the
previous works.
We apply our model to unsupervised action segmentation
and recognition, and also to a novel application that detects
forgotten actions, which we call action patching. For evaluation, we also contribute a new challenging RGB-D activity
video dataset recorded by the new Kinect v2, which contains several human daily activities as compositions of multiple actions interacted with different objects. The extensive
experiments show the effectiveness of our model.

Figure 1: Our goal is to automatically segment RGB-D videos
and assign action-topics to each segment. We propose a completely unsupervised approach to modeling the human skeleton
and RGB-D features to actions, as well as the pairwise action cooccurrence and temporal relations. We then show that our model
can be used to detect which action people forgot, a new application
which we call action patching.

fully labeled actions in videos [23, 29, 31], or weakly supervised action labels [9, 7], or locations of human/their
interactive objects [21, 35, 25]. Among them, the temporal structure of actions is often discovered by Markov models such as Hidden Markov Model (HMM) [34] and semiMarkov [12, 32], or by linear dynamical systems [3], or by
hierarchical grammars [27, 37, 20, 39, 2], or by other spatiotemporal representations [15, 26, 17, 19]. Most of these
works are based on RGB features and only model the shortrange relations between actions (see Section 2 for details).
Different from these approaches, we consider a completely unsupervised setting. The novelty of our approach
is the ability to model the long-range action relations in
the temporal sequence, by considering pairwise action cooccurrence and temporal relations, e.g., put-milk-back-tofridge often co-occurs with and temporally after fetch-milkfrom-fridge. We also use the more informative human skeleton and RGB-D features, which show higher performance
over RGB only features for action recognition [18, 42, 22].

1. Introduction
We consider modeling human activities containing a sequence of actions (see an example in Fig. 1), as perceived
by an RGB-D sensor in home and office environments. In
the complex human activity such as warming milk in the example, there are not only short-range action relations, e.g.,
microwaving is often followed by fetch-bowl-from-oven, but
there are also long-range action relations, e.g., fetch-milkfrom-fridge is strongly related to put-milk-back-to-fridge
even though several other actions occur between them.
The challenge that we undertake in this paper is: Can
an algorithm learn about the aforementioned relations in
the activities when just given a completely unlabeled set
of RGB-D videos?
Most previous works focus on action detection in a supervised learning setting. In the training, they are given
1

