Matching Bags of Regions in RGBD images
Hao Jiang
Boston College, USA
hjiang@cs.bc.edu

Abstract
We study the new problem of matching regions between
a pair of RGBD images given a large set of overlapping
region proposals. These region proposals do not have a
tree hierarchy and are treated as bags of regions. Matching RGBD images using bags of region candidates with unstructured relations is a challenging combinatorial problem. We propose a linear formulation, which optimizes the
region selection and matching simultaneously so that the
matched regions have similar color histogram, shape, and
small overlaps, the selected regions have a small number
and overall low concavity, and they tend to cover both of
the images. We efﬁciently compute the lower bound by solving a sequence of min-cost bipartite matching problems via
Lagrangian relaxation and we obtain the global optimum
using branch and bound. Our experiments show that the
proposed method is fast, accurate, and robust against cluttered scenes.

1. Introduction
Region matching between images is an important task in
computer vision. It is also challenging because of the difﬁculty of extracting regions consistently from one image to
another. Even with the same set of parameters, a segmentation method may give quite different partitions on two similar images. Instead of relying on segmentation algorithms to
give consistent partitions, we resort to a large set of region
candidates from different segmentation methods. By using
a large number of region proposals, we have a better chance
to ﬁnd a subset that has a one-to-one matching between two
images. Since these region candidates do not have speciﬁc
relations to each other, we treat them as a bag of regions on
each image. In this paper, we propose a novel method to
optimize the region selection and matching between a pair
of RGBD images given a large bag of overlapping region
proposals in source and target images. Fig. 1 shows one example of our method on matching the regions between two
RGBD images.
The fundamental problem of our region selection and
matching task is min-cost bipartite matching with global re-

(a)



(e)

(b)

(c)

(d)



(f)

(g)

Figure 1. Finding region correspondence between RGBD images
using bags of region candidates. We extract candidate regions using different methods to form bags of candidates on the source
(a, b) and target (c, d) RGBD images. Our method optimizes the
region selection and matching using the graph model in (e) and
gives the matching result in (f, g). The same color in (f, g) indicates matched regions.

gion constraints as shown in Fig. 1(e). Traditional bipartite
matching minimizes the matching costs with the constraint
that each site from one image at most matches one site on
the other image. To match a bag of overlapping regions, the
optimization needs to satisfy more conditions such as the
max-covering constraints, overlapping penalty constraints,
and the number constraints. Previous min-cost bipartite
matching methods, such as the Hungarian algorithm, cannot
be directly used any more. Finding the global optimal solution of the proposed region matching problem is a challenging combinatorial problem, which to our knowledge has not
been studied before.

1.1. Related methods
Matching non-overlapping regions between two images
has been intensively studied. A many-to-one region matching method is proposed in [1]. This method matches
non-overlapping regions in the source and target color images. To handle region splitting and merging, partial region
matching method is proposed. Inexact matching [5] has
also been proposed to handle region splitting and merging.
Apart from matching in a single level, a region hierarchy
can be generated by organizing the regions and successively
merged ones into a tree. Matching regions in the tree has be

