A Dataset for Movie Description
Anna Rohrbach1 Marcus Rohrbach2 Niket Tandon1 Bernt Schiele1
1
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbrücken, Germany
2
UC Berkeley EECS and ICSI, Berkeley, CA, United States

Abstract
Audio Description (AD) provides linguistic descriptions
of movies and allows visually impaired people to follow a
movie along with their peers. Such descriptions are by design mainly visual and thus naturally form an interesting
data source for computer vision and computational linguistics. In this work we propose a novel dataset which contains
transcribed ADs, which are temporally aligned to full length
HD movies. In addition we also collected the aligned movie
scripts which have been used in prior work and compare
the two different sources of descriptions. In total the MPII
Movie Description dataset (MPII-MD) contains a parallel
corpus of over 68K sentences and video snippets from 94
HD movies. We characterize the dataset by benchmarking different approaches for generating video descriptions.
Comparing ADs to scripts, we find that ADs are far more
visual and describe precisely what is shown rather than
what should happen according to the scripts created prior
to movie production.

AD: Abby gets in the
basket.

Mike leans over and sees
how high they are.

Script: After a moment a
frazzled Abby pops up in
his place.

Mike looks down to see –
they are now fifteen feet
above the ground.

Abby clasps her hands
around his face and
kisses him passionately.
For the first time in
her life, she stops thinking and grabs Mike and
kisses the hell out of him.

Figure 1: Audio description (AD) and movie script samples
from the movie “Ugly Truth”.

input one has to reliably recognize scenes, human activities,
and participating objects. To generate a good description
one has to decide what part of the visual information to verbalize, i.e. recognize what is salient.
Large datasets of objects [19] and scenes [73, 76] had an
important impact in the field and significantly improved our
ability to recognize objects and scenes in combination with
CNNs [40]. To be able to learn how to generate descriptions of visual content, parallel datasets of visual content
paired with descriptions are indispensable [59]. While recently several large datasets have been released which provide images with descriptions [31, 49, 53], video description datasets focus on short video snippets only and are
limited in size [12] or not publicly available [54]. TACoS
Multi-Level [58] and YouCook [17] are exceptions by providing multiple sentence descriptions and longer videos.
While these corpora pose challenges in terms of finegrained recognition, they are restricted to the cooking scenario. In contrast, movies are open domain and realistic, even though, as any other video sources (e.g. YouTube
or surveillance videos), have their specific characteristics.
ADs and scripts associated with movies provide rich multiple sentence descriptions. They even go beyond this by
telling a story which means they allow to study how to extract plots and understand long term semantic dependencies
and human interactions from the visual and textual data.

1. Introduction
Audio descriptions (ADs) make movies accessible to
millions of blind or visually impaired people1 . AD provides
an audio narrative of the “most important aspects of the visual information” [61], namely actions, gestures, scenes,
and character appearance as can be seen in Figures 1 and
2. AD is prepared by trained describers and read by professional narrators. More and more movies are audio transcribed, but it may take up to 60 person-hours to describe a
2-hour movie [44], resulting in the fact that only a small
subset of movies and TV programs are available for the
blind. Consequently, automating this would be a noble task.
In addition to the benefits for the blind, generating descriptions for video is an interesting task in itself requiring
to understand and combine core techniques of computer vision and computational linguistics. To understand the visual
1 In this work we refer for simplicity to “the blind” to account for all
blind and visually impaired people which benefit from AD, knowing of the
variety of visually impaired and that AD is not accessible to all.

1

