Mining Semantic Affordances of Visual Object Categories
Yu-Wei Chao, Zhan Wang, Rada Mihalcea, and Jia Deng

Affordances are fundamental attributes of objects. Affordances reveal the functionalities of objects and the possible
actions that can be performed on them. Understanding affordances is crucial for recognizing human activities in visual data and for robots to interact with the world. In this
paper we introduce the new problem of mining the knowledge of semantic affordance: given an object, determining
whether an action can be performed on it. This is equivalent to connecting verb nodes and noun nodes in WordNet, or filling an affordance matrix encoding the plausibility
of each action-object pair. We introduce a new benchmark
with crowdsourced ground truth affordances on 20 PASCAL
VOC object classes and 957 action classes. We explore a
number of approaches including text mining, visual mining,
and collaborative filtering. Our analyses yield a number
of significant insights that reveal the most effective ways of
collecting knowledge of semantic affordances.

1. Introduction
Affordances are fundamental attributes of objects. Affordances reveal the functionalities of objects and the possible
actions that can be performed on them. An object is a chair
because it affords the possibility to be sit on. An object is
a food item because it is edible. Understanding affordances
is crucial for recognizing human activities in images and
videos because the functionality of objects informs us about
possibile activities and roles—a person wearing a stethoscope is likely to be a doctor; a person looking at a clock is
likely to be checking the time. In addition to helping computers better undersand human activities, the knowledge of
affordances is also essential for a robot to interact with the
environment and achieve its goals.
The key question is: given an object, can an action be
performed on it? Can a dog be hugged? What about an ant?
Can a TV be turned on? What about a bottle? While these
questions might seem obvious to a human, to the best of our
knowledge, there is no automated system that can readily
answer this question and there is no knowledge base that

bo
ar
d

rid
e

op
er
at
e
m
an
uf
ac
tu
dr
re
iv
e

fe
ed

hu
nt

hu
rt

Abstract

ac
ce
le
ra
te
in
te
rv
ie
w
ra
ce

Computer Science & Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
{ywchao, wangzhan, mihalcea, jiadeng}@umich.edu

bicycle
bird
boat
bottle
car
cat
cow
dining table
horse
person
train
tv

Figure 1. Mining the knowledge of semantic affordance is equivalent to filling an “affordance matrix” encoding the plausibility of
each action-object pair.

provides comprehensive knowledge of object affordances.
In this paper, we introduce the problem of mining the
knowledge of semantic affordance: given an action and an
object, determine whether the action can be applied to the
object. For example, the action of “carry” form a valid
combination with “bag”, but not with “skyscraper”. This is
equivalent to establishing connections between action concepts and object concepts, or filling an “affordance matrix”
encoding the plausibility of each action-object pair (Fig. 1).
We envision that the collection of such knowledge will
benefit a variety of applications. For example, the knowledge of semantic affordance provides a vocabulary for action recognition. It gives a list of valid action-object pairs,
the basis for creating a large-scale image/video dataset to
train and evaluate action recognition algorithms. Another
application is to use the affordance knowledge as a common sense prior for generating natural language descriptions from images or videos. As demonstrated in the literature [15, 22, 31, 42, 45], such priors improves recognition
of actions by eliminating implausible verb-noun combinations.
It is important to note two important distinctions of se-

