An Improved Deep Learning Architecture for Person Re-Identification
Ejaz Ahmed
University of Maryland
3364 A.V. Williams, College Park, MD 20740

Michael Jones and Tim K. Marks
Mitsubishi Electric Research Labs
201 Broadway, Cambridge, MA 02139

ejaz@umd.edu

{mjones, tmarks}@merl.com

Abstract
In this work, we propose a method for simultaneously
learning features and a corresponding similarity metric for
person re-identification. We present a deep convolutional
architecture with layers specially designed to address the
problem of re-identification. Given a pair of images as
input, our network outputs a similarity value indicating
whether the two input images depict the same person. Novel
elements of our architecture include a layer that computes
cross-input neighborhood differences, which capture local
relationships between the two input images based on midlevel features from each input image. A high-level summary
of the outputs of this layer is computed by a layer of patch
summary features, which are then spatially integrated in
subsequent layers. Our method significantly outperforms
the state of the art on both a large data set (CUHK03) and a
medium-sized data set (CUHK01), and is resistant to overfitting. We also demonstrate that by initially training on an
unrelated large data set before fine-tuning on a small target
data set, our network can achieve results comparable to the
state of the art even on a small data set (VIPeR).

Figure 1: Examples of true positives (first row), false positives (second row), and true negatives (bottom row) for our
trained network on CUHK03. More results can be found in
the supplementary material.
the images are of different people). In this paper, we follow this approach and use a novel deep learning network to
assign similarity scores to pairs of images of human bodies. Our network architecture includes two novel layers: a
neighborhood difference layer that compares convolutional
image features in each patch of one input image to the same
features computed on nearby patches in the other input image, and a subsequent layer whose features summarize each
patch’s neighborhood differences. These novel aspects of
our network lead to large improvements over the previous
state of the art on the CUHK03 and CUHK01 data sets. We
also show that our method is less prone to overfitting on
small training sets. Results on CUHK01 and VIPeR demonstrate its effectiveness on smaller data sets.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification is the problem of identifying
people across images that have been taken using different cameras, or across time using a single camera. Reidentification is an important capability for surveillance systems as well as human-computer interaction systems. It is
an especially difficult problem, because large variations in
viewpoint and lighting across different views can cause two
images of the same person to look quite different and can
cause images of different people to look very similar. See
Figure 1 for some difficult examples. The problem of reidentification is usually formulated in a similar way to face
recognition. A typical re-identification system takes as input two images, each of which usually contains a person’s
full body, and outputs either a similarity score between the
two images or a classification of the pair of images as same
(if the two images depict the same person) or different (if

2. Related Work
2.1. Overview of Previous Re-Identification Work
Typically, methods for re-identification include two
components: a method for extracting features from input
1

