Total Variation Regularization of Shape Signals
Maximilian Baust1

Laurent Demaret2

Martin Storath3

Nassir Navab1,4

Andreas Weinmann2

1 Computer Aided Medical Procedures and Augmented Reality, Technische Universität München,
2 Institute of Computational Biology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, 3 Biomedical Imaging Group, EPFL, Lausanne, 4 Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore.

[maximilian.baust,nassir.navab]@tum.de, [laurent.demaret, andreas.weinmann]@helmholtz-muenchen.de, martin.storath@epfl.ch

Abstract
This paper introduces the concept of shape signals, i.e.,
series of shapes which have a natural temporal or spatial
ordering, as well as a variational formulation for the regularization of these signals. The proposed formulation can
be seen as the shape-valued generalization of the RudinOsher-Fatemi (ROF) functional for intensity images. We
derive a variant of the classical finite-dimensional representation of Kendall, but our framework is generic in the sense
that it can be combined with any shape space. This representation allows for the explicit computation of geodesics
and thus facilitates the efficient numerical treatment of the
variational formulation by means of the cyclic proximal
point algorithm. Similar to the ROF-functional, we demonstrate experimentally that `1 -type penalties both for data
fidelity term and regularizer perform best in regularizing
shape signals. Finally, we show applications of our method
to shape signals obtained from synthetic, photometric, and
medical data sets.

Figure 1: Regularization of Shape Signals: Objects segmented from video data enjoy a natural temporal ordering
and thus form a shape signal. First row: Three frames
of the ”parachute” sequence from [28] segmented with the
method proposed by [18]. Second row: Regularized shapes
obtained with our method. Third and fourth row: Shape
signal of the original segmentations (third row) and regularized shape signal (fourth row). Only a few shapes of this
sequence are shown for better visibility. Shapes corresponding to the selected frames are highlighted in red.

1. Introduction

1.1. Motivation

In this paper we wish to introduce the concept of shape
signals, i.e., collections of shapes which appear in a spatial
or temporal context. An obvious example is object tracking
in video sequences where all shapes have a natural temporal ordering, cf. Fig. 1. Another example is organ segmentation from tomographic imaging modalities such as computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging, where a
three-dimensional organ can be segmented by obtaining its
two-dimensional outlines from all containing slices. In both
scenarios it is possible to arrange the obtained shapes in a
one dimensional grid with (often) equidistant spacing. The
resulting shape signal is a mapping from a discrete index,
which corresponds to a time stamp or a slice number for
instance, to some shape space.

The idea of introducing shape signals is inspired by the
observation of Rahman et al. [19], who noticed that many
signals in science and engineering are actually manifoldvalued signals as well as some recent efforts of total variation (TV) regularization of such data, cf. Lellmann et al.
[14] and Weinmann et al. [29]. A typical example is pose
tracking data, e.g., acquired with an optical tracking system, which can be represented as a series of rigid transformation matrices acquired at equally spaced points in time.
While these approaches focus, however, on rather low dimensional manifolds, e.g. SE(3) which is useful for regularizing pose data, we would like to go beyond these applications and consider shapes and shape spaces which are
high-dimensional by nature – typical polygonal shape rep1

