Fine-Grained Classification of Pedestrians in Video:
Benchmark and State of the Art
David Hall and Pietro Perona
California Institute of Technology
dhall,perona@vision.caltech.edu

Abstract
A video dataset that is designed to study fine-grained categorisation of pedestrians is introduced. Pedestrians were
recorded “in-the-wild” from a moving vehicle. Annotations
include bounding boxes, tracks, 14 keypoints with occlusion information and the fine-grained categories of age (5
classes), sex (2 classes), weight (3 classes) and clothing
style (4 classes). There are a total of 27,454 bounding box
and pose labels across 4222 tracks. This dataset is designed
to train and test algorithms for fine-grained categorisation
of people; it is also useful for benchmarking tracking, detection and pose estimation of pedestrians. State-of-the-art algorithms for fine-grained classification and pose estimation
were tested using the dataset and the results are reported as
a useful performance baseline.

1. Introduction

Figure 1: Three examples from the CRP dataset. Annotations include a bounding box, tracks, parts, occlusion, sex,
age, weight and clothing style.

People are an important component of a machine’s environment. Detecting, tracking, and recognising people,
interpreting their behaviour and interacting with them is a
valuable capability for machines. Using vision to estimate
human attributes such as: age, sex, activity, social status,
health, pose and motion patterns is useful for interpreting
and predicting behaviour. This motivates our interest in
fine-grained categorisation of people.
Visual classification involves recognising basic categories (e.g. ‘birds’ vs. ‘chairs’) and fine-grained categories, also called subcategories (e.g. ‘barn swallow’ vs.
‘marten’) [5]. Since subcategories are similar in appearance
subtle differences are often crucial. This is in contrast to basic categorisation where categories are visually distinct and
therefore broad statistics of the image are often sufficient.
While research in broad categorisation is well-supported
by large datasets comprising thousands of categories [11,
24], fine-grained categorisation has so far been explored in
a small number of domains including: animal breeds and
species [6, 21, 39], plant species [30], objects [37, 26] and,

what will be the focus of this work, people [7, 9, 4, 42]. The
availability of good-quality, large annotated datasets covering as many domains as possible is crucial for progress in
fine-grained categorisation.
Prior work on the fine-grained categorisation1 of people
has typically focused on faces with subcategories including: identity, age, sex, clothing type, facial hair and skin
colour [10, 15, 29, 36, 1, 22].
Fine-grained classification using the entire human body
is still a relatively unexplored area. The current benchmark using images is “The Attributes of People Dataset” [4]
which was introduced in 2011. It includes 9 subcategories
and has large variations in viewpoint and occlusion. This
dataset has been useful for researchers working on human
1 In the literature, fine-grained categorisation is more commonly referred to as attribute recognition in the human domain.

1

