Superpixel Meshes for Fast Edge-Preserving Surface Reconstruction
András Bódis-Szomorú1
Hayko Riemenschneider1
Luc Van Gool1,2
1
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich, Switzerland 2 PSI-VISICS, KU Leuven, Belgium
{bodis,hayko,vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
Multi-View-Stereo (MVS) methods aim for the highest
detail possible, however, such detail is often not required.
In this work, we propose a novel surface reconstruction
method based on image edges, superpixels and secondorder smoothness constraints, producing meshes comparable to classic MVS surfaces in quality but orders of magnitudes faster. Our method performs per-view dense depth
optimization directly over sparse 3D Ground Control Points
(GCPs), hence, removing the need for view pairing, image rectification, and stereo depth estimation, and allowing
for full per-image parallelization. We use Structure-fromMotion (SfM) points as GCPs, but the method is not specific to these, e.g. LiDAR or RGB-D can also be used. The
resulting meshes are compact and inherently edge-aligned
with image gradients, enabling good-quality lightweight
per-face flat renderings. Our experiments demonstrate on
a variety of 3D datasets the superiority in speed and competitive surface quality.

Figure 1. Given only sparse SfM data and a single view (left),
our lightweight method produces a mesh aligned to image contents fast (seconds) (top). The approach is general but particularly
promising for scalable LoD-3 street-level city modeling. Bottom:
output of a state-of-the-art multi-view stereo software [29].

load. In case of volumetric MVS, like the GPU-based CMPMVS [29], a street scene can cost multiple hours.
In turn, our aim is to develop a fast image-based surface
meshing approach to cover large city areas at the level of
a CityGML LoD-3 model, i.e. the geometry of buildings to
be captured precisely, with indications of architectural components like windows being set back or balconies sticking
out. However, we additionally experiment with reliefs, and
believe that our meshing could be applied in other scenarios, e.g. indoor scenes, replacing SfM with LiDAR points,
or when dense 3D data (e.g. RGB-D) is already available.
In this paper, we present a novel approach to directly obtain a 3D surface mesh from a set of images and from sparse
Structure-from-Motion (SfM) data, which we assume to
have been pre-calculated, e.g. from the same set of images. This is in contrast to the classical approach of reconstructing a highly detailed pixelwise dense model via MVS
and then apply simplification and meshing at the expense
of even more processing time. As we demonstrate, SfM
can already give sufficient 3D data to treat the problem as
many single-view surface fitting problems with small overlap between the views. By incorporating superpixels and

1. Introduction
Automatic 3D modelling of real urban environments has
been a long-term challenge [40], and has a wide range of
applications such as cultural heritage, entertainment, real
estate business, navigation and urban planning. Companies
like Google, Apple and Acute3D have automated 3D urban
model creation using Multi-View Stereo (MVS) technologies. These solutions rely on aerial data, as to meet the large
scale requirements. The resulting, textured meshes lack facade details, however. Yet, many applications would benefit
from facade-level details or the related semantics.
The alternative is to use street-level acquisition. In this
vein, image-based Multi-View Stereo (MVS) has also been
used, at least at a city district scale [29, 38, 18, 57]. These
methods tend to be too slow for larger scenes for several
reasons. They often enforce pixelwise photo-consistency
across multiple views, and deliver very dense point clouds
or depth maps that need extra meshing steps to obtain more
compact surfaces. Leaving them as such comes with a high
toll on the required storage space and visualization work1

