Scalable Object Detection by Filter Compression with Regularized Sparse
Coding
Ting-Hsuan Chao, Yen-Liang Lin, Yin-Hsi Kuo, and Winston H. Hsu
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan

Abstract
For practical applications, an object detection system requires huge number of classes to meet real world needs.
Many successful object detection systems use part-based
model which trains several filters (classifiers) for each class
to perform multiclass object detection. However, these
methods have linear computational complexity in regard to
the number of classes and may lead to huge computing time.
To solve the problem, some works learn a codebook for the
filters and conduct operations only on the codebook to make
computational complexity sublinear in regard to the number of classes. But the past studies missed to consider filter
characteristics, e.g., filters are weights trained by Support
Vector Machine, and rather they applied method such as
sparse coding for visual signals’ optimization. This misuse results in huge accuracy loss when a large speedup is
required. To remedy this shortcoming, we have developed
a new method called Regularized Sparse Coding which is
designed to reconstruct filter functionality. That is, it reconstructs the ability of filter to produce accurate score for
classification. Our method can reconstruct filters by minimizing score map error, while sparse coding reconstructs
filters by minimizing appearance error. This different optimization strategy makes our method be able to have small
accuracy loss when a large speedup is achieved. On the
ILSVRC 2013 dataset, which has 200 classes, this work represents a 16 times speedup using only 1.25% memory on
single CPU with 0.04 mAP drop when compared with the
original Deformable Part Model. Moreover, parallel computing on GPUs is also applicable for our work to achieve
more speedup.

1. Introduction
In object detection, many works based on part-based
model such as the Deformable Part Model (DPM) [8] have
achieved high accuracy in recent years. However, long detection time has raised concerns on whether it is suitable
for real applications. Most of the computing time of these
methods comes from convolution operations between filters

and images. Moreover, to overcome the deformation nature
of objects, an object class often comprises 20 or even 100
more filters and such a huge number of filters will unacceptably prolong detection time. In general, object detection
can be divided into two stages. The first stage collects object proposals, while the second stage uses a bank of filters
to decide the class of each proposal. Trying to scale down
the number of convolution operations, an efficient method
has been proposed [18], which tries to reconstruct all filters
with a fixed size codebook. Therefore, convolution operations are only conducted between the codebook and input
image to make computational complexity not linear in regard to the number of classes. It proves that sparse coding
can be a good method for efficient object detection.
We question that if sparse coding is still suitable for scalable object detection when the number of classes grows in
the ILSVRC 2013 detection task. When a large speedup is
required, it has to scale down size of codebook and use the
codebook to reconstruct huge number of filters. However,
sparse coding cannot fully reconstruct all filters with the
small codebook and results in accuracy loss. It means that
we need a method to reconstruct filters with limit budget
(i.e., small memory consumption, small model and small
computation) and achieve larger speedup. In object detection, filters are used to convolve with images to get score
maps (Figure 2) and then leverage these score maps to
produce reliable detection results which consist of several
bounding box-label pairs. But as we know, sparse coding
is inspired by the function of the human vision system and
frequently used to reconstruct visual signals. Using sparse
coding to reconstruct filters appearance will be the reason
why accuracy drops with limit budget as confirmed by our
experiments in Section 4.
To tackle the problem, we proposed Regularized Sparse
Coding which is optimized for filter functionality1 . The intuition is that we should reconstruct filter functionality directly rather than reconstruct filter appearance and ask it
to perform like the original filter. In other words, understanding functionality of filter and codebook will be the
1 In this work we call the ability of filter to produce accurate score map
in object detection as filter functionality.

