Understanding Tools:
Task-Oriented Object Modeling, Learning and Recognition
Yixin Zhu ∗

Yibiao Zhao ∗

Song-Chun Zhu

yixin.zhu@ucla.edu

ybzhao@ucla.edu

sczhu@stat.ucla.edu

Center for Vision, Cognition, Learning, and Art
University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA

Abstract
In this paper, we present a new framework – taskoriented modeling, learning and recognition which aims
at understanding the underlying functions, physics and
causality in using objects as “tools”. Given a task, such
as, cracking a nut or painting a wall, we represent each
object, e.g. a hammer or brush, in a generative spatiotemporal representation consisting of four components: i)
an affordance basis to be grasped by hand; ii) a functional
basis to act on a target object (the nut), iii) the imagined
actions with typical motion trajectories; and iv) the underlying physical concepts, e.g. force, pressure, etc. In a
learning phase, our algorithm observes only one RGB-D
video, in which a rational human picks up one object (i.e.
tool) among a number of candidates to accomplish the task.
From this example, our algorithm learns the essential physical concepts in the task (e.g. forces in cracking nuts). In an
inference phase, our algorithm is given a new set of objects
(daily objects or stones), and picks the best choice available together with the inferred affordance basis, functional
basis, imagined human actions (sequence of poses), and the
expected physical quantity that it will produce. From this
new perspective, any objects can be viewed as a hammer
or a shovel, and object recognition is not merely memorizing typical appearance examples for each category but reasoning the physical mechanisms in various tasks to achieve
generalization.

Figure 1. Task-oriented object recognition. (a) In a learning phase,
a rational human is observed picking a hammer among other tools
to crack a nut. (b) In an inference phase, the algorithm is asked to
pick the best object (i.e. the wooden leg) on the table for the same
task. This generalization entails physical reasoning.

cal object used in the human action to achieve the task, such
as a hammer or brush, and it can be any daily objects and
is not restricted to conventional hardware tools. This leads
us to a new framework – task-oriented modeling, learning
and recognition, which aims at understanding the underlying functions, physics and causality in using objects as tools
in various task categories.
Fig. 1 illustrates the two phases of this new framework.
In a learning phase, our algorithm observes only one RGBD video as an example, in which a rational human picks up
one object, the hammer, among a number of candidates to
accomplish the task. From this example, our algorithm reasons about the essential physical concepts in the task (e.g.
forces produced at the far end of the hammer), and thus
learns the task-oriented model. In an inference phase, our
algorithm is given a new set of daily objects (on the desk in
(b)), and makes the best choice available (the wooden leg)
to accomplish the task.
From this new perspective, any objects can be viewed
as a hammer or a shovel, and this generative representation allows computer vision algorithms to generalize object
recognition to novel functions and situations by reasoning

1. Introduction
In this paper, we rethink object recognition from the perspective of an agent: how objects are used as “tools” in
actions to accomplish a “task”. Here a task is defined as
changing the physical states of a target object by actions,
such as, cracking a nut or painting a wall. A tool is a physi? Yixin Zhu and Yibiao Zhao contribute equally to this work.

1

