Learning Coarse-to-Fine Sparselets for Efficient
Object Detection and Scene Classification
Gong Cheng1, Junwei Han1,*, Lei Guo1, Tianming Liu2
1
School of Automation, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi'an, China
2
Department of Computer Science, The University of Georgia, Athens, GA
{gcheng,jhan,lguo}@nwpu.edu.cn, tliu@cs.uga.edu

Abstract1
Part model-based methods have been successfully
applied to object detection and scene classification and
have achieved state-of-the-art results. More recently the
"sparselets" work [1-3] were introduced to serve as a
universal set of shared basis learned from a large number
of part detectors, resulting in notable speedup. Inspired by
this framework, in this paper, we propose a novel scheme to
train more effective sparselets with a coarse-to-fine
framework. Specifically, we first train coarse sparselets to
exploit the redundancy existing among part detectors by
using an unsupervised single-hidden-layer auto-encoder.
Then, we simultaneously train fine sparselets and
activation vectors using a supervised single-hidden-layer
neural network, in which sparselets training and
discriminative activation vectors learning are jointly
embedded into a unified framework. In order to adequately
explore the discriminative information hidden in the part
detectors and to achieve sparsity, we propose to optimize a
new discriminative objective function by imposing L0-norm
sparsity constraint on the activation vectors. By using the
proposed framework, promising results for multi-class
object detection and scene classification are achieved on
PASCAL VOC 2007, MIT Scene-67, and UC Merced Land
Use datasets, compared with the existing sparselets
baseline methods.

1. Introduction
Object detection and scene classification are two
fundamental but challenging tasks in computer vision field.
In recent years, since the seminal work of [4, 5] and with
the success of deformable part models (DPMs) [6, 7], part
model-based methods have demonstrated impressive
performance for object detection [6-13] and scene
classification [14-21]. Their success is largely owing to the
usage of a number of part detectors to explicitly capture the
locations, scales, and appearances of some representative
and discriminative visual concepts.
*

Corresponding author.

However, as the number of part detectors grows (e.g., in
[7] there are 960 part filters for PASCAL VOC 2007
dataset [22] and in [15] there are 13,400 part detectors for
MIT Scene-67 dataset [23]), a major bottleneck to their
wide applications is their heavy computational load caused
by the exhaustive convolution operation between image
feature pyramid and the large number of part detectors.
This severely prevents them from scaling up to dealing with
a large number of object or scene categories. In this
situation, how to learn a universal and shared basis from a
mass of part detectors is highly desirable due to the
potential benefits for gaining computational efficiency.
To tackle this problem, Song et al. [1] introduced a new
notion of "sparselets" to serve as a shared intermediate
representation for multi-class object detection with DPM [7]
thereby accelerating detection speed. In this application,
the sparselets are defined as a universal set of shared basis
learned from a number of part filters in a sparse coding
framework, where each sparselet is regarded as a generic
basis that is shared between all object categories. With this
representation, the part filter responses of a DPM, for any
object category, can be approximately reconstructed as
sparse combinations of the sparselets with their
corresponding activation vectors instead of exhaustive
convolutions. However, as pointed out by [2] and [3], the
method proposed by Song et al. [1] is brittle. In [1],
sparselets and activation vectors were approximately
obtained by using greedy orthogonal matching pursuit
algorithm (OMP) [24, 25]. As sparsity increases, the errors
between the original and the reconstructed part filters
become larger, so the decision boundary of original models
cannot be well preserved. Although these sparse coding
based sparselets led to a great computational saving, they
also resulted in a substantial loss in detection accuracy.
To address this drawback, [2] and [3] reformulated
sparselets in a general structured output prediction
framework and described a new training method to further
improve the performance of [1]. The core idea of [2] and [3]
is to learn which sparselets should be activated. Their
solution was first learning sparselets in a sparse coding
framework, then fixing the sparselets, and finally learning
discriminative activation vectors for each predictor in a
structural support vector machine (SVM) framework. The

