Face Alignment by Coarse-to-Fine Shape Searching
Shizhan Zhu1,2 Cheng Li2 Chen Change Loy1,3 Xiaoou Tang1,3
1
Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
SenseTime Group
3
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
zs014@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, chengli@sensetime.com, ccloy@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, xtang@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
We present a novel face alignment framework based on
coarse-to-fine shape searching. Unlike the conventional
cascaded regression approaches that start with an initial
shape and refine the shape in a cascaded manner, our approach begins with a coarse search over a shape space that
contains diverse shapes, and employs the coarse solution
to constrain subsequent finer search of shapes. The unique
stage-by-stage progressive and adaptive search i) prevents
the final solution from being trapped in local optima due
to poor initialisation, a common problem encountered by
cascaded regression approaches; and ii) improves the robustness in coping with large pose variations. The framework demonstrates real-time performance and state-of-theart results on various benchmarks including the challenging
300-W dataset.

1. Introduction
Face alignment aims at locating facial key points automatically. It is essential to many facial analysis tasks,
e.g. face verification and recognition [11], expression recognition [2], or facial attributes analysis [16]. Among the
many different approaches for face alignment, cascaded
pose regression [8, 10, 29, 37] has emerged as one of the
most popular and state-of-the-art methods. The algorithm
typically starts from an initial shape, e.g. mean shape of
training samples, and refines the shape through sequentially
trained regressors.
In this study, we re-consider the face alignment problem from a different view point by taking a coarse-to-fine
shape searching approach (Fig. 1(a)). The algorithm begins
with a coarse searching in a shape space that encompasses
a large number of candidate shapes. The coarse searching stage identifies a sub-region within the shape space for
further searching in subsequent finer stages and simultaneously discards unpromising shape space sub-regions. Subsequent finer stages progressively and adaptively shrink the

plausible region and converge the space to a small region
where the final shape is estimated. In practice, only three
stages are required.
In comparison to the conventional cascaded regression
approaches, the coarse-to-fine framework is attractive in
two aspects:
1) Initialisation independent: A widely acknowledged
shortcoming of cascaded regression approach is its dependence on initialisation [32]. In particular, if the initialised
shape is far from the target shape, it is unlikely that the
discrepancy will be completely rectified by subsequent iterations in the cascade. As a consequence, the final solution may be trapped in local optima (Fig. 1(c)). Existing
methods often circumvent this problem by adopting some
heuristic assumptions or strategies (see Sec. 2 for details),
which mitigate the problem to certain extent, but do not
fully resolve the issue. The proposed coarse-to-fine framework relaxes the need of shape initialisation. It starts its first
stage by exploring the whole shape space, without locking
itself on a specific single initialisation point. This frees the
alignment process from being affected by poor initialisation, leading to more robust face alignment.
2) Robust to large pose variation: The early stages in the
coarse-to-fine search is formulated to simultaneously accommodate and consider diverse pose variations, e.g. with
different degrees of head pose, and face contours. The
search then progressively focus the processing on dedicated
shape sub-region to estimate the best shape. Experimental
results show that this searching mechanism is more robust
in coping with large pose variations in comparison to the
cascaded regression approach.
Since searching through shape space is challenging w.r.t.
speed issue, we propose a hybrid features setting to achieve
practical speed. Owing to the unique error tolerance in the
coarse-to-fine searching mechanism, our framework is capable of exploiting the advantages and characteristics of
different features. For instance, we have the flexibility to
employ less accurate but computationally efficient feature,
e.g. BRIEF [9] at the early stages, and use more accurate but

