A Maximum Entropy Feature Descriptor for Age Invariant Face Recognition
Dihong Gong1

Zhifeng Li1

dh.gong@siat.ac.cn

zhifeng.li@siat.ac.cn

Jianzhuang Liu3,4

liu.jianzhuang@huawei.com

Dacheng Tao2
dacheng.tao@uts.edu.au

Xuelong Li5

xuelong_li@opt.ac.cn

1

Shenzhen Key Lab of Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
2
Centre for Quantum Computation & Intelligent Systems, Faculty of Engineering and IT, University of
Technology, Sydney, NSW 2007, Australia
3
Dept. of Information Engineering, the Chinese University of Hong Kong
4
Media Lab, Huawei Technologies Co. Ltd., China
5
Xi'an Institute of Optics and Precision Mechanics, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Abstract
In this paper, we propose a new approach to overcome
the representation and matching problems in age invariant
face recognition. First, a new maximum entropy feature
descriptor (MEFD) is developed that encodes the
microstructure of facial images into a set of discrete codes
in terms of maximum entropy. By densely sampling the
encoded face image, sufficient discriminatory and
expressive information can be extracted for further
analysis. A new matching method is also developed, called
identity factor analysis (IFA), to estimate the probability
that two faces have the same underlying identity. The
effectiveness of the framework is confirmed by extensive
experimentation on two face aging datasets, MORPH (the
largest public-domain face aging dataset) and FGNET. We
also conduct experiments on the famous LFW dataset to
demonstrate the excellent generalizability of our new
approach.
1. Introduction
Age invariant face recognition (AIFR) is an important
but challenging area of face recognition research. AIFR is
useful in a number of practical applications, for example
finding missing children and identifying criminals based on
their mug shots [1, 2]. Although significant progress has
been made in face recognition, AIFR still remains a major
challenge in real world applications such as face
recognition systems, in which age-related face image
analysis has most traction.
Most existing works focus on age estimation [3–13] and
aging simulation [14–18]; only a very limited number of
studies tackle AIFR [19, 20]. A typical AIFR approach is to
use face modeling to synthesize and render face images to
the same age as the gallery image prior to recognition [4,

14, 18, 33]. However, due to strong parametric assumptions
and the complexity of the algorithm, these methods are
computationally expensive and the results are often
unstable for real-world face recognition.
Recently, several discriminative methods have been
proposed to improve the performance of AIFR [19, 20, 34,
35, 41, 42]. For example, the method in [19] uses gradient
orientation pyramids (GOPs) for feature representation
combined with SVMs to verify faces as they age. The
method presented in [20] combines scale-invariant feature
transforms (SIFT) [23] and multi-scale local binary
patterns (MLBP) [26] with a random sampling-based
fusion framework to improve AIFR performance. Random
sampling linear discriminant analysis (LDA) variants have
also been proposed [34][35] to tackle the face-aging
problem in face recognition, which have been shown to be
robust, have fewer parameter and training data
requirements, and outperform existing methods. More
recently, [41] and [42] have notably improved the
performance of AIFR.
In this paper, we propose a new two-step AIFR
approach. First, a new feature descriptor called the
maximum entropy feature descriptor (MEFD) is used to
extract expressive and informative features. Unlike existing
feature descriptors, MEFD can maximize the expressive
power in terms of maximum entropy, which is highly
beneficial to classification. Second, a factor analysis-based
matching framework termed identity factor analysis (IFA)
is developed to further improve recognition performance.
We demonstrate the efficiency of the new approach
compared to state-of-the-art methods in several face
databases including MORPH (the largest public-domain
facial aging dataset) [30], FGNET [36], and the famous
LFW database [50].
2. Proposed Approach

