Long-term Recurrent Convolutional Networks for
Visual Recognition and Description
Jeff Donahue?
Lisa Anne Hendricks?
Sergio Guadarrama?
Marcus Rohrbach?⇤
Subhashini Venugopalan†
Kate Saenko‡
Trevor Darrell?⇤
?
†UT Austin
‡UMass Lowell
UC Berkeley, ⇤ ICSI
Austin, TX
Lowell, MA
Berkeley, CA
vsub@cs.utexas.edu

saenko@cs.uml.edu

{jdonahue, lisa anne, sguada,

rohrbach, trevor}@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract

Visual Input

Visual Features

Predictions

LSTM

W1

LSTM

LSTM

W2

LSTM

LSTM

W3

CNN

LSTM

LSTM

W4

CNN

LSTM

LSTM

WT

CNN

Models based on deep convolutional networks have dominated recent image interpretation tasks; we investigate
whether models which are also recurrent, or “temporally
deep”, are effective for tasks involving sequences, visual
and otherwise. We develop a novel recurrent convolutional
architecture suitable for large-scale visual learning which
is end-to-end trainable, and demonstrate the value of these
models on benchmark video recognition tasks, image description and retrieval problems, and video narration challenges. In contrast to current models which assume a fixed
spatio-temporal receptive field or simple temporal averaging for sequential processing, recurrent convolutional models are “doubly deep” in that they can be compositional
in spatial and temporal “layers”. Such models may have
advantages when target concepts are complex and/or training data are limited. Learning long-term dependencies is
possible when nonlinearities are incorporated into the network state updates. Long-term RNN models are appealing
in that they directly can map variable-length inputs (e.g.,
video frames) to variable length outputs (e.g., natural language text) and can model complex temporal dynamics; yet
they can be optimized with backpropagation. Our recurrent
long-term models are directly connected to modern visual
convnet models and can be jointly trained to simultaneously
learn temporal dynamics and convolutional perceptual representations. Our results show such models have distinct
advantages over state-of-the-art models for recognition or
generation which are separately defined and/or optimized.

Sequence Learning
LSTM

CNN

CNN

Figure 1: We propose Long-term Recurrent Convolutional Networks (LRCNs), a class of architectures leveraging the strengths
of rapid progress in CNNs for visual recognition problem, and the
growing desire to apply such models to time-varying inputs and
outputs. LRCN processes the (possibly) variable-length visual input (left) with a CNN (middle-left), whose outputs are fed into a
stack of recurrent sequence models (LSTMs, middle-right), which
finally produce a variable-length prediction (right).

progress has been achieved by supervised convolutional
models on image recognition tasks, and a number of extensions to process video have been recently proposed. Ideally,
a video model should allow processing of variable length
input sequences, and also provide for variable length outputs, including generation of full-length sentence descriptions that go beyond conventional one-versus-all prediction
tasks. In this paper we propose long-term recurrent convolutional networks (LRCNs), a novel architecture for visual
recognition and description which combines convolutional
layers and long-range temporal recursion and is end-to-end
trainable (see Figure 1). We instantiate our architecture for
specific video activity recognition, image caption genera-

1. Introduction
Recognition and description of images and videos is
a fundamental challenge of computer vision. Dramatic
1

