Solving Multiple Square Jigsaw Puzzles with Missing Pieces
Genady Paikin
Technion

Ayellet Tal
Technion

genadyp28@gmail.com

ayellet@ee.technion.ac.il

Abstract
Jigsaw-puzzle solving is necessary in many applications,
including biology, archaeology, and every-day life. In
this paper we consider the square jigsaw puzzle problem,
where the goal is to reconstruct the image from a set of
non-overlapping, unordered, square puzzle parts. Our key
contribution is a fast, fully-automatic, and general solver,
which assumes no prior knowledge about the original image. It is general in the sense that it can handle puzzles of
unknown size, with pieces of unknown orientation, and even
puzzles with missing pieces. Moreover, it can handle all the
above, given pieces from multiple puzzles. Through an extensive evaluation we show that our approach outperforms
state-of-the-art methods on commonly-used datasets.

4287 pieces(14.5% missing)

9379 pieces(9.6% missing)

Figure 1. Accurate reconstructions of our solver, given jigsaw puzzles with missing pieces (black squares).

also solves puzzles with additional challenges. In particular,
it handles puzzles with missing pieces, unknown size, and
unknown orientation of the parts (Figure 1). Moreover, it
concurrently solves multiple jigsaw puzzles whose pieces
are mixed together, where neither the size of the puzzles
nor a priori knowledge regarding possible missing pieces is
given. This is illustrated in Figure 2, where more than 5000
pieces that belong to five different puzzles, some with many
missing pieces, are given, and our algorithm reconstructs
them faultlessly.
Like [8, 17], our algorithm is greedy. However, it incorporates three key ideas, which not only prove beneficial for
solving traditional puzzles, but also support the additional
requirements mentioned above. First, similarly to previous methods, our placement is based on the compatibility
between pieces. We propose a more accurate and faster
compatibility function, which takes advantage both of the
similarity between the pieces, and of the reliability of this
similarity. Second, since greedy solvers are extremely vulnerable to the initial placement, we take special care when
choosing the first piece. We require it to have distinctive
borders and to be located in a distinctive region. Third,
rather than choosing the best piece for a specific location,
we select the piece that minimizes the likelihood of erring,
regardless of its location. As a result, our algorithm is deterministic, conversely to previous approaches, which make
random choices and are thus sensitive either to the selection of the first piece or to an initial random solution. This
means that it suffices to run our algorithm only once.

1. Introduction
Puzzle solving is important in many applications, such as
image editing [4], biology [15] and archaeology [2, 10, 3],
to name a few. Though the problem is NP-complete [7, 1],
various solutions have been proposed. These are based on
shape matching [21, 20, 11, 9] or on a combination of shape
matching and color matching [12, 6, 23, 14, 18, 16]. When
the parts are square, only color matching is possible [5, 22,
17, 8, 19, 13]. The latter is the focus of our work.
The problem is introduced by [5], where a greedy algorithm, as well as a benchmark, are proposed. The algorithm
discussed in [22] improves the results by using a particle filter. Pomeranz et al. [17] introduce the first fully-automatic
square jigsaw puzzle solver that is based on a greedy placer
and on a novel prediction-based dissimilarity. Gallagher [8]
generalizes the method to handle parts of unknown orientation. Son et al. [13] demonstrate a considerable improvement for the case of unknown orientation, by adding ”loop
constraints” to [8]. Rather than pursuing a greedy solver,
Sholomon et al. [19] present a genetic algorithm that is able
to solve large puzzles.
Our work is inspired by [17]. However, it takes the next
step and not only improves upon state-of-the-art results, but
1

