Transport-Based Single Frame Super Resolution
of Very Low Resolution Face Images
Soheil Kolouri
Carnegie Mellon University

Gustavo K. Rohde
Carnegie Mellon University

skolouri@andrew.cmu.edu

gustavor@cmu.edu

Abstract
Extracting high-resolution information from highly degraded facial images is an important problem with several applications in science and technology. Here we describe a single frame super resolution technique that uses
a transport-based formulation of the problem. The method
consists of a training and a testing phase. In the training
phase, a nonlinear Lagrangian model of high-resolution facial appearance is constructed fully automatically. In the
testing phase, the resolution of a degraded image is enhanced by finding the model parameters that best fit the
given low resolution data. We test the approach on two
face datasets, namely the extended Yale Face Database B
and the AR face datasets, and compare it to state of the art
methods. The proposed method outperforms existing solutions in problems related to enhancing images of very low
resolution.

1. Introduction
Super-resolution (SR) is the process of reconstructing a
high-resolution (abbr. high-res) image from one or several
corresponding low-resolution (abbr. low-res) images. SR
techniques have been used in a wide variety of applications
from satellite and aerial imaging to intelligence surveillance, medical image processing, and finger print enhancement. In particular, the use of SR techniques to infer highres face images from low-res ones has recently attracted a
large amount of interest in the image processing and computer vision communities [2, 15, 27, 28].
Based on the number of low-res images used to reconstruct the corresponding high-res image, SR techniques can
be broadly categorized into two major classes [20], namely
“multi-frame” SR (MFSR) [4, 10, 9, 19] and “single-frame”
SR (SFSR) [2, 11, 16, 27]. Due to the inherent undersampling, most SR problems are inherently ill-posed. Meaning
that for a specific low-res image there exist multiple corresponding high-res images. Generally speaking, SR tech-

niques overcome this problem by constraining the space of
high-res solutions using either information from multiple
low-res images or prior information regarding the class of
high-res images. The idea is to restrict the space of solutions
to automatically discard irrelevant solutions of the problem.
We begin by noting that the class of face images is a
relatively small subset of the entire set of high-res images.
This is because of the unique structure of the human face
(i.e. eyes, nose, mouth, etc). In SFSR techniques, this prior
knowledge is first learned from a set of high-res training images and then it is used to reconstruct a high-res image from
a low-res test image. Baker and Kanade [2], for instance,
proposed to learn a prior on the spatial distribution of the
image gradient for frontal images of faces. Chakrabarti
et al. [7] proposed to learn a kernel principal component
analysis-based prior model for high-res images. More recently, Zou et al. [28] proposed a method based on learning
the best linear mapping that maps low-res images to their
corresponding high-res images.
In this paper we focus on SFSR techniques and describe
a method for reconstructing high-res faces from very lowres face images (e.g. 16 × 16 pixels) by learning a nonlinear
Lagrangian model for the high-res face images. Our technique is based on the mathematics of optimal transport, and
hence we denote it as transport-based SFSR (TB-SFSR).
The idea is to use the Monge formulation of the optimal
transport problem [1, 13], and with it construct a nonlinear model for both the pixel intensities and their locations
for facial images. Our model is nonlinear, and Lagrangian
(using PDE parlance) in the sense that intensities are not
compared using a fixed grid but can also be displaced and
transported to other image regions. In short, TB-SFSR first
finds diffeomorphisms, in the sense of ‘optimal transport’,
from a reference face to the training faces and then learns a
linear subspace that best describes these diffeomorphisms.
Next, it constrains the space of high-res images to those that
can be obtained by morphing the reference face using an arbitrary diffeomorphism from the learned subspace.
We show that TB-SFSR can be used to recover information from very low-res face images. We test our proposed

