Learning to Propose Objects
Philipp Krähenbühl
UC Berkeley

Vladlen Koltun
Intel Labs

Abstract
We present an approach for highly accurate bottomup object segmentation. Given an image, the approach
rapidly generates a set of regions that delineate candidate
objects in the image. The key idea is to train an ensemble of figure-ground segmentation models. The ensemble
is trained jointly, enabling individual models to specialize
and complement each other. We reduce ensemble training
to a sequence of uncapacitated facility location problems
and show that highly accurate segmentation ensembles can
be trained by combinatorial optimization. The training procedure jointly optimizes the size of the ensemble, its composition, and the parameters of incorporated models, all for
the same objective. The ensembles operate on elementary
image features, enabling rapid image analysis. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that the presented approach outperforms prior object proposal algorithms by a significant
margin, while having the lowest running time. The trained
ensembles generalize across datasets, indicating that the
presented approach is capable of learning a generally applicable model of bottom-up segmentation.

Figure 1: Object proposals for three images from the Microsoft
COCO dataset. From left to right: input images, ground-truth instance segmentations, region proposals generated by the presented
approach. Note the accurate instance proposals in the top and middle rows, despite color and texture similarity across instances. In
the bottom row, the trained ensemble correctly identifies the white
surfboard as a single object with three connected components.

support high-performance image parsing [16, 32].
In this paper, we present an object proposal algorithm
that has all of these characteristics. The key idea is to
optimize an ensemble of figure-ground segmentation models. Given a new image, the algorithm simply applies each
model and outputs all of the produced foreground segments.
The algorithm is fast since each model is highly efficient
and operates on elementary image features. Proposals produced by a trained ensemble are shown in Figure 1.
A number of prior object proposal techniques can
be viewed as ensembles of binary segmentation models
[7, 12, 19]. However, in each case all models used the same
potentials and differed only in one or two hyperparameters,
which were varied according to a predefined schedule. In
some cases, diversity was achieved at test time by means of
a computationally expensive classifier that was used to rank
the proposals [7, 12].
In contrast, the presented approach optimizes a diverse
ensemble of segmentation models globally during training.
The training objective is the accuracy of the generated proposal set balanced by its size. We show that the training

1. Introduction
Object proposal algorithms aim to identify a small set
of regions such that each object in the image is approximately delineated by at least one proposed region. Object
proposals can be computed bottom-up, based only on lowlevel boundary detection and category-independent grouping [7, 12, 32]. They are used as a starting point for both
object detection and semantic segmentation, and have become a standard first step in state-of-the-art image analysis
pipelines [5, 6, 16, 17, 32].
To support diverse image parsing tasks, object proposal algorithms must have a number of characteristics.
They need to provide region proposals with informative
shape for semantic segmentation and instance segmentation [5, 6, 16, 17, 23]. They must have high recall, producing
corresponding regions for as many genuine objects as possible. They must generate a manageable number of proposals
to limit unnecessary workload. And they must be fast to
1

