Superpixel-based Video Object Segmentation using Perceptual Organization and
Location Prior
Daniela Giordano

Francesca Murabito
Simone Palazzo
Concetto Spampinato
University of Catania
Department of Electrical, Electronic and Computer Engineering

{dgiordan, palazzosim, cspampin}@dieei.unict.it, francescamurabito@gmail.com

Abstract
In this paper we present an approach for segmenting objects in videos taken in complex scenes with multiple and
different targets. The method does not make any specific
assumptions about the videos and relies on how objects
are perceived by humans according to Gestalt laws. Initially, we rapidly generate a coarse foreground segmentation, which provides predictions about motion regions by
analyzing how superpixel segmentation changes in consecutive frames. We then exploit these location priors to refine
the initial segmentation by optimizing an energy function
based on appearance and perceptual organization, only on
regions where motion is observed. We evaluated our method
on complex and challenging video sequences and it showed
significant performance improvements over recent state-ofthe-art methods, being also fast enough to be used for “onthe-fly” processing.

1. Introduction
Object segmentation in videos is a fundamental task for
many computer vision applications, ranging from object
tracking to behaviour understanding to event detection. One
of the most common approaches for object segmentation
is through background modeling/subtraction techniques[5],
which aims at estimating a model of the scene without objects of interest; this model is then compared to each video
frame in order to extract foreground objects. Motion analysis [15, 2], object ranking [24, 9] and clustering point tracks
[17, 4] methods have also been proposed, but they impose
strict assumptions on objects’ appearance and motion patterns and on the target videos. Traditionally, background
modeling has been addressed by density-based methods,
where the distribution of each background pixel in time
is modeled by a probability density function (e.g. Gaussian) [20, 18]. A recent trend in background modeling is
not to provide a pixelwise model but to exploit superpixels

[16, 12], thus increasing the spatial coherency and the overall quality of segmented objects. Superpixel-based modeling not only improves segmentation performance but also
boosts efficiency, in terms of both required memory and
computation time, since fewer models have to be kept in
memory and updated at every frame.
In this paper we describe an approach for object segmentation in videos which is able to work with fast moving and
multimodal backgrounds, highly deformable and/or articulated objects and with different video qualities. At the same
time, it does not make any assumptions on how objects look
like or move but, instead, it adopts general properties of
real-world objects.
A key distinctive element of our method is the capability to quickly identify candidate motion regions, as those
where significant variations on superpixel segmentation in
consecutive frames have been observed. This initial background/foreground segmentation does not rely on optical
flow as in [16], which is known to be computationally
expensive, but is based on assessing similarity between
spatio-temporal neighbor superpixels. The initial coarse
foreground segmentation proposes a set of location priors,
which are used as a basis for small segmentation problems
(one for each motion region) solved by minimizing an energy function designed to take into account how combinations of superpixels resemble both foreground/background
models and “real-world” objects, according to perceptual
organization principles.
The performance evaluation carried out on three standard
datasets shows that our approach 1) is able to deal with
complex scenes, with several non-rigid objects undergoing
sudden appearance changes, and with fast varying and multimodal backgrounds; 2) is able to generalize over different
object classes since no offline training or a-priori knowledge
is required; 3) outperforms existing and powerful video object segmentation approaches, e.g., [3, 16]; 4) achieves encouraging results on challenging datasets such as SegTrack
[21], Underwater Dataset [19], I2R [10]; and 5) is able to
work “on-the-fly”.

