Robust Large Scale Monocular Visual SLAM
Guillaume Bourmaud
Rémi Mégret
Univ. Bordeaux, CNRS, IMS, UMR 5218, F-33400 Talence, France
{guillaume.bourmaud,remi.megret}@ims-bordeaux.fr

Abstract

monocular VSLAM problem.
In this problem, one of the major difficulties, compared
to stereo VSLAM, consists in the fact that the scale of the
scene is not observed. In order to prevent scale drift, loop
closures (i.e when the camera comes back at a place already
visited) need to be detected. However, a large environment
usually contains places that look alike. Thus when a camera
evolves in such an environment, wrong loop closures may
be detected, resulting in an erroneous 3D model.
We propose a novel robust monocular VSLAM algorithm which is able to operate on long challenging videos
where the state of the art algorithms fail. First of all,
submaps (parts of the camera trajectory and the unknown
environment) are robustly and accurately estimated using
the so-called Known Rotation Problem [5]. We then build
a graph of relative 3D similarities (computed between the
submaps). In order to reject the outlier relative 3D similarities coming from wrong loop closures, we propose a simple
and efficient outlier removal algorithm. Finally, to obtain a
scalable monocular VSLAM framework, we derive a loopy
belief propagation algorithm which is able to align a large
number of submaps very efficiently.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: section 2
deals with the related works. Our novel monocular VSLAM
framework is presented in section 3. The two proposed algorithms dedicated to outlier rejection and inference in the
graph of relative 3D similarities are described in section 4.
In section 5, the limitations of the proposed approach are
discussed while in section 6, our monocular VSLAM formalism is evaluated experimentally. Finally, a conclusion is
provided in section 7.

This paper deals with the trajectory estimation of a
monocular calibrated camera evolving in a large unknown
environment, also known as monocular visual simultaneous
localization and mapping. The contribution of this paper is
threefold: 1) We develop a new formalism that builds upon
the so called Known Rotation Problem to robustly estimate
submaps (parts of the camera trajectory and the unknown
environment). 2) In order to obtain a globally consistent
map (up to a scale factor), we propose a novel loopy belief propagation algorithm that is able to efficiently align
a large number of submaps. Our approach builds a graph
of relative 3D similarities (computed between the submaps)
and estimates the global 3D similarities by passing messages through a super graph until convergence. 3) To render the whole framework more robust, we also propose a
simple and efficient outlier removal algorithm that detects
outliers in the graph of relative 3D similarities. We extensively demonstrate, on the TUM and KITTI benchmarks as
well as on other challenging video sequences, that the proposed method outperforms the state of the art algorithms.

1. Introduction
Estimating a 3D model of the environment in which a
camera evolves as well as its trajectory, also known as Visual Simultaneous Localization And Mapping (VSLAM),
is an important problem for the computer vision community. Indeed, a large number of applications, such as imagebased localization [1, 2] or augmented reality, assume that
a 3D model of the environment has been previously reconstructed. Thus, being able to accurately estimate this 3D
model is essential in order for these applications to operate
correctly.
Robust, accurate and scalable VSLAM algorithms for a
stereo camera have been proposed [3, 4] a few years ago.
However, stereo cameras are still not widely spread compared to monocular cameras which are present on every
smart-phone. As a consequence, this paper focuses on the

2. Related Work
The problem of monocular VSLAM has been studied
for 20 years. Thus an exhaustive state of the art is beyond the scope of this paper. Here, we simply describe the
most recent approaches and their differences with our novel
method. Almost all the recent approaches, as well as the
one we propose in this paper, consist in two main modules:
1) A Visual Odometry (VO) approach which estimates
the camera poses and the 3D model associated to several
1

