Simultaneous Feature Learning and Hash Coding with Deep Neural Networks

†

‡

§

†

Hanjiang Lai , Yan Pan ∗ , Ye Liu , and Shuicheng Yan
†

Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore
‡
School of Software, Sun Yan-Sen University, China
§
School of Information Science and Technology, Sun Yan-Sen University, China

Abstract

posed, e.g., [8, 9, 4, 12, 16, 27, 14, 25, 3]. The existing
learning-based hashing methods can be categorized into unsupervised and supervised methods, based on whether supervised information (e.g., similarities or dissimilarities on
data points) is involved. Compact bitwise representations
are advantageous for improving the efficiency in both storage and search speed, particularly in big data applications.
Compared to unsupervised methods, supervised methods
usually embed the input data points into compact hash codes
with fewer bits, with the help of supervised information.

Similarity-preserving hashing is a widely-used method
for nearest neighbour search in large-scale image retrieval
tasks. For most existing hashing methods, an image is
first encoded as a vector of hand-engineering visual features, followed by another separate projection or quantization step that generates binary codes. However, such visual
feature vectors may not be optimally compatible with the
coding process, thus producing sub-optimal hashing codes.
In this paper, we propose a deep architecture for supervised
hashing, in which images are mapped into binary codes via
carefully designed deep neural networks. The pipeline of
the proposed deep architecture consists of three building
blocks: 1) a sub-network with a stack of convolution layers to produce the effective intermediate image features; 2)
a divide-and-encode module to divide the intermediate image features into multiple branches, each encoded into one
hash bit; and 3) a triplet ranking loss designed to characterize that one image is more similar to the second image than
to the third one. Extensive evaluations on several benchmark image datasets show that the proposed simultaneous
feature learning and hash coding pipeline brings substantial improvements over other state-of-the-art supervised or
unsupervised hashing methods.

In the pipelines of most existing hashing methods for images, each input image is firstly represented by a vector of
traditional hand-crafted visual descriptors (e.g., GIST [18],
HOG [1]), followed by separate projection and quantization steps to encode this vector into a binary code. However, such fixed hand-crafted visual features may not be optimally compatible with the coding process. In other words,
a pair of semantically similar/dissimilar images may not
have feature vectors with relatively small/large Euclidean
distance. Ideally, it is expected that an image feature representation can sufficiently preserve the image similarities,
which can be learned during the hash learning process. Very
recently, Xia et al. [27] proposed CNNH, a supervised hashing method in which the learning process is decomposed
into a stage of learning approximate hash codes from the supervised information, followed by a stage of simultaneously
learning hash functions and image representations based
on the learned approximate hash codes. However, in this
two-stage method, the learned approximate hash codes are
used to guide the learning of the image representation, but
the learned image representation cannot give feedback for
learning better approximate hash codes. This one-way interaction thus still has limitations.

1. Introduction
With the ever-growing large-scale image data on the
Web, much attention has been devoted to nearest neighbor search via hashing methods. In this paper, we focus on
learning-based hashing, an emerging stream of hash methods that learn similarity-preserving hash functions to encode input data points (e.g., images) into binary codes.
Many learning-based hashing methods have been pro-

In this paper, we propose a “one-stage” supervised hashing method via a deep architecture that maps input images
to binary codes. As shown in Figure 1, the proposed deep
architecture has three building blocks: 1) shared stacked

∗ Corresponding author: Yan Pan, email: panyan5@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

1

