Prediction of Search Targets From Fixations in Open-World Settings
Hosnieh Sattar1,2
Sabine Müller1
Mario Fritz2
Andreas Bulling1
1
Perceptual User Interfaces Group, 2 Scalable Learning and Perception Group
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbrücken, Germany
{sattar,smueller,mfritz,bulling}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

open-world

Abstract

closed-world

Previous work on predicting the target of visual search
from human fixations only considered closed-world settings
in which training labels are available and predictions are
performed for a known set of potential targets. In this work
we go beyond the state of the art by studying search target
prediction in an open-world setting in which we no longer
assume that we have fixation data to train for the search
targets. We present a dataset containing fixation data of
18 users searching for natural images from three image categories within synthesised image collages of about 80 images. In a closed-world baseline experiment we show that
we can predict the correct target image out of a candidate
set of five images. We then present a new problem formulation for search target prediction in the open-world setting
that is based on learning compatibilities between fixations
and potential targets.

?

?
{

}

Figure 1: Experiments conducted in this work. In the closedworld experiment we aim to predict which target image
(here Q2 ) out of a candidate set of five images Qtrain =
Qtest the user is searching for by analysing fixations Fi on
an image collage C. In the open-world experiments we aim
to predict Qi on the whole Qtest .

1. Introduction
In his seminal work from 1967, Yarbus showed that visual behaviour is closely linked to task when looking at a
visual scene [39]. This work is an important demonstration
of task influence on fixation patterns and sparked a large
number of follow-up works in a range of disciplines, including human vision, neuroscience, artificial intelligence, and
computer vision. A common goal in these human and computer vision works is to analyse visual behaviour, i.e. typically fixations and saccades, in order to make predictions
about user behaviour. For example, previous work has used
visual behaviour analysis as a means to predict the users’
tasks [1, 3, 13, 17, 22, 41, 42], visual activities [6, 7, 8, 26,
33], cognitive processes such as memory recall or high cognitive load [5, 38], abstract thought processes [12, 28], the
type of a visual stimulus [4, 10, 23], interest for interactive
image retrieval [11, 15, 20, 25, 32, 37, 43], which number a
person has in mind [27], or – most recently – to predict the
search target during visual search [2, 16, 34, 41].
Predicting the target of a visual search task is particularly

interesting, as the corresponding internal representation, the
mental image of the search target, is difficult if not impossible to assess using other modalities. While [41] and [2]
underlined the significant potential of using gaze information to predict visual search targets, they both considered a
closed-world setting. In this setting, all potential search targets are part of the training set, and fixations for all of these
targets were observed.
In contrast, in this work we study an open-world setting
in which we no longer assume that we have fixation data
to train for these targets. Search target prediction in this setting has significant practical relevance for a range of applications, such as image and media retrieval. This setting is challenging because we have to develop a learning mechanism
that can predict over an unknown set of targets. We study
this problem on a new dataset that contains fixation data of
1

