Person Count Localization in Videos from Noisy Foreground and Detections
Sheng Chen, Alan Fern and Sinisa Todorovic
Oregon State University
{chenshen, afern, sinisa}@eecs.oregonstate.edu

Abstract

ever, such as videos of American football (Fig.1) or public
spaces crowded with pedestrians, detecting every individual
person is highly unreliable, and remains an open problem.
This motivates us to study alternative formulations that
do not require perfect person localization, especially under severe clutter and occlusion, and still prove useful for
higher-level video understanding. One related problem that
has successfully addressed videos of crowded scenes is
frame-level counting of people [5, 20, 17, 6, 14]. This
frame-level count information, however, is a very coarse
description of the video, with limited utility for high-level
tasks. In particular, these problem formulations and evaluations do not address location of individuals or sub-groups.
Rather than counting people per frame, we would like
to retain as much localization capability of detecting individuals as possible, but gracefully transition to counting
people within areas in the frame occupied by crowds. As
these crowded groups are often isolated and visually distinct from the rest of the scene, they can be viewed as “visual phrases” whose spatially tight localization and count
assignment could provide useful cues for higher-level processing. For example, as shown in Fig.1, localized counts
provide rich information about the activity unfolding during a football play by identifying many isolated and small
groups of players and the primary larger player groups.
Similarly, localized counts can provide space-time density
statistics of crowds in an area of interest and also serve as a
basis for more refined individual tracking when desired.
New Problem. In this paper, we introduce a new problem, person count localization from noisy foreground and
person detections. Our formulation strikes a middle-ground
between person detection and frame-level counting. Given
a video, our goal is to output for each frame a set of:
1. Detections optimally covering both isolated individuals and crowds of people in the video; and
2. Counts assigned to each detection indicating the number of people inside.
Overview of Approach and Contributions. Our approach first extracts noisy foreground by running a person
detector and foreground segmentation, which will sometimes be redundant. A flow graph is then built and trans-

This paper formulates and presents a solution to a new
problem called person count localization. Given a video
of a crowded scene, our goal is to output for each frame a
set of: 1) Detections optimally covering both isolated individuals and cluttered groups of people; and 2) Counts of
people inside these detections. This problem is a middleground between frame-level person counting, which does
not localize counts, and person detection aimed at perfectly localizing people with count-one detections. Our
problem formulation is important for a wide range of domains, where people appear frequently under severe occlusion within a crowd. As these crowds are often visually distinct from the rest of the scene, they can be viewed as “visual phrases” whose spatially tight localization and count
assignment could facilitate higher-level video understanding. For count localization, we specify a novel framework
of iterative error-driven revisions of a flow graph derived
from noisy input of people detections and foreground segmentation. Each iteration creates and solves an integer program for count localization based on iterative revisions of
the flow graph. The graph revisions are based on detected
violations of basic integrity constraints. They in turn trigger
learned modifications to the graph aimed at reducing noise
in input features. For evaluation, we introduce a new metric
that measures both count precision and localization of our
approach on American football and pedestrian videos.

1. Introduction
Motivation. In this paper, we consider the problem of
detecting people in videos of crowded scenes, where people frequently appear under severe occlusion by other people in the crowd. This is an important line of research,
since detecting people in video frames has become the standard initial step of many approaches to activity recognition
[1, 16, 10, 2, 7, 4, 23], and multi-object tracking by detection [19, 25, 22, 12, 3, 24, 11]. They typically use as input
human appearance, pose, and orientation, and thus critically
depend on robust person detections. In many domains, how4321

