Generalized Video Deblurring for Dynamic Scenes
Tae Hyun Kim and Kyoung Mu Lee
Department of ECE, ASRI, Seoul National University, 151-742, Seoul, Korea
{lliger9, kyoungmu}@snu.ac.kr, http://cv.snu.ac.kr

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: (a) Blurry frame of the bicycle sequence. (b) Deblurring result of Cho et al.[7]. (c) Our result.

Abstract
Several state-of-the-art video deblurring methods are
based on a strong assumption that the captured scenes are
static. These methods fail to deblur blurry videos in dynamic scenes. We propose a video deblurring method to
deal with general blurs inherent in dynamic scenes, contrary to other methods. To handle locally varying and general blurs caused by various sources, such as camera shake,
moving objects, and depth variation in a scene, we approximate pixel-wise kernel with bidirectional optical flows.
Therefore, we propose a single energy model that simultaneously estimates optical flows and latent frames to solve
our deblurring problem. We also provide a framework and
efficient solvers to optimize the energy model. By minimizing the proposed energy function, we achieve significant improvements in removing blurs and estimating accurate optical flows in blurry frames. Extensive experimental results
demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method in real
and challenging videos that state-of-the-art methods fail in
either deblurring or optical flow estimation.

1. Introduction
Motion blurs are the most common artifacts in videos
recorded using hand-held cameras. For decades, several
researchers have studied deblurring algorithms to remove
motion blurs. Their methodologies depend on whether the

captured scenes are static or non-static. Early works on
single image deblurring usually assumed that the scene is
static with constant depth [5, 9, 10, 11, 25, 27]. The successful approaches were naturally extended to video deblurring. In the work of Cai et al. [2], a multi-image deconvolution method was proposed using sparsity of blur kernels
and clear image to handle registration errors. However, this
method only enables two-dimensional translational camera motion, which generates uniform blur. Therefore, the
proposed approach cannot handle rotational camera shake,
which is the main cause of large motion blurs [27]. To overcome this limitation, Li et al. [21] used a method parameterizing spatially varying motions with 3x3 homographies,
and could handle spatially varying blurs by camera rotation. In the work of Cho et al. [4], camera motion in threedimensional space was estimated without the assistance of
specialized hardware. In addition, non-uniform blurs by
projective camera motion could be removed. Spatially varying blurs by depth variation in a static scene was handled
recently in the works of Lee and Lee [19] and Paramanand
et al. [23].
However, previous approaches, which assume that the
scene is static, suffer from general blurs not only from camera shake but also from moving objects and depth variations in a dynamic scene. As parameterizing a spatially
varying blur kernel in the dynamic scene is difficult with
simple homography, kernel estimation to handle dynamic
scene becomes more challenging. Therefore, several re-

