Multiclass Semantic Video Segmentation with Object-level Active Inference
Buyu Liu
ANU/NICTA

Xuming He
NICTA/ANU

buyu.liu@anu.edu.au

xuming.he@nicta.com.au

Abstract
We address the problem of integrating object reasoning with supervoxel labeling in multiclass semantic video
segmentation. To this end, we first propose an objectaugmented dense CRF in spatio-temporal domain, which
captures long-range dependency between supervoxels, and
imposes consistency between object and supervoxel labels.
We develop an efficient mean field inference algorithm to
jointly infer the supervoxel labels, object activations and
their occlusion relations for a moderate number of object
hypotheses. To scale up our method, we adopt an active inference strategy to improve the efficiency, which adaptively
selects object subgraphs in the object-augmented dense
CRF. We formulate the problem as a Markov Decision Process, which learns an approximate optimal policy based
on a reward of accuracy improvement and a set of welldesigned model and input features. We evaluate our method
on three publicly available multiclass video semantic segmentation datasets and demonstrate superior efficiency and
accuracy.

Figure 1: Overview of our approach. Example of the objectaugmented dense CRF model. Our active inference adaptively selecting subgraphs thus improve the inference efficiency.

more object classes and their relations added, it becomes
challenging to develop efficient inference algorithm in the
joint models. Greedy strategies, such as alternating inference between pixels and objects, have been used to address
such difficulty [26], which do not exploit the full potential
of joint modeling. In addition, object hypotheses have to be
pruned based on heuristic thresholds to provide a balance
between precision and recall, which is tedious for adding
new object classes. Furthermore, it is even more difficult to
extend this to dynamic scene parsing in videos, as the number of object hypotheses may increase greatly due to object
motion and longer image sequences.
An alternative approach to addressing this difficulty is
to adaptively select a subset of model components which
is most informative for inference and within a budget constraint, or active inference [21, 29]. This allows users to
achieve a balance between efficiency and performance in
a principled way. Most of previous work, however, focuses
on improving efficiency in feature computation except a few
on model structure [28].
In this work, we aim to address the problem of joint pixel
and object inference in semantic video segmentation. We
take a hypothesize-and-verify approach [10, 17], in which
we generate a pool of object hypotheses and formulate
video segmentation as a joint labeling of pixels and object
hypotheses. To handle a large number of object hypotheses,
we adopt an active inference strategy at object level to select

1. Introduction
Semantic scene parsing, which aims to segment images into conherent and semantically meaningful regions,
has recently made much progress by incorporating highlevel visual information, such as scene context and objects [8, 5, 14], and jointly solving multiple related vision
tasks [32, 22, 26]. Such integration with object and scenelevel reasoning not only provides more global cues and
longer-range constraints for pixel-level labeling, but also
enables us to generate a deeper parsing of images with multiple properties, ranging from object instance [26] to scene
geometry [9].
However, such object-aware strategies require many
hypotheses of object instances and their relations to accommodate uncertainty in object detection and localization [22, 25]. This leads to increasingly larger structure
and/or higher complexity of the resulting models on pixels and objects, which has several drawbacks. First, with
1

