Privacy Preserving Optics for Miniature Vision Sensors
Francesco Pittaluga and Sanjeev J. Koppal
University of Florida, Electrical and Computer Engineering Dept.
216 Larsen Hall Gainesville, FL 32611-6200
f.pittaluga@ufl.edu and sjkoppal@ece.ufl.edu

Abstract

both power efficiency and privacy preservation for vision
on small devices. We build novel optical designs that filter
incident illumination from the scene, before image capture.
This allows us to attenuate sensitive information while capturing exactly the portion of the signal that is relevant to a
particular vision task. In this sense, we seek to generalize
the idea of privacy preserving optics beyond specialized efforts (cylindrical lenses [45], thermal motion sensors [7]).
We demonstrate privacy preserving optics that enable accurate depth sensing, full-body motion tracking, multiple
people tracking, blob detection and face recognition.
Our optical designs filter light before image capture and
represent a new axis of privacy vision research that complements existing “post image capture” hardware and software based approaches to privacy preservation, such as
de-identification and cryptography. Like these other approaches, we seek both data-utility and privacy protection
in our designs. Additionally, for miniature sensors, we must
also balance the performance and privacy guarantees of the
system with sensor characteristics such as mass/volume,
field-of-view and resolution. In this paper, we demonstrate
applications on macro-scale devices (smartphones, webcams, etc.), but our theory has impact for smaller devices.
Our contributions are
1. To our knowledge, we are the first to demonstrate kanonymity preserving optical designs for faces. We
also provide theory to miniaturize these designs within
the smallest sensor volume.
2. We show how to select a defocus blur that provides a
certain level of privacy over a working region, within
the limits of sensor size. We show applications where
defocus blur provides both privacy and utility for timeof-flight and thermal sensors.
3. We implement scale space analysis using an optical
array, with most of the power hungry difference-ofgaussian computations performed pre-capture. We
demonstrate human head tracking with this sensor. We
provide an optical version of the knapsack problem
to miniaturize such multi-aperture optical privacy preserving sensors in the smallest mass/volume.

The next wave of micro and nano devices will create
a world with trillions of small networked cameras. This
will lead to increased concerns about privacy and security. Most privacy preserving algorithms for computer vision are applied after image/video data has been captured.
We propose to use privacy preserving optics that filter or
block sensitive information directly from the incident lightfield before sensor measurements are made, adding a new
layer of privacy. In addition to balancing the privacy and
utility of the captured data, we address trade-offs unique
to miniature vision sensors, such as achieving high-quality
field-of-view and resolution within the constraints of mass
and volume. Our privacy preserving optics enable applications such as depth sensing, full-body motion tracking,
people counting, blob detection and privacy preserving face
recognition. While we demonstrate applications on macroscale devices (smartphones, webcams, etc.) our theory has
impact for smaller devices.

1. Introduction
Our world is bursting with ubiquitous, networked sensors. Even so, a new wave of sensing that dwarfs current
sensor networks is on the horizon. These are miniature
platforms, with feature sizes less than 1mm, that will appear in micro air vehicle swarms, intelligent environments,
body and geographical area networks. Equipping these platforms with computer vision capabilities could impact security, search and rescue, agriculture, environmental monitoring, exploration, health, energy, and more.
Yet, achieving computer vision at extremely small scales
still faces two challenges. First, the power and mass constraints are so severe that full-resolution imaging, along
with post-capture processing with convolutions, matrix inversions, and the like, are simply too restrictive. Second, the
privacy implications of releasing trillions of networked, tiny
cameras into the world would mean that there would likely
be significant societal pushback and legal restrictions.
In this paper, we propose a new framework to achieve
1

