Robust Manhattan Frame Estimation from a Single RGB-D Image
Bernard Ghanem1 , Ali Thabet1 , Juan Carlos Niebles2 , and Fabian Caba Heilbron1
1
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Saudi Arabia
2
Universidad del Norte, Colombia

Abstract

our method, we introduce a new evaluation benchmark that
comprises ground truth MFs (logged as rotation matrices)
for the NYUv2 dataset [19]. Using this new benchmark,
we compare our method against several popular MF algorithms in the literature, and show that our approach outperforms state-of-the-art techniques in terms of accuracy and
speed. Furthermore, we perform controlled tests to evaluate the repeatability and robustness of our method in a variety of scenarios. We also show how our method can be
used in addressing the RGB-D SLAM problem. We do this
by incorporating it into and improving the performance of
a popular RGB-D SLAM method. Finally, we present a
framework of assessment for any MF estimation method,
and make our code and results publicly available for future
use. To the best of our knowledge, no prior work provides
such detailed evaluation and benchmarking for the task of
MF estimation.
Figure 1 presents the pipeline of our approach. Given
an RGB-D image pair, we first compute normals at every
pixel. Given the point normals and the Manhattan assumption on the scene, we formulate an optimization problem to
estimate a rotation matrix that transforms most of the normals to be aligned with a coordinate direction (i.e. either
the x, y, or z axis). This process is equivalent to finding a
rotation that converts the original normals into the sparsest
set of directions in 3D. We use this sparsity intuition in our
solution, and show how it yields accurate results in a fast
and robust manner. With this solution, we are also able to
estimate outliers in the scene, i.e., points with normals that
are not aligned with one of the principal directions of the
scene. We present the details of our method in Section 3
and a comparative evaluation in Section 4.

This paper proposes a new framework for estimating the
Manhattan Frame (MF) of an indoor scene from a single
RGB-D image. Our technique formulates this problem as
the estimation of a rotation matrix that best aligns the normals of the captured scene to a canonical world axes. By
introducing sparsity constraints, our method can simultaneously estimate the scene MF, the surfaces in the scene that
are best aligned to one of three coordinate axes, and the
outlier surfaces that do not align with any of the axes. To
test our approach, we contribute a new set of annotations to
determine ground truth MFs in each image of the popular
NYUv2 dataset. We use this new benchmark to experimentally demonstrate that our method is more accurate, faster,
more reliable and more robust than the methods used in the
literature. We further motivate our technique by showing
how it can be used to address the RGB-D SLAM problem
in indoor scenes by incorporating it into and improving the
performance of a popular RGB-D SLAM method.

1. Introduction
The representation of indoor scenes using the Manhattan world assumption [4] has been widely used in applications of computer vision and robotics. These applications
take advantage of this assumption, by simplifying the representation of objects with respect to the whole scene layout. This simplification states that most objects in an indoor scene are composed of planar surfaces aligned to one
of three orthogonal directions. This set of orthogonal directions is referred to as the Manhattan Frame (MF) of the
scene. In this paper, we are interested in determining the
MF of an indoor scene. Our motivation is that an accurate
estimation of the MF can assist in addressing a variety of
3D problems, such as RGB-D SLAM and 3D understanding of objects and their spatial relations, as well as, speedup
the pipeline of indoor scene understanding methods.
In this work, we propose an accurate, fast, reliable, and
robust method to estimate the MF of an indoor scene using a
single RGB-D image. In order to evaluate the properties of

2. Related Work
We now review the most common approaches in the literature that estimate MFs in indoor scenes. Here, we note
that most previous work usually presents comprehensive approaches that focus on a higher-level end task (e.g. indoor
scene semantic labeling of objects, free-space and support
surface estimation, etc.), however, all of these methods formulate a module to estimate the MF of the scene, and use
1

