Ambient Occlusion via Compressive Visibility Estimation
Wei Yang∗1

Yu Ji∗1
Haiting Lin1
Yang Yang1
1
University of Delaware

{wyangcs,yuji,haiting,yyangwin,jingyiyu}@udel.edu

Abstract

Sing Bing Kang2
Jingyi Yu1
2
Microsoft Research
sbkang@microsoft.com

More recent work has focused on recovering intrinsic properties related to surface reflectance and visibility [3].
In this paper, we explore a challenging type of intrinsic
properties called the ambient occlusion map. Ambient Occlusion (AO) characterizes the visibility of a surface point
due to local geometry occlusions. Given a scene point x, its
AO measures the occlusion of ambient light caused by local
surface geometry:
Z
1
v(x, ẇ)hẇ · ṅidẇ
(1)
A(x) =
π Ω

There has been emerging interest on recovering traditionally challenging intrinsic scene properties. In this
paper, we present a novel computational imaging solution
for recovering the ambient occlusion (AO) map of an object.
AO measures how much light from all different directions
can reach a surface point without being blocked by selfocclusions. Previous approaches either require obtaining
highly accurate surface geometry or acquiring a large number of images. We adopt a compressive sensing framework
that captures the object under strategically coded lighting
directions. We show that this incident illumination field
exhibits some unique properties suitable for AO recovery:
every ray’s contribution to the visibility function is binary while their distribution for AO measurement is sparse.
This enables a sparsity-prior based solution for iteratively
recovering the surface normal, the surface albedo, and
the visibility function from a small number of images. To
physically implement the scheme, we construct an encodable directional light source using the light field probe.
Experiments on synthetic and real scenes show that our
approach is both reliable and accurate with significantly
reduced size of input.

where ẇ is the direction of incident light; ṅ is the normal
of x; and h·i refers to the dot product. v(x, ẇ) is the local
visibility function and is equal to 0 if the light ray from ẇ
is occluded from x. Ω is the unit sphere over the point x.
AO reveals local visibility of illumination and hence
affects the appearance of objects under shading. Applications are numerous in both computer vision and graphics,
ranging from inverse rendering[1], image based relighting
[25] to photometric stereo [20, 32, 6]. Recovering AO
from images, however is highly ill-posed (See details in
Sec. 3.1). A brute-force approach is to first capture the 3D
geometry of object and then compute AO using ray casting
[28]. This task, however, is challenging since accurate
3D reconstruction remains difficult. The seminal work by
Hauagge et al. [12] analyzes a stack of images acquired
under a moving point light source. To make the problem
trackable, they adopt a parametric visibility model, a coneshaped function centered at the normal. A simple, perpixel statistics was then used to cancel out surface albedo
and to estimate visibility. Although highly effectively, their
approach used a large number of images to obtain high
accuracy and the parametric visibility model is not always
valid (e.g., point A and D in Fig. 1).
In this paper, we present a novel computational imaging
solution for recovering AO. We adopt a compressive sensing framework that captures the object under strategically
coded directional lights. We show that the incident illumination field exhibits some unique properties suitable for AO
recovery: every ray’s contribution to the visibility function
is binary and their distribution for AO measurement is

1. Introduction
The problem of recovering intrinsic properties of a
scene/object from images has attracted much attention in
the past decade. Tremendous efforts have been focused
on intrinsic properties related to shading and reflectance
[11, 2]. The problem is inherently challenging as it is underconstrained: we have multiple unknowns but a smaller
set of constraints (images). Additional constraints such
as priors are needed to make the problem trackable. For
example, the earlier work by Weiss [35] used a maximum
likelihood (ML) method to recover illumination invariant
intrinsic properties from a sequence of images captured at
a fixed viewpoint but under significantly different lightings.
∗ These authors contributed to the work equally.

1

