End-to-End Integration of a
Convolutional Network, Deformable Parts Model
and Non-Maximum Suppression
Li Wan
David Eigen
Rob Fergus
Dept. of Computer Science, Courant Institute, New York University
251 Mercer Street New York, NY 10012
wanli,deigen,fergus@cs.nyu.edu

Abstract

fprop

root

obj view

...

...

AND

part1
part9

OR

...

obj view

...

root

NMS

Def

...

...

part9

Def

bicycle
AND

part1

ConvNet
Features

person

Def

...

Image
Pyramid

person

Def

Deformable Parts Models and Convolutional Networks
each have achieved notable performance in object detection. Yet these two approaches find their strengths in complementary areas: DPMs are well-versed in object composition, modeling fine-grained spatial relationships between
parts; likewise, ConvNets are adept at producing powerful image features, having been discriminatively trained directly on the pixels. In this paper, we propose a new model
that combines these two approaches, obtaining the advantages of each. We train this model using a new structured
loss function that considers all bounding boxes within an
image, rather than isolated object instances. This enables
the non-maximal suppression (NMS) operation, previously
treated as a separate post-processing stage, to be integrated
into the model. This allows for discriminative training of
our combined Convnet + DPM + NMS model in end-to-end
fashion. We evaluate our system on PASCAL VOC 2007 and
2011 datasets, achieving competitive results on both benchmarks.

Deformable
Parts Model

Response
Pyramid

NMS

Final
Prediction

bprop

Figure 1. An overview of our system: (i) a convolutional network
extracts features from an image pyramid; (ii) a set of deformable
parts models (each capturing a different view) are applied to the
convolutional feature maps; (iii) non-maximal suppression is applied to the resulting response maps, yielding bounding box predictions. Training is performed using a new loss function that enables back-propagation through all stages.

1. Introduction
Object detection has been addressed using a variety
of approaches, including sliding-window Deformable Parts
Models [6, 20, 7], region proposal with classification [8,
17], and location regression with deep learning [14, 15].
Each of these methods have their own advantages, yet are by
no means mutually exclusive. In particular, structured parts
models capture the composition of individual objects from
component parts, yet often use rudimentary features like
HoG [3] that throw away much of the discriminative information in the image. By contrast, deep learning approaches
[10, 19, 14], based on Convolutional Networks [11], extract
strong image features, but do not explicitly model object
composition. Instead, they rely on pooling and large fully
connected layers to combine information from spatially disparate regions; these operations can throw away useful finegrained spatial relationships important for detection.

In this paper, we propose a framework (shown in Fig. 1)
that combines these two approaches, fusing together structured learning and deep learning to obtain the advantages
of each. We use a DPM for detection, but replace the HoG
features with features learned by a convolutional network.
This allows the use of complex image features, but still preserves the spatial relationships between object parts during
inference.
An often overlooked aspect of many detection systems
is the non-maximal suppression stage, used to winnow multiple high scoring bounding boxes around an object instance down to a single detection. Typically, this is a postprocessing operation applied to the set of bounding boxes
produced by the object detector. As such, it is not part of
the loss function used to train the model and any parame1

