Blur Kernel Estimation using Normalized Color-Line Priors
Wei-Sheng Lai1
Jian-Jiun Ding1
1
National Taiwan University

Yen-Yu Lin2
Yung-Yu Chuang1
2
Academia Sinica, Taiwan

Abstract

a result, some state-of-the-art methods use different strategies to maximize marginal distributions [4, 11, 12]. Another
group of algorithms [16, 9, 21] incorporate special regularization into MAP to implicitly remove small details and
maintain salient structures. Finally, edge-based approaches
[3, 20] explicitly select and enhance salient edges.

This paper proposes a single-image blur kernel estimation algorithm that utilizes the normalized color-line prior
to restore sharp edges without altering edge structures or
enhancing noise. The proposed prior is derived from the
color-line model, which has been successfully applied to
non-blind deconvolution and many computer vision problems. In this paper, we show that the original color-line
prior is not effective for blur kernel estimation and propose a normalized color-line prior which can better enhance edge contrasts. By optimizing the proposed prior, our
method gradually enhances the sharpness of the intermediate patches without using heuristic filters or external patch
priors. The intermediate patches can then guide the estimation of the blur kernel. A comprehensive evaluation on
a large image deblurring dataset shows that our algorithm
achieves the state-of-the-art results.

Most previous methods assume that image gradients of x
follow a heavy-tailed distribution [4, 16]. However, gradient priors consider only 2 or 3 neighboring pixels, which are
not sufficient for modeling larger image structures. In recent years, patch priors that consider larger neighborhoods
(e.g., 5 × 5 or 7 × 7 image patches) have been developed
for image super-resolution [6, 13] and non-blind deconvolution [22, 18]. For blind deconvolution, Sun et al. [17]
used a patch prior learned from an external image dataset
to restore sharp edges, from which the blur kernel is estimated. Michaeli and Irani [14] adopted the internal patch
recurrence property for estimation of the blur kernel. Both
approaches resulted in a significant improvement in performance of blind deblurring, especially on robustness.

1. Introduction

In this paper, we exploit the statistic property of the
color-line model [15] on natural images and blur images,
and then propose the normalized color-line prior for blur
kernel estimation and blind deconvolution. The color-line
model has been adopted to non-blind deconvolution by
Joshi et al. [8]. They used the k-means algorithm to find
two color centers for every image patch and built a prior
for image reconstruction. Different from their approach, we
propose to use the normalized color-line prior for blur kernel estimation based on two observations. First, the colorline prior is more effective for blur kernel estimation than
image reconstruction. Second, the k-means centers are not
effective enough for blind deconvolution because the blur
process would have shrunk the distance between two centers of an image patch. Figure 1 visualizes the color-line
distribution of a sharp patch and its blurred version in the
RGB space. As seen from this figure, the centers found by
the k-mean algorithm from the blur patch are too close and
not effective for restoring contrast of the patch. Our method
can find more effective centers.

Image blur is a common unwanted photographing artifact caused by camera shake and its removal has been an
active research topic for years. Assuming the blur is uniform across the entire image and the captured scene is static
without too much depth variation, a motion blurred image
y is often modeled as a convolution between a blur kernel k
and a sharp image x:
y = k ⊗ x + n,

(1)

where ⊗ is the convolution operator and n is additive noise.
For the problem of single-image blind deconvolution, the
goal is to recover the desired sharp image x and the blur
kernel k solely from the given blurry image y. Since there
are many pairs of x and k that may result in the same y,
many existing algorithms rely on prior knowledge on x and
k to avoid trivial solutions. Maximum a Posterior (MAP)
inference is a popular technique for solving blind deconvolution by jointly optimizing the latent image and the blur
kernel. However, as shown by Levin et al. [11], the naive
MAP would fail because it favors the no-blur solution. As

Based on the normalized color-line prior, we propose a
new blur kernel estimation method. Our method belongs
1

