Depth from Shading, Defocus, and Correspondence Using Light-Field Angular Coherence
Michael W. Tao

Pratul P. Srinivasan

Jitendra Malik

mtao@berkeley.edu

pratul@berkeley.edu
University of California, Berkeley

malik@eecs.berkeley.edu

Szymon Rusinkiewicz

Ravi Ramamoorthi

smr@cs.princeton.edu
Princeton University

ravir@cs.ucsd.edu
University of California, San Diego

Abstract
Light-field cameras are now used in consumer and industrial applications. Recent papers and products have
demonstrated practical depth recovery algorithms from a
passive single-shot capture. However, current light-field
capture devices have narrow baselines and constrained
spatial resolution; therefore, the accuracy of depth recovery is limited, requiring heavy regularization and producing planar depths that do not resemble the actual geometry. Using shading information is essential to improve the
shape estimation. We develop an improved technique for
local shape estimation from defocus and correspondence
cues, and show how shading can be used to further refine
the depth.
Light-field cameras are able to capture both spatial and
angular data, suitable for refocusing. By locally refocusing
each spatial pixel to its respective estimated depth, we produce an all-in-focus image where all viewpoints converge
onto a point in the scene. Therefore, the angular pixels have
angular coherence, which exhibits three properties: photo
consistency, depth consistency, and shading consistency.
We propose a new framework that uses angular coherence
to optimize depth and shading. The optimization framework
estimates both general lighting in natural scenes and shading to improve depth regularization. Our method outperforms current state-of-the-art light-field depth estimation
algorithms in multiple scenarios, including real images.

1. Introduction
Light-fields [15, 25] can be used to refocus images [27].
Light-field cameras also enable passive and general depth
estimation [32, 33, 35]. A key advantage is that multiple
cues, such as defocus and correspondence can be obtained
from a single shot [32]. Our main contribution is integrating
a third cue: shading, as shown in Fig. 1.
We make the common assumption of Lambertian surfaces under general (distant) direct lighting. We differ from

Figure 1. Light-field Depth Estimation Using Shading, Defocus,
and Correspondence Cues. In this work, we present a novel algorithm that estimates shading to improve depth recovery using
light-field angular coherence. Here we have an input of a real
scene with a shell surface and a camera tilted slightly toward the
right of the image (a). We obtain an improved defocus and correspondence depth estimation (b,c). However, because local depth
estimation is only accurate at edges or textured regions, depth estimation of the shell appears regularized and planar. We use the
depth estimation to estimate shading, which is S (d), the component in I = AS, where I is the observed image and A is the
albedo (e) With the depth and shading estimations, we can refine
our depth to better represent the surface of the shell (f,g). Throughout this paper, we use the scale on the right to represent depth.

shape from shading from single images, by exploiting the
full angular data captured by the light-field. Our algorithm
is able to use images captured with the Lytro and Lytro Illum cameras. We compare our results against the Lytro Illum software and other state of the art methods (Fig. 7),
demonstrating that our results give accurate representations
of the shapes captured. Upon publication, we will release
our source code and dataset.
Shape from shading is a heavily under-constrained problem and usually only produces accurate results when
fairly accurate initial depths are available for subsequence
shading-based optimization [3, 6, 9, 21, 39]. Unfortunately,
captured light-field data typically does not provide such information, because of the narrow baseline and limited reso-

