Background Subtraction via Generalized Fused Lasso Foreground Modeling
Bo Xin Yuan Tian Yizhou Wang Wen Gao
Nat’l Engineering Laboratory for Video Technology
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MoE)
Sch’l of EECS, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, China

Abstract

[21, 27, 12] and neural network models [9, 17] etc. Nonparametric models are also proposed for improved efficiency [1]. The pixel-wise models are prone to resulting
in fragmentary foregrounds, i.e. there are both “holes” in
the foregrounds and false positive pixels from the background. Whereas, the models of the second category, i.e.
frame-wise models, usually achieve better performance by
exploring structure information of the background. These
works can be generally viewed as follow-ups of the celebrated eigen-background model proposed in [20], of which
the key assumption is that when camera motion is small,
the matrix consists of background frames is approximately
low-rank [20, 7]. Hence, these models project video frames
onto the subspace spanned by the eigen-vectors associated
with the largest eigen-values of the matrix composed of all
the frames of a video sequence. The recovered signal in
the subspace is regarded as background and the residual is
assumed to be foreground. Although structure information
acquired by such holistic models helps to improve the integrity of the recovered background, such improvement can
be limited in many situations due to the neglect of foreground structural prior at the same time. Thus deliberate
post-processing steps are often needed e.g. in [5, 12, 19].
Therefore, is there a way to quest for intact structured foregrounds, which in turn can benefit background estimation?
Learning in BS. In some scenarios, when pure background
frames are available, learning background models can be
achieved in a supervised manner. We call this situation
the supervised model learning (SML) case. Many pixelwise models belong to this category and they learn/update
the models from given background pixels. Whereas framewise models, due to their blind decomposition origin of the
eigen-background, tend to neglect this piece of information.
In many other situations, foreground background coexist in each frame. We call this situation the unsupervised
model learning (UML) case and it is more challenging than
the SML case. In practice, however, pixel-wise models are
learnt based on the frames ahead of the test frame, regardless of such an existence of foregrounds. Consequently, in

Background Subtraction (BS) is one of the key steps
in video analysis. Many background models have been
proposed and achieved promising performance on public
data sets. However, due to challenges such as illumination
change, dynamic background etc. the resulted foreground
segmentation often consists of holes as well as background
noise. In this regard, we consider generalized fused lasso
regularization to quest for intact structured foregrounds.
Together with certain assumptions about the background,
such as the low-rank assumption or the sparse-composition
assumption (depending on whether pure background frames
are provided), we formulate BS as a matrix decomposition
problem using regularization terms for both the foreground
and background matrices. Moreover, under the proposed
formulation, the two generally distinctive background assumptions can be solved in a unified manner. The optimization was carried out via applying the augmented Lagrange multiplier (ALM) method in such a way that a fast
parametric-flow algorithm is used for updating the foreground matrix. Experimental results on several popular BS
data sets demonstrate the advantage of the proposed model
compared to state-of-the-arts.

1. Introduction
Background Subtraction (BS) is often regarded as a key
step in video analysis. In general, it is challenging to devise
a good background model and some well-known challenges
include: illumination changes, dynamic background, bootstrapping, camouflage etc. To meet these challenges, many
works on BS have been proposed. In the following, we discuss some related topics.
Models of BS. From the representation perspective, most
existing works could be categorized into two classes: pixelwise modeling and frame-wise modeling. In the first category, representative methods model pixel-wise statistics of
the background using mixture of Gaussian models (MoG)
1

