Object Proposal by Multi-branch Hierarchical Segmentation
Chaoyang Wang
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Long Zhao
Tongji University

Shuang Liang∗
Tongji University

wangchaoyang@sjtu.edu.cn

9012garyzhao@tongji.edu.cn

shuangliang@tongji.edu.cn

Liqing Zhang
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Jinyuan Jia
Tongji University

Yichen Wei
Microsoft Research

zhang-lq@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

jyjia@tongji.edu.cn

yichenw@microsoft.com

Abstract

5, 23] address the problem from the image segmentation
perspective. Starting from an initial oversegmentation, object proposals are modeled as a composition of neighboring
segments. This segment composition space is exponential,
so the principle of all segment-based methods is to use efficient strategy such as automatic foreground-background
segmentation [19, 6], randomized prim sampling [21], hierarchical image segmentation [26], combinatorial grouping [5], or a combination of above [23] to search the segment composition space.

Hierarchical segmentation based object proposal methods have become an important step in modern object detection paradigm. However, standard single-way hierarchical
methods are fundamentally flawed in that the errors in early
steps cannot be corrected and accumulate. In this work,
we propose a novel multi-branch hierarchical segmentation
approach that alleviates such problems by learning multiple
merging strategies in each step in a complementary manner,
such that errors in one merging strategy could be corrected
by the others. Our approach achieves the state-of-the-art
performance for both object proposal and object detection
tasks, comparing to previous object proposal methods.

In this work, we develop our approach based on hierarchical image segmentation. As proposed in [26], using segments from hierarchical segmentation as proposal regions
handles multiple scales by natural. Moreover, organizing
object proposals with a hierarchical structure coincides with
the intuition that the semantic meanings of real world objects are hierarchical.

1. Introduction

Hierarchical segmentation divides an image into a hierarchy of regions [20]. Each region is visually or semantically
homogeneous, and regions in lower level of the hierarchy
form subparts of regions in higher levels. It is most commonly implemented as a bottom-up greedy merging process [4, 12, 23, 26, 24]. Starting from an initial oversegmentation, the image segmentation hierarchy is generated by iteratively merging neighboring segments in a greedy manner: a merging strategy gives a score to each pair of adjacent
segments and the pair with the highest score is merged. This
greedy merging process continues until either the whole image is merged into one segment [26, 4] or the maximum
merging score is below some threshold [23, 24, 12].

The goal of generic object proposal generation is to find
all candidate regions that may contain objects in an image [1]. A generic object proposal algorithm has the following requirements: it should be able to capture objects of all
scales, has small bias towards object class, and most importantly: achieve high detection recall with as few proposals
as possible. The problem has received intensive interests in
recent years, as it serves as an effective preprocessing for
other high-level computer vision tasks such as object detection. Recent works [14, 16, 15] demonstrate that the proposal algorithm can indeed significantly speed up the object
detection task and improves its performance.
Generic object proposal is first addressed within traditional sliding window object detection framework [1].
Methods such as [1, 22, 9, 7, 28] use features like saliency,
image gradient and contour information to measure the objectness of a given sliding window.
Different from the above, methods such as [19, 6, 21, 26,

The merging strategy has been defined in various ways.
The method in [4, 3, 5] gives merge scores using global
contour detection result; the methods in [12, 26, 23] heuristically define merging strategies based on appearance similarity and segment’s size; the methods in [24, 27] trains
a cascade of linear classifiers and uses classifiers’ decision
value as merge score.

∗ Corresponding author.

1

