Eye tracking assisted extraction of attentionally important objects from videos
S. Karthikeyan∗ , Thuyen Ngo∗ , Miguel Eckstein‡ , B.S. Manjunath∗
∗
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
‡
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences
University of California Santa Barbara
∗

{karthikeyan, thuyen, manj}@ece.ucsb.edu , ‡ eckstein@psych.ucsb.edu

Abstract
Visual attention is a crucial indicator of the relative importance of objects in visual scenes to human viewers. In
this paper, we propose an algorithm to extract objects which
attract visual attention from videos. As human attention
is naturally biased towards high level semantic objects in
visual scenes, this information can be valuable to extract
salient objects. The proposed algorithm extracts dominant
visual tracks using eye tracking data from multiple subjects on a video sequence by a combination of mean-shift
clustering and Hungarian algorithm. These visual tracks
guide a generic object search algorithm to get candidate object locations and extents in every frame. Further, we propose a novel multiple object extraction algorithm by constructing a spatio-temporal mixed graph over object candidates. Bounding box based object extraction inference is
performed using binary linear integer programming on a
cost function defined over the graph. Finally, the object
boundaries are refined using grabcut segmentation. The
proposed technique outperforms state-of-the-art video segmentation using eye tracking prior and obtains favorable
object extraction over algorithms which do not utilize eye
tracking data.

Figure 1. A simple illustration of the proposed problem. Given a video
sequence (left), we collect eye tracking data in the sequence from multiple subjects (center) and utilize this information to extract visually salient
objects (right). Best viewed in color.

Ma et al. [28], important objects are segmented by connecting the extracted object candidates from all video frames
using mutual exclusiveness constraints. Also, in [35] Ramakanth et al. utilize video seams to segment moving objects effectively. Recently [47], Zhang et al. proposed a
framework to extract objects using objectness [12] and optical flow proposals and segment the key object by dynamic
programming on a directed acyclic graph. They also utilize
a warping technique to ensure robustness to broken object
segments. All the aforementioned methods utilize motion
to define the importance of objects and can extract only a
single object of interest from a video sequence. However,
motion may not be a good metric to determine importance
of objects in videos. For example in a video sequence where
two subjects are having a conversation, the motion cues
might be misleading. We note that salient objects in a scene
can be better understood by visual attention regions. Therefore, in this work we investigate the utility of eye tracking
to extract multiple interesting objects in a scene.
Eye movements have been shown to reflect a combination of influences of low level image properties, the observer’s task, interest, and goals [18, 40, 11, 10, 11, 26].
In a free viewing task, eye movements are biased towards
high level semantics [22, 29] in static and dynamic scenes.
Therefore, visual attention can provide a robust prior to assist multiple object extraction in video sequences. Recent
advancements in eye tracking technology have opened up
avenues to collect data without affecting the experience of
the viewer. State-of-the-art eye trackers are affordable [2]
and this has enabled large-scale collection of eye tracking
data from multiple subjects. Multimedia content is typi-

1. Introduction
Object extraction in videos is a challenging problem in
computer vision. Automated extraction of objects in a video
sequence can benefit several applications related to annotation, compression, summarization, search and retrieval. A
critical bottleneck in object extraction is defining the importance of objects in a video sequence. Several works
in object extraction from videos have focussed on utilizing
motion to determine importance of objects. These methods typically aim to extract a single dominant object in the
scene, determined by motion. In [27] Lee et al. identify important motion segments representing an object and extrapolate the object of interest throughout the video frames. In
1

