Superpixel Segmentation using Linear Spectral Clustering
Zhengqin Li
Jiansheng Chen
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
li-zq12@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

jschenthu@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
We present in this paper a superpixel segmentation algorithm called Linear Spectral Clustering (LSC), which produces compact and uniform superpixels with low computational costs. Basically, a normalized cuts formulation of
the superpixel segmentation is adopted based on a similarity metric that measures the color similarity and space
proximity between image pixels. However, instead of using
the traditional eigen-based algorithm, we approximate the
similarity metric using a kernel function leading to an explicitly mapping of pixel values and coordinates into a high
dimensional feature space. We revisit the conclusion that
by appropriately weighting each point in this feature space,
the objective functions of weighted K-means and normalized cuts share the same optimum point. As such, it is possible to optimize the cost function of normalized cuts by iteratively applying simple K-means clustering in the proposed
feature space. LSC is of linear computational complexity
and high memory efficiency and is able to preserve global
properties of images. Experimental results show that LSC
performs equally well or better than state of the art superpixel segmentation algorithms in terms of several commonly
used evaluation metrics in image segmentation.

Figure 1. Images [13] segmented into 1000/500/200 superpixels
using the proposed LSC algorithm.

ing properties of superpixel segmentation are generally desirable. First, superpixels should adhere well to the natural
image boundaries and each superpixel should not overlap
with multiple objects. Second, as a preprocessing technique
for improving efficiency of computer vision tasks, superpixel segmentation should be of low complexity itself. Last
but not the least, global image information which is important for human vision cognition should be considered appropriately. It is critical for a segmentation process to utilize the perceptually important non-local clues to group unrelated image pixels into semantically meaningful regions.
Nevertheless, considering global relationship among pixels
usually lead to substantial increases in computational complexity. A typical example is the eigen-based solution to
the normalized cuts (Ncuts) based superpixel segmentation
algorithm proposed in [17]. As a result, most practical superpixel segmentation algorithms, such as [5][21][11], are
mainly based on the analysis of local image information
only. These methods may fail to correctly segment image
regions with high intensity variability [8].
To address this issue, we propose a superpixel segmentation algorithm, Linear Spectral Clustering (LSC), which
not only captures perceptually important global image properties, but also runs in linear complexity with high memory
efficiency. In LSC, we map each image pixel to a point
in a ten dimensional feature space in which weighted Kmeans is applied for segmentation. Non-local information
is implicitly preserved due to the equivalence between the
weighted K-means clustering in this ten dimensional feature
space and normalized cuts in the original pixel space. Simple weighted K-means clustering in the feature space can be

1. Introduction
Superpixel segmentation is an increasingly popular image preprocessing technique used in many computer vision
applications such as image segmentation [17], image parsing [19], object tracking [22], and 3D reconstruction [9]. It
provides a concise image representation by grouping pixels
into perceptually meaningful small patches that adhere well
to object boundaries. Comparing to the pixel-rigid image
representation, superpixel is more consistent with human
visual cognition and contains less redundancy. Moreover,
compact and uniform superpixel segmentation can serve as
the spatial support for vision feature extraction [12].
Many different superpixel segmentation algorithms have
been proposed to meet the needs of various applications
[17][8][5][21][11]. It is widely understood that the follow1

