Data-Driven Depth Map Refinement via Multi-scale Sparse Representation
HyeokHyen Kwon
KAIST

Yu-Wing Tai
KAIST

Stephen Lin
Microsoft Research

hyeokhyen@kaist.ac.kr

yuwing@kaist.ac.kr

stevelin@microsoft.com

Abstract
Depth maps captured by consumer-level depth cameras
such as Kinect are usually degraded by noise, missing values, and quantization. In this paper, we present a datadriven approach for refining degraded RAW depth maps that
are coupled with an RGB image. The key idea of our approach is to take advantage of a training set of high-quality
depth data and transfer its information to the RAW depth
map through multi-scale dictionary learning. Utilizing a
sparse representation, our method learns a dictionary of geometric primitives which captures the correlation between
high-quality mesh data, RAW depth maps and RGB images.
The dictionary is learned and applied in a manner that accounts for various practical issues that arise in dictionarybased depth refinement. Compared to previous approaches
that only utilize the correlation between RAW depth maps
and RGB images, our method produces improved depth
maps without over-smoothing. Since our approach is data
driven, the refinement can be targeted to a specific class of
objects by employing a corresponding training set. In our
experiments, we show that this leads to additional improvements in recovering depth maps of human faces.

1. Introduction
The recent popularity of consumer-level depth cameras
such as Kinect has led to growing interest in using depth
maps as auxiliary data for various computer vision tasks,
such as pose recognition [1] and scene understanding [2].
The benefits of utilizing depth data, however, are limited by
the relatively low resolution of depth maps as well as depth
degradations due to noise, missing values, and quantization,
which can significantly reduce data quality.
To facilitate the use of depth data, most methods have focused on the depth upsampling problem, in which a higherresolution depth map is recovered from a lower-resolution
input. This task is typically performed with the help of
a corresponding high-resolution RGB image of the scene,
which is jointly captured with the depth map by Kinect.
These methods make use of the RGB image through the

statistical co-occurrence of its discontinuities with those in
the depth map, as they both arise from common underlying
3D structure. Since the RGB image is at a higher resolution,
its discontinuities are used to locate depth discontinuities at
a higher resolution than the input depth map. Many successful results have been demonstrated with this approach,
but the computed depth maps often exhibit distortions and
over-smoothing due to the aforementioned degradations in
depth measurements.
In this paper, we present a data-driven approach for
dealing with the problem of low-quality depth data. The
key idea is to transfer high-quality depth map primitives
to the RAW depth map through multi-scale dictionary
learning. Dictionaries are formed through structure-guided
sparse coding [3] of RGB images, RAW depth maps, and
high-quality depth data constructed by Kinect Fusion [4].
Learning the statistical relationship between low- and highquality depth maps allows our method to account for the
various degradations that can occur in depth map measurement. However, there exist three major issues that complicate this approach in practice, namely RGB textures uncorrelated with depth map discontinuities, large dictionary size,
and differences in geometric features at different scales. We
present adaptations of our dictionary-based framework to
address these practical issues in the depth refinement process.
The performance of our algorithm is evaluated and compared with state-of-the-art depth map refinement methods
that also take a single RGB-D image as input. Our approach
consistently outperforms previous techniques both quantitatively in synthetic examples and qualitatively in real-world
instances. We additionally demonstrate that by learning
a class-specific dictionary, the effectiveness of our datadriven approach can be further enhanced.

2. Related work
Related works on depth map refinement are reviewed in
this section. These techniques can be classified as either
RGB-D based techniques that utilize an additional RGB image to guide the depth map refinement process, or reconstruction based techniques that merge multiple unaligned

