Active Learning and Discovery of Object Categories in the Presence of
Unnameable Instances
Christoph Käding, Alexander Freytag, Erik Rodner, Paul Bodesheim, Joachim Denzler
Computer Vision Group, Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Germany
{firstname.lastname}@uni-jena.de | www.inf-cv.uni-jena.de

Abstract
Current visual recognition algorithms are “hungry” for
data but massive annotation is extremely costly. Therefore,
active learning algorithms are required that reduce labeling
efforts to a minimum by selecting examples that are most
valuable for labeling. In active learning, all categories occurring in collected data are usually assumed to be known
in advance and experts should be able to label every requested instance. But do these assumptions really hold in
practice? Could you name all categories in every image?
Existing algorithms completely ignore the fact that there
are certain examples where an oracle can not provide an
answer or which even do not belong to the current problem domain. Ideally, active learning techniques should be
able to discover new classes and at the same time cope with
queries an expert is not able or willing to label.
To meet these observations, we present a variant of the
expected model output change principle for active learning and discovery in the presence of unnameable instances.
Our experiments show that in these realistic scenarios, our
approach substantially outperforms previous active learning methods, which are often not even able to improve with
respect to the baseline of random query selection.

1. Introduction
Visual data is omnipresent and a flood of free digital data
became available with the existence of smart phones, cheap
cameras, and internet sharing platforms. While advantageous in several aspects, the resulting data is often unstructured and with none or wrong annotations. As an illustrative example, consider the amount of video data uploaded
to YouTube, which currently is about 100 hours of video
data per minute [36]. While computer vision systems would
greatly benefit from using these massive amounts of unlabeled data resources, manual annotation is costly. Thus,
only a fraction of the data is actually available for supervised training of object classification systems.

Figure 1: The answers of an annotator are likely to be: (a)
laptop (b) what the heck is that? (c) no object! (d) some toy
figure (e) no idea (f) cat (g) cup (h) keyboard (i) cup. In an
active learning and discovery scenario, an annotator might
reject examples that do not show valid objects, that cannot
be identified, or that are not part of the problem domain,
which should be considered when requesting annotations.
Not surprisingly, researchers have been interested in understanding what makes individual examples informative
for a given task. Given that knowledge, we could automatically select a small, unlabeled subset containing as much
information as possible which is then labeled by an expert
and still stays within a specified labeling budget. This field
of research is known as active learning and gained popularity within the computer vision community over the last
years [20, 17, 21, 35, 22, 10, 25, 11].
Existing active learning algorithms assume that an annotator always knows an answer, e.g., the requested label of a given image. From our experience, this assumption does not hold in practice and annotators are likely to
reject labeling in two scenarios: either the sample does

