From Single Image Query to Detailed 3D Reconstruction
Johannes L. Schönberger1 , Filip Radenović2 , Ondrej Chum2 , Jan-Michael Frahm1
1
Department of Computer Science, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
2
CMP, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague
jsch@cs.unc.edu, radenfil@cmp.felk.cvut.cz, chum@cmp.felk.cvut.cz, jmf@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
Structure-from-Motion for unordered image collections
has significantly advanced in scale over the last decade.
This impressive progress can be in part attributed to the
introduction of efficient retrieval methods for those systems.
While this boosts scalability, it also limits the amount of detail that the large-scale reconstruction systems are able to
produce. In this paper, we propose a joint reconstruction
and retrieval system that maintains the scalability of largescale Structure-from-Motion systems while also recovering
the often lost ability of reconstructing fine details of the
scene. We demonstrate our proposed method on a largescale dataset of 7.4 million images downloaded from the
Internet.

1. Introduction
In the last decade, computer vision has made great
progress in the areas of image retrieval and 3D modeling.
Current image search engines operate on web-scale image
collections and are able to localize specific objects and landmarks, and aid user-friendly content browsing. In the field
of reconstructing scenes from images and videos, arguably
the biggest steps have been made in 3D modeling from unordered Internet photo collections. A natural step forward
is to address the problem of obtaining a detailed 3D model
of an object depicted in a single, user-provided photograph.
Structure-from-Motion (SfM) systems have been extended from modeling scenes from a few thousand images [29, 30] to modeling city-scale photo collections of
millions of images [7, 9]. Early photo collection reconstruction systems leverage exhaustive matching of image
pairs to determine possible overlapping image pairs. This
is generally quadratic in the number of images and features. Hence, this approach does not scale and is not applicable to datasets containing thousands or even millions
of images, which are commonly available. However, exhaustive matching guarantees the discovery of all possible
camera overlaps. To achieve scalability, the current state-of-

Figure 1. Arc de Triomphe, Paris. 3D reconstruction from a single
input image (red inset) using 2,640 views around the landmark
from a 7.4M image database. Only imagery is used (no GPS or
text). The scene contains 395,431 points and the surface resolution
reaches the order of 1mm in the most photographed areas.

the-art large-scale reconstruction systems abandon the exhaustive pairwise overlap determination. Instead, modern
systems leverage image retrieval algorithms [21, 3, 4], or
image-clustering techniques to identify overlapping images
during reconstruction, as demonstrated by the systems of
Agarwal et al. [1] and Frahm et al. [7]. While the introduction of image retrieval was essential to boosting the scalability of reconstruction methods on large datasets, it also
severely impacted the ability to reconstruct fine details of
the scene. This problem stems from the fact that the image
pairs showing the details are often absent from the retrieval
results. This is unsatisfactory, as for applications such as
photo field of view extension using unordered photo collections, recently proposed by Zhang et al. [36], it is desirable
to have the details present in the reconstruction.
The lack of detail is a result of the employed retrieval
approaches [21, 3, 4], which are tuned to obtain images
similar in scale and appearance. In this paper, we introduce
a tightly-coupled retrieval and SfM system for large-scale
reconstruction from unordered photo collections of several
million images, which not only recovers the coarse geometry of the scene but specifically focuses on modeling scene
details. Our approach achieves this by combining SfM with
retrieval across differently scaled scene images.
In order to achieve these detailed reconstructions, our

