Modeling Object Appearance using Context-Conditioned Component Analysis
Daniyar Turmukhambetov1 Neill D.F. Campbell1,2
Simon J.D. Prince1,3 Jan Kautz1,4
1

University College London, UK

2

University of Bath, UK

Abstract

3

Anthropics Technology, UK

4

NVIDIA, USA

faces, medical scans of organs, etc. Some works address
a more challenging case of visual objects that exhibit deformations, by jointly learning spatial transformations and
appearance representations (e.g., unaligned images of faces,
images of mushrooms, medical scans of hands). The models rely on estimating dense mappings between the images
of the dataset, usually to a common template.

Subspace models have been very successful at modeling
the appearance of structured image datasets when the visual objects have been aligned in the images (e.g., faces).
Even with extensions that allow for global transformations
or dense warps of the image, the set of visual objects whose
appearance may be modeled by such methods is limited.
They are unable to account for visual objects where occlusion leads to changing visibility of different object parts
(without a strict layered structure) and where a one-toone mapping between parts is not preserved. For example
bunches of bananas contain different numbers of bananas
but each individual banana shares an appearance subspace.
In this work we remove the image space alignment limitations of existing subspace models by conditioning the
models on a shape dependent context that allows for the
complex, non-linear structure of the appearance of the visual object to be captured and shared. This allows us to
exploit the advantages of subspace appearance models with
non-rigid, deformable objects whilst also dealing with complex occlusions and varying numbers of parts. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our new model with examples of
structured inpainting and appearance transfer.

However, visual objects with varying structure (Figure 1)
cannot be readily expressed using previous methods. By
fixed structure, we mean that images consist of a fixed set of
regions that have certain associated textures. For example,
side views of cars in general have two regions corresponding to two wheels and these regions are always present in
the image. On the other hand, an example of a visual object
with a varying structure would be a facade of a building with
a varying number of windows. In this scenario, the texture
of window regions can be shared across images, but each
image may have a different number of regions corresponding to windows. Furthermore, datasets of visual objects
that have occlusions or significant deformations which can
cause self-occlusions or 2D topology changes also remain
a challenging input, e.g., animals under different poses. We
note that, due to the diverse structure of such images, methods that estimate a warping or dense mapping between images, such as SIFT flow [19], are unlikely to succeed as
some of their assumptions about the images are not met;
e.g., smoothness of the deformation field and the presence
of occlusions.

1. Introduction
Subspace models are commonly used to learn a parametric model of a visual object appearance from a large dataset
of images. The parametric model captures low-dimensional
representation of the appearance of the visual object as a
linear combination of “components”. Such representations
have been successfully used to model the appearance of the
visual object in a range of computer vision and graphics applications such as face detection, identification, image hallucination, image synthesis, etc.
These parametric models yield good results when images
are preprocessed so that features of the visual objects are
aligned throughout the dataset. This is applicable to visual
objects that have fixed structure and do not have significant
deformations or occlusions, for example frontal images of

Recently, image datasets of various objects have been
provided with high-quality segmentation maps and perpixel semantic and part labels; such labeled datasets are becoming more prevalent [11] and are being used to tackle
a variety of visual challenges. We exploit such additional
information by formulating a generative parametric statistical model that explains a visual object’s appearance conditioned on the additional information, such as the segmentation map, but in a more complex way than just warping. So,
we assume that the additional information of each image is
known during training, as well as during sampling.
Existing methods for statistical shape modeling, for example the recent ShapeBM model [10], produce generative
1

