Large-Scale and Drift-Free Surface Reconstruction
Using Online Subvolume Registration
Nicola Fioraio†
†

Jonathan Taylor‡

Andrew Fitzgibbon‡

Luigi Di Stefano†

Shahram Izadi‡

‡

CVLab - CSE, University of Bologna
Viale Risorgimento, 2
40135 Bologna, Italy

Microsoft Research
21 Station Road
Cambridge CB1 2FB, UK

{nicola.fioraio,luigi.distefano}@unibo.it

{jota,awf,shahrami}@microsoft.com

Abstract

frame-to-frame pose estimation errors results in distortions
in the reconstructed 3D models.

Depth cameras have helped commoditize 3D digitization
of the real-world. It is now feasible to use a single Kinectlike camera to scan in an entire building or other large-scale
scenes. At large scales, however, there is an inherent challenge of dealing with distortions and drift due to accumulated pose estimation errors. Existing techniques suffer from
one or more of the following: a) requiring an expensive
offline global optimization step taking hours to compute;
b) needing a full second pass over the input depth frames
to correct for accumulated errors; c) relying on RGB data
alongside depth data to optimize poses; or d) requiring the
user to create explicit loop closures to allow gross alignment
errors to be resolved. In this paper, we present a method that
addresses all of these issues. Our method supports online
model correction, without needing to reprocess or store any
input depth data. Even while performing global correction of
a large 3D model, our method takes only minutes rather than
hours to compute. Our model does not require any explicit
loop closures to be detected and, finally, relies on depth data
alone, allowing operation in low-lighting conditions. We
show qualitative results on many large scale scenes, highlighting the lack of error and drift in our reconstructions.
We compare to state of the art techniques and demonstrate
large-scale dense surface reconstruction “in the dark”, a
capability not offered by RGB-D techniques.

To address these issues, researchers have explored a number of approaches for globally optimizing 3D models. The
problem of bundle adjustment across RGB images is well
understood [19] and some techniques combine depth data
with RGB to directly build on top of this concept, adding
depth data as an additional prior in the optimization step
[9]. Others systems more explicitly detect loop closures and
distribute the accumulated error across the underlying pose
graph [18, 7].

1. Introduction
The availability of cheap depth cameras has transformed
the face of 3D reconstruction. Over the past few years,
researchers have demonstrated real-time high-quality 3D surface reconstructions [14, 10], even at large scales [4, 21, 15].
However, with these new capabilities have also come new
challenges. One particular issue is of sensor drift which often
occurs when scanning larger scenes. Here accumulation of

More recently, Zhou and Koltun [23, 24] have demonstrated impressive globally optimized 3D surface models
that extend the frame-to-model incremental tracking and reconstruction technique utilized in KinectFusion [14, 10, 6]
to support drift-free reconstructions of larger scenes. In their
first work, [23], they explicitly analyze pose trajectories to
extract points of interest. These form sub-graphs around
which errors can be distributed, and connections with other
nodes formed. In their follow-up work, [24], non-rigid warps
are computed across fragments of KinectFusion scans to support globally consistent large-scale models. Whilst resulting
in compelling results, this body of work suffers from a number of issues. Firstly, these global optimization methods are
expensive, requiring hours if not tens of hours to reconstruct
a single model. Secondly, these approaches can require multiple passes of the depth data, meaning that the depth data
needs to be stored, and reprocessed after global registration
[23]. Thirdly, this approach uses an RGB-D SLAM system
[7] in order to initially optimize the pose trajectory. This
reliance on an initial bundle adjustment step essentially hinders the use of the system in challenging lighting conditions.
This ultimately leads to an experience that cannot support
online correction during scene scanning.
Similarly to [23, 24], Henry et al. [8] propose to globally align smaller volumes. These are, though, the result
of an online segmentation of the scene in non-overlapping

