P3.5P: Pose Estimation with Unknown Focal Length
Changchang Wu
Google Inc.

Abstract

X1

It is well known that the problem of camera pose estimation with unknown focal length has 7 degrees of freedom.
Since each image point gives 2 constraints, solving this
problem requires a minimum of 3.5 image points of 4 known
3D points, where 0.5 means either x or y coordinate of an
image point. We refer to this minimal problem as P3.5P.
However, the existing methods require 4 full image points
to solve the camera pose and focal length [21, 1, 3, 23]. In
this paper, we present a general solution to the true minimal P3.5P problem with up to 10 solutions. The remaining
image coordinate is then used to filter the candidate solutions, which typically results in a single solution for good
data or no solution for outliers. Experiments show the proposed method significantly improves the efficiency over the
state of the art methods while maintaining a high accuracy.

(x1 , y1)

X2

(x2 , y2)
(x3 , y3)

X3

X4

(x4 , -)
f

camera coordinate system

world coordinate system

Figure 1. The P3.5P problem. The input are the 3 image points
(x1 , y1 )(x2 , y2 )(x3 , y3 ) plus either x4 or y4 of the 4th image point
and their corresponding 3D points {X1 , X2 , X3 , X4 } in the world
coordinate system. The 7 image coordinates give sufficient constraints for solving the unknown focal length and camera pose.

1. Introduction

lem. See Figure 1 for an illustration.
The pose estimation problem with a single unknown focal length is a widely used approximation for the pose estimation of uncalibrated cameras, where the other intrinsic parameters are assumed known (e.g. principal point at
image center, zero skew). In particular, such a minimal
parametrization is often used in the 3D reconstruction of
internet photos [18, 6, 22]. Despite extensive studies on
various PnP problems over the past decades, surprisingly
there does not exist a general minimal solution for the P3.5P
problem. The state-of-the-art methods require n = 4 full
image points instead to solve for the m = 7 unknowns,
which leads to an over-constrained P4P (also called P4Pf)
problem [21, 1, 3, 23]. This paper presents the first general
solution to the P3.5P problem, which is truly minimal and
additionally has simpler polynomial systems than [3, 2, 23].
The extra image coordinate is straightforwardly useful
for solution verification. Among the set of solutions from
the 3.5 image points, we consider the ones with large reprojection error for the remanding coordinate as invalid and
discard them. This reliable reduction of solution candidates

The Perspective-n-Point (PnP) problem is a classic problem in computer vision, and a key component of many techniques, including incremental structure from motion [18, 6,
22] and location recognition [10, 16]. Given a set of n 2D
image points in a camera and their corresponding known
3D points, the problem is to solve for the unknown camera
parameters, including the pose and sometimes the intrinsics.
Let m be the number of independently unknown paramm
eters of the camera, the minimal problem requires n =
2
image points to recover the unknowns. For example, the
homogeneous 3 × 4 camera projection matrix has m = 11
degrees of freedom, so it requires n = 5.5 image points
to compute [9]. Take P3P as another example, the calibrated pose estimation has m = 6 unknowns (3 for rotation and 3 for translation) and thus requires n = 3 image
points [5, 13]. This paper addresses the m = 7 case, where
the unknowns are the camera pose and a single focal length
parameter. Obviously the corresponding minimum problem
is for n = 3.5 image points, which we call the P3.5P prob1

