Motion Part Regularization: Improving Action Recognition via Trajectory
Group Selection
Bingbing Ni
ADSC Singapore

Pierre Moulin
UIUC USA

Xiaokang Yang
SJTU China

Shuicheng Yan
NUS Singapore

bingbing.ni@adsc.com.sg

moulin@ifp.uiuc.edu

xkyang@sjtu.edu.cn

eleyans@nus.edu.sg

Abstract

Action label: golf

Action label: punch

Original Fisher vector

golf

Dense local trajectories have been successfully used in
action recognition. However, for most actions only a few
local motion features (e.g., critical movement of hand, arm,
leg etc.) are responsible for the action label. Therefore,
highlighting the local features which are associated with
important motion parts will lead to a more discriminative
action representation. Inspired by recent advances in sentence regularization for text classification, we introduce a
Motion Part Regularization framework to mine for discriminative groups of dense trajectories which form important
motion parts. First, motion part candidates are generated
by spatio-temporal grouping of densely extracted trajectories. Second, an objective function which encourages
sparse selection for these trajectory groups is formulated
together with an action class discriminative term. Then,
we propose an alternative optimization algorithm to efficiently solve this objective function by introducing a set of
auxiliary variables which correspond to the discriminativeness weights of each motion part (trajectory group). These
learned motion part weights are further utilized to form
a discriminativeness weighted Fisher vector representation
for each action sample for final classification. The proposed
motion part regularization framework achieves the state-ofthe-art performances on several action recognition benchmarks.

punch

“Discriminative motion part selection”

Discriminativeness
Weighted Fisher vector

golf

punch

Figure 1. Motivation of our work. Note that our motion part regularization framework generate discriminativeness weighted Fisher
vector representation, which is more discriminative than the unweighted traditional Fisher vector.

tion, a bag-of-words [23] or Fisher vector [25] action representation vector is calculated by pooling the entire video.
However, this processing pipeline has obvious drawbacks.
For most actions, only a small subset of local motion features out of the entire video is relevant to the action label.
For example, when a person is waving his hand while walking, only the movement around the arm/hand is responsible for the action waving hand. Another example is when
there exist severe background motions, it would be demanding that the video-level action representation should make
the foreground motion highlighted. Unfortunately, in either
bag-of-words or Fisher vector, redundant and noisy features
extracted over the entire video sequence may dominate the
representation and downgrade the discriminative capability.

1. Introduction
Video based action recognition is a challenging task
due to large variation of human posture/movement and significant background/irrelavant motions. Spatio-temporal
local motion features, such as spatio-temporal interest
points (STIPs) [10], HOG3D [7], Cuboids [2] and especially the recent prevailing dense trajectories [23, 25], have
shown great discriminative capability in action recognition.
Typically, hundreds of thousands of dense local trajectories
are extracted from a given video clip. After feature extrac-

Based on the latent structural model [4], several local
motion feature selection methods have been proposed for
action recognition. Wang et al. [31] proposed a max-margin
hidden conditional random field framework to select discriminative spatio-temporal interest points by considering
the spatial relationship among the local features. Roo and
Aggarwal [18] matched two local motion feature graphs for
action detection. Graph-based approach is also adopted for
1

