Saliency Detection via Cellular Automata
Yao Qin, Huchuan Lu, Yiqun Xu and He Wang
Dalian University of Technology

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce Cellular Automata–a dynamic evolution model to intuitively detect the salient object. First, we construct a background-based map using color and space contrast with the clustered boundary seeds.
Then, a novel propagation mechanism dependent on Cellular Automata is proposed to exploit the intrinsic relevance
of similar regions through interactions with neighbors. Impact factor matrix and coherence matrix are constructed to
balance the influential power towards each cell’s next state.
The saliency values of all cells will be renovated simultaneously according to the proposed updating rule. It’s surprising to find out that parallel evolution can improve all
the existing methods to a similar level regardless of their original results. Finally, we present an integration algorithm in the Bayesian framework to take advantage of multiple
saliency maps. Extensive experiments on six public datasets
demonstrate that the proposed algorithm outperforms stateof-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Recently, saliency detection aimed at finding out the
most important part of an image has become increasingly
popular in computer vision [1, 14]. As a pre-processing
procedure, saliency detection can be used for many vision tasks, such as visual tracking [26], object retargeting
[11, 39], image categorization [37] and image segmentation
[35].
Generally, methods of saliency detection can be categorized as either top-down or bottom-up approaches. Topdown methods [3, 27, 31, 50] are task-driven and require
supervised learning with manually labeled ground truth. To
better distinguish salient objects from background, highlevel information and supervised methods are incorporated to improve the accuracy of saliency map. In contrast,
bottom-up methods [15, 18, 22, 40, 41, 48] usually exploit low-level cues such as features, colors and spatial
distances to construct saliency maps. One of the most
used principles, contrast prior, is to take the color contrast or geodesic distance against surroundings as a region’s

saliency[7, 8, 18, 21, 22, 33, 43]. In addition, several recent methods formulate their algorithms based on boundary
prior, assuming that regions along the image boundary are
more likely to be the background [19, 23, 44, 49]. Admittedly, it is highly possible for the image border to be the
background, which have been proved in [5, 36]. However,
it is not appropriate to sort all nodes on the boundary into
one category as most previous methods. If the object appears on the image boundary, the chosen background seeds
will be imprecise and directly lead to the inaccuracy of results.
In this paper, we propose effective methods to address
the aforementioned problem. Firstly, we apply the Kmeans algorithm to classify the image border into different clusters. Due to the compactness of boundary clusters,
we can generate different color distinction maps with complementary advantages and integrate them by taking spatial distance into consideration. Secondly, a novel propagation method based on Cellular Automata [42] is introduced to enforce saliency consistency among similar image
patches. Through interactions with neighbors, boundary
cells misclassified as background seeds will automatically
modify their saliency values. Furthermore, we use Singlelayer Cellular Automata to optimize the existing methods
and achieve favorable results.
Many effective methods have been established to deal
with saliency detection and each of them has their own
superiorities [7, 17, 23, 33, 52]. In order to take advantage of different methods, we propose an integration model
called Multi-layer Cellular Automata. With different saliency maps as original inputs, the integrated result outperforms
all the previous state-of-the-arts.
In summary, the main contributions of our work include:
1). We propose an efficient algorithm to integrate global distance matrices and apply Cellular Automata to optimize the
prior maps via exploiting local similarity.
2). Single-layer Cellular Automata can greatly improve all
the state-of-the-art methods to a similar precision level and
is insensitive to the previous maps.
3). Multi-layer Cellular Automata can integrate multiple
saliency maps into a more favorable result under the Bayes
framework.

