Learning to rank in person re-identification with metric ensembles
Sakrapee Paisitkriangkrai, Chunhua Shen∗, Anton van den Hengel
The University of Adelaide, Australia; and Australian Centre for Robotic Vision

Abstract
We propose an effective structured learning based approach to the problem of person re-identification which outperforms the current state-of-the-art on most benchmark
data sets evaluated. Our framework is built on the basis of multiple low-level hand-crafted and high-level visual features. We then formulate two optimization algorithms, which directly optimize evaluation measures commonly used in person re-identification, also known as the
Cumulative Matching Characteristic (CMC) curve. Our
new approach is practical to many real-world surveillance
applications as the re-identification performance can be
concentrated in the range of most practical importance.
The combination of these factors leads to a person reidentification system which outperforms most existing algorithms. More importantly, we advance state-of-the-art
results on person re-identification by improving the rank1 recognition rates from 40% to 50% on the iLIDS benchmark, 16% to 18% on the PRID2011 benchmark, 43% to
46% on the VIPeR benchmark, 34% to 53% on the CUHK01
benchmark and 21% to 62% on the CUHK03 benchmark.

1. Introduction
The task of person re-identification (re-id) is to match
pedestrian images observed from multiple cameras. It has
recently gained popularity in research community due to its
several important applications in video surveillance. An automated re-id system could save a lot of human labour in
exhaustively searching for a person of interest from a large
amount of video sequences.
Despite several years of research in the computer vision
community, person re-id is still a very challenging task and
remains unsolved due to (a) large variation in visual appearance (person’s appearance often undergoes large variations
across different camera views); (b) significant changes in
human poses at the time the image was captured; (c) large
amount of illumination changes and (d) background clutter
and occlusions. Moreover the problem becomes increas∗ Corresponding author: C. Shen (chhshen@gmail.com). This work
was in part supported by the Data to Decisions Cooperative Research Centre.

ingly difficult when persons share similar appearance, e.g.,
people wearing similar clothing style with similar color.
To address these challenges, existing research on this
topic has concentrated on the development of sophisticated
and robust features to describe the visual appearance under significant changes. However the system that relies
heavily on one specific type of visual cues, e.g., color, texture or shape, would not be practical and powerful enough
to discriminate individuals with similar visual appearance.
Existing studies have tried to address the above problem
by seeking a combination of robust and distinctive feature
representation of person’s appearance, ranging from color
histogram [12], spatial co-occurrence representation [40],
LBP [44], color SIFT [46], etc.
One simple approach to exploit multiple visual features
is to build an ensemble of distance functions, in which each
distance function is learned using a single feature and the
final distance is calculated from a weighted sum of these
distance functions [6, 44, 46]. However existing works on
person re-id often pre-define these weights, which need to
be re-estimated beforehand for different data sets. Since
different re-id benchmark data sets can have very different
characteristics, i.e., variation in view angle, lighting and occlusion, combining multiple distance functions using predetermined weights is undesirable as highly discriminative
features in one environment might become irrelevant in another environment.
In this paper, we introduce effective approaches to learn
weights of these distance functions. The first approach optimizes the relative distance using the triplet information and
the second approach maximizes the average rank-k recognition rate, in which k is chosen to be small, e.g., k < 10.
Setting the value of k to be small is crucial for many realworld applications since most surveillance operators typically inspect only the first ten or twenty items retrieved.
The main contributions of this paper are twofold: 1) We
propose two principled approaches to build an ensemble of
person re-id metrics. The first approach aims at maximizing
the relative distance between images of different individuals
and images of the same individual such that the CMC curve
approaches one with a minimal number of returned candidates. The second approach directly optimizes the probability that any of these top k matches are correct using struc-

