Multi-Objective Convolutional Learning for Face Labeling
Sifei Liu
UC Merced

Jimei Yang
UC Merced

Chang Huang
Baidu Research

Ming-Hsuan Yang
UC Merced

Abstract
This paper formulates face labeling as a conditional random field with unary and pairwise classifiers. We develop
a novel multi-objective learning method that optimizes a
single unified deep convolutional network with two distinct
non-structured loss functions: one encoding the unary label
likelihoods and the other encoding the pairwise label dependencies. Moreover, we regularize the network by using
a nonparametric prior as new input channels in addition to
the RGB image, and show that significant performance improvements can be achieved with a much smaller network
size. Experiments on both the LFW and Helen datasets
demonstrate state-of-the-art results of the proposed algorithm, and accurate labeling results on challenging images
can be obtained by the proposed algorithm for real-world
applications.

(a) input

(b) unary

(c) edge

(d) label

Figure 1. Face labeling on the LFW [10] and Helen [1] (a) input
images (b) pixel-wise label likelihoods (c) semantic edge maps
(d) face labeling results. Our algorithm first generates pixel-wise
label likelihoods and semantic edge maps, which are combined in
a CRF energy function to generate face labels. The images in (b)
are soft labels (probabilistic outputs) and images in (d) are hard
labels (excluding hair) which are shown in different colors. While
the pixel-wise maps alone are effective for labeling, the use of edge
maps further facilitates delineating the details, especially near the
class boundaries.

1. Introduction

for the pairwise term. The training process is carried out
through a multi-objective optimization, which minimizes
the losses of unary and pairwise terms respectively through
a unified convolutional network. Weight sharing is enforced between them so that the network is strengthened by
learning from both objectives. Compared to structured loss
CNNs, our method has two advantages. First, the training
process is as efficient as existing CNNs with non-structured
losses. Second, by converting the pairwise term into a logistic loss (edge versus non-edge), semantic image boundaries are learned for effective labeling. Our model is trained
on patches for flexibility. During the test stage, by making
some simple adjustments, we can apply our patch model
directly to a full image without patch cropping for efficient
pixel-wise label prediction. We apply the proposed learning
algorithm to a practical problem, face labeling that assigns
every pixel a facial component label, e.g. skin, nose, eyes
and mouth. Two examples are shown in Figure 1. Compared to facial landmarks, face labeling provides a better
intermediate representation for many face analysis, synthesis and editing tasks.

Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been
applied to image labeling and parsing problems [7, 4, 3, 13,
21]. As powerful end-to-end nonlinear classifiers, CNNs
generate more discriminative representations compared to
traditional methods based on hand-crafted features. Conditional random fields (CRFs) are another important class
of image labeling models [14, 5, 6, 2] that carry out structured prediction by considering label dependencies and allow flexible use of pre-trained image features. We are concerned with combining CNNs and CRFs for image labeling
by exploiting rich features from CNNs and structured output from CRFs [17, 23]. Considering a typical CRF energy
function with unary and pairwise terms, a straightforward
combination is to add CRF based structured losses on top
of CNNs. Learning CNNs with structured loss, however,
requires MAP inference of all the samples during training
cycles. On one hand, it significantly increases computational cost while restricting the training flexibility. On the
other hand, the direct combination of CNNs and CRFs with
structured loss may not guarantee convergence.
This paper presents a novel learning method by decomposing the structured loss into two distinct, non-structured
losses: softmax loss for the unary term and logistic loss

Faces are highly structured visual patterns. For image
labeling, we integrate a global facial prior into our learn1

