Tree Quantization for
Large-Scale Similarity Search and Classification
Artem Babenko
Yandex, Moscow
National Research University
Higher School of Economics

Victor Lempitsky
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
(Skoltech)
lempitsky@skoltech.ru

arbabenko@yandex-team.ru

Abstract

sion scheme, an input vector is approximated as a concatenation of M codewords (one codeword from each codebook). Product quantization implicitly relies on the limited
amount of correlation between the dimension groups, since
each codebook is learned independently from others. The
encoding process within PQ is very simple and fast, and
the computation of scalar product and distances between
a large number of PQ-compressed vectors and an uncompressed vector can be implemented very efficiently using
look-up tables.

We propose a new vector encoding scheme (tree quantization) that obtains lossy compact codes for highdimensional vectors via tree-based dynamic programming.
Similarly to several previous schemes such as product
quantization, these codes correspond to codeword numbers within multiple codebooks. We propose an integer
programming-based optimization that jointly recovers the
coding tree structure and the codebooks by minimizing the
compression error on a training dataset. In the experiments
with diverse visual descriptors (SIFT, neural codes, Fisher
vectors), tree quantization is shown to combine fast encoding and state-of-the-art accuracy in terms of the compression error, the retrieval performance, and the image classification error.

Recently, we have proposed an alternative compression
scheme called additive quantization (AQ) that pushes the
coding accuracy of PQ-based methods even further [3].
Similarly to PQ, AQ maintains a set of M codebooks. However, the codewords within the codebooks are full-length,
i.e. D-dimensional. During the compression stage AQ represents a vector as a sum of M codewords (one codeword
from each codebook). The vector code is thus the same
as within PQ, i.e. M codeword numbers. The additive nature of the compression means that the evaluation of scalar
products between AQ-compressed and uncompressed vectors can use the same look-up table trick and is thus very
fast. Evaluation of Euclidean distances takes slightly more
time or an extra byte of memory but is still efficient. In general, AQ achieves a significant boost in coding accuracy (for
the same code length) over PQ, which can be explained by
the lack of low-correlation assumption between dimension
groups. Furthermore, AQ codebooks possess an increased
number of parameters that can be adjusted at the codebook
learning stage in order to fit the data distribution.

1. Introduction
As very large datasets of high-dimensional vectors proliferate, machine learning, computer vision, and information retrieval systems that work with such datasets increasingly rely on lossy vector compression or hashing
schemes. A crucial requirement for these schemes is the
ability to evaluate distances and scalar products between
compressed and uncompressed vectors efficiently and without explicit decompression. At the moment, systems that
rely on the product quantization compression [10] are often
preferred to hashing approaches due to a more favourable
memory-accuracy tradeoff as evidenced by comparisons in
e.g. [8, 15].
Given a dataset of vectors in RD , product quantization
starts by splitting the vector dimensions into M groups.
Each dimension group is then quantized separately and
independently from others using codebooks of small size
(most often 256 codewords), whereas codewords in the
codebooks have the dimension D/M . In the PQ compres-

The main limitation of the AQ-compression is the inefficiency of the encoding step. As we show in [3], finding
the optimal combination of the codebook vectors is equivalent to the MAP-inference in the fully-connected Markov
random field with unstructured and highly non-submodular
pairwise potentials. As reported in [3] none of the standard MRF optimization methods [12] work well and there4321

