Hierarchical-PEP Model for Real-world Face Recognition
Haoxiang Li, Gang Hua
Stevens Institute of Technology
Hoboken, NJ 07030
{hli18, ghua}@stevens.edu

Abstract
Pose variation remains one of the major factors adversely affect the accuracy of real-world face recognition
systems. Inspired by the recently proposed probabilistic
elastic part (PEP) model and the success of the deep hierarchical architecture in a number of visual tasks, we propose the Hierarchical-PEP model to approach the unconstrained face recognition problem. We apply the PEP model
hierarchically to decompose a face image into face parts
at different levels of details to build pose-invariant partbased face representations. Following the hierarchy from
bottom-up, we stack the face part representations at each
layer, discriminatively reduce its dimensionality, and hence
aggregate the face part representations layer-by-layer to
build a compact and invariant face representation. The
Hierarchical-PEP model exploits the fine-grained structures of the face parts at different levels of details to address the pose variations. It is also guided by supervised
information in constructing the face part/face representations. We empirically verify the Hierarchical-PEP model on
two public benchmarks (i.e., the LFW and YouTube Faces)
and a face recognition challenge (i.e., the PaSC grand challenge) for image-based and video-based face verification.
The state-of-the-art performance demonstrates the potential of our method.

Figure 1. Pose variation: the same person looks different in varied
poses.

of addressing pose variation because it can greatly help relieve the adverse effects of the other visual variations.
A line of research approaches this problem by generating
the same-view face images given a face pair in presence of
pose variations. For example, Prabhu et al. [40] use 3D face
models to rotate the face image to an unseen view. Zhu et
al. [54] recover the canonical-view faces with deep neural
networks directly trained to predict the transformation from
multi-view face images to their canonical views. In these
methods, they try to holistically align faces to relieve the
pose variation.
Another set of methods resort to locate facial landmarks
to build pose-invariant face representations [10, 15]. For
example, Chen et al. [15] concatenate dense features around
the facial landmarks to build the face representation. The
pose-invariance is achieved in this way, because it always
extracts features from the face part surrounded around the
facial landmarks regardless of their locations in the image.
The elastic matching methods [20, 29, 30, 50] generalize this design. Li et al. [29, 30] present a probabilistic
elastic part (PEP) model unsupervisedly learned from face
image patches. The PEP model is a mixture of part models,
each of which implicitly defines a face part. The PEP model
looks for the image patches from these face parts for faces
in varied poses. It then constructs the face representation by
concatenating features from these selected image patches.
This procedure – locating the face parts and stacking the
features to build face representation – is demonstrated to
be effective by both Chen et al. [15] and Li et al. [29].
In extracting feature of the face part, Chen et al. [15] use
the high-dimensional stacked SIFT [33] features and Li et
al. [29] simply use the SIFT feature. Although low-level

1. Introduction
In real-world face recognition, the difficulty comes from
all kinds of visual variations including changes in expression, illumination, pose, and etc. Pose variation is one of
the major challenges among these. The same face in different poses can look drastically different to each other as
shown in Figure 1, Early works by Turk et al. [47] and Belhumeur et al. [4] in this area focus on recognizing well
aligned frontal faces. They empirically demonstrate that
frontal faces can be projected to a low-dimensional subspace invariant to variation in illumination and facial expressions [4]. This observation highlights the importance
1

