Image Segmentation in Twenty Questions
Christian Rupprecht1,2
1

Loı̈c Peter1

Nassir Navab1,2

Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany
2
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore MD, USA
{christian.rupprecht, peter, navab}@in.tum.de

Abstract
Consider the following scenario between a human user
and the computer. Given an image, the user thinks of an
object to be segmented within this picture, but is only allowed to provide binary inputs to the computer (yes or no).
In these conditions, can the computer guess this hidden segmentation by asking well-chosen questions to the user? We
introduce a strategy for the computer to increase the accuracy of its guess in a minimal number of questions. At
each turn, the current belief about the answer is encoded
in a Bayesian fashion via a probability distribution over
the set of all possible segmentations. To efficiently handle
this huge space, the distribution is approximated by sampling representative segmentations using an adapted version of the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm, whose proposal
moves build on a geodesic distance transform segmentation
method. Following a dichotomic search, the question halving the weighted set of samples is finally picked, and the
provided answer is used to update the belief for the upcoming rounds. The performance of this strategy is assessed on
three publicly available datasets with diverse visual properties. Our approach shows to be a tractable and very adaptive solution to this problem.

1. Introduction
Twenty Questions is a classical two-player game involving a questioner and an oracle. Before the game starts, the
oracle thinks about something (e.g. an object, an animal or a
character) which we will call the answer, and the questioner
is allowed to ask a series of binary questions to guess what
the answer is. While the game originally involves a human in the role of the oracle and another human as player,
the development of artificial intelligence techniques led to
softwares where the computer tries to guess what the human user has in mind [1, 2]. Going in the same direction,
we consider in this work the case of a computer playing the
Twenty Questions game with a human user in the role of the

oracle, where the expected answer is a binary segmentation
of a given image. We introduce a strategy for the computer
to provide a guess as accurate as possible in a limited number of questions. Alternatively, the proposed approach can
also be seen as an interactive segmentation task. The crucial characteristic of our scenario is that the user interaction
with the machine is restricted to binary inputs (yes/no) instead of the usual scribbles or bounding boxes [10]. This
setting is common to provide relevant feedback for interactive image retrieval [19, 24, 26] but was never considered
in the context of segmentation. Moreover, if combined with
e.g. a voice recognition system, our method can eventually
provide a hands-free segmentation technique, for which an
alternative solution was proposed by Sadeghi et al. [21] who
used an eye tracker for seed placement. This has potential
applications like segmentation of medical data in sterilized
operating room environments, where physical interactions
with objects have to be avoided.
Our method can be summarized as follows. At each turn,
the question to be posed consists in asking whether a wellchosen pixel is inside the hidden segmentation or not. The
choice of the location to ask about is made as to maximize
the information brought by the answer. More precisely, we
define for any possible segmentation a probability to have
been picked by the oracle. Each segmentation score is based
on two aspects: its intrinsic quality in terms of image partitioning (i.e. the homogeneity of the segmented object),
and its compatibility with the answers already collected.
Hence, this defines a probability distribution over the set
of possible segmentations S. In theory, the ideal question
choice would follow a divide and conquer approach and
halve S in two parts of approximately equal probabilities.
However, the huge size of S excludes the exhaustive computation of the aforementioned distribution, which we approximate instead by sampling a series of segmentations
proportionally to their probability of having been chosen
by the oracle. This sampling is performed via a Markov
Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) framework, which builds on
the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm [18] and consists in ex-

