segDeepM: Exploiting Segmentation and Context in Deep Neural Networks for
Object Detection
Yukun Zhu

Raquel Urtasun Ruslan Salakhutdinov
University of Toronto

Sanja Fidler

{yukun,urtasun,rsalakhu,fidler}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we propose an approach that exploits object segmentation in order to improve the accuracy of object
detection. We frame the problem as inference in a Markov
Random Field, in which each detection hypothesis scores
object appearance as well as contextual information using
Convolutional Neural Networks, and allows the hypothesis
to choose and score a segment out of a large pool of accurate object segmentation proposals. This enables the detector to incorporate additional evidence when it is available and thus results in more accurate detections. Our experiments show an improvement of 4.1% in mAP over the
R-CNN baseline on PASCAL VOC 2010, and 3.4% over the
current state-of-the-art, demonstrating the power of our approach.

Figure 1: Proposed segDeepM model.
generate a large pool of candidate boxes [23] and classify
them using CNNs [9]. The quality of such a detector thus
largely depends on the quality of the object hypotheses. Interestingly, however, using much better proposals obtained
via a high-end bottom-up segmentation approach [11] has
resulted only in small improvements in accuracy.
In this paper, we show how to exploit a small number of
accurate object segment proposals in order to significantly
improve object detection performance. We frame the detection problem as inference in a Markov Random Field as in
Figure 1, in which each detection hypothesis scores object
appearance as well as contextual information using Convolutional Neural Networks. Each hypothesis can choose and
score a segment out of a small pool of accurate object segmentation proposals. This enables our approach to place
more accurate object bounding boxes in parts of the image
where an object segmentation hypothesis [2] exists or where
strong contextual cues are available. We additionally show
that a significant performance boost can be obtained by a sequential approach, where the network iterates between adjusting its spatial scope (the bounding box) and classifying
its content. This strategy reduces the dependency on the
initial candidate boxes obtained by [23] and enables our approach to recover from the potentially bad initial localiza-

1. Introduction
In the past two years, Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) have revolutionized computer vision. They have
been applied to a variety of general vision problems, such
as recognition [15, 9], segmentation [11], stereo [18],
flow [24], and even text-from-image generation [13], consistently outperforming past work. This is mainly due to
their high generalization power achieved by learning complex, non-linear dependencies across millions of labelled
examples.
It has recently been shown that increasing the depth of
the network increases the performance by an additional impressive margin on the ImageNet challenge [21, 22]. It remains to be seen whether recognition can be solved by simply pushing the limits of computation (the size of the networks) and increasing the amount of the training data. We
believe that the main challenge in the next few years will be
to design computationally simpler and more efficient models that can achieve a similar or better performance compared to the very deep networks.
For object detection, a successful approach has been to
1

