Complexity-Adaptive Distance Metric for Object Proposals Generation
Yao Xiao

Cewu Lu

Efstratios Tsougenis

Yongyi Lu

Chi-Keung Tang

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{yxiaoab,lucewu,tsougenis,yluaw,cktang}@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
Distance metric plays a key role in grouping superpixels
to produce object proposals for object detection. We observe that existing distance metrics work primarily for low
complexity cases. In this paper, we develop a novel distance
metric for grouping two superpixels in high-complexity scenarios. Combining them, a complexity-adaptive distance
measure is produced that achieves improved grouping in
different levels of complexity. Our extensive experimentation shows that our method can achieve good results in the
PASCAL VOC 2012 dataset surpassing the latest state-ofthe-art methods.

1. Introduction
Object Proposals has become indispensable for object
detection, providing the latter with a set of image regions
where objects are likely to occur. A proposal generator
should produce an ideal number of candidate bounding
boxes to include most observable objects (high recall) in
a considerably short time (high efficiency).
Currently, the mainstream methods [19, 2] partition the
image into hundreds of superpixels, and then group them
under certain criteria to form object proposals. This strategy
is reasonable because an image object is composed of a set
of superpixels (or in fact, pixels). Much research has therefore been dedicated to seeking a better superpixels grouping
strategy.
A powerful distance metric is conducive to acceptable
grouping of superpixels regardless the grouping strategies
(e.g., greedy grouping, cluster-based grouping [17]). In
conventional methods [19], the distance metric computes
the difference between two superpixels in terms of an aggregate measure. That is, all the elements (superpixels) participate in calculating the measure. Take color cue as an
example [19]. Color histograms are computed to represent
a superpixels set which involves all superpixels in the set.
While existing distance metrics are well suited to low-

Figure 1. Color distance metrics. (a) The mean color is well behaved to delineate low-complexity superpixels, but (b) such aggregate measure fails to reflect the distance between two highcomplexity superpixel sets.

complexity superpixels grouping, they become less effective in high-complexity grouping scenarios. Figure 1(a)
shows that a typical low-complexity case. Here, the aggregate measure, mean color, can adequately capture the distance between the two superpixel sets. In a typical highcomplexity case, however, as shown in Figure 1(b), while
the mean color of the two superpixel sets are significantly
different, it is still reasonable to group them into a single
proposal, since the two superpixel sets can be well connected by superpixel A and B. Typical aggregate measures
fail to capture the inherent complexity when the superpixel
set contains highly diversified elements.
1

