MRF Optimization by Graph Approximation
Wonsik Kim∗ and Kyoung Mu Lee
Department of ECE, ASRI, Seoul National University, 151-742, Seoul, Korea
{ultra16, kyoungmu}@snu.ac.kr, http://cv.snu.ac.kr

Abstract

Original Function

Graph cuts-based algorithms have achieved great success in energy minimization for many computer vision applications. These algorithms provide approximated solutions for multi-label energy functions via move-making approach. This approach fuses the current solution with a proposal to generate a lower-energy solution. Thus, generating
the appropriate proposals is necessary for the success of the
move-making approach. However, not much research efforts has been done on the generation of “good” proposals,
especially for non-metric energy functions. In this paper,
we propose an application-independent and energy-based
approach to generate “good” proposals. With these proposals, we present a graph cuts-based move-making algorithm called GA-fusion (fusion with graph approximationbased proposals). Extensive experiments support that our
proposal generation is effective across different classes of
energy functions. The proposed algorithm outperforms others both on real and synthetic problems.

1. Introduction
Markov random field (MRF) has been used for numerous
areas in computer vision [25]. MRFs are generally formulated as follows. Given a graph G = (V, E), the energy
function of the pairwise MRF is given by
E(x) =

X

θp (xp ) + λ

p∈V

X

θpq (xp , xq ),

(1)

(p,q)∈E

where V is the set of nodes, E is the set of edges, xp ∈
{1, 2, · · · , L} is the label assigned on node p, and λ is the
weight factor between unary and pairwise terms. Optimization of the MRF model is challenging because finding the
global minimum of the energy function (1) is NP-hard in
general cases.
There have been numerous researches on optimizing
aforementioned function. Although they have been successful for many different applications, they still end up
∗ Currently at Samsung Electronics

E(x)

current
labeling

xcurrent

Approx. Function
current
labeling

E'(x)

optimize

current fusion
proposal
labeling

proposal

x'

next
labeling

Figure 1. The basic idea of the overall algorithm. The original
function is approximated via graph approximation. The approximated function is optimized, and the solution is used as a proposal
for the original problem.

with unsatisfactory solutions when it comes to extremely
difficult problems. In those kind of problems, many graph
cuts-based algorithms cannot label sufficient number of
nodes due to the strong non-submodularity and dual decomposition cannot decrease gaps due to many frustrated
cycles [24]. In this paper, we address this problem by introducing simple graph cuts-based algorithm with the right
choice of proposal generation scheme.
Graph cuts-based algorithms have attracted much attention as an optimization method for MRFs [18, 6, 7, 2, 15].
Graph cuts can obtain the exact solution in polynomial time
when the energy function (1) is submodular [5]. Even if
the function is not submodular, a partial solution can be obtained with unlabeled nodes using roof duality (QPBO) [11,
22]. Graph cuts have also been used to solve multi-label energy functions. For this purpose, move-making algorithms
have been proposed [7], in which graph cuts optimize a sequence of binary functions to make moves.
In a move-making algorithm, the most important decision is the choice of appropriate move-spaces. For example, in α-expansion1, move-spaces are determined by the
selected α value. Simple α-expansion strategy has obtained
satisfactory results when the energy function is metric. Re1 In this paper, α-expansion always refers to QPBO-based α-expansion
unless noted otherwise.

