Intra-Frame Deblurring by Leveraging Inter-Frame Camera Motion
Haichao Zhang

Jianchao Yang

Duke University, NC
hczhang1@gmail.com

Adobe Research, CA
jiayang@adobe.com

Abstract
Camera motion introduces motion blur, degrading the
quality of video. A video deblurring method is proposed
based on two observations: (𝑖) camera motion within
capture of each individual frame leads to motion blur;
(𝑖𝑖) camera motion between frames yields inter-frame misalignment that can be exploited for blur removal. The
proposed method effectively leverages the information distributed across multiple video frames due to camera motion,
jointly estimating the motion between consecutive frames
and blur within each frame. This joint analysis is crucial
for achieving effective restoration by leveraging temporal
information. Extensive experiments are carried out on
synthetic data as well as real-world blurry videos. Comparisons with several state-of-the-art methods verify the
effectiveness of the proposed method.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed approach. (a-b) two blurry
video frames (c) optical flow estimated directly on the blurry
images (d-f) the output of the proposed method: (d-e) deblurred
video frames and blur kernels (f) optical flow (with color encoding [22]) jointly estimated with blur using the proposed method
(for comparison, the ground-truth flow estimated on the original
sharp images is shown on the top-right of (f)).

1. Introduction

of blur variation due to camera motion, different frames
may contain complementary information about the latent
scene, which can be exploited for robust restoration, as
show in Figure 1. However, direct application of multiimage-based deblurring methods typically does not always
produce desirable results, mainly due to artifacts caused by
inter-frame camera and/or object motion [5]. While this
often requires accurate motion estimation to better exploit
complementary information across frames, establishing the
correspondence between different frames is challenging due
to the inherent matching ambiguity caused by the motion
blur.
We argue that camera motion is both an enemy and a
friend for restoration, particularly in the context of video.
On the one hand, camera motion occurring during the exposure period (within capture of a single frame) introduces
blur, which smears detailed structures. On the other hand,
due to inter-frame motion, different observations (frames)
typically have different blurs, thus containing complementary information. This therefore provides more constraints
for the ill-posed inverse problem, and hence is beneficial
both in blur-kernel estimation and sharp-video-frame recov-

Camera shake is a typical problem encountered during
video capture, especially when using light-weight handheld devices, such as cell-phones. Conventional video
stabilization techniques compensate for the irregular interframe motion caused by camera shake, but such techniques
do not help with camera-shake-induced intra-frame blur.
Even worse, the problem of intra-frame motion blur often
becomes more pronounced after stabilization, because of
inconsistencies with the modified stabilization-induced motion path [16]. Blurry frames often cause a flickering effect
when viewed in real time, leading to degraded quality in
terms of visual perception. In this work, we aim to present
a video deblurring method to handle this problem.
The task of video deblurring is constrained by several
challenges. The blur introduced by the camera shake is
typically spatially varying, and therefore estimating the blur
from a single frame is challenging. Also, recovering a
deblurred frame from only a single frame typically introduces ringing artifacts. Therefore, to achieve robust video
deblurring, it is desirable to go beyond a single frame and
exploit information contained in multiple frames. Because
1

