Semantic Part Segmentation using Compositional Model combining Shape and
Appearance
Jianyu Wang, Alan Yuille
University of California, Los Angeles
wjyouch@ucla.edu, yuille@stat.ucla.edu

Abstract

tree$

horse$

In this paper, we study the problem of semantic part segmentation for animals. This is more challenging than standard object detection, object segmentation and pose estimation tasks because semantic parts of animals often have similar appearance and highly varying shapes. To tackle these
challenges, we build a mixture of compositional models to
represent the object boundary and the boundaries of semantic parts. And we incorporate edge, appearance, and semantic part cues into the compositional model. Given partlevel segmentation annotation, we develop a novel algorithm to learn a mixture of compositional models under various poses and viewpoints for certain animal classes. Furthermore, a linear complexity algorithm is offered for efficient inference of the compositional model using dynamic
programming. We evaluate our method for horse and cow
using a newly annotated dataset on Pascal VOC 2010 which
has pixelwise part labels. Experimental results demonstrate
the effectiveness of our method.

grass$

(a)$

(c)$

(e)$

(b)$

(d)$

(f)$

Figure 1: Different visual recognition tasks: (a) semantic
labeling with pixelwise object and background label. (b)
object detection which outputs bounding box. (c) part detection which gives bounding box for part. (d,e,f) semantic part segmentation with pixelwise part label. We study
the semantic part segmentation problem in this paper. Best
viewed in color.

tic part segmentation for animals in this paper. Since animals often have homogeneous appearance (e.g., furs) on the
whole body, mid-level segmentation methods [6, 2] could
not output quality proposals for semantic parts. Besides,
current classifers are not able to distinguish between different semantic parts since they often have similar appearance.
Thus we could not simply take the popular object segmentation pipeline [5, 1] by treating each semantic part as an
object. This tells us that the shape information of semantic parts are necessary for part segmentation. But there is
a large amount of variability of part shapes due to different animal viewpoints and poses (see (d,e,f) in Figure 1).
Therefore, it is very challenging to build a model that effectively combines animal appearance, part shape and spatial
relation among parts under varying viewpoints and poses,
while still allowing efficient learning and inference.
Inspired by [19, 34, 32, 20], compositional model is able
to capture long-range relations among parts while still en-

1. Introduction
The past few years have witnessed significant progress
on various object-level visual recognition tasks, such as object detection [13, 17], object segmentation [5, 1, 7], etc.
Understanding how different parts of an object are related
and where the parts are located have been an increasingly
important topic in computer vision. There is extensive study
on some part-level visual recognition tasks, such as human
pose estimation (predicting joints) [30, 27] and landmark localization (predicting keypoints) [3, 22]. But there are only
a few pieces of works on semantic part segmentation, such
as human parsing [4, 10, 9, 29] and car parsing [26, 11, 23].
In some applications (e.g., activity analysis), it would be of
great use if computers can output richer part segmentation
instead of just giving a set of keypoints/landmarks, a bounding box or an entire object.
We make an attempt on the challenging task of seman1

