Fixation Bank: Learning to Reweight Fixation Candidates
Jiaping Zhao, Christian Siagian, Laurent Itti
University of Southern California
{jiapingz, siagian, itti}@usc.edu

Abstract

feature integration [28, 21], while others [17] have raised
psychophysical arguments against linear summation strategies. Since neural mechanisms underlying visual attention
need further exploration, here we propose a data-driven approach using human eye-tracking data to learn associations
between patterns of feature responses and human fixations.

Predicting where humans will fixate in a scene has many
practical applications. Biologically-inspired saliency models decompose visual stimuli into feature maps across multiple scales, and then integrate different feature channels,
e.g., in a linear, MAX, or MAP. However, to date there is no
universally accepted feature integration mechanism. Here,
we propose a new a data-driven solution: We first build a
“fixation bank” by mining training samples, which maintains the association between local patterns of activation,
in 4 feature channels (color, intensity, orientation, motion)
around a given location, and corresponding human fixation density at that location. During testing, we decompose
feature maps into blobs, extract local activation patterns
around each blob, match those patterns against the fixation bank by group lasso, and determine weights of blobs
based on reconstruction errors. Our final saliency map is
the weighted sum of all blobs. Our system thus incorporates
some amount of spatial and featural context information
into the location-dependent weighting mechanism. Tested
on two standard data sets (DIEM for training and test, and
CRCNS for test only; total of 23,670 training and 15,793 +
4,505 test frames), our model slightly but significantly outperforms 7 state-of-the-art saliency models.

Several computational saliency models learn from biological or behavioral data. Itti and Koch [13] learned feature
map weights that would render some specific objects more
salient, from manual ground-truth annotations around training exemplars of these objects. Zhao and Koch [33] used
adaboost to learn visual saliency by taking into account feature selection, weight assignments, and integration in a unified framework. Kienzle et al [16] directly learned a fixation
model from fixated and non-fixated image patches using
SVM. Judd et al [15] extracted low, middle and high-level
features from images, and used SVM to learn the mapping
from feature to fixations. All these works learn saliency in a
pixel-wise fashion and ignore neighboring-pixel dependencies. Moreover, none of them take into account contextual
information, although Judd et al [15] took advantage of semantic faces. While bottom-up, low-level properties of a
visual scene play a significant role in visual attention, undoubtedly high-level factors such as scene context [9] and
search goals [23] are not negligible. Torralba [27] explicitly
model global scene contexts in a visual search task. While
their method improves gaze prediction, the drawback is the
need for sufficient amounts of labelled data to build different contextual models for different objects. A more recent
work [24] studied saliency in dynamic scenes and proposed
to use Gaussian blobs on the GBVS [8] saliency map as
fixation candidates. They used random forest regression to
learn transition probabilities between fixation candidates on
contiguous frames to do fixation candidate selection.

1. Introduction
Saliency models have been developed to measure the
likelihood of a location to attract human attention [14]. Typical computational saliency models employ the following
paradigm: (1) compute individual activation maps in several feature channels, (2) combine activation maps into a
master saliency map [14, 8, 33]. Several bottom-up features
including color contrast, intensity, orientation, spatial frequency, and motion, are typically extracted, and they are
then integrated linearly [14], in a MAX [17], or MAP [29]
manner into a master saliency map.
Yet, to date, there is no universally accepted feature integration mechanism for visual attention allocation; some
physiological and psychophysical studies support linear

Inspired by object bank [19] and action bank [25] for
image and video activity representation, we present fixation
bank to model fixation allocations. We use primitive features, including color (C), intensity (I), orientation (O) and
motion (M), extracted from visual stimuli, along with associated inter-observer (IO) fixation maps obtained from
human eye-tracking data. During training, the feature maps
1

