Fusing Subcategory Probabilities for Texture Classification
Yang Song1 , Weidong Cai1 , Qing Li1 , Fan Zhang1 , David Dagan Feng1 , Heng Huang2
1
BMIT Research Group, School of IT, University of Sydney, Australia
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Texas, Arlington, USA

Abstract

subcategory-level has also been explored [3, 8] by discovering subtypes in a texture category based on the concept of
visual attributes [16, 2, 4, 24, 32].
On the other hand, the classification models used in texture classification are usually quite standard. The most often
used classifiers include the nearest neighbor (NN) approach
[41, 44, 9, 40, 38], and support vector machine (SVM) with
various kernel types [45, 29, 37, 35, 34, 8]. SVM is widely
recognized as highly effective and usually boosts the discriminative power of feature descriptors compared to NN.
However, it is a monolithic model and its performance can
be affected with large intra-class variations especially when
there is considerable inter-class overlap in the feature space.
The sub-categorization method has recently been proposed to alleviate the problem of intra-class variations and
inter-class ambiguity. It works by identifying the visual
subcategory structures of individual classes and modeling
the different subcategories independently. This could facilitate better separation between different classes compared
to generating a monolithic model for the entire feature
space. The sub-categorization method generally contains
three main components: generation of subcategories, classifier learning for individual subcategories, and fusion of
subcategory results. Unsupervised clustering is usually performed for subcategory generation [46, 15, 1, 47]. Samples
from different classes are incorporated as additional constraints to improve the clustering performance [12]. Fusion of subcategory results is typically performed by max
or mean pooling [46, 15, 1, 47], and second layer of classifier learning [19, 12]. The clustering step could also be discriminative and integrated with the classification objective
[20]. Such methods have been shown to improve the classification performance in various applications, including face
recognition [46], traffic sign categorization [15], object detection and recognition [19, 1, 47, 12], and discovering head
orientations [20].
Different from the current studies in texture classification, which mostly focus on designing new texture feature
descriptors, our aim is to improve the classification accuracy with a new classification model using existing features.

Texture, as a fundamental characteristic of objects, has
attracted much attention in computer vision research. Performance of texture classification is however still lacking for
some challenging cases, largely due to the high intra-class
variation and low inter-class distinction. To tackle these issues, in this paper, we propose a sub-categorization model
for texture classification. By clustering each class into subcategories, classification probabilities at the subcategorylevel are computed based on between-subcategory distinctiveness and within-subcategory representativeness. These
subcategory probabilities are then fused based on their contribution levels and cluster qualities. This fused probability
is added to the multiclass classification probability to obtain the final class label. Our method was applied to texture
classification on three challenging datasets – KTH-TIPS2,
FMD and DTD, and has shown excellent performance in
comparison with the state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
Texture provides important information for many computer vision applications, such as material classification and
scene and object recognition. Accurate classification of texture images is however quite challenging. Some of the main
challenges include the wide variety of natural texture patterns and large intra-class variation caused by illumination
and geometric changes, and relatively low inter-class distinction [26, 41].
To tackle these challenges, extensive research has been
conducted to design highly discriminative and descriptive
texture features. Local texture descriptors have been the
predominant approaches with different ways of keypoint
selection, local descriptor design and histogram encoding [31, 25, 45, 29, 40, 37, 8]. Another research focus is to incorporate feature invariance to key transformations to accommodate the intra-class variations and enhance the discriminative capability of texture descriptors
[27, 41, 44, 9, 38, 35, 21, 34]. Classification at the finer
1

