SOM: Semantic Obviousness Metric for Image Quality Assessment

Peng Zhang, Wengang Zhou, Lei Wu, Houqiang Li
Department of Electronic Engineering and Information Science, University of Science and Technology of China
pzhangoo@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zhwg@ustc.edu.cn, wuleibig@gmail.com, lihq@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

ple, image quality can be used to measure video quality [25]
and to guide an image compression scheme [6].
According to the existence of non-distorted reference
images, IQA algorithms can be classified into three categories: full-reference IQA (FR-IQA), no-reference IQA
(NR-IQA) and reduced-reference IQA (RR-IQA).
FR-IQA methods [20, 29, 26, 24] require the corresponding non-distorted reference image to predict visual quality
of a distorted image. Most of these algorithms estimate
visual image quality based on the difference between distorted image and the corresponding reference image. Recent FR-IQA methods usually adopt a top-down framework [11, 29, 24], trying to model the function of human visual system based on some global assumptions on
it. Examples of state-of-the-art FR-IQA algorithms include
FSIM [29], VIF [20], VSNR [3]. With reference images, the
image quality scores produced by FR-IQA methods have
high correlation with human perceptual quality.
NR-IQA measures try to estimate the human perceptual quality by extracting discriminative features from distorted images. Most of the traditional NR-IQA algorithms [16, 15, 19, 3, 29, 22, 8] design features based
on Natural Scene Statistics (NSS). NSS based approaches
process images with certain type of filters, then the responses are used to extract features. Some typical transforms and filters include DCT transform [15, 19], wavelet
transform [16, 3] and Gabor filter [29]. NR-IQA can be further classified into two categories: distortion-specific NRIQA and non-distortion-specific NR-IQA.
Existing IQA methods measure the image quality from
signal level rather than semantic sense. FR-IQA methods like [20, 29], NR-IQA algorithms like [15, 3], NSSbased approaches like [15, 29] and training-based methods
like [28, 28], even the CNN architecture in [10] all depend
on features based on pixel-level or patch-level local characteristic. However, the analysis of eye tracking data [9]
shows that most of the time human focus on object-like regions when looking at an image. Therefore, some objectlevel factors should be explored for image quality assess-

Image quality assessment (IQA) tries to estimate human
perception based image visual quality in an objective manner. Existing approaches target this problem with or without
reference images. For no-reference image quality assessment, there is no given reference image or any knowledge
of the distortion type of the image. Previous approaches
measure the image quality from signal level rather than semantic analysis. They typically depend on various features
to represent local characteristic of an image.
In this paper we propose a new no-reference (NR) image quality assessment (IQA) framework based on semantic
obviousness. We discover that semantic-level factors affect
human perception of image quality. With such observation,
we explore semantic obviousness as a metric to perceive
objects of an image. We propose to extract two types of
features, one to measure the semantic obviousness of the
image and the other to discover local characteristic. Then
the two kinds of features are combined for image quality
estimation. The principles proposed in our approach can
also be incorporated with many existing IQA algorithms to
boost their performance. We evaluate our approach on the
LIVE dataset. Our approach is demonstrated to be superior to the existing NR-IQA algorithms and comparable to
the state-of-the-art full-reference IQA (FR-IQA) methods.
Cross-dataset experiments show the generalization ability
of our approach.

1. Introduction
This paper proposes a framework based on semantic obviousness to predict the quality of distorted images to match
human perception of image quality. This work targets at the
non-distortion-specific NR-IQA problem, which is thought
as the most challenging IQA problem since neither knowledge of the distortion type nor the reference image is available. Image quality is a fundamental metric in many computer vision and image processing applications. For exam1

