Reconstructing the World* in Six Days
*(As Captured by the Yahoo 100 Million Image Dataset)
Jared Heinly, Johannes L. Schönberger, Enrique Dunn, Jan-Michael Frahm
Department of Computer Science, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
{jheinly,jsch,dunn,jmf}@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
We propose a novel, large-scale, structure-from-motion
framework that advances the state of the art in data scalability from city-scale modeling (millions of images) to
world-scale modeling (several tens of millions of images)
using just a single computer. The main enabling technology
is the use of a streaming-based framework for connected
component discovery. Moreover, our system employs an
adaptive, online, iconic image clustering approach based
on an augmented bag-of-words representation, in order to
balance the goals of registration, comprehensiveness, and
data compactness. We demonstrate our proposal by operating on a recent publicly available 100 million image crowdsourced photo collection containing images geographically
distributed throughout the entire world. Results illustrate
that our streaming-based approach does not compromise
model completeness, but achieves unprecedented levels of
efficiency and scalability.

1. Introduction
For decades, modeling the world from images has been
a major goal of computer vision, enabling a wide range
of applications including virtual reality, image-based localization, and autonomous navigation. One of the most
diverse data sources for modeling is Internet photo collections, and the computer vision community has made
tremendous progress in large-scale structure-from-motion
(LS-SfM) from Internet datasets over the last decade. However, utilizing this wealth of information for LS-SfM remains a challenging problem due to the ever-increasing
amount of image data. For example, it is estimated that
10% of all photos have been taken in the last year alone [1].
In a short period of time, research in large-scale modeling
has progressed from modeling using several thousand images [25, 26] to modeling from city-scale datasets of several million [9]. Major research challenges that these approaches have focused on are:

Figure 1. Examples of our world-scale reconstructed models.

• Data Robustness: Enable the modeling from unorganized and heterogeneous Internet photo collections.
• Compute & Storage Scalability: Achieve efficiency
to meet the true scale of Internet photo collections.
• Registration Comprehensiveness: Identify as many
camera-to-camera associations as possible.
• Model Completeness: Build 3D scene models that are
as extensive and panoramic as possible.
In practice, these goals have been prioritized differently
by existing LS-SfM frameworks [25, 26, 4, 3, 9, 24]. The
approach of Frahm et al. [9] emphasizes scalability to enable modeling from millions of images. While it achieves
impressive city-scale models, this emphasis leads to limitations in the model completeness. In contrast, the approach
of Agarwal et al. [4, 3] prioritizes model completeness,
but can only model from hundreds of thousands of images,
instead of millions. We propose a novel structure-frommotion framework that advances the state of the art in scalability from city-scale modeling to world-scale modeling
(several tens of millions of images) using just a single computer. Moreover, our approach does not compromise model
completeness, but achieves results that are on par or beyond
the state of the art in efficiency and scalability of LS-SfM
systems. We demonstrate this scalability by performing 3D
reconstructions from the 100 million image world-scale Yahoo Flickr Creative Commons dataset [2, 28]. Our method

