Virtual View Networks for Object Reconstruction
João Carreira, Abhishek Kar, Shubham Tulsiani and Jitendra Malik
University of California, Berkeley - Berkeley, CA 94720
❢carreira,akar,shubtuls,malik❣@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
All that structure from motion algorithms “see” are sets
of 2D points. We show that these impoverished views of
the world can be faked for the purpose of reconstructing
objects in challenging settings, such as from a single image, or from a few ones far apart, by recognizing the object
and getting help from a collection of images of other objects from the same class. We synthesize virtual views by
computing geodesics on networks connecting objects with
similar viewpoints, and introduce techniques to increase the
specificity and robustness of factorization-based object reconstruction in this setting. We report accurate object shape
reconstruction from a single image on challenging PASCAL
VOC data, which suggests that the current domain of applications of rigid structure-from-motion techniques may be
significantly extended.

1. Introduction
Modern structure from motion (SfM) and multiview
stereo approaches [45, 12, 18] are widely used to recover
viewpoint and shape information of objects and scenes in
realistic settings, but require multiple images with overlapping fields of view. If only a single image of the target object is available, or if multiple ones are available but from
viewpoints far apart, these methods are, respectively, inapplicable or prone to fail.
Here we aim to extend SfM-style techniques to these
cases by incorporating recognition. Once an object is recognized into some potentially broad class such as ”cars” or
”aeroplanes”, one can leverage a reusable collection of images of similar objects to aid reconstruction. This is in the
spirit of recent papers on face reconstruction using automatically learned morphable models [31, 30] but we target
generic categories and use SfM techniques. Our main insight is the following: SfM algorithms inhabit a rudimentary visual world made of 2D points in correspondence and
these are all they “see”. In this visual world, novel views
can be faked more easily than in ours, where light complicates matters. Our idea, illustrated in fig. 1 is to synthesize

Figure 1. Our goal is to reconstruct an object from a single image using structure from motion techniques on virtual views obtained by aligning points on a regular grid on the test object
(shown on top) with points on similar grids defined on objects in a
reusable collection. Accurate alignment is achieved by computing
geodesics on virtual view networks, VVN in short, which induce
smooth rotations through the class object collection and simplify
matching. Our approach assumes object classification, localization and viewpoint detection as inputs and produces a point cloud
(here shown for different camera azimuths on the left and different
elevations on the right). Better seen on a computer screen with
color and zoom.

virtual (SfM) views of the target object by aligning it with
images of different instances from the same class then employing robust rigid SfM techniques to reconstruct its visible surfaces. This idea is compatible with findings that human perception of structure from motion is robust to small
shape deformations of the object [27] and prefers to interpret them as manifestations of a rigid object with slightly
altered shape instead of a non-rigid object [51].
The main technical challenge we face is the need to align
the target object with every different object in a collection,
which may be pictured with arbitrary viewpoint displacements, all the way up to 180 degrees from the viewpoint of
the target object. There is no dense 2D alignment technique
that we know of that is prepared for such large viewpoint
variation, so we propose a new one: instead of attempting
to match the target object with each object in the collection

