New Insights into Laplacian Similarity Search
Xiao-Ming Wu1 Zhenguo Li2 Shih-Fu Chang1
1
Department of Electrical Engineering, Columbia University
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Hong Kong
{xmwu,sfchang}@ee.columbia.edu

Abstract
Graph-based computer vision applications rely critically
on similarity metrics which compute the pairwise similarity
between any pair of vertices on graphs. This paper investigates the fundamental design of commonly used similarity metrics, and provides new insights to guide their use in
practice. In particular, we introduce a family of similarity
metrics in the form of (L + αΛ)−1 , where L is the graph
Laplacian, Λ is a positive diagonal matrix acting as a regularizer, and α is a positive balancing factor. Such metrics respect graph topology when α is small, and reproduce
well-known metrics such as hitting times and the pseudoinverse of graph Laplacian with different regularizer Λ.
This paper is the first to analyze the important impact of
selecting Λ in retrieving the local cluster from a seed. We
find that different Λ can lead to surprisingly complementary
behaviors: Λ = D (degree matrix) can reliably extract the
cluster of a query if it is sparser than surrounding clusters,
while Λ = I (identity matrix) is preferred if it is denser
than surrounding clusters. Since in practice there is no reliable way to determine the local density in order to select
the right model, we propose a new design of Λ that automatically adapts to the local density. Experiments on image
retrieval verify our theoretical arguments and confirm the
benefit of the proposed metric. We expect the insights of our
theory to provide guidelines for more applications in computer vision and other domains.

1. Introduction
Quite a few computer vision applications have been successfully modeled on graphs, including image segmentation
[21, 3, 7, 28, 15], image retrieval [29, 8, 5, 16, 10], manifold learning [24, 14, 27, 2, 22], and face recognition [9]. A
central element in various graph-based applications is the
notion of similarity between vertices. Well-known similarity metrics include personalized PageRank [20], hitting
and commute times [17], and the pseudo-inverse of graph
Laplacian [6]. Despite their popularity, the understanding

li.zhenguo@huawei.com

of their behaviors is far from complete, and their use in
practice is mostly guided by empirical trials and error analysis. This paper bridges this gap by investigating the fundamental design of commonly used similarity metrics, revealing their hidden assumptions, characterizing their behaviors, and solving the model selection problem.
We propose to study a family of graph similarity metrics in the form of M = (L + αΛ)−1 , where L is the graph
Laplacian matrix, Λ is a positive diagonal matrix acting as a
regularizer, and α is a positive balancing factor controlling
the degree of regularization. Our motivations are as follows.
First, unlike metrics such as commute times which do not
capture the global graph structure in large random neighborhood graphs [23], M is shown to respect the graph structure
when α is small [25]. Second, as shown in this paper, given
a vertex as query, ranking by M converges to a meaningful
limit when α → 0 (see Sec. 2). In contrast, other metrics
with balancing parameters such as personalized PageRank
[20] and manifold ranking [29] converge to uninformative
results that are solely determined by vertex degrees, making it sensitive to select the appropriate balancing parameter. Third, we will show that M unifies several well-known
metrics with different Λ. For example, with Λ = D (degree
matrix), M corresponds to the hitting times and the degree
normalized personalized PageRank [1]; and with Λ = I
(identity matrix), M corresponds to the the pseudo-inverse
of graph Laplacian. This unified view opens the door to
compare and analyze these otherwise irrelevant metrics under a single framework.
One of the main contributions of this paper is to provide
a unified analysis to reveal the important impact of selecting the regularizer Λ in retrieving the local cluster from a
seed. We find that different Λ can lead to surprisingly complementary behaviors. Λ = D works amazingly well in
extracting the cluster sparser than its surrounding clusters
but is less preferred than Λ = I the other way around. On
the contrary, Λ = I is particularly desirable if the cluster is
denser than its surrounding clusters but is much worse than
Λ = D otherwise. These findings allow us to select the better metric for retrieval if the density of the cluster of interest

