Line Drawing Interpretation in a Multi-View Context
Jean-Dominique FAVREAU
Florent LAFARGE
INRIA Sophia-Antipolis, France

Adrien BOUSSEAU

firstname.lastname@inria.fr

Abstract
Many design tasks involve the creation of new objects
in the context of an existing scene. Existing work in computer vision only provides partial support for such tasks.
On the one hand, multi-view stereo algorithms allow the reconstruction of real-world scenes, while on the other hand
algorithms for line-drawing interpretation do not take context into account. Our work combines the strength of these
two domains to interpret line drawings of imaginary objects
drawn over photographs of an existing scene. The main
challenge we face is to identify the existing 3D structure
that correlates with the line drawing while also allowing
the creation of new structure that is not present in the real
world. We propose a labeling algorithm to tackle this problem, where some of the labels capture dominant orientations
of the real scene while a free label allows the discovery of
new orientations in the imaginary scene. We illustrate our
algorithm by interpreting line drawings for urban planing,
home remodeling, furniture design and cultural heritage.

1. Introduction
Multi-view stereo greatly facilitates modeling of realword scenes, but is of little help for modeling imaginary
scenes. Our work is motivated by the observation that designers and architects often create imaginary objects as a
complement to an existing scene. Common modeling in
context tasks include remodeling or extending a building,
designing custom furniture to fit in a leaving room, or creating archaeological reconstitutions from ruins. We describe
an algorithm that assists such modeling tasks by estimating a 3D model from a single line drawing traced over one
picture of a multi-view dataset.
Recovering a 3D object from a single line drawing is
a long-standing problem in computer vision because of
the infinity of shapes that can project on the same input [2]. Existing methods resolve such ambiguity by trying to enforce a variety of regularities (symmetry, parallelism, orthogonality, minimal standard deviation of angles)
[16, 18, 6, 15, 17, 28]. However, identifying regularity cues

from the drawing alone is difficult because typical line configurations often have multiple concurrent interpretations.
Instead of using arbitrary regularity cues, we propose to
consider the existing scene as a flexible context-driven regularizer for the new content. In particular, we leverage the
fact that man-made environments are often composed of a
small set of dominant planes – although not necessarily orthogonal – and that parts of the extensions drawn by designers follow a similar structure.
Our algorithm takes as input an unordered set of photographs of a scene, along with a drawing composed of intersecting line segments. We first extract the dominant orientations of the scene using standard multi-view stereo techniques. Next, the core technical contribution of our work
resides in a labeling algorithm that assigns each polygon in
the drawing to either one orientation of the existing scene,
or to an unknown orientation. While we require that at least
some of the polygons in the drawing have the same orientation as some planes in the scene, our algorithm uses this
3D information to bootstrap the reconstruction of polygons
with arbitrary orientations.
We demonstrate the flexibility of our algorithm with several reconstruction scenarios in architecture, furniture design and archeology.

2. Related work
Our work is related to object reconstruction and modeling as well as line drawing interpretation. In this section
we detail the existing work that most inspired our approach,
we refer the interested reader to surveys of these fields for a
more general overview [19, 20, 7].
Multi-view reconstruction of man-made environments.
Scenes often contain dominant structures that can greatly
constrain the multi-view stereo problem. In particular,
buildings are often composed of planar surfaces [5, 24, 4,
10] that are mutually orthogonal [12, 26]. Our method also
exploits the inherent structure of man-made environments.
However, while prior work detects planar surfaces to regularize the multi-view reconstruction, we use the dominant

