3D Reconstruction in the Presence of Glasses by Acoustic and Stereo Fusion
http://vis.uky.edu/˜gravity/Research/audiofusion

Mao Ye
Univ. of Kentucky
Lexington, USA

Yu Zhang
Nanjing Univ.
Nanjing, China

Ruigang Yang
Univ. of Kentucky
Lexington, USA

Dinesh Manocha
Univ. of North Carolina
Chapel Hill, NC, USA

mao.ye@uky.edu

zhangyu606@gmail.com

r.yang@uky.edu

dm@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
We present a practical and inexpensive method to reconstruct 3D scenes that include piece-wise planar transparent
objects. Our work is motivated by the need for automatically generating 3D models of interior scenes, in which
glass structures are common. These large structures are
often invisible to cameras or even our human visual system.
Existing 3D reconstruction methods for transparent objects
are usually not applicable in such a room-size reconstruction setting. Our approach augments a regular depth camera (e.g., the Microsoft Kinect camera) with a single ultrasonic sensor, which is able to measure distance to any objects, including transparent surfaces. We present a novel
sensor fusion algorithm that first segments the depth map
into different categories such as opaque/transparent/infinity
(e.g., too far to measure) and then updates the depth map
based on the segmentation outcome. Our current hardware
setup can generate only one additional point measurement
per frame, yet our fusion algorithm is able to generate satisfactory reconstruction results based on our probabilistic
model. We highlight the performance in many challenging
indoor benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Imaging and reconstructing the 3D structure of the scene
have been an active area of computer vision research for the
past decades. Given the rapid development of range sensors such as ToF (time-of-flight) cameras, laser scanners,
and stereo cameras, 3D point clouds with sufficient accuracy can be easily generated for 3D reconstruction. On the
other hand, many indoor scenes consist of transparent and
refractive objects, which can cause severe artifacts in reconstructed results. Overall, 3D reconstruction of non-diffuse
objects remains a challenging problem in the field.
Some techniques have been proposed that can generate
impressive results using specialized setup, e.g., laser plus
thermal cameras [5], or fluorescent liquid [9]. To the best
of our knowledge, however, the reconstruction of building

interiors in the presence of large glasses structure has not
been addressed. Glasses are commonly used in building interiors and are a key part of modern architectures. Many
of these glasses structures are completely transparent. Furthermore, it is not uncommon to have buildings with big
or many glass structures, and current methods designed for
small objects may not work well in such cases.
We present a simple and inexpensive setup in which an
ultrasonic range sensor is added to a Microsoft Kinect camera. The ultrasonic sensor computes a valid depth value
even for completely transparent glasses. A user can sweep
the camera around to scan the scene of interests, in a fashion similar to KinectFusion [13]. Given the multiple ultrasonic sensor reads, which are registered in the same coordinate frame as the depth readings, we have developed a
novel sensor fusion algorithm to combine the sparse range
values from the ultrasonic sensor with the depth map based
on stereo vision. The main challenge in this fusion algorithm is that the ultrasonic sensor readings tend to be sparse
and unevenly distributed, as compared to the depth maps.
Assuming piece-wise planar transparent objects, we formulate this fusion problem as a segmentation/labeling problem followed by depth reconstruction. More specifically
we define a Bayesian network to optimally infer whether
a pixel should be assigned to the depth value generated by
the stereo matching, one of the fitted planes from the ultrasonic sensor readings, or infinity (unknown). Given the
labeled pixels we then update the depth map to reconstruct
the entire scene, including transparent objects.
Acoustic sensors have been used for a few scene reconstruction and recognition applications in different domains.
This includes considerable work for 3D scene reconstruction [10], 3D acoustic images for object recognition [21],
and augmented scene modeling and visualization of underwater scenes [6]. These environments are quite different from our current work. In general, sound waves and
their propagation paths vary considerably based on the frequency. For example, low frequency waves exhibit diffraction and scattering effects. However, ultrasound waves are
high frequency waves and at those frequencies it is reason-

