Beyond Frontal Faces: Improving Person Recognition Using Multiple Cues
Ning Zhang1 , Manohar Paluri2 , Yaniv Taigman2 , Rob Fergus2 , Lubomir Bourdev2
1
2
UC Berkeley
Facebook AI Research
{nzhang}@eecs.berkeley.edu

{mano, yaniv, robfergus, lubomir}@fb.com

Abstract
We explore the task of recognizing peoples’ identities
in photo albums in an unconstrained setting. To facilitate
this, we introduce the new People In Photo Albums (PIPA)
dataset, consisting of over 60000 instances of ∼2000 individuals collected from public Flickr photo albums. With
only about half of the person images containing a frontal
face, the recognition task is very challenging due to the
large variations in pose, clothing, camera viewpoint, image
resolution and illumination. We propose the Pose Invariant
PErson Recognition (PIPER) method, which accumulates
the cues of poselet-level person recognizers trained by deep
convolutional networks to discount for the pose variations,
combined with a face recognizer and a global recognizer.
Experiments on three different settings confirm that in our
unconstrained setup PIPER significantly improves on the
performance of DeepFace, which is one of the best face recognizers as measured on the LFW dataset.

Figure 1: We are able to easily recognize people we know
in unusual poses, and even if their face is not visible. In this
paper we explore the subtle cues necessary for such robust
viewpoint-independent recognition.

nition, and second, it is not clear how to go beyond a frontal
face and leverage these subtle cues. In this paper we address
both of these problems.
We introduce the People In Photo Albums (PIPA) dataset,
a large-scale recognition dataset collected from Flickr photos with creative commons licenses. It consists of 37,107
photos containing 63,188 instances of 2,356 identities and
examples are shown in Figure 2. We tried carefully to preserve the bias of people in real photo albums by instructing annotators to mark every instance of the same identity
regardless of pose and resolution. Our dataset is challenging due to occlusion with other people, viewpoint, pose and
variations in clothes. While clothes are a good cue, they are
not always reliable, especially when the same person appears in multiple albums, or for albums where many people
wear similar clothes (sports, military events), as shown in
Figure 3. As an indication of the difficulty of our dataset,
the DeepFace system [32], which is one of the state-of-theart recognizers on LFW [18], was able to register only 52%
of the instances in our test set and, because of that, its overall accuracy on our test set is 46.66%. The dataset is publicly available1 .
We propose a Pose Invariant PErson Recognition
(PIPER) method, which uses part-level person recognizers
to account for pose variations. We use poselets [2] as our
part models and train identity classifiers for each poselet.

1. Introduction
Recognizing people we know from unusual poses is easy
for us, as illustrated on Figure 1. In the absence of a clear,
high-resolution frontal face, we rely on a variety of subtle cues from other body parts, such as hair style, clothes,
glasses, pose and other context. We can easily picture Charlie Chaplin’s mustache, hat and cane or Oprah Winfrey’s
curly volume hair. Yet, examples like these are beyond
the capabilities of even the most advanced face recognizers.
While a lot of progress has been made recently in recognition from a frontal face, non-frontal views are a lot more
common in photo albums than people might suspect. For
example, in our dataset which exhibits personal photo album bias, we see that only 52% of the people have high resolution frontal faces suitable for recognition. Thus the problem of recognizing people from any viewpoint and without
the presence of a frontal face or canonical pedestrian pose is
important, and yet it has received much less attention than it
deserves. We believe this is due to two reasons: first, there is
no high quality large-scale dataset for unconstrained recog-

1 http://www.eecs.berkeley.edu/ nzhang/piper.
˜
html

1

