Mid-level Deep Pattern Mining∗
Yao Li1,2
Lingqiao Liu1
1
The University of Adelaide

Chunhua Shen1,3
Anton van den Hengel1,3
2
3
NICTA
Australian Centre for Robotic Vision

Abstract
Mid-level visual element discovery aims to find clusters
of image patches that are both representative and discriminative. In this work, we study this problem from the prospective of pattern mining while relying on the recently popularized Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs). Specifically,
we find that for an image patch, activation extracted from
the first fully-connected layer of a CNN have two appealing
properties which enable its seamless integration with pattern mining. Patterns are then discovered from a large number of CNN activations of image patches through the wellknown association rule mining. When we retrieve and visualize image patches with the same pattern (See Fig. 1), surprisingly, they are not only visually similar but also semantically consistent. We apply our approach to scene and object classification tasks, and demonstrate that our approach
outperforms all previous works on mid-level visual element
discovery by a sizeable margin with far fewer elements being used. Our approach also outperforms or matches recent
works using CNN for these tasks. Source code of the complete system is available online.

1. Introduction
Mid-level visual elements, which are clusters of image patches rich in semantic meaning, were proposed by
Singh et al. [1] with the aim of replacing low-level visual
words (play the game in Fig. 1 and then check your answers below1 ). In this pioneering work, mid-level visual
elements must meet two requirements, that is, representativeness and discriminativeness. Representativeness means
mid-level visual elements should frequently occur in the
target category, while discriminativeness implies that they
should be visually discriminative against the natural world.
The discovery of mid-level visual elements has boosted performance in a variety of vision tasks, including image clas∗ The first two authors contributed to this work equally. This work
was in part funded by the Data to Decisions Cooperative Research Centre, Australia. Correspondence should be addressed to C. Shen (e-mail:
chhshen@gmail.com).
1 Answer key: 1.aeroplane, 2.train, 3.cow, 4.motorbike, 5.bike, 6.sofa.

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

Figure 1. Name that Object: Given the mid-level visual elements
discovered by our algorithm from the PASCAL VOC 2007 dataset,
can you guess what categories are they from? (answer key below)

sification [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7], action recognition [8, 9],
discovering stylistic elements [10, 11], geometry estimation [12] and 2D-3D alignment [13, 14].
Originally motivated by market basket analysis, association rule mining is a well-known pattern mining algorithm
that aims to discover a collection of if-then rules (i.e., association rules) from a large number of records named transactions. The main advantage of association rule mining lies
in its ability to process “Big Data”: association rules can be
discovered from millions of transactions efficiently. In the
context of mid-level visual element discovery, as noted by
Doersch et al. [2], finding discriminative patches usually
involves searching through tens of thousands of patches,
which has become a bottleneck in recent works. In this
sense, if appropriately used, association rule mining can be
an appealing solution for handling “Big Data” in mid-level
visual element discovery.
In this paper, building on the well-known association
rule mining, we propose a pattern mining algorithm, Midlevel Deep Pattern Mining (MDPM), to study the problem
of mid-level visual element discovery. This approach is particularly appealing because the specific properties of activations extracted from the fully-connected layer of a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) allow them to be seamlessly
integrated with association rule mining, which enables the

