Subspace Clustering by Mixture of Gaussian Regression
Baohua Li1 ,Ying Zhang1 , Zhouchen Lin2,3 and Huchuan Lu1
1
Dalian University of Technology
2
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University
3
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai, China

Abstract
Subspace clustering is a problem of finding a multisubspace representation that best fits sample points drawn
from a high-dimensional space. The existing clustering
models generally adopt different norms to describe noise,
which is equivalent to assuming that the data are corrupted by specific types of noise. In practice, however, noise
is much more complex. So it is inappropriate to simply
use a certain norm to model noise. Therefore, we propose Mixture of Gaussian Regression (MoG Regression)
for subspace clustering by modeling noise as a Mixture of
Gaussians (MoG). The MoG Regression provides an effective way to model a much broader range of noise distributions. As a result, the obtained affinity matrix is better
at characterizing the structure of data in real applications.
Experimental results on multiple datasets demonstrate that
MoG Regression significantly outperforms state-of-the-art
subspace clustering methods.

1. Introduction
Subspace clustering models high-dimensional data as
samples drawn from a union of multiple low-dimensional
subspaces. It has been attracting more and more attention
in recent years and has found many applications in computer vision and image processing, such as image segmentation [30], motion segmentation [21], face clustering [6],
and image representation and compression [24].

1.1. Related Work
A number of approaches to subspace clustering have
been proposed in the past two decades. These methods can be roughly divided into four main categories: algebraic methods [14, 22, 4], iterative methods [2, 1], statistical methods [13, 18, 29], and spectral-clustering-based
methods [23, 28, 5, 9, 12, 19, 10]. It should be noted that
the spectral-clustering-based methods, which are based on
the spectral graph theory [3], have shown excellent performance in many real applications.

Generally, the spectral-clustering-based methods consist
of two steps. Firstly, an affinity matrix is built to capture the
similarity between pairs of sample points. Secondly, graph
cut is applied to a graph, whose vertices are the samples
and whose weights are prescribed by the affinity matrix, for
segmenting the sample points. Building a ”good” affinity
matrix is key to guarantee a good clustering result. So many
subspace clustering methods focus on bringing up a good
affinity matrix.
Based on the fact that each data point in a union of subspaces can be represented as a linear or affine combination
of other points, the Sparse Subspace Clustering (SSC) algorithm [5] utilizes the ℓ1 -norm to find the sparsest representation of a data point, where points from the same subspace
correspond to the nonzero representation coefficients. LowRank Representation (LRR) [9] aims to get a low rank representation for robust subspace recovery of the data containing corruptions. Least Squares Regression (LSR) [12] employs the Frobenius norm to speed up the clustering process,
while still ensuring the grouping effect of the representation
matrix. However, the solution to SSC may be too sparse to
encode the data correlation, while both LRR and LSR may
result in dense connections between clusters. To achieve a
good balance between within-cluster density (which we call grouping effect afterwards) and between-cluster sparsity,
Correlation Adaptive Subspace Segmentation (CASS) [10]
adopts trace Lasso, which is adaptive to the data correlation,
to regularize the representation matrix.
As pointed out by Liu et al. [9], noise which always exists in data can perturb the subspace structures, leading to
unreliable subspace clustering. To recover the subspaces
when the data are corrupted, SSC, LRR, LSR, and CASS
employ different norms to describe different types of noise,
respectively.
Given data matrix X = (x1 , x2 , ..., xN ) ∈ RM ×N with
N samples in RM , we denote E ∈ RM ×N and Z ∈ RN ×N
as the noise matrix and the representation matrix, respectively, where the entry Zij of Z measures the similarity between points xi and xj . We use k · kF , k · k1 , k · k2 , k · k2,1 ,
and k · k∗ to denote Frobenius norm, the ℓ1 -norm (sum of

