Indoor Scene Structure Analysis for Single Image Depth Estimation

Wei Zhuo , Mathieu Salzmann , Xuming He , and Miaomiao Liu
Australian National University, Canberra, Australia
NICTA, Canberra, Australia
{wei.zhuo, mathieu.salzmann, xuming.he, miaomiao.liu}@nicta.com.au

Abstract
We tackle the problem of single image depth estimation,
which, without additional knowledge, suffers from many
ambiguities. Unlike previous approaches that only reason
locally, we propose to exploit the global structure of the
scene to estimate its depth. To this end, we introduce a hierarchical representation of the scene, which models local
depth jointly with mid-level and global scene structures. We
formulate single image depth estimation as inference in a
graphical model whose edges let us encode the interactions
within and across the different layers of our hierarchy. Our
method therefore still produces detailed depth estimates, but
also leverages higher-level information about the scene. We
demonstrate the benefits of our approach over local depth
estimation methods on standard indoor datasets.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Depth estimation from a single image: (Top) Image
and ground-truth depth map. (Bottom) Estimated layout and detailed depth map. Color indicates depth (red is far, blue is close).

Without any prior information, estimating the depth of
a scene from a single image is a highly ambiguous problem. Humans, however, can easily perceive depth from a
static monocular input, thanks to the data and knowledge
they accumulated over the years. Intuitively, this suggests
that learning from existing image-depth pairs should make
single image depth estimation a realistic, achievable goal.
This observation has been the motivation for several recent approaches to monocular depth estimation [25, 26,
20, 15, 21, 18, 5]. These methods, however, typically
model depth only at a local scale. For instance, [18] predict the depth of each pixel individually. While, in contrast, [25, 26, 20, 15, 21] encode some higher-level information by modeling the relationships of neighboring superpixels, the resulting methods still lack reasoning about the
global structure of the scene. This contradicts our intuition
that humans exploit such higher-level scene structure to apprehend their environment.
Recovering the structure of a scene has nevertheless been

studied in the past [13, 19, 9, 8, 12, 28, 7]. The resulting
methods typically represent the scene of interest at a coarse
scale. As a consequence, they fail to provide a detailed description of the scene. More importantly, while these methods indeed infer the scene structure, they do not yield an absolute depth estimate; typically, only normals are predicted
by these techniques, which leaves at least a global scale ambiguity for depth.
In this paper, we propose to exploit high-level scene
structure for detailed single image depth estimation. To
this end, we introduce an approach that relies on a hierarchical representation of the scene depth encoding local,
mid-level and global information. This lets us model the
detailed depth of a scene while still benefiting from information about its global structure.
More specifically, our hierarchical representation of the
scene depth consists of three layers: superpixels, regions
and layout. The superpixels allow us to model the local
1

