Casual Stereoscopic Panorama Stitching
Fan Zhang and Feng Liu
Department of Computer Science
Portland State University
{zhangfan,fliu}@cs.pdx.edu

Abstract
This paper presents a method for stitching stereoscopic
panoramas from stereo images casually taken using a stereo
camera. This method addresses three challenges of stereoscopic image stitching: how to handle parallax, how to
stitch the left- and right-view panorama consistently, and
how to take care of disparity during stitching. This method
addresses these challenges using a three-step approach.
First, we employ a state-of-the-art stitching algorithm that
handles parallax well to stitch the left views of input stereo
images and create the left view of the final stereoscopic
panorama. Second, we stitch the input disparity maps to obtain the target disparity map for the stereoscopic panorama
by solving a Poisson’s equation. This target disparity map
is optimized to avoid vertical disparities and preserve the
original perceived depth distribution. Finally, we warp the
right views of the input stereo images and stitch them into
the right-view panorama according to the target disparity
map. The stitching of the right views is formulated as a labeling problem that is constrained by the stitching of the left
views to make the left- and right-view panorama consistent
to avoid “retinal rivalry”. Our experiments show that our
method can effectively stitch casually taken stereo images
and produce high-quality stereo panoramas that deliver a
pleasant stereoscopic 3D viewing experience.

1. Introduction
Panorama stitching is a well studied topic and many software tools are available for users to create panoramas [26].
Most of these methods, however, are designed for monocular image stitching. Employing a monocular image stitching
method to independently create the left and right view of a
stereoscopic panorama is problematic as the left and right
panorama may not be consistent. As shown in Figure 1 (a),
the cat in the left panorama is different from that in the right
panorama. This is because the input images are taken at different time and the cat appears different in the input images.
The left and right panorama take the cat from different input
images. The inconsistency will lead to “retinal rivalry” and

bring in “3D fatigue” to viewers [17]. Moreover, stereoscopic images have an extra dimension of disparity, which
cannot be taken care of by independently stitching the two
views. Figure 1 (a) shows that the resulting panorama has
vertical disparities in the car headlight and tire area. This
will also compromise the 3D viewing experience. Dedicated stereoscopic image stitching methods have been developed [8, 19, 21]. However, these methods require a user
to densely sample the scene using a video camera and/or
follow some specific rules to rotate the camera and cannot
work well with a sparse set of casually taken input images.
The goal of this paper is to develop a technology that allows users to create stereoscopic panoramas as conveniently
as monocular ones. As consumer stereo cameras now become more and more available to daily users, it becomes
easy for them to take stereoscopic images. We therefore
aim to develop a stereoscopic image stitching method that
enables users to generate stereoscopic panoramas from casually taken stereo images. To achieve this goal, we need to
address three challenges. First, our method needs to handle
parallax well. No matter how a user moves a stereo camera,
images from at least one of the left and right view have parallax. As we allow users to freely move the stereo camera, it
is common that images from both views have parallax. Second, our method needs to stitch the left and right panorama
consistently. Third, our method needs to take care of disparity to deliver a pleasant viewing experience.
This paper presents a three-step stereoscopic image
stitching method to address the above challenges. First,
we employ a state-of-the-art parallax-tolerant monocular
image stitching method to create one of the two views of
the stereoscopic panorama. Without loss of generality, we
always select the left-view panorama to stitch first. Second, we stitch the disparity maps of the input stereoscopic
images to create the target disparity map for the stereoscopic panorama by solving a Poisson’s equation. This target disparity map is optimized to avoid vertical disparities
and seamlessly merge the perceived depth field of the input
stereoscopic images. Finally, we warp the right views of
the input stereoscopic images and stitch them into the right-

