Beyond Short Snippets: Deep Networks for Video Classification

1

Joe Yue-Hei Ng1

Matthew Hausknecht2

Sudheendra Vijayanarasimhan3

yhng@umiacs.umd.edu

mhauskn@cs.utexas.edu

svnaras@google.com

Oriol Vinyals3

Rajat Monga3

George Toderici3

vinyals@google.com

rajatmonga@google.com

gtoderici@google.com

University of Maryland, College Park

2

University of Texas at Austin

3

Google, Inc.

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been extensively applied for image recognition problems giving stateof-the-art results on recognition, detection, segmentation
and retrieval. In this work we propose and evaluate several
deep neural network architectures to combine image information across a video over longer time periods than previously attempted. We propose two methods capable of handling full length videos. The first method explores various
convolutional temporal feature pooling architectures, examining the various design choices which need to be made
when adapting a CNN for this task. The second proposed
method explicitly models the video as an ordered sequence
of frames. For this purpose we employ a recurrent neural
network that uses Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) cells
which are connected to the output of the underlying CNN.
Our best networks exhibit significant performance improvements over previously published results on the Sports 1 million dataset (73.1% vs. 60.9%) and the UCF-101 datasets
with (88.6% vs. 88.0%) and without additional optical flow
information (82.6% vs. 73.0%).

Figure 1: Overview of our approach.

motion and other information can be additionally used. At
the same time, the task is much more computationally demanding even for processing short video clips since each
video might contain hundreds to thousands of frames, not
all of which are useful. A naı̈ve approach would be to treat
video frames as still images and apply CNNs to recognize
each frame and average the predictions at the video level.
However, since each individual video frame forms only a
small part of the video’s story, such an approach would
be using incomplete information and could therefore easily confuse classes especially if there are fine-grained distinctions or portions of the video irrelevant to the action of
interest.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks have proven highly successful at static image recognition problems such as the
MNIST, CIFAR, and ImageNet Large-Scale Visual Recognition Challenge [15, 21, 28]. By using a hierarchy of trainable filters and feature pooling operations, CNNs are capable of automatically learning complex features required
for visual object recognition tasks achieving superior performance to hand-crafted features. Encouraged by these
positive results several approaches have been proposed recently to apply CNNs to video and action classification
tasks [2, 13, 14, 19].
Video analysis provides more information to the recognition task by adding a temporal component through which

Therefore, we hypothesize that learning a global description of the video’s temporal evolution is important for
accurate video classification. This is challenging from a
modeling perspective as we have to model variable length
videos with a fixed number of parameters. We evaluate two
approaches capable of meeting this requirement: featurepooling and recurrent neural networks. The feature pooling networks independently process each frame using a
1

