UniHIST: A Unified Framework for Image Restoration With Marginal
Histogram Constraints
Xing Mei1,2
Weiming Dong2
Bao-Gang Hu2
Siwei Lyu1
1
Computer Science Department, University at Albany, SUNY
2
NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
xmei@albany.edu, {wmdong,hubg}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, slyu@albany.edu

Abstract
Marginal histograms provide valuable information for
various computer vision problems. However, current image restoration methods do not fully exploit the potential
of marginal histograms, in particular, their role as ensemble constraints on the marginal statistics of the restored image. In this paper, we introduce a new framework, UniHIST, to incorporate marginal histogram constraints into
image restoration. The key idea of UniHIST is to minimize the discrepancy between the marginal histograms of
the restored image and the reference histograms in pixel or
gradient domains using the quadratic Wasserstein (W2 ) distance. The W2 distance can be computed directly from data
without resorting to density estimation. It provides a differentiable metric between marginal histograms and allows
easy integration with existing image restoration methods.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of UniHIST through denoising of pattern images and non-blind deconvolution of
natural images. We show that UniHIST enhances restoration performance and leads to visual and quantitative improvements over existing state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
A histogram is a discrete approximation of the probability distribution of a continuous random variable. For high
dimensional signals such as images, when one treats individual data points as independent samples from a random
source, the corresponding histogram is known as a marginal
histogram [11]. In image processing and computer vision,
marginal histograms in pixel or gradient domains provide a
simple and effective summary of image statistics. For instance, intensity and color histograms capture the contrast
and tone variations of the corresponding image, which are
widely used as features in image enhancement [15] and retrieval [16]. Important image feature descriptors such as
SIFT [23] and HOG [9] are in the form of histograms of

oriented gradients. Matching histograms of band-pass filter responses is the essential step in Heeger and Bergen’s
influential method for texture analysis and synthesis [17].
Marginal histograms of image gradients and wavelet coefficients show sharp peaks around zero and heavy tails, which
inspired many parametric image models such as Gaussian scale mixtures [31, 33] and hyper-Laplacian [13, 19]. These
models have achieved state-of-the-art performance for various image restoration tasks [20, 21, 38].
For most vision applications, a marginal histogram is interpreted as an approximate description of the underlying
distribution, specifying the probability of the data points
taking a particular value. However, a marginal histogram
collected from an image provides more information as it
represents an ensemble constraint on the image, specifying
the proportion of the pixels taking each value. This introduces a negative correlation between the data points - if the
marginal histogram specifies that 10% of the pixels take a
certain value, this means that the remaining 90% pixels can
only take other values. Therefore a marginal histogram provides a constraint on the marginal statistics of the output image. Similar is true for marginal histograms in other transform domains of the images. Several recent studies have
shown that image restoration tasks can benefit from such ensemble constraints, but incorporating these constraints with
existing restoration methods in a numerically stable manner
remains a challenging problem [7, 30, 35, 39].
In this work, we emphasize the aspect of marginal histograms as ensemble constraints and introduce a unified
framework, UniHIST, to incorporate such constraints in image restoration problems. In UniHIST, we use the quadratic
Wasserstein (W2 ) metric [32] (also known as Cramer-von
Mises distance) to measure the statistical distance between
the marginal histograms of the output image and the reference histogram. The W2 distance can be computed directly
from data without relying on density estimation, providing
a smooth and differentiable form to measure the dissimilarity between histograms. By including this term in an optimization framework, UniHIST can readily work with most

