Convolutional Feature Masking for Joint Object and Stuff Segmentation
Jifeng Dai

Kaiming He

Jian Sun

Microsoft Research
{jifdai,kahe,jiansun}@microsoft.com

Abstract

lead to artificial boundaries. These boundaries do not exhibit on the samples during the network pre-training (e.g.,
in the 1000-category ImageNet [5]). This issue may degrade the quality of the extracted segment features. Second,
similar to the R-CNN method for object detection [8], these
methods need to apply the network on thousands of raw
image regions with/without the masks. This is very timeconsuming even on high-end GPUs.
The second issue also exists in R-CNN based object detection. Fortunately, this issue can be largely addressed by
a recent method called SPP-Net [11], which computes convolutional feature maps on the entire image only once and
applies a spatial pyramid pooling (SPP) strategy to form
cropped features for classification. The detection results via
these cropped features have shown competitive detection
accuracy [11], and the speed can be ∼50× faster. Therefore, in this paper, we raise a question: for semantic segmentation, can we use the convolutional feature maps only?
The first part of this work says yes to this question. We
design a convolutional feature masking (CFM) method to
extract segment features directly from feature maps instead
of raw images. With the segments given by the region proposal methods (e.g., selective search [22]), we project them
to the domain of the last convolutional feature maps. The
projected segments play as binary functions for masking
the convolutional features. The masked features are then
fed into the fully-connected layers for recognition. Because
the convolutional features are computed from the unmasked
image, their quality is not impacted. Besides, this method is
efficient as the convolutional feature maps only need to be
computed once. The aforementioned two issues involving
semantic segmentation are thus both addressed. Figure 1
compares the raw-image-based pipeline and our featuremap-based pipeline.
The second part of this paper further generalizes our
method for joint object and stuff segmentation [18]. Different from objects, “stuff” [18] (e.g., sky, grass, water) is
usually treated as the context in the image. Stuff mostly exhibits as colors or textures and has less well-defined shapes.
It is thus inappropriate to use a single rectangular box or
a single segment to represent stuff. Based on our masked

The topic of semantic segmentation has witnessed considerable progress due to the powerful features learned
by convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [13]. The current leading approaches for semantic segmentation exploit
shape information by extracting CNN features from masked
image regions. This strategy introduces artificial boundaries on the images and may impact the quality of the extracted features. Besides, the operations on the raw image
domain require to compute thousands of networks on a single image, which is time-consuming.
In this paper, we propose to exploit shape information
via masking convolutional features. The proposal segments
(e.g., super-pixels) are treated as masks on the convolutional feature maps. The CNN features of segments are directly masked out from these maps and used to train classifiers for recognition. We further propose a joint method
to handle objects and “stuff” (e.g., grass, sky, water) in
the same framework. State-of-the-art results are demonstrated on benchmarks of PASCAL VOC and new PASCALCONTEXT, with a compelling computational speed.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation [14, 19, 24, 2] aims to label each
image pixel to a semantic category. With the recent breakthroughs [13] by convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
[15], R-CNN based methods [8, 10] for semantic segmentation have substantially advanced the state of the art.
The R-CNN methods [8, 10] for semantic segmentation
extract two types of CNN features - one is region features
[8] extracted from proposal bounding boxes [22]; the other
is segment features extracted from the raw image content
masked by the segments [10]. The concatenation of these
features are used to train classifiers [10]. These methods
have demonstrated compelling results on this long-standing
challenging task.
However, the raw-image-based R-CNN methods [8, 10]
have two issues. First, the masks on the image content can
1

