Regularizing Max-Margin Exemplars by Reconstruction and Generative Models
Jose C. Rubio and Björn Ommer
jose.rubio@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de, ommer@uni-heidelberg.de
Heidelberg Collaboratory for Image Processing
IWR, Heidelberg University, Germany

Abstract

Learning part-based models benefits from intensive supervision [3, 11]. Manual labeling and aligning of all instances of a part is, however, very laborious and becomes
prohibitive when dealing with large numbers of categories
and training samples. Therefore, a common strategy is to
automatically learn a small number of parts within object
bounding boxes [9]. However, without part annotations,
alignment of all training instances of a part is challenging,
so that the variability of training samples for a part hampers learning the part representation. A recent solution to
this problem are exemplar-based approaches [21] where a
classifier is trained with only a single positive sample for
a part and a large corpus of negatives. To achieve optimal performance, this exemplar-SVM approach requires
several rounds of computationally demanding hard-negative
mining, where a set of characteristic negatives are selected
based on the single positive. [14] circumvent this mining by
employing Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) as a very
efficient training method for exemplar classifiers at the cost
of significantly lower performance. A main limitation of
LDA is the implicit assumption that the positive and negative classes share the same covariance. Typically the negative distribution is also utilized for the positive class (a very
crude simplification).

Part-based models are one of the leading paradigms in
visual recognition. In the absence of costly part annotations, associating and aligning different training instances
of a part classifier and finding characteristic negatives is
challenging and computationally demanding. To avoid this
costly mining of training samples, we estimate separate
generative models for negatives and positives and integrate
them into a max-margin exemplar-based model. The generative model and a sparsity constraint on the correlation
between spatially neighboring feature dimensions regularize the part filters during learning and improve their generalization to similar instances. To suppress inappropriate
positive part samples, we project the classifier back into
the image domain and penalize against deviations from the
original exemplar image patch. The part filter is then optimized to i) discriminate against clutter, to ii) generalize to
similar instances of the part, and iii) to yield a good reconstruction of the original image patch. Moreover, we propose
an approximation for estimating the geometric margin so
that learning large numbers of parts becomes feasible. Experiments show improved part localization, object recognition, and part-based reconstruction performance compared
to popular exemplar-based approaches on PASCAL VOC.

Our goal is to avoid negative mining, while retaining
the discriminative performance of the part classifier and
improving its ability to generalize to other part instances,
which are related to the original exemplar. Rather than selecting hard negatives, we represent the negative by a generative model and we learn another generative model for
features from within object bounding boxes of a category.
The distribution of positives couples spatially neighboring
feature dimensions (e.g. HoG cells) and thus reduces its
degrees of freedom. When adding further part instances
from other training images to the original exemplar patch,
we need to prevent the classifier from drifting away from
the original exemplar part due to badly aligned samples and
clutter. Otherwise we would end up with a representation
corresponding to an uninformative, averaged patch. Therefore, we propose a perceptual regularization that projects

1. Introduction
The large intra-class variability of real world object categories is one of the primary challenges of visual recognition. Part-based models are presently the most popular and
powerful paradigm to learn representations that characterize all instances of a category despite their variation in appearance, articulation, occlusion, etc. In contrast to holistic,
rigid templates [19, 4] and pooling strategies that provide
some local shift invariance [17], explicitly modeling object
parts [9, 20, 26] not only can explain away object deformation and missing parts. It also provides an explicit parsing
of objects (e.g. [11, 23, 3, 24, 6]) and reasoning about their
pose and articulation.
1

