A Convolutional Neural Network Cascade for Face Detection
Haoxiang Li† ,
†

Zhe Lin‡ ,

Xiaohui Shen‡ ,

Jonathan Brandt‡ ,

Gang Hua†

‡

Stevens Institute of Technology
Hoboken, NJ 07030

Adobe Research
San Jose, CA 95110

{hli18, ghua}@stevens.edu

{zlin, xshen, jbrandt}@adobe.com

Abstract

the face detector to accurately address a binary classification problem while the latter one further imposes a time efficiency requirement.
Ever since the seminal work of Viola et al. [27], the
boosted cascade with simple features becomes the most
popular and effective design for practical face detection.
The simple nature of the features enable fast evaluation and
quick early rejection of false positive detections. Meanwhile, the boosted cascade constructs an ensemble of the
simple features to achieve accurate face vs. non-face classification. The original Viola-Jones face detector uses the
Haar feature which is fast to evaluate yet discriminative
enough for frontal faces. However, due to the simple nature
of the Haar feature, it is relatively weak in the uncontrolled
environment where faces are in varied poses, expressions
under unexpected lighting.
A number of improvements to the Viola-Jones face detector have been proposed in the past decade [30]. Most
of them follow the boosted cascade framework with more
advanced features. The advanced feature helps construct a
more accurate binary classifier at the expense of extra computation. However, the number of cascade stages required
to achieve the similar detection accuracy can be reduced.
Hence the overall computation may remain the same or even
reduced because of fewer cascade stages.
This observation suggests that it is possible to apply
more advanced features in a practical face detection solution as long as the false positive detections can be rejected
quickly in the early stages. In this work, we propose to apply the Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) [13] to face
detection. Compared with the previous hand-crafted features, CNN can automatically learn features to capture complex visual variations by leveraging a large amount of training data and its testing phase can be easily parallelized on
GPU cores for acceleration.
Considering the relatively high computational expense
of the CNNs, exhaustively scanning the full image in multiple scales with a deep CNN is not a practical solution.
To achieve fast face detection, we present a CNN cascade,

In real-world face detection, large visual variations,
such as those due to pose, expression, and lighting, demand an advanced discriminative model to accurately differentiate faces from the backgrounds. Consequently, effective models for the problem tend to be computationally
prohibitive. To address these two conflicting challenges,
we propose a cascade architecture built on convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) with very powerful discriminative capability, while maintaining high performance. The
proposed CNN cascade operates at multiple resolutions,
quickly rejects the background regions in the fast low resolution stages, and carefully evaluates a small number of
challenging candidates in the last high resolution stage. To
improve localization effectiveness, and reduce the number
of candidates at later stages, we introduce a CNN-based
calibration stage after each of the detection stages in the
cascade. The output of each calibration stage is used to
adjust the detection window position for input to the subsequent stage. The proposed method runs at 14 FPS on a
single CPU core for VGA-resolution images and 100 FPS
using a GPU, and achieves state-of-the-art detection performance on two public face detection benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Face detection is a well studied problem in computer vision. Modern face detectors can easily detect near frontal
faces. Recent research in this area focuses more on the
uncontrolled face detection problem, where a number of
factors such as pose changes, exaggerated expressions and
extreme illuminations can lead to large visual variations in
face appearance, and can severely degrade the robustness of
the face detector.
The difficulties in face detection mainly come from two
aspects: 1) the large visual variations of human faces in the
cluttered backgrounds; 2) the large search space of possible face positions and face sizes. The former one requires
1

