ConceptLearner: Discovering Visual Concepts from Weakly Labeled Image
Collections
Bolei Zhou† , Vignesh Jagadeesh‡ , Robinson Piramuthu‡
†
MIT ‡ eBay Research Labs
bolei@mit.edu,[vjagadeesh, rpiramuthu]@ebay.com

Abstract
Discovering visual knowledge from weakly labeled data
is crucial to scale up computer vision recognition systems, since it is expensive to obtain fully labeled data for
a large number of concept categories. In this paper, we
propose ConceptLearner, which is a scalable approach to
discover visual concepts from weakly labeled image collections. Thousands of visual concept detectors are learned
automatically, without human in the loop for additional annotation. We show that these learned detectors could be
applied to recognize concepts at image-level and to detect
concepts at image region-level accurately. Under domainspeciﬁc supervision, we further evaluate the learned concepts for scene recognition on SUN database and for object detection on Pascal VOC 2007. ConceptLearner shows
promising performance compared to fully supervised and
weakly supervised methods.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in mobile devices, cloud storage and social network have increased the amount of visual data along
with other auxiliary data such as text. Such big data is accumulating at an exponential rate and is typically diverse with
a long tail. Detecting new concepts and trends automatically is vital to exploit the full potential of this data deluge.
Scaling up visual recognition for such large data is an important topic in computer vision. One of the challenges in
scaling up visual recognition is to obtain fully labeled images for a large number of categories. The majority of data
is not fully annotated. Often, they are mislabeled or labels
are missing or annotations are not as precise as name-value
pairs. It is almost impossible to annotate all the data with
human in the loop. In computer vision research, there has
been great effort to build large-scale fully labeled datasets
by crowd sourcing, such as ImageNet [7], Pascal Visual Object Classes [9], Places Database [38] from which the stateof-the-art object/scene recognition and detection systems

Predicted Concepts

Concept Recognition

root-castle:ROOT
building-white:AMOD
building-roof:PREP_WITH
ship-pirate:AMOD
town-beach:NN
roofs-the:DET
building-background:PREP_IN
port-the:DET
castle-background:PREP_IN
ocean-atlantic:AMOD
ship-cruise:NN
roof-green:AMOD
white-blue:CONJ_AND
castle-the:DET
boat-white:AMOD

show-car:parked:car:NSUBJ:1.46
window-car:NN:1.05
show-car:NN:1.23
root-wheel:ROOT:1.09
wheel-the:DET:1.26

Concept Detection

Figure 1. ConceptLearner: Thousands of visual concepts are
learned automatically from weakly labeled image collections.
Weak labels can be in the form of keywords or short description.
ConceptLearner can be used to recognize concepts at image level,
as well as detect concepts within an image. Here we show two
examples done by the learned detectors.

are trained [18, 12]. However, it is cumbersome and expensive to obtain such fully labeled datasets. Recently, there
has been growing interest to harvest visual concepts from
internet search engines [2, 8]. These approaches re-rank the
search results and then learn concept detectors. The learned
detectors largely depend on the quality of image search results, while image search engines themselves have sophisticated supervised training procedures. Alternatively, this
paper explores another scalable direction to discover visual
concepts from weakly labeled images.
Weakly labeled images could be collected cheaply and
massively. Images uploaded to photo sharing websites like
Facebook, Flickr, Instagram typically include tags or sentence descriptions. These tags or descriptions, which might
be relevant to the image contents, can be treated as weak
labels for these images. Despite the noise in these weak
labels, there is still a lot of useful information to describe
the scene and objects in the image. Thus, discovering visual concepts from weakly labeled images is crucial and has
wide applications such as large scale visual recognition, image retrieval, and scene understanding. Figure 1 shows our
concept recognition and detection results by detectors discovered by the ConceptLearner from weakly labeled image
collections1 .
1 Project page is at http://conceptlearner.csail.mit.
edu/

