Hyper-class Augmented and Regularized Deep Learning for
Fine-grained Image Classification
Saining Xie
University of California, San Diego
s9xie@eng.ucsd.edu

Tianbao Yang
Department of Computer Science
University of Iowa
tianbao-yang@uiowa.edu

Xiaoyu Wang
Snapchat Research

Yuanqing Lin
NEC Laboratories America, Inc.

xiaoyu.wang@snapchat.com

ylin@nec-labs.com

Abstract
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNN) have seen
tremendous success in large-scale generic object recognition. In comparison with generic object recognition, finegrained image classification (FGIC) is much more challenging because (i) fine-grained labeled data is much more
expensive to acquire (usually requiring domain expertise);
(ii) there exists large intra-class and small inter-class variance. Most recent work exploiting deep CNN for image
recognition with small training data adopts a simple strategy: pre-train a deep CNN on a large-scale external dataset
(e.g., ImageNet) and fine-tune on the small-scale target
data to fit the specific classification task. In this paper,
beyond the fine-tuning strategy, we propose a systematic
framework of learning a deep CNN that addresses the challenges from two new perspectives: (i) identifying easily
annotated hyper-classes inherent in the fine-grained data
and acquiring a large number of hyper-class-labeled images from readily available external sources (e.g., image
search engines), and formulating the problem into multitask learning; (ii) a novel learning model by exploiting a
regularization between the fine-grained recognition model
and the hyper-class recognition model. We demonstrate the
success of the proposed framework on two small-scale finegrained datasets (Stanford Dogs and Stanford Cars) and on
a large-scale car dataset that we collected.

1. Introduction
The goal of FGIC is to recognize objects that are both semantically and visually similar to each other. Since the seminal work of [23], deep convolution neural networks (CNN)
have achieved the state-of-the-art performance on large-

Chevrolet Avalanche

Chevrolet Silverado

Figure 1. Illustration of large intra-class variance due to different
views.

scale image classification [41, 33]. An important factor in
the success of deep CNNs is the access of large-scale labeled training data. However, because it is often expensive
to obtain a large number of labeled images in fine-grained
image classification tasks, it can be difficult to train a good
deep CNN on a small dataset without suffering from significant overfitting. Several works have used the ImageNet
dataset (containing 1.2 million images from 1,000 classes)
to pre-train a deep CNN and then directly use the resulting CNN to extract features that are then directly used in a
fine-grained image recognition task at hand 1 . However, as
we report below, the features learned from a generic dataset
might not be well suited for a specific FGIC task. Recently,
more attempts followed the strategy in [17], where network
parameters are fine-tuned on the target FGIC data.
Another challenge for fine-grained image classification
is that intra-class variation can be quite large due to differences in pose, view-point, etc. One example of this issue is
illustrated in Figure 1 for fine-grained car recognition.
In this paper, we propose a principled framework to explicitly tackle the challenges of learning a deep CNN for
FGIC.
Our first contribution is to propose a task-specific data
augmentation approach to address the data scarcity issue.
1 https://sites.google.com/site/fgcomp2013/

