Accurate Depth Map Estimation from a Lenslet Light Field Camera
Hae-Gon Jeon Jaesik Park Gyeongmin Choe Jinsun Park
Yunsu Bok Yu-Wing Tai In So Kweon
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Republic of Korea
[hgjeon,jspark,gmchoe,ysbok]@rcv.kaist.ac.kr
[zzangjinsun,yuwing]@gmail.com, iskweon@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
This paper introduces an algorithm that accurately estimates depth maps using a lenslet light field camera. The
proposed algorithm estimates the multi-view stereo correspondences with sub-pixel accuracy using the cost volume. The foundation for constructing accurate costs is
threefold. First, the sub-aperture images are displaced using the phase shift theorem. Second, the gradient costs
are adaptively aggregated using the angular coordinates of
the light field. Third, the feature correspondences between
the sub-aperture images are used as additional constraints.
With the cost volume, the multi-label optimization propagates and corrects the depth map in the weak texture regions. Finally, the local depth map is iteratively refined
through fitting the local quadratic function to estimate a
non-discrete depth map. Because micro-lens images contain unexpected distortions, a method is also proposed that
corrects this error. The effectiveness of the proposed algorithm is demonstrated through challenging real world examples and including comparisons with the performance of
advanced depth estimation algorithms.

Lytro software [1]

Ours

Figure 1. Synthesized views of the two depth maps acquired from
Lytro software [1] and our approach.

of adjacent sub-aperture images in Lytro is between −1 to
1 pixels. Consequently, it is very challenging to estimate an
accurate depth map because the one pixel disparity error is
already a significant error in this problem.
In this paper, an algorithm for stereo matching between
sub-aperture images with an extremely narrow baseline is
presented. Central to the proposed algorithm is the use of
the phase shift theorem in the Fourier domain to estimate
the sub-pixel shifts of sub-aperture images. This enables the
estimation of the stereo correspondences at sub-pixel accuracy, even with a very narrow baseline. The cost volume
is computed to evaluate the matching cost of different disparity labels, which is defined using the similarity measurement between the sub-aperture images and the center view
sub-aperture image shifted at different sub-pixel locations.
Here, the gradient matching costs are adaptively aggregated
based on the angular coordinates of the light field camera.
In order to reduce the effects of image noise, the
weighted median filter was adopted to remove the noise
in the cost volume, followed by using the multi-label optimization to propagate reliable disparity labels to the weak
texture regions. In the multi-label optimization, confident
matching correspondences between the center view and
other views are used as additional constraints, which assist in preventing oversmoothing at the edges and texture
regions. Finally, the estimated depth map is iteratively refined using quadratic polynomial interpolation to enhance
the estimated depth map with sub-label precision.

1. Introduction
The problem of estimating an accurate depth map
from a lenslet light field camera, e.g. LytroTM [1] and
RaytrixTM [19], is investigated. Different to conventional
cameras, a light field camera captures not only a 2D image,
but also the directions of the incoming light rays. The additional light directions allow the image to be re-focused and
the depth map of a scene to be estimated as demonstrated
in [12, 17, 19, 23, 26, 29].
Because the baseline between sub-aperture images from
a lenslet light field camera is very narrow, directly applying
the existing stereo matching algorithms such as [20] cannot produce satisfying results, even if the applied algorithm
is a top ranked method in the Middlebury stereo matching
benchmark. As reported in Yu et al. [29], the disparity range
1

