3D All The Way:
Semantic Segmentation of Urban Scenes From Start to End in 3D
And̄elo Martinović♠1

Jan Knopp♠1
1
KU Leuven

Hayko Riemenschneider2
2
ETH Zurich

Abstract

Luc Van Gool1,2

steps to that effect is semantic facade parsing. Thus far,
it has been largely treated as a 2D pre-processing step. This
paper investigates whether it could benefit from a direct
coupling to the 3D data that mobile mapping campaigns
also produce. As a matter of fact, the paper presents an
entire pipeline for facades, from raw images to semantic 3D
model, with all steps carried out in 3D. As we will show,
our avoidance of any going back and forth between 2D and
3D leads to substantially shorter runtimes (20x faster).
In particular, we see three main contributions:

We propose a new approach for semantic segmentation
of 3D city models. Starting from an SfM reconstruction of
a street-side scene, we perform classification and facade
splitting purely in 3D, obviating the need for slow imagebased semantic segmentation methods. We show that a
properly trained pure-3D approach produces high quality
labelings, with significant speed benefits (20x faster) allowing us to analyze entire streets in a matter of minutes. Additionally, if speed is not of the essence, the 3D labeling can
be combined with the results of a state-of-the-art 2D classifier, further boosting the performance. Further, we propose a novel facade separation based on semantic nuances
between facades. Finally, inspired by the use of architectural principles for 2D facade labeling, we propose new
3D-specific principles and an efficient optimization scheme
based on an integer quadratic programming formulation.

• an end-to-end facade modelling fully in 3D,
• a novel facade separation based on the results of semantic facade analysis,
• a formulation and implementation of weak architectural principles like alignment, symmetry, etc. in 3D.

2. Related work
As this work joins multiple research areas for the purpose of 3D facade understanding and modeling, we will
briefly review the current state of the art in (1) 3D classification, (2) facade parsing and (3) facade separation.

1. Introduction
Increasingly, the topics of recognition and 3D reconstruction are intermingled. On the one hand, adding 3D
features may aid recognition, on the other the knowledge
about object classes helps with their 3D modeling. In the
end, one can imagine feedback loops - cognitive loops if
you will (e.g. [47]) - where a system jointly evolves through
the solution spaces that each such subproblem (e.g. recognition, 3D reconstruction) lives in. Human vision seems to
strive for such kind of unified, consistent interpretation and
the endeavour seems to serve us well.
This paper looks into the creation of semantic, 3D models of cities. The task comes with both the subtasks of
recognition and 3D modeling. Thus, the models should not
only consist of high-quality 3D models, but ought to come
with delineated functional units (e.g. windows, doors, balconies, etc.). Although substantial effort has already gone
into the creation of 3D city models, efforts to render those
‘semantic’ are rather recent. One of the most important

2.1. 3D classification
A vast amount of work has dealt with the issue of 2D
classification. However, the bulk of 3D classification work
is rather recent, especially where 2D and 3D features are
used together. To the best of our knowledge, [9] were the
first to combine image classification and sparse 3D points
from SfM. [25] combine depth maps and appearance features for better classification. In a similar vein, [32, 2] combine LIDAR and image data.
Since then, recent works show the advantage of combining 3D and 2D for classification [42, 21, 19, 38, 56] or place
recognition [37] using LIDAR, 3D CAD or Kinect models. However, 3D is used in the context of improving 2D
recognition, as these approaches still heavily rely on 2D features. Some even show that 2D information is much more
important than 3D descriptors [38]. In contrast, instead of
using 3D as useful aid for the 2D classifier, we design an

♠ Indicates equal contribution.

1

