Practical Robust Two-View Translation Estimation
Johan Fredriksson, Viktor Larsson, Carl Olsson
Centre for Mathematical Sciences
Lund University
{johanf,viktorl,calle}@maths.lth.se

Abstract

works assume that there are no outlier correspondences.
In this paper we are interested in estimation and outlier rejection in the presence of large amounts of outliers.
For multiple view geometry problems, the predominant approach for dealing with outliers is RANSAC [5, 14, 9]. The
method has been applied to related geometry problems such
as relative pose estimation with rotation around one axis
[6, 13]. This formulation is motivated by the fact that many
modern cell phones are able to directly measure the gravitation vector. A disadvantage with these methods is the
randomness of the results and that the solution space is restricted to the hypotheses given by minimal subsets of the
data. Furthermore, in settings with a large amount of mismatches this approach becomes costly because of the need
to evaluate a large number of random samples. The approach offers no optimality guarantees meaning that even
if there is a good solution the algorithm is not guaranteed to
find it.
In [7], Fredriksson et al. gave an optimal algorithm for
the two-view translation problem in the presence of outliers.
For a given error threshold  the algorithm finds a translation
with the maximal amount of inlier correspondences, with a
theoretical time complexity of O(n2 log n). It was demonstrated that in settings with large amounts of outliers the
approach not only produces better results but is also faster
than RANSAC.
In this paper we present a branch and bound approach
that is significantly faster than [7] with the same kind of
theoretical guarantees. The branch and bound methodology has been applied to a variety of geometry problems.
In [8], a branch and bound framework is introduced that
searches over all rotations. As a subroutine, the translation
of the camera is estimated using linear programming. It is
assumed that no outliers are present in the data. The linear
program could in principle be replaced with our approach to
obtain an algorithm that works in the presence of outliers.
A related algorithm for dealing with outliers is given in [3].
In [11] a method for uncalibrated reconstruction based on
an algebraic cost function and a mixed integer formulation
is proposed. While these methods guarantee optimality of

Outliers pose a problem in all real structure from motion systems. Due to the use of automatic matching methods
one has to expect that a (sometimes very large) portion of
the detected correspondences can be incorrect. In this paper we propose a method that estimates the relative translation between two cameras and simultaneously maximizes
the number of inlier correspondences.
Traditionally, outlier removal tasks have been addressed
using RANSAC approaches. However, these are random in
nature and offer no guarantees of finding a good solution.
If the amount of mismatches is large, the approach becomes
costly because of the need to evaluate a large number of
random samples. In contrast, our approach is based on the
branch and bound methodology which guarantees that an
optimal solution will be found. While most optimal methods
trade speed for optimality, the proposed algorithm has competitive running times on problem sizes well beyond what is
common in practice. Experiments on both real and synthetic
data show that the method outperforms state-of-the-art alternatives, including RANSAC, in terms of solution quality. In addition, the approach is shown to be faster than
RANSAC in settings with a large amount of outliers.

1. Introduction
Two-view relative pose estimation is one of the cornerstone problems in computer vision. Most structure from
motion pipelines solve it as a subproblem in order to build
an overall reconstruction. In this paper, we study the special case of translation estimation between two views. Either the camera is known not to rotate or the relative rotation
can be estimated by other means. There are many situations
where the camera undergoes pure translation, for example
in robotic applications. In addition, known rotation formulations have been shown to be useful subproblems for the
structure from motion pipeline. They were first addressed
in an algebraic framework in [16], and later with reprojection errors in the L∞ -framework of [10]. However, these
1

