Sparse Representation Classification with Manifold Constraints Transfer
Baochang Zhang∗,†

Alessandro Perina∗

Vittorio Murino∗

Alessio Del Bue∗

∗

Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia (IIT)
Pattern Analysis and Computer Vision (PAVIS)
Via Morego 30, 16136 Genova, Italy
†

School of Automation Science and Electrical Engineering
Beihang University, Beijing, China

Abstract
The fact that image data samples lie on a manifold has
been successfully exploited in many learning and inference
problems. In this paper we leverage the specific structure
of data in order to improve recognition accuracies in general recognition tasks. In particular we propose a novel
framework that allows to embed manifold priors into sparse
representation-based classification (SRC) approaches. We
also show that manifold constraints can be transferred from
the data to the optimized variables if these are linearly correlated. Using this new insight, we define an efficient alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM) that can
consistently integrate the manifold constraints during the
optimization process. This is based on the property that
we can recast the problem as the projection over the manifold via a linear embedding method based on the Geodesic
distance. The proposed approach is successfully applied on
face, digit, action and objects recognition showing a consistently increase on performance when compared to the state
of the art.

Figure 1. A scheme of the MCT approach.

instantiates recognition as a sparse optimization problem
where the aim is to estimate an assignment matrix Z that associates each testing sample Hr to the corresponding training data Hd such that:
Hr = Hd Z.
This inference is in general done through the use of a dictionary computed directly from the training data. If such dictionary has certain properties, namely being uncorrelated,
the theory of SRC has interesting links to the compressive sensing framework. This makes the problem solvable
through a l1 relaxation that can be dealt with efficient optimization techniques.
This paper provides new insights to the problem, in particular a relevant intuition that was neglected in previous
work. It is well known in fact that often data lies on specific manifolds, especially when one has to identify a welldefined object category (e.g. faces, digits, animals, flowers,
etc.). To this end, any recognition framework taking advantage of the implicit structure of the data can obtain improved
results. However, the main crux is to efficiently embed manifold constraint in any optimization methods and, in the specific, in the SRC framework. Here we show that there exists
a solution with high practicability that can include manifold

1. Introduction
A constrained learning model allows one to incorporate
domain-specific knowledge as constraints to balance the
learned model given the implicit structure of the data [7].
From a machine learning perspective, it is of high significance to simplify the learning stage while improving the
quality of the solutions. Imposing a data structure as a constraint is a new and flexible way to solve the optimization
problems [5], and it has shown a lot of promise in improving
performance of machine learning algorithms.
In this paper we revisit the Sparse Representation Classification (SRC) [29] framework by including the notion that
data often lies on a specific manifold. The SRC approach
1

