Learning a Non-linear Knowledge Transfer Model
for Cross-View Action Recognition
Hossein Rahmani, and Ajmal Mian
Computer Science and Software Engineering, The University of Western Australia
hossein@csse.uwa.edu.au, ajmal.mian@uwa.edu.au

Abstract
This paper concerns action recognition from unseen
and unknown views. We propose unsupervised learning
of a non-linear model that transfers knowledge from multiple views to a canonical view. The proposed Non-linear
Knowledge Transfer Model (NKTM) is a deep network, with
weight decay and sparsity constraints, which finds a shared
high-level virtual path from videos captured from different unknown viewpoints to the same canonical view. The
strength of our technique is that we learn a single NKTM for
all actions and all camera viewing directions. Thus, NKTM
does not require action labels during learning and knowledge of the camera viewpoints during training or testing.
NKTM is learned once only from dense trajectories of synthetic points fitted to mocap data and then applied to real
video data. Trajectories are coded with a general codebook learned from the same mocap data. NKTM is scalable
to new action classes and training data as it does not require re-learning. Experiments on the IXMAS and N-UCLA
datasets show that NKTM outperforms existing state-of-theart methods for cross-view action recognition.

Figure 1: Existing cross-view action recognition techniques [11,
12, 19, 33, 40] connect source and target views with a set of linear
transformations that are unable to capture the non-linear manifolds
on which real actions lie. Our NKTM finds a shared high-level
non-linear virtual path that connects multiple source and target
views to the same canonical view.

A practical system should be able to recognize human
actions from different unknown and more importantly unseen views. One approach for recognizing actions across
viewpoints is to collect data from all possible views and
train a separate classifier for each view. However, this approach does not scale well as it requires a large number of
labeled samples for each view. To overcome this problem,
some techniques infer 3D scene structure and use geometric
transformations to achieve view invariance [4, 8, 23, 29, 39].
These methods often require robust joint estimation which
is still an open problem in real-world settings. Other methods focus on spatio-temporal features which are insensitive
to viewpoint variations [18, 24, 28, 34]. However, the discriminative power of these methods is limited by their inherent structure of view invariant features [38].
Recently, knowledge transfer-based methods [6,7,10,19,
21,40,41] have become popular for cross-view action recognition. These methods find a view independent latent space
in which features extracted from different views are directly
comparable. Such methods are either not applicable or perform poorly when recognition is performed on videos from
unknown and, more importantly, unseen views. Recently,
Wang et al. [33] proposed cross-view action recognition
by discovering discriminative 3D Poselets and learning the
geometric relations among different views. However, they

1. Introduction
Action recognition from videos is a significant research
problem with applications in human-computer interaction,
smart surveillance, and video retrieval. Several techniques
have been proposed for discriminative action representation
such as 2D shape matching [20, 22, 37], spatio-temporal interest points [5, 16, 27, 35], and trajectory-based representation [30–32, 36]. Especially, dense trajectories-based methods [30–32] have shown impressive results for action recognition by tracking densely sampled points using optical flow
fields. While these methods are effective for action recognition from a common viewpoint, their performance degrades
significantly under viewpoint changes. This is because the
same action appears quite different when observed from different viewpoints [25–27].
1

