Person Re-identification by Local Maximal Occurrence
Representation and Metric Learning
Shengcai Liao, Yang Hu, Xiangyu Zhu, and Stan Z. Li
Center for Biometrics and Security Research, National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 95 Zhongguancun East Road, Beijing 100190, China
{scliao,yhu,xiangyu.zhu,szli}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Person re-identification is an important technique towards automatic search of a person’s presence in a surveillance video. Two fundamental problems are critical for
person re-identification, feature representation and metric
learning. An effective feature representation should be robust to illumination and viewpoint changes, and a discriminant metric should be learned to match various person images. In this paper, we propose an effective feature representation called Local Maximal Occurrence (LOMO), and
a subspace and metric learning method called Cross-view
Quadratic Discriminant Analysis (XQDA). The LOMO feature analyzes the horizontal occurrence of local features,
and maximizes the occurrence to make a stable representation against viewpoint changes. Besides, to handle illumination variations, we apply the Retinex transform and a
scale invariant texture operator. To learn a discriminant
metric, we propose to learn a discriminant low dimensional subspace by cross-view quadratic discriminant analysis,
and simultaneously, a QDA metric is learned on the derived
subspace. We also present a practical computation method
for XQDA, as well as its regularization. Experiments on
four challenging person re-identification databases, VIPeR,
QMUL GRID, CUHK Campus, and CUHK03, show that the
proposed method improves the state-of-the-art rank-1 identification rates by 2.2%, 4.88%, 28.91%, and 31.55% on the
four databases, respectively.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification is a problem of finding a person from a gallery who has the same identity to the probe.
This is a challenging problem because of big intra-class
variations in illumination, pose or viewpoint, and occlusion. Many approaches have been proposed for person reidentification [40, 8], which greatly advance this field.
Two fundamental problems are critical for person re-

identification, feature representation and metric learning.
An effective feature representation should be robust to illumination and viewpoint changes, and a discriminant metric
should be learned to match various person images. Many
efforts have been made along the two directions to tackle the challenge of person re-identification. For feature
representation, several effective approaches have been proposed, for example, the ensemble of local features (ELF)
[10], SDALF [2], kBiCov [33], fisher vectors (LDFV) [32],
salience match [46], and mid-level filter [48]. These handcrafted or learning based descriptors have made impressive improvements over robust feature representation, and
advanced the person re-identification research. However,
how to design or learn a robust feature for the person reidentification challenge still remains an open problem.
Another aspect of person re-identification is how to learn
a robust distance or similarity function to deal with the complex matching problem. Many metric learning algorithms
have been proposed considering this aspect [5, 49, 18, 14,
24]. In practice, many previous metric learning methods
[43, 4, 5, 14, 18, 38] show a two-stage processing for metric
learning, that is, the Principle Component Analysis (PCA)
is first applied for dimension reduction, then metric learning
is performed on the PCA subspace. However, this two-stage
processing may not be optimal for metric learning in low dimensional space, because samples of different classes may
already be cluttered after the first stage.
In this paper, we propose an efficient feature representation called Local Maximal Occurrence (LOMO), and a
subspace and metric learning method called Cross-view
Quadratic Discriminant Analysis (XQDA). The LOMO feature analyzes the horizontal occurrence of local features,
and maximizes the occurrence to make a stable representation against viewpoint changes. Besides, we find that applying the Retinex transform is useful to handle illumination variations in person re-identification. To learn a discriminant metric, we propose to learn a discriminant low
dimensional subspace by cross-view quadratic discriminant
analysis, and simultaneously, a QDA metric is learned on

