Adopting an Unconstrained Ray Model in Light-field Cameras
for 3D Shape Reconstruction
Filippo Bergamasco, Andrea Albarelli, Luca Cosmo, Andrea Torsello
Dipartimento di Scienze Ambientali, Informatica e Statistica
Università Ca’ Foscari Venezia, Venice Italy

Emanuele Rodolà, Daniel Cremers
Department of Computer Science
Technische Universität München, Garching, Germany

Abstract
Given the raising interest in light-field technology and
the increasing availability of professional devices, a feasible and accurate calibration method is paramount to unleash practical applications. In this paper we propose to
embrace a fully non-parametric model for the imaging and
we show that it can be properly calibrated with little effort
using a dense active target. This process produces a dense
set of independent rays that cannot be directly used to produce a conventional image. However, they are an ideal tool
for 3D reconstruction tasks, since they are highly redundant, very accurate and they cover a wide range of different
baselines. The feasibility and convenience of the process
and the accuracy of the obtained calibration are comprehensively evaluated through several experiments.

1. Introduction
Due to their recent availability as off-the-shelf commercial devices, light-field cameras have attracted increasing
attention from both scientific and industrial operators.
Traditional cameras are designed to capture the amount
of light radiation directed toward an image plane. The captured rays can converge to a common projection point (as
for the pinhole model), could go through a common axis
(as for the models including radial distortion), or can follow
any other distribution, even ditching any parametric model.
However, regardless of the camera model, the mechanics
remains basically projective, and the result of the imaging
process is a 2D image. Light-field cameras pursue a different goal: to capture the full plenoptic function generated
by each observed material point [1], which includes the intensity of the light radiating from each point along all the
directions over the sphere. Of course, this goal is not practi-

Figure 1. A real-word light-field camera is no more than a tightly
packed array of very small (distorted) pinhole cameras sharing the
same imaging sensor.

cally achievable by any physical sensor, due to the technical
and theoretical problem involved. In practice, most, if not
all, the light-field devices ever built are made up of an array (explicit or implicit) of traditional cameras, each one
contributing to capture a portion of the plenoptic function.
An example can be seen in Figure 1, where we show a detail of the composite image captured by a Lytro light-field
camera [22]. The number, type and arrangement of such
cameras, as well as their calibration, has been a very active
topic in recent research. One of the main hurdles in plenoptic photography derives from the composite imaging formation process which limits the ability to exploit the well consolidated stack of calibration methods that are available for
traditional cameras. While several efforts have been done
to propose practical approaches, most of them still rely on
the quasi-pinhole behavior of the single microlens involved
in the capturing process. This results in several drawbacks,
ranging from the difficulties in feature detection, due to the
reduced size of each microlens, to the need to adopt a model
with a relatively small number of parameters.

