Toward User-speciﬁc Tracking by Detection of Human Shapes in Multi-Cameras
Chun-Hao Huang1 , Edmond Boyer2 , Bibiana do Canto Angonese1 , Nassir Navab1 , Slobodan Ilic1,3
1

Technische Universität München, 2 LJK-INRIA Grenoble Rhône-Alpes, 3 Siemens AG
{huangc,slobodan.ilic,bibiana.canto,navab}@in.tum.de, edmond.boyer@inria.fr

Abstract
Human shape tracking consists in ﬁtting a template
model to temporal sequences of visual observations. It usually comprises an association step, that ﬁnds correspondences between the model and the input data, and a deformation step, that ﬁts the model to the observations given
correspondences. Most current approaches ﬁnd their common ground with the Iterative-Closest-Point (ICP) algorithm, which facilitates the association step with local distance considerations. It fails when large deformations occur, and errors in the association tend to propagate over
time. In this paper, we propose a discriminative alternative for the association, that leverages random forests to
infer correspondences in one shot. It allows for large deformations and prevents tracking errors from accumulating. The approach is successfully integrated to a surface
tracking framework that recovers human shapes and poses
jointly. When combined with ICP, this discriminative association proves to yield better accuracy in registration, more
stability when tracking over time, and faster convergence.
Evaluations on existing datasets demonstrate the beneﬁts
with respect to the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Visual shape tracking is the process of recovering temporal evolutions of a template shape using visual information,
such as image silhouettes or 3D points. It ﬁnds applications
in several domains including computer vision, graphics and
medical imaging. In particular, it has recently demonstrated
a good success in marker-less human motion capture (mocap). Numerous approaches assume a user-speciﬁc reference surface, and the objective is to recover the skeletal
poses [29], surface shapes [6], or both simultaneously [15].
Most of these model-based methods [6, 12, 15, 18, 29]
can be viewed as extensions of Iterative-Closest-Point (ICP)
framework [5], which attempts to explain newly observed
data using the previous outcomes. As long as the initialization is close to the optimum solution, it is able to produce

(a) ref. surface

(b) input data

(c) detected shape

(d) results

Figure 1. Given a reference surface (a), our method discovers reliable data-model correspondences by random forests, color-coded
in (c). Instead of tracking, this strategy detects user-speciﬁc shapes
in a frame-wise manner, resulting in more sustainability.

outstanding results. However, they also suffer from inherent weaknesses of generative strategies, e.g., the slow convergence. Moreover, when large deformations or outliers
occur, discovering associations between data and models is
particularly difﬁcult. Unreliable associations result in ambiguous situations that yield erroneous numerical solutions
and, consequently, break the tracking process.
In contrast, discriminative approaches that ‘detect’ rather
than track models have shown better robustness over
the past decade, for instance, in human pose estimation
with Kinect [22, 27]. These approaches operate frameindependently, and are generally drift free. In this paper,
we explore this direction in order to get robust observationmodel associations, regardless of the results from previous
frames. We further present a discriminative ‘tracking-bydetection’ human mocap framework, as in Fig. 1. Inspired
by Taylor et al. [27], we apply regression forests to improve the associations. Shape geometries are characterized
by volumetric representations, and are fed into user-speciﬁc
forests to predict correspondences in one shot. Contrary to
generative methods, this prediction does not require close
initializations from a nearby frame. In addition, it allows
a single model to be used as a reference surface for several
different sequences, again even if large deformations or outliers exist. We combine this strategy with a generative tracking approach that takes our one-shot associations as input.
Experiments demonstrate that this hybrid discriminativegenerative framework leads to better, or comparable results

