Viewpoints and Keypoints
Shubham Tulsiani and Jitendra Malik
University of California, Berkeley - Berkeley, CA 94720
{shubhtuls,malik}@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
We characterize the problem of pose estimation for rigid
objects in terms of determining viewpoint to explain coarse
pose and keypoint prediction to capture the finer details. We
address both these tasks in two different settings - the constrained setting with known bounding boxes and the more
challenging detection setting where the aim is to simultaneously detect and correctly estimate pose of objects. We
present Convolutional Neural Network based architectures
for these and demonstrate that leveraging viewpoint estimates can substantially improve local appearance based
keypoint predictions. In addition to achieving significant
improvements over state-of-the-art in the above tasks, we
analyze the error modes and effect of object characteristics
on performance to guide future efforts towards this goal.

1. Introduction
There are two ways in which one can describe the pose
of the car in Figure 1 - either via its viewpoint or via specifying the locations of a fixed set of keypoints. The former
characterization provides a global perspective about the object whereas the latter provides a more local one. In this
work, we aim to reliably predict both these representations
of pose for objects.
Our overall approach is motivated by the theory of global
precedence - that humans perceive the global structure before the fine level local details [27]. It was also noted
by Koenderink and van Doorn [22] that viewpoint determines appearance and several works have shown that larger
wholes improve the discrimination performance of parts
[31, 26, 29]. Inspired by this philosophy, we propose an
algorithm which first estimates viewpoint for the target object and leverages the predicted viewpoint to improve the
local appearance based keypoint predictions.
Viewpoint is manifested in a 2D image by the spatial relationships among the different features of the object. Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) [9, 24] based methods
which can implicitly capture and hierarchically build on
such relations are therefore suitable candidates for view-

Figure 1: Alternate characterizations of pose in terms of
viewpoint and keypoint locations

point prediction.
A robot which merely knows that a cup exists but cannot
find its handle will not be able to grasp it. Towards the goal
of developing a finer understanding of objects, we tackle
the task of predicting keypoints by modeling appearances
at multiple scales - a fine scale appearance model, while
prone to false positives can localize accurately and a coarser
scale appearance model is more robust to mis-localizations.
Note that merely reasoning over local appearance is not sufficient to solve the task of keypoint prediction. For example,
the notion of the ’front wheel’ assumes its meaning in context of the whole bicycle. The local appearance of the patch
might also correspond to the ’back wheel’ - it is because we
know the bicycle is front facing that we are able to disambiguate. Motivated by this, we use the viewpoint predicted
by our system to improve the local appearance based keypoint predictions.
Our proposed algorithm, as illustrated in Figure 2 has the
following components Viewpoint Prediction : We formulate the problem of
viewpoint prediction as predicting three euler angles ( azimuth, elevation and cyclorotation) corresponding to the instance. We train a CNN based architecture which can implicitly capture and aggregate local evidences for predicting
the euler angles to obtain a viewpoint estimate.
Local Appearance based Keypoint Activation : We
propose a fully convolutional CNN based architecture to
model local part appearance. We capture the appearance
at multiple scales and combine the CNN responses across
scales to obtain a resulting heatmap which corresponds to a
spatial log-likelihood distribution for each keypoint.

