SOLD: Sub-Optimal Low-rank Decomposition for Efficient Video Segmentation
Chenglong Li1,2 , Liang Lin2∗, Wangmeng Zuo3 , Shuicheng Yan4 , Jin Tang1
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University, Hefei,China

2
3

School of Advanced Computing, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China

School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, China
4

Department of ECE, National University of Singapore, Singapore

lcl1314@foxmail.com, linliang@ieee.org, {cswmzuo, ahhftang}@gmail.com, eleyans@nus.edu.sg

Abstract

analytics, summarization and indexing. However, it is still
a challenging research area due to its computational complexity and inherent difficulties, like the large intra-category
variations and the large inter-category similarities. Recently, various works on video segmentation have been
introduced ranging from mean-shift [14], spectral clustering [11, 16], graph-based processing [2, 12] and superpixel
tracking [10, 13]. And some benchmarks [4, 7] have also
been provided to evaluate existing methods and help further
study. Despite of much progress on video segmentation,
there exists a critical limitation, i.e., most of video segmentation methods have worse segmentation quality due to only
utilizing low-level features. On one hand, the low-level
features are easily contaminated by video noises. On the
other hand, the low-level features are usually not powerful
enough to differentiate the different semantic regions.

This paper investigates how to perform robust and efficient unsupervised video segmentation while suppressing
the effects of data noises and/or corruptions. We propose
a general algorithm, called Sub-Optimal Low-rank Decomposition (SOLD), which pursues the low-rank representation for video segmentation. Given the supervoxels affinity matrix of an observed video sequence, SOLD seeks a
sub-optimal solution by making the matrix rank explicitly
determined. In particular, the affinity matrix with the rank
fixed can be decomposed into two sub-matrices of low rank,
and then we iteratively optimize them with closed-form solutions. Moreover, we incorporate a discriminative replication prior into our framework based on the obervation
that small-size video patterns tend to recur frequently within
the same object. The video can be segmented into several
spatio-temporal regions by applying the Normalized-Cut
(NCut) algorithm with the solved low-rank representation.
To process the streaming videos, we apply our algorithm
sequentially over a batch of frames over time, in which
we also develop several temporal consistent constraints improving the robustness. Extensive experiments on the public benchmarks demonstrate superior performance of our
framework over other state-of-the-art approaches.

Motivated by the advances in subspace clustering [30],
especially the Low-Rank Representation (LRR) methods
for image segmentation [6, 22], we propose a Sub-Optimal
Low-rank Decomposition (SOLD) algorithm, which pursues the low-rank representation for video segmentation.
Instead of using superpixels in previous works like [13, 16],
we take supervoxels as graph nodes to infer their optimal
affinities because they can preserve local spatio-temporal
coherence as well as good boundaries. To seek the unbiased and task-independent video segmentation solution, we
define our low-rank model based on very generic assumption inspired by [1, 8, 20]. In particular, we assume that the
intra-class supervoxels are drawn from one identical lowrank feature subspace, and all supervoxels in a period lie on
a union of multiple subspaces, which can be justified by natural statistic and observations of videos. Thus, we can represent each supervoxel descriptor as a linear combination of
other supervoxel descriptors, and seek for the low-rank representation of all supervoxels in a joint fashion. Moreover,
we also integrate discriminative replication prior in the formulation for enlarging its discriminative ability. As a natural extension from internal image statistics [1], this prior,

1. Introduction
Video segmentation is to partition the video into several semantically consistent spatio-temporal regions. It is
a fundamental computer vision problem in many applications, such as object tracking, activity recognition, video
∗ Corresponding author is Liang Lin. This work was done when the first
author worked as a visiting student in Sun Yat-sen University. This work
was supported by the 863 Program of China (no. 2013AA013801), Natural
Science Foundation of China (no. 61472002), Guangdong Natural Science
Foundation (no.S2013050014548), and Program of Guangzhou Zhujiang
Star of Science and Technology (no.2013J2200067).

1

