Efﬁcient and Accurate Approximations of Nonlinear Convolutional Networks
Xiangyu Zhang1∗
Jianhua Zou1
1
Xi’an Jiaotong University

Xiang Ming1∗

Abstract

Kaiming He2
Jian Sun2
2
Microsoft Research

the original ﬁlters can be approximately decomposed into
a series of smaller ﬁlters, and the complexity is reduced.
These methods have shown promising speedup ratios on a
single [3] or a few layers [10] with some degradation of
accuracy.
The algorithms and approximations in the previous work
are developed for reconstructing linear ﬁlters [3, 10] and
linear responses [10]. However, the nonlinearity like the
Rectiﬁed Linear Units (ReLU) [14, 11] is not involved in
their optimization. Ignoring the nonlinearity will impact
the quality of the approximated layers. Let us consider a
case that the ﬁlters are approximated by reconstructing the
linear responses. Because the ReLU will follow, the model
accuracy is more sensitive to the reconstruction error of the
positive responses than to that of the negative responses.
Moreover, it is a challenging task of accelerating the
whole network (instead of just one or a very few layers).
The errors will be accumulated if several layers are approximated, especially when the model is deep. Actually, in the
recent work [3, 10] the approximations are applied on a single layer of large CNN models, such as those trained on
ImageNet [2, 16]. It is insufﬁcient for practical usage to
speedup one or a few layers, especially for the deeper models which have been shown very accurate [18, 19, 8].
In this paper, a method for accelerating nonlinear convolutional networks is proposed. It is based on minimizing
the reconstruction error of nonlinear responses, subject to a
low-rank constraint that can be used to reduce computation.
To solve the challenging constrained optimization problem,
we decompose it into two feasible subproblems and iteratively solve them. We further propose to minimize an asymmetric reconstruction error, which effectively reduces the
accumulated error of multiple approximated layers.
We evaluate our method on a 7-convolutional-layer
model trained on ImageNet. We investigate the cases of
accelerating each single layer and the whole model. Experiments show that our method is more accurate than the recent
method of Jaderberg et al.’s [10] under the same speedup ratios. A whole-model speedup ratio of 4× is demonstrated,
and its degradation is merely 0.9%. When our model is accelerated to have a comparably fast speed as the “AlexNet”
[11], our accuracy is 4.7% higher.

This paper aims to accelerate the test-time computation
of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs). Unlike existing methods that are designed for approximating linear
ﬁlters or linear responses, our method takes the nonlinear
units into account. We minimize the reconstruction error
of the nonlinear responses, subject to a low-rank constraint
which helps to reduce the complexity of ﬁlters. We develop
an effective solution to this constrained nonlinear optimization problem. An algorithm is also presented for reducing
the accumulated error when multiple layers are approximated. A whole-model speedup ratio of 4× is demonstrated
on a large network trained for ImageNet, while the top-5 error rate is only increased by 0.9%. Our accelerated model
has a comparably fast speed as the “AlexNet” [11], but is
4.7% more accurate.

1. Introduction
This paper addresses efﬁcient test-time computation of
deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [12, 11]. Since
the success of CNNs [11] for large-scale image classiﬁcation, the accuracy of the newly developed CNNs [24, 17,
8, 18, 19] has been continuously improving. However, the
computational cost of these networks (especially the more
accurate but larger models) also increases signiﬁcantly. The
expensive test-time evaluation of the models can make them
impractical in real-world systems. For example, a cloud service needs to process thousands of new requests per seconds; portable devices such as phones and tablets mostly
have CPUs or low-end GPUs only; some recognition tasks
like object detection [4, 8, 7] are still time-consuming for
processing a single image even on a high-end GPU. For
these reasons and others, it is of practical importance to accelerate the test-time computation of CNNs.
There have been a few studies on approximating deep
CNNs for accelerating test-time evaluation [22, 3, 10]. A
commonly used assumption is that the convolutional ﬁlters
are approximately low-rank along certain dimensions. So
∗ This work is done when Xiangyu Zhang and Xiang Ming are interns
at Microsoft Research.

1

