Visual Recognition by Counting Instances: A Multi-Instance Cardinality
Potential Kernel
Hossein Hajimirsadeghi
Wang Yan
Arash Vahdat
Greg Mori
School of Computing Science, Simon Fraser University, Canada
hosseinh@sfu.ca, wyan@sfu.ca, avahdat@sfu.ca, mori@cs.sfu.ca

Abstract

a framework built on a latent structured model to encode
these cardinality relations and deal with the ambiguity or
clutter in the data.
Another example is unconstrained internet video analysis. Detecting events in internet videos [21] or determining
whether part of of a video is interesting [10] are challenging for many reasons, including temporal clutter – videos
often contain frames unrelated to the event of interest or
that are difficult to classify. Two broad approaches exist
for video analysis, either relying on holistic bag-of-words
models or building temporal models of events. Again,
successful methods for modeling temporal structure exist
(e.g. [8, 28, 25, 29]). Our method builds on these successes,
but directly considers cardinality relations, counting how
many frames of a video appear to contain a class of interest,
and using soft and intuitive constraints such as “the more,
the better” to enhance recognition.
Fig. 1 shows an overview of our method. We encode
our intuition about these counting relations in a multiple instance learning framework. In multiple instance learning,
the input to the algorithm is a set of labeled bags containing
instances, where the instance labels are not given. We approach this problem by modeling the bag with a probabilistic latent structured model. Here, we highlight the major
contributions of this paper.

Many visual recognition problems can be approached
by counting instances. To determine whether an event is
present in a long internet video, one could count how many
frames seem to contain the activity. Classifying the activity
of a group of people can be done by counting the actions
of individual people. Encoding these cardinality relationships can reduce sensitivity to clutter, in the form of irrelevant frames or individuals not involved in a group activity.
Learned parameters can encode how many instances tend
to occur in a class of interest. To this end, this paper develops a powerful and flexible framework to infer any cardinality relation between latent labels in a multi-instance model.
Hard or soft cardinality relations can be encoded to tackle
diverse levels of ambiguity. Experiments on tasks such as
human activity recognition, video event detection, and video
summarization demonstrate the effectiveness of using cardinality relations for improving recognition results.

1. Introduction
A number of visual recognition problems involve examining a set of instances, such as the people in an image or
frames in a video. For example, in group activity recognition (e.g. [6]) the prominent approach to analyzing the activity of a group of people is to look at the actions of individuals in a scene. A number of impressive methods have
been developed for modeling the structure of a group activity [18, 5, 3], capturing spatio-temporal relations between
people in a scene. However, these methods do not directly
consider cardinality relations about the number of people
that should be involved in an activity. These cardinality relations vary per activity. An activity such as a fall in a nursing home [18] is different in composition from an activity
such as queuing [5], involving different numbers of people
(one person falls, many people queue). Further, clutter, in
the form of people in a scene performing unrelated actions,
confounds recognition algorithms. In this paper we present

• Showing the importance of cardinality relations for
visual recognition. We show in different applications
that encoding cardinality relations, either hard (e.g. majority) or soft (e.g. the more, the better), can help to enhance recognition performance and increase robustness
against labeling ambiguity.
• A kernelized framework for classification with cardinality relations. We use a latent structured model,
which can easily encode any type of cardinality constraint on instance labels. A novel kernel is defined on
these probabilistic models. We show that our proposed
kernel method is effective, principled, and has efficient
and exact inference and learning methods.
1

