Finding Distractors In Images
Ohad Fried
Princeton University

Eli Shechtman
Adobe Research

Dan B Goldman
Adobe Research

Adam Finkelstein
Princeton University

ohad@cs.princeton.edu

elishe@adobe.com

dgoldman@adobe.com

af@cs.princeton.edu

Abstract

car driven partially out of frame, etc. Removing distractors demands a time-consuming editing session in which
the user manually selects the target area and then applies
features like iPhoto’s “Retouch Tool” or Photoshop’s “Content Aware Fill” to swap that area with pixels copied from
elsewhere in the image.
In this work we take the first steps towards semiautomatic distractor removal from images. The main challenge towards achieving this goal is to automatically identify what types of image regions a person might want to
remove, and to detect such regions in arbitrary images. To
address this challenge we conduct several studies in which
people mark distracting regions in a large collection of images, and then we use this dataset to train a model based on
image features.
Our main contributions are: (1) defining a new task
called “distractor prediction”, (2) collecting a large-scale
database with annotations of distractors, (3) training a prediction model that can produce distractor maps for arbitrary
images, and (4) using our prediction model to automatically
remove distractors from images.
In the following sections we describe related work (Section 2), describe and analyze our datasets (Section 3), explain our distractor prediction model (Section 4), evaluate
our predictor (Section 5) and present applications of distractor prediction (Section 6). With this publication we also
make available an annotated dataset containing images with
distractors as well as code for both analyzing the dataset and
computing distractor maps.

We propose a new computer vision task we call “distractor prediction.” Distractors are the regions of an image that
draw attention away from the main subjects and reduce the
overall image quality. Removing distractors — for example,
using in-painting — can improve the composition of an image. In this work we created two datasets of images with
user annotations to identify the characteristics of distractors. We use these datasets to train an algorithm to predict
distractor maps. Finally, we use our predictor to automatically enhance images.

1. Introduction
Taking pictures is easy, but editing them is not. Professional photographers expend great care and effort to compose aesthetically-pleasing, high-impact imagery. Image
editing software like Adobe Photoshop empowers photographers to achieve this impact by manipulating pictures with
tremendous control and flexibility – allowing them to carefully post-process good photos and turn them into great
photos. However, for most casual photographers this effort
is neither possible nor warranted. Last year Facebook reported that people were uploading photos at an average rate
of 4,000 images per second. The overwhelming majority of
these pictures are casual – they effectively chronicle a moment, but without much work on the part of the photographer. Such cases may benefit from semi- or fully-automatic
enhancement methods.
Features like “Enhance” in Apple’s iPhoto or “Auto
Tone” in Photoshop supply one-click image enhancement,
but they mainly manipulate global properties such as exposure and tone. Likewise, Instagram allows novices to
quickly and easily apply eye-catching filters to their images.
Although they have some more localized effects like edge
darkening, they apply the same recipe to any image. However, local, image-specific enhancements like removing distracting areas are not handled well by automatic methods.
There are many examples of such distractors – trash on
the ground, the backs of tourists visiting a monument, a

2. Related Work
A primary characteristic of distractors is that they attract
our visual attention, so they are likely to be somewhat
correlated with models of visual saliency. Computational
saliency methods can be roughly divided into two groups:
human fixation detection [13, 11, 15] and salient object
detection [7, 6, 22, 20]. Most of these methods used groundtruth gaze data collected in the first 3-5 seconds of viewing
(a few get up to 10 seconds) [15]. Although we found some
correlation between distractor locations and these earlyviewing gaze fixations, it was not high. Our hypothesis
1

