Learning to Detect Motion Boundaries
Philippe Weinzaepfela

Jerome Revauda
a
Inria∗

Zaid Harchaouia,b
b
NYU

Cordelia Schmida

firstname.lastname@inria.fr

Abstract
We propose a learning-based approach for motion
boundary detection. Precise localization of motion boundaries is essential for the success of optical flow estimation,
as motion boundaries correspond to discontinuities of the
optical flow field. The proposed approach allows to predict motion boundaries, using a structured random forest
trained on the ground-truth of the MPI-Sintel dataset. The
random forest leverages several cues at the patch level,
namely appearance (RGB color) and motion cues (optical
flow estimated by state-of-the-art algorithms). Experimental results show that the proposed approach is both robust
and computationally efficient. It significantly outperforms
state-of-the-art motion-difference approaches on the MPISintel and Middlebury datasets. We compare the results obtained with several state-of-the-art optical flow approaches
and study the impact of the different cues used in the random forest. Furthermore, we introduce a new dataset,
the YouTube Motion Boundaries dataset (YMB), that comprises 60 sequences taken from real-world videos with manually annotated motion boundaries. On this dataset, our approach, although trained on MPI-Sintel, also outperforms
by a large margin state-of-the-art optical flow algorithms.

1. Introduction
Digital video content, such as home movies, films and
surveillance videos, is increasing at an exponential rate. Automated analysis of such video content requires fast and
scalable approaches for many computer vision tasks, such
as action and activity recognition [19, 34], video surveillance of crowds [15], sport video understanding [23]. All
these latter approaches rely on optical flow. Therefore, designing a fast and precise optical flow estimation method is
essential.
State-of-the-art methods for optical flow computation
are usually cast into an energy minimization framework.
Coarse-to-fine algorithms [6] are then used to efficiently
∗ LEAR team, Inria Grenoble Rhone-Alpes, Laboratoire Jean Kuntzmann, CNRS, Univ. Grenoble Alpes, France.

(a) Image

(b) Ground-truth motion boundaries

(c) Flow gradient (Classic+NL)

(d) Proposed method

Figure 1. For the image in (a), we show in (b) its ground-truth
motion boundaries, in (c) motion boundaries computed as gradient of the Classic+NL [28] flow, and in (d) the proposed motion
boundary detection. Despite using the Classic+NL flow as one of
our cues, our method is able to detect motion boundaries even at
places where the flow estimation failed, such as on the spear or the
character’s arm.

minimize the energy objective [2, 9, 28, 33]. However, such
approaches can be sensitive to initialization. Therefore, the
prior information that is encoded in the design of energy is
key to the success in optical flow estimation.
Optical flow can be simply described as a field that consists of large regions where it varies smoothly, divided by
boundaries where the flow abruptly changes. Yet, energy
minimization frameworks assume that the flow is continuous. Consequently, while smooth variations of optical flow
are estimated well most of the time, capturing the sharp discontinuities remains more challenging. We propose here
to focus on the prediction of such motion boundaries, see
Figure 1. To prevent any ambiguities, we define this notion precisely as follows: motion boundaries (MB) are the
discontinuities of the ground-truth optical flow between 2
frames.
Other computer vision tasks could benefit from the
knowledge of accurate motion boundaries, for e.g. action
recognition [34], stereo depth computation, object segmentation in videos [24] or object tracking [4]. Several approaches have been proposed to predict motion boundaries [4, 5, 22, 26]. In particular, motion boundaries have
recently been computed using the norm of the gradient of

