Phase-Based Frame Interpolation for Video
Simone Meyer1

Oliver Wang2
1

Henning Zimmer2

ETH Zurich

2

Max Grosse2

Alexander Sorkine-Hornung2

Disney Research Zurich

Abstract

biguities in computing such correspondences, most methods are heavily dependent on computationally expensive
global optimization and require considerable parameter tuning [24]. With today’s trend in the movie and broadcasting industry to higher resolution, higher frame rate video
(e.g. current cameras support 4k resolution at 120 frames
per second and beyond), there is the need for interpolation
techniques that can deal efficiently with this considerably
larger data volume. Standard optical flow techniques based
on global optimization often become inefficient for interpolating this type of large scale, densely sampled input.
Recently, phase-based methods have shown promising
results in applications such as motion and view extrapolation [10, 27]. These methods rely on the assumption that
small motions can be encoded in the phase shift of an individual pixel’s color. Currently, however, the spatial displacement which can be encoded in the phase information
with these methods is highly limited, which narrows their
practical usability.

Standard approaches to computing interpolated (inbetween) frames in a video sequence require accurate pixel
correspondences between images e.g. using optical flow. We
present an efficient alternative by leveraging recent developments in phase-based methods that represent motion in
the phase shift of individual pixels. This concept allows inbetween images to be generated by simple per-pixel phase
modification, without the need for any form of explicit correspondence estimation. Up until now, such methods have
been limited in the range of motion that can be interpolated,
which fundamentally restricts their usefulness. In order to
reduce these limitations, we introduce a novel, bounded
phase shift correction method that combines phase information across the levels of a multi-scale pyramid. Additionally,
we propose extensions for phase-based image synthesis that
yield smoother transitions between the interpolated images.
Our approach avoids expensive global optimization typical
of optical flow methods, and is both simple to implement
and easy to parallelize. This allows us to interpolate frames
at a fraction of the computational cost of traditional optical flow-based solutions, while achieving similar quality
and in some cases even superior results. Our method fails
gracefully in difficult interpolation settings, e.g., significant
appearance changes, where flow-based methods often introduce serious visual artifacts. Due to its efficiency, our
method is especially well suited for frame interpolation and
retiming of high resolution, high frame rate video.

Contributions. To overcome this fundamental issue, we
propose a method that propagates phase information across
oriented multi-scale pyramid levels using a novel bounded
shift correction strategy. Our algorithm estimates and adjusts the phase shift information using a coarse-to-fine approach, assuming that high frequency content moves in
a similar way to lower frequency content. We propose
an adaptive upper bound on the phase shift that effectively avoids artifacts for large motions, and an extension
to phase-based image synthesis that leads to smoother transitions between interpolated images. In combination, these
extensions considerably increase the amount of displacement that can be successfully represented and interpolated,
rendering phase-based methods practical to be used for general motion interpolation tasks, e.g., for high resolution,
high frame rate video.
Based on these extensions, we describe an efficient
framework to synthesize in-between images, which is simple to implement and parallelize. Our implementation allows us to interpolate a HD frame in a few seconds on the
CPU and in 1 second on a GPU, while scaling favorably
for larger image sizes. Thus our method only requires a

1. Introduction
Computing interpolated, in-between images is a classic
problem in image and video processing, and is a necessary
step in numerous applications such as frame rate conversion (e.g. between broadcast standards), temporal upsampling for generating slow motion video, image morphing,
as well as virtual view synthesis. Traditional solutions to
image interpolation first compute correspondences (mostly
leveraging optical flow or stereo methods), followed by
correspondence-based image warping. Due to inherent am1

