High-Fidelity Pose and Expression Normalization for Face Recognition
in the Wild
Xiangyu Zhu
Zhen Lei∗
Junjie Yan
Dong Yi
Stan Z. Li
Center for Biometrics and Security Research & National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
95 Zhongguancun Donglu, Beijing 100190, China.
{xiangyu.zhu,zlei,jjyan,dony.yi,szli}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Pose and expression normalization is a crucial step to
recover the canonical view of faces under arbitrary conditions, so as to improve the face recognition performance.
An ideal normalization method is desired to be automatic, database independent and high-fidelity, where the face
appearance should be preserved with little artifact and information loss. However, most normalization methods fail
to satisfy one or more of the goals. In this paper, we
propose a High-fidelity Pose and Expression Normalization (HPEN) method with 3D Morphable Model (3DMM)
which can automatically generate a natural face image in
frontal pose and neutral expression. Specifically, we firstly make a landmark marching assumption to describe the
non-correspondence between 2D and 3D landmarks caused
by pose variations and propose a pose adaptive 3DMM fitting algorithm. Secondly, we mesh the whole image into a
3D object and eliminate the pose and expression variations using an identity preserving 3D transformation. Finally,
we propose an inpainting method based on Possion Editing
to fill the invisible region caused by self occlusion. Extensive experiments on Multi-PIE and LFW demonstrate that
the proposed method significantly improves face recognition performance and outperforms state-of-the-art methods
in both constrained and unconstrained environments.

1. Introduction
During the past decade, face recognition has attracted
much attention due to its great potential value in real world
applications, such as access control, identity verification
and video surveillance. However, in unconstrained environment the performance of face recognition always drops
significantly because of large variations caused by pose, illumination, expression, occlusion and so on. Among them
∗ Corresponding author.

pose and expression have always been important challenges
because they can dramatically increase intra-person variances, sometimes even exceeding inter-person variances.
To deal with the two challenges, many promising works
have been developed, which can be divided into two categories: feature level normalization and image level normalization.
The feature level normalization aims at designing face
representations with robustness to pose and expression variations [21, 32, 44, 35, 42]. For instance, the Pose Adaptive Filter [48] adjusts its filter according to pose conditions
and extracts features on semantic consistent positions. The
High-dim LBP [21] concatenates many local descriptors to
a high-dim form and demonstrates robustness to global and
local distortions. Besides hand crafted features, discriminative features can also be learned from data. Fisher vector [41], Learning Based Descriptor [17] and Probabilistic
Elastic Matching [32] use unsupervised learning techniques
to learn encoders from training examples. Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN) provides a framework to learn face
representations in a supervised form, and has achieved significant improvements in recent years [44, 46].
The image level normalization aims to synthesize a virtual canonical-view and expression-free image from one under arbitrary conditions. The advantage of this category is
that it can be easily incorporated into traditional face recognition framework as a pre-processing procedure. There are
2D and 3D methods. One type of 2D methods estimates a
spatial mapping (a flow), either pixel-wise or patch-wise, to
simulate the geometry transformation in 3D space, such as
Stack Flow [4], Markov Random Field [3] and Morphable
Displacement [34]. In these methods, although the face pixels are rearranged to the frontal view, the shape and consistency are not well preserved. Another type of 2D methods
tries to learn the appearance transformations between different poses, such as Local Linear Regression [18] and Tied
Factor [39]. These methods use linear models to approxi-

