Query-Adaptive Late Fusion for Image Search and Person Re-identification
Liang Zheng1 , Shengjin Wang1 , Lu Tian1 , Fei He1 , Ziqiong Liu1 , and Qi Tian2
1
State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Technology and Systems;
1
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology;
1
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
2
University of Texas at San Antonio, TX, 78249, USA
liangzheng06@gmail.com wgsgj@tsinghua.edu.cn qitian@cs.utsa.edu

Abstract
Feature fusion has been proven effective [35, 36] in image search. Typically, it is assumed that the to-be-fused heterogeneous features work well by themselves for the query.
However, in a more realistic situation, one does not know
in advance whether a feature is effective or not for a given query. As a result, it is of great importance to identify
feature effectiveness in a query-adaptive manner.
Towards this goal, this paper proposes a simple yet effective late fusion method at score level. Our motivation is
that the sorted score curve exhibits an “L” shape for a good
feature, but descends gradually for a bad one (Fig. 1). By
approximating score curve’s tail with a reference collected on irrelevant data, the effectiveness of a feature can be
estimated as negatively related to the area under the normalized score curve.
Experiments are conducted on two image search datasets and one person re-identification dataset. We show that our
method is robust to parameter changes, and outperforms two popular fusion schemes, especially on the resistance to
bad features. On the three datasets, our results are competitive to the state-of-the-arts.

1. Introduction
This paper1 considers the task of similar image search,
with additional attempts in person re-identification. Given a
query (probe) image, we aim at searching for all the similar
images in a database (gallery).
Recently, the fusion of multiple features [35, 36, 40] has
been pushing the state-of-the-art forward. Ideally, for a given query, if a to-be-fused feature works well by itself and is
complementary (heterogeneous) to existing features, then it
1 Codes are released at our website: www.liangzheng.com.cn

query

Figure 1. Example of a multi-feature system. For a query in the
Holidays [10] dataset, the SIFT (upper) and GIST (bottom) features are employed to obtain two score lists respectively. There
are four relevant images for this query, where SIFT produces good
performance (AP = 90.83%), but GIST fails (AP = 0.25%). We
plot the sorted scores for rank 1-99, and the corresponding 7 topranked images. Relevant images are in marked in green, and irrelevant ones red. Note that the sorted score curve is L-shaped for
SIFT, but gradually descending for GIST.

is expected that a higher search accuracy can be achieved.
Nevertheless, in realistic settings, the problem is that one
does not necessarily know in advance if a heterogeneous
feature is good for a given query.
Failure in predicting feature effectiveness might result in
undesirable search quality. On one hand, the failure of identifying good features may under-utilize features’ discriminative power. On the other hand, bad features that escape
unpunished may lead to worse consequences: accuracy gets
even lower after fusion. This problem is not trivial: some
state-of-the-art fusion methods [40, 35], as will be shown,
suffer from the fusion of black sheep features.
For this problem, our solution is two-fold. 1) Query-

