Associating Neural Word Embeddings with Deep Image Representations
using Fisher Vectors
Benjamin Klein, Guy Lev, Gil Sadeh, and Lior Wolf
The Blavatnik School of Computer Science
Tel Aviv University
beni.klein@gmail.com, levguy@gmail.com, gilsadeh@gmail.com, wolf@cs.tau.ac.il

Abstract

sian Mixture Model. In [13], Jia et al. showed empirically
that the statistics of gradient based image descriptors, such
as SIFT [25], often follow a heavy-tailed distribution which
suggests that a Gaussian distribution does not capture well
the descriptors’ distribution, and that the Euclidean distance
is not a suitable distance. They advocate for the selection of
a distance measure according to the appropriate probabilistic model that ﬁts the distribution of the empirical data, and
show that for the application of SIFT feature matching, a
signiﬁcant improvement is obtained by using the Laplacian
distribution and the L1 distance instead of the Euclidean
distance. Motivated by their ﬁndings, this paper presents
and evaluates new variants of Fisher Vectors that are based
on the Laplacian distribution.
By using the common assumption in the Fisher Vector
that the covariance matrix is a diagonal one, we deﬁne the
multivariate Laplacian distribution and the Laplacian Mixture Model (LMM). We explain how to ﬁt a LMM by deriving the Expectation-Maximization (EM) equations and
supply the Fisher Vector deﬁnition for this model. Similar
to [33], we approximate the diagonal of the Fisher Information Matrix in order to normalize the dynamic range of the
different dimensions in the Fisher Vector variant presented.
In order to gain the beneﬁts of the two distributions in
a single model, we deﬁne a new distribution, the Hybrid
Gaussian-Laplacian distribution, which can be seen as a
weighted geometric mean of the Gaussian and Laplacian
distributions. As before, we deﬁne the Hybrid GaussianLaplacian Mixture Model (HGLMM), derive the EM equations for ﬁtting a HGLMM model, derive the Fisher Vector
deﬁnition and approximate the diagonal of the Fisher Information Matrix. Although the distribution of each dimension in each component is a weighted geometric mean of
a Gaussian and a Laplacian distribution, we show that in
the EM algorithm, there is a sharp binary choice between
the Gaussian and the Laplacian distributions that results directly from the Maximization-Step derivations.
We employ the new variants of the Fisher Vectors for
tasks that match texts with images. In our experiments,

In recent years, the problem of associating a sentence
with an image has gained a lot of attention. This work continues to push the envelope and makes further progress in
the performance of image annotation and image search by
a sentence tasks. In this work, we are using the Fisher Vector as a sentence representation by pooling the word2vec
embedding of each word in the sentence. The Fisher Vector
is typically taken as the gradients of the log-likelihood of
descriptors, with respect to the parameters of a Gaussian
Mixture Model (GMM). In this work we present two other
Mixture Models and derive their Expectation-Maximization
and Fisher Vector expressions. The ﬁrst is a Laplacian Mixture Model (LMM), which is based on the Laplacian distribution. The second Mixture Model presented is a Hybrid Gaussian-Laplacian Mixture Model (HGLMM) which
is based on a weighted geometric mean of the Gaussian and
Laplacian distribution. Finally, by using the new Fisher
Vectors derived from HGLMMs to represent sentences, we
achieve state-of-the-art results for both the image annotation and the image search by a sentence tasks on four benchmarks: Pascal1K, Flickr8K, Flickr30K, and COCO.

1. Introduction
The Fisher Vector [33] is an advanced pooling technique,
which provided state-of-the-art results on many different
applications in computer vision [38, 32, 2, 34]. In this
work, the Fisher Vector is used in order to represent sentences by pooling the word2vec embedding [28] of each
word in the sentence. The Fisher Vector of a set of local
descriptors is obtained as a concatenation of gradients of
the log-likelihood of the descriptors in the set with respect
to the parameters of a Gaussian Mixture Model that was
ﬁtted on a training set in an unsupervised manner. Many
different improvements were suggested for the Fisher Vector [35, 45, 39] but all of them are in the context of the Gaus1

