A Linear Least-Squares Solution to Elastic Shape-from-Template
Abed Malti1 Adrien Bartoli2 Richard Hartley3
1
Fluminance/INRIA, Rennes, France
2
ALCoV/ISIT, UMR 6284 CNRS/Université d’Auvergne, Clermont-Ferrand, France
3
Australian National University and NICTA, Canberra, Australia

Abstract

Analytical solutions [3] are fast but with lower accuracy.
Non-linear optimization methods [9, 10] are more accurate
but at a higher computation cost. Moreover, their accuracy
depends on the initialization and on some hyper-parameters.
Methods based on Kalman filtering [1] also require an initialization step besides the fact that errors may accumulate
over the considered time frame. In summary, physics-based
approaches lack a method which is (i) able to exploit the
mechanical constraints to cover a large deformation range,
(ii) robust to noise, and (iii) both accurate and fast. Developing such a method is the main goal of this work. The
answer we propose is to use mechanical constraints into a
linear least-squares estimation framework.
We use finite elements (FEM) to represent the surface
and the deformation. This is particularly adapted to SfT and
fits the problem we want to solve. Indeed, only the finite
discrete set of point correspondences has a natural boundary condition through the RBC. Any other point of the surface is free from boundary conditions and is only subject to
the physical prior. Thus, we use the finite set of correspondences as nodes of the elements (triangles). Each element
is subject to the mechanical laws that rule the deformation.
We use a weak formulation of these laws to derive a linear
relation (via the stiffness matrix) between the displacement
of the nodes and the external deforming forces. The assembly of all elementary matrices reconstruct the global stiffness matrix that links the global external deforming force
to the global deformation δX. Minimizing this force subject to the RBC is a linear least-squares problem that can be
solved very efficiently.

We cast SfT (Shape-from-Template) as the search of a
vector field (X, δX), composed of the pose X and the displacement δX that produces the deformation. We propose
the first fully linear least-squares SfT method modeling elastic deformations. It relies on a set of Solid Boundary Constraints (SBC) to position the template at X in the deformed
frame. The displacement is mapped by the stiffness matrix
to minimize the amount of force responsible for the deformation. This linear minimization is subjected to the Reprojection Boundary Constraints (RBC) of the deformed shape
X + δX on the deformed image. Compared to state-ofthe-art methods, this new formulation allows us to obtain
accurate results at a low computation cost.

1. Introduction
The SfT problem is to reconstruct a 3D deformed surface
from its image and a 3D shape template. Most SfT methods
rely on point correspondences between the template and the
image, defining Reprojection Boundary Constraints (RBC).
These constrain 3D points to lie on the sightlines from the
image, leaving an infinite number of possible 3D deformations. Physics-based or statistics-based priors are then used
as additional constraints. In physics-based priors, the geometric and mechanical priors are the most used. While
geometric priors tend to use invariant measures between
deformations, mechanical priors represent the physics that
rules the deformation. In parallel to an extensive study of
isometry-based priors [3, 5, 17, 15, 18, 19], mechanical priors [1, 2, 10, 7] have recently become a line of investigation
in SfT. They have potential for real applications since they
address a wider class of deformable objects such as organs,
tissues and other elastic objects. In comparison, isometric
SfT is limited to paper and some types of clothes.
Current geometric/mechanical SfT methods suffer from
a certain number of caveats that are summarized in table
1. First, the types of deformations: geometric approaches
[3, 9] may not behave well when the prior is not fulfilled by
the deformation, while mechanical methods [10, 1] cover a
larger range of deformations (such as linear elasticity). Second, the tradeoff between accuracy and speed of estimation.

2. State-of-the-Art
Statistical constraints usually represent the deformation
as a linear combination of basis vectors, which can be
learned online either for face reconstruction [12] or for
generic shapes [17, 15, 19]. Non-linear learning methods
were applied in human tracking [16] and then extended to
more generic surfaces [18].
Physical constraints include spatial and temporal surface priors. The isometry constraint [5] requires that any
geodesic distance is preserved by the deformation. This
approach has proven its accuracy for paper-like surfaces
and was extended to conformal deformations [9, 3]. [3]
1

