Structured Sparse Subspace Clustering: A Unified Optimization Framework
Chun-Guang Li
SICE, Beijing University of Posts
and Telecommunications

René Vidal
Center for Imaging Science
Johns Hopkins University

Abstract

Previous Work. The subspace clustering problem has received a lot of attention over the past few years and many
methods have been developed, including iterative methods
[5, 40, 48, 49, 1], algebraic methods [3, 43, 32, 21], statistical methods [22, 2, 17, 31, 47], and spectral clustering based
methods [46, 15, 11, 7, 49, 9, 10, 25, 24, 12, 42, 28, 27, 29]
(see [41] for details). Among them, methods based on spectral clustering have become extremely popular. Such methods divide the problem in two steps. In the first one, an
affinity matrix is learned from the data. In the second one,
spectral clustering is applied to this affinity. Arguably, the
first step is the most important, as the success of the spectral
clustering algorithm is largely dependent on constructing an
informative affinity matrix.
Recent methods for learning the affinity matrix are based
on the self-expressiveness model, which states that a point
in a union of subspaces can be expressed as a linear combination in terms of other data points, i.e., X = XZ, where X
is the data matrix and Z is the matrix of coefficients. With
corrupted data, this constraint is relaxed to X = XZ + E,
where E is a matrix of errors. The subspace clustering problem is then formulated as the following optimization problem:

Subspace clustering refers to the problem of segmenting
data drawn from a union of subspaces. State of the art approaches for solving this problem follow a two-stage approach. In the first step, an affinity matrix is learned from
the data using sparse or low-rank minimization techniques.
In the second step, the segmentation is found by applying
spectral clustering to this affinity. While this approach has
led to state of the art results in many applications, it is suboptimal because it does not exploit the fact that the affinity
and the segmentation depend on each other. In this paper,
we propose a unified optimization framework for learning
both the affinity and the segmentation. Our framework is
based on expressing each data point as a structured sparse
linear combination of all other data points, where the structure is induced by a norm that depends on the unknown
segmentation. We show that both the segmentation and the
structured sparse representation can be found via a combination of an alternating direction method of multipliers
with spectral clustering. Experiments on a synthetic data
set, the Hopkins 155 motion segmentation database, and
the Extended Yale B data set demonstrate the effectiveness
of our approach.

min ∥Z∥κ +λ∥E∥ℓ s.t. X = XZ+E, diag(Z) = 0, (1)
Z,E

1. Introduction

where ∥·∥κ and ∥·∥ℓ are two properly chosen norms, λ > 0
is a tradeoff parameter, and the constraint diag(Z) = 0 is
optionally used to rule out the trivial solution of Z being an
identity matrix.
The primary difference between different methods lies
in the choice of norms for the regularization on Z and/or
the noise term E. For example, in Sparse Subspace Clustering (SSC) [9, 10] the ℓ1 norm is used for ∥ · ∥κ as a convex surrogate over the ℓ0 norm to promote sparseness in Z,
and the Frobenius norm and/or the ℓ1 norm of E is used
to handle Gaussian noise and/or outlying entries. In LowRank Representation (LRR) [25, 24] and Low-Rank Subspace Clustering (LRSC) [12, 42] the nuclear norm ∥ · ∥∗
is adopted as a convex surrogate of the rank function, the
ℓ2,1 norm of E is used to tackle outliers (LRR), and the
Frobenius norm and/or the ℓ1 of E is used to handle noise

In many real-world applications, we need to deal with
high-dimensional datasets, such as images, videos, text, and
more. In practice, such high-dimensional datasets can often be well approximated by multiple low-dimensional subspaces corresponding to multiple classes or categories. For
example, the feature point trajectories associated with a
rigidly moving object in a video lie in an affine subspace
(of dimension up to 4) [38], and face images of a subject
under varying illumination lie in a linear subspace (of dimension up to 9) [18]. Therefore, the task, known in the
literature as subspace clustering, is to segment the data into
the corresponding subspaces and has many applications in
computer vision, e.g., image representation and compression [19], motion segmentation [8, 36], and temporal video
segmentation [43].
1

