Deep Hierarchical Parsing for Semantic Segmentation
Abhishek Sharma
Computer Science Department
University of Maryland

Oncel Tuzel
MERL
Cambridge

David W. Jacobs
Computer Science Department
University of Maryland

bhokaal@cs.umd.edu

oncel@merl.com

djacobs@umiacs.umd.edu

Abstract

super-pixel through random binary parse trees. First, a semantic mapper mapped visual features of the super-pixels
into a semantic space. This was followed by a recursive
combination of semantic features of two adjacent image regions, using a combiner, to yield the holistic feature vector of the entire image, termed the root feature. Next, the
global information contained in the root feature was disseminated to every super-pixel in the image, using a decombiner, followed by classification of each super-pixel
via a categorizer. The parameters were learned by minimizing the classification loss of the super-pixels by backpropagation through structure [5]. RCPN was shown to outperform recent approaches in terms of per-pixel accuracy
(PPA) and mean-class accuracy (MCA). Most interestingly,
it was almost two orders of magnitude faster than competing algorithms.
RCPN’s speed and state-of-the-art performance motivate
us to carefully analyze it. In this paper we show that it still
has some weaknesses and we show how to remedy them. In
particular, the direct path from the semantic mapper to the
categorizer gives rise to bypass errors that can cause RCPN
to bypass the combiner and decombiner assembly. This can
cause back-propogation to reduce RCPN to a simple multilayer neural network for each super-pixel. We propose modifications to RCPN that overcome this problem

This paper proposes a learning-based approach to scene
parsing inspired by the deep Recursive Context Propagation Network (RCPN). RCPN is a deep feed-forward neural
network that utilizes the contextual information from the entire image, through bottom-up followed by top-down context
propagation via random binary parse trees. This improves
the feature representation of every super-pixel in the image for better classification into semantic categories. We
analyze RCPN and propose two novel contributions to further improve the model. We first analyze the learning of
RCPN parameters and discover the presence of bypass error paths in the computation graph of RCPN that can hinder
contextual propagation. We propose to tackle this problem
by including the classification loss of the internal nodes of
the random parse trees in the original RCPN loss function.
Secondly, we use an MRF on the parse tree nodes to model
the hierarchical dependency present in the output. Both
modifications provide performance boosts over the original RCPN and the new system achieves state-of-the-art performance on Stanford Background, SIFT-Flow and Daimler
urban datasets.

1. Introduction

1. Pure-node RCPN - We improve the loss function by
adding the classification loss of those internal nodes of
the random parse trees that correspond to a single semantic category, referred to as pure-nodes. This serves
three purposes. a) It provides more labels for training,
which results in better generalization. b) It encourages
stronger gradients deep in the network. c) Lastly, it
tackles the problem of bypass errors, resulting in better use of contextual information.
2. Tree MRF RCPN - Pure-node RCPN also provides us
with reliable estimates of the internal node label distributions. We utilize the label distribution of the internal
nodes to define a tree-style MRF on the parse tree to
model the hierarchical dependency between the nodes.

Semantic segmentation refers to the problem of labeling every pixel in an image with the correct semantic category. Handling the immense variability in the appearance of semantic categories requires the use of context to
achieve human-level accuracy, as shown, for example, by
[24, 14, 13]. Specifically, [14, 13] found that human performance in labeling a super-pixel is worse than a computer
when both have access to that super-pixel only. Effectively
using context presents a significant challenge, especially
when a real-time solution is required.
An elegant deep recursive neural network approach for
semantic segmentation was proposed in [19], referred to as
RCPN. The main idea was to facilitate the propagation of
contextual information from each super-pixel to every other
1

