Reflection Removal using Ghosting Cues
YiChang Shih
MIT CSAIL

Dilip Krishnan
Google Research ∗

Frédo Durand
MIT CSAIL

William T. Freeman
MIT CSAIL

yichang@mit.edu

dilipkay@google.com

fredo@mit.edu

billf@mit.edu

Abstract
Photographs taken through glass windows often contain
both the desired scene and undesired reflections. Separating
the reflection and transmission layers is an important but
ill-posed problem that has both aesthetic and practical applications. In this work, we introduce the use of ghosting cues
that exploit asymmetry between the layers, thereby helping
to reduce the ill-posedness of the problem. These cues arise
from shifted double reflections of the reflected scene off the
glass surface. In double-pane windows, each pane reflects
shifted and attenuated versions of objects on the same side
of the glass as the camera. For single-pane windows, ghosting cues arise from shifted reflections on the two surfaces
of the glass pane. Even though the ghosting is sometimes
barely perceptible by humans, we can still exploit the cue
for layer separation. In this work, we model the ghosted
reflection using a double-impulse convolution kernel, and
automatically estimate the spatial separation and relative attenuation of the ghosted reflection components. To separate
the layers, we propose an algorithm that uses a Gaussian
Mixture Model for regularization. Our method is automatic
and requires only a single input image. We demonstrate that
our approach removes a large fraction of reflections on both
synthetic and real-world inputs.

(a) Input	


(b) Close-up of ghosting	


(c) Recovered Transmission	


(d) Recovered Reflection	


Figure 1: Our method removes undesired reflections in an
image taken through a glass pane: (a) Input image with
reflection artifacts; (b) Close-up shows ghosting on the reflection layer; (c) Recovered transmission layer using our algorithm; (d) Recovered reflection layer. Our method exploits
the ghosting cues (seen in (b)) to overcome the ill-posedness
of the layer separation problem.

1. Introduction

ages with similar characteristics, and traditional imaging
models assume that T and R play symmetric roles when
forming the input I, i.e., I = T + R. Most previous work
tackles the ill-posedness through the use of multiple input
images [3, 10, 19, 26, 28, 29, 31, 32] or through user inputs which mark regions of the observed image as belonging
either to T or R (see [21]).
In this paper, we address the reflection removal problem
using “ghosting” effects – multiple reflections on glasses in
the captured image. A common example is a double-pane
window, which consists of two thin glass panes separated
by some distance for insulation [1]. The glass pane at the
inner side (closer to the camera) generates the first reflection,
and the outer side generates the second, which is a shifted

When taking photographs through windows or glass
panes, reflections of the scene on the same side of the glass
as the camera often ruin the picture. To minimize reflection artifacts, one may try to change camera position, use
polarizers, or put a piece of dark cloth around the camera,
but often it is impractical to make any of these adjustments.
This raises the need for post-processing to remove reflection artifacts. Separating transmission T and reflection R
is an ill-posed problem, since both T and R are natural im∗ Part of this work was done while the author was a postdoctoral as-

sociate at MIT CSAIL. Supplemental material, code and data is available at: https://dilipkay.wordpress.com/reflection_
ghosting.

1

