Single-Image Estimation of the Camera Response Function in Near-Lighting∗
Pedro Rodrigues1 and João P. Barreto1,2
1
Institute of Systems and Robotics, University of Coimbra
Coimbra, Portugal
{prodrigues,jpbar}@isr.uc.pt
2

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Faculty of Sciences and Technology
University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal

Abstract

linear. Endoscopic cameras are no exception with such nonlinearity being either due to limitations in camera/optics
manufacturing, or intentionally used for compressing the
dynamic range of the sensors or adapting the visualization
to a particular display technology. The camera response
function (CRF) models this non-linear relation by describing how (physically meaningful) incoming light is mapped
to quantised image brightness values. Calibration of the
CRF can be useful in many ways in the context of clinical endoscopy. Since the color of organs and tissues is a
primary cue in many diagnosis procedures, fidelity in color
visualization is of key importance. Thus, the CRF can be
used in an image post-processing stage for the purpose of
color constancy and white-balance [9], i.e., invariance of
color to different illumination, lenses, and cameras. The
CRF estimation is a crucial step for deblurring as described
in [18] and is an important first step for the application of
photometric vision algorithms for the purpose of developing systems of computer-aided surgery (CAS). Reconstruction methods like shape-from-shading [20, 6] or photometric stereo [3] assume a linear (or affine) mapping between
physical scene radiance and image brightness, and such
techniques are becoming increasingly popular in CAS as
a way of performing 3D modelling of deformable surfaces
[12].

The camera response function (CRF) relates quantised
image pixel values with physical incoming light. This paper
describes a method to estimate the CRF from a single image of a general two-coloured surface for which the albedo
ratio between the coloured regions is known a priori. While
other radiometric calibration methods either use multiple
frames or require the light to be infinitely distant, the algorithm herein proposed makes no assumptions about lighting
conditions and can handle cameras with strong vignetting.
Although the approach is generic, in the sense that can be
applied to any camera system, the method is particularly
well suited for determining the CRF of near-lighting endoscopes in the operating room. This is a very pertinent problem for which no practical, effective solutions have been
proposed. The robustness, repeatability, and accuracy of
the algorithm is experimentally validated in real images acquired with different endoscopic set-ups.

1. Introduction
In minimally invasive procedures the doctor executes the
clinical action of surgery or diagnosis based exclusively in
the video acquired by a small endoscopic camera that is inserted in the targeted anatomical cavity. Such procedures
are prone to errors and very difficulty to execute, with the
surgeons having to undergo a long training period till mastering the surgical technique. In this context, improving visualization conditions and developing systems for assisting
the doctor during the procedures is of paramount importance to decrease clinical errors and to reduce the surgeon
learning curve.
It is well known that, in most cameras, the relation between incident light and the image digitized values is non-

Radiometric calibration is a classical problem in computer vision with several different methods described in the
literature [4, 15, 5, 8, 10, 16, 13, 19]. However, and as discussed in the subsequent section, the estimation of the CRF
of medical endoscopes poses specific challenges that are not
properly addressed by the current state-of-the-art. First, the
anatomical cavity is illuminated via a light guide that runs
along the endoscope, which means that we can neither consider a far light source, nor a light source coincident with
the optical center [17]. It is a situation of near-light source
[20] for which the vast majority of radiometric calibration
methods are not applicable. Moreover, and as pointed out

∗ The method and apparatus described in this work are object of the US
Provisional Patent Application No. 62/146,643.

1

