Visual Vibrometry: Estimating Material Properties from Small Motions in Video
Abe Davis∗1

1

Katherine L. Bouman∗1
Justin G. Chen1
Michael Rubinstein†2
Frédo Durand1
William T. Freeman1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology

{abedavis,klbouman,ju21743,fredo,billf}@mit.edu

2

Google Research

mrub@google.com

0.22

Hanging fabric

0.2

Power

0.18
0.16
0.14
0.12

Silk

Corduroy

Outdoor Polyester

0.1

Upholstery

0.08
0

Increasing Area Weight

2

1.5

1

0.5

Frequency (Hz)

(A) Setup Diagram

15
14

Copper
Aluminum

Power

Rod

Speaker

Increasing Elasticity
Density Ratio

16

Brass

13
12
11
10
9

Steel

8

4

5

6

7

8

Frequency (Hz)

(B) Sample of Fabrics and Rods Ordered and Color-coded by Material Properties

(C) Extracted Motion Spectra

Figure 1. We present a method for estimating material properties of an object by examining small motions in video. (A) We record video of different
fabrics and clamped rods exposed to small forces such as sound or natural air currents in a room. (B) We show fabrics (top) color-coded and ordered by area
weight, and rods (bottom) similarly ordered by their ratio of elastic modulus to density. (C) Local motion signals are extracted from captured videos and
used to compute a temporal power spectrum for each object. These motion spectra contain information that is predictive of each object’s material properties.
For instance, observe the trends in the spectra for fabrics and rods as they increase in area weight and elasticity/density, resp (blue to red). By examining
these spectra, we can make inferences about the material properties of objects.

1. Introduction

Abstract

Understanding a scene involves more than just recognizing object categories or 3D shape. The physical properties of objects, such as the way they move and bend, can
be critical for applications that involve assessing or interacting with the world. In the field of non-destructive testing (NDT), an object’s physical properties are often studied through the measurement of its vibrations using contact
sensors or expensive laser vibrometers. In both cases, measurements are often limited to a small set of discrete points.
In contrast, we leverage the ubiquity and high spatial resolution of video cameras to extract physical properties from
video. These physical properties are then used to make inferences about the object’s underlying material properties.
We are inspired by recent work in computer vision, but seek
to bridge the gap with engineering techniques and focus on
fundamentals of vibration analysis.
Objects tend to vibrate in a set of preferred modes. These
vibrations occur in most materials, but often happen at

The estimation of material properties is important for
scene understanding, with many applications in vision,
robotics, and structural engineering. This paper connects
fundamentals of vibration mechanics with computer vision
techniques in order to infer material properties from small,
often imperceptible motion in video. Objects tend to vibrate
in a set of preferred modes. The shapes and frequencies of
these modes depend on the structure and material properties of an object. Focusing on the case where geometry is
known or fixed, we show how information about an object’s
modes of vibration can be extracted from video and used to
make inferences about that object’s material properties. We
demonstrate our approach by estimating material properties for a variety of rods and fabrics by passively observing
their motion in high-speed and regular framerate video.
∗ Joint first author
† Part of this work was done while the author was at Microsoft Research

1

