Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation for Social Images
Wei Zhang, Sheng Zeng, Dequan Wang, and Xiangyang Xue
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing
School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
{weizh, zengsheng, dqwang12, xyxue}@fudan.edu.cn

Weakly Labeled Social Images

Abstract
Image semantic segmentation is the task of partitioning
image into several regions based on semantic concepts. In
this paper, we learn a weakly supervised semantic segmentation model from social images whose labels are not pixellevel but image-level; furthermore, these labels might be
noisy. We present a joint conditional random field model leveraging various contexts to address this issue. More
specifically, we extract global and local features in multiple scales by convolutional neural network and topic model. Inter-label correlations are captured by visual contextual cues and label co-occurrence statistics. The label consistency between image-level and pixel-level is finally achieved
by iterative refinement. Experimental results on two realworld image datasets PASCAL VOC2007 and SIFT-Flow
demonstrate that the proposed approach outperforms stateof-the-art weakly supervised methods and even achieves accuracy comparable with fully supervised methods.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation, i.e., parsing image into several semantic regions, assigns each pixel (or superpixel) to
one of the predefined semantic categories. Most state-ofthe-art methods rely on a sufficiently huge amount of annotated samples in training. However, there are not enough labeled samples for this task because pixel-level (or
superpixel-level) annotation is time-consuming and laborintensive. Recent works have begun to address the semantic segmentation problem in the weakly supervised settings,
where each training image is only annotated by image-level
labels [24, 25, 26, 27, 30, 33, 34]. The existing weakly supervised semantic segmentation methods are based on one
strict assumption that image-level labels are guaranteed to
be precise by professional annotators.
With the prevalence of photo sharing websites and collaborative image tagging system, e.g., Flickr, a large number of social images with user provided labels are available
from the Internet. These labels are usually image-level;

building
car
grass
person
road

bridge
river
sky
tree

Performance of Semantic Segmentation
field
sky
tree

Traditional Semantic
Segmentation System

sky
field

Global Labels

sun
sky
mountain

tree

Joint Inference
System

field

Label Correlations

Regional Labels

Our Framework

sky
tree
field
Segmentation Results

Figure 1. Several social images and the associated noisy labels
which may be correct (green), incorrect (red) or missing (blue).
We learn a joint model to simultaneously segment and recognize
visual concept in images. Best viewed in color.

what’s more, they might be noisy: There are either incorrect additional labels assigned to a training image or labels
missing from the ground truth. Figure 1 shows several social images and the associated noisy labels. It is challenging
but attractive to learn an effective semantic segmentation
model from such social images.
In this paper, we propose a weakly supervised semantic segmentation model to overcome the challenge posed
by noisy image-level labels for training. We learn a joint conditional random field (CRF) from weakly labeled social images by sufficiently leveraging various contexts, e.g.,
the associations between high-level semantic concepts and
low-level visual appearance, inter-label correlations, spatial
neighborhoods, and label consistency between image-level
and pixel-level. More specifically, each image is segmented
into superpixels with multiple quantization levels. Global

