In Defense of Color-based Model-free Tracking
Horst Possegger∗
Thomas Mauthner∗
Horst Bischof
Institute for Computer Graphics and Vision, Graz University of Technology
{possegger,mauthner,bischof}@icg.tugraz.at

Abstract
In this paper, we address the problem of model-free online object tracking based on color representations. According to the findings of recent benchmark evaluations, such
trackers often tend to drift towards regions which exhibit a
similar appearance compared to the object of interest. To
overcome this limitation, we propose an efficient discriminative object model which allows us to identify potentially
distracting regions in advance. Furthermore, we exploit this
knowledge to adapt the object representation beforehand so
that distractors are suppressed and the risk of drifting is
significantly reduced. We evaluate our approach on recent
online tracking benchmark datasets demonstrating state-ofthe-art results. In particular, our approach performs favorably both in terms of accuracy and robustness compared
to recent tracking algorithms. Moreover, the proposed approach allows for an efficient implementation to enable online object tracking in real-time.

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking is a fundamental task for a wide
range of computer vision applications. Domains such as
visual surveillance, robotics, human-computer interaction,
and augmented reality require robust and reliable location
estimates of a target throughout an image sequence. Despite significant progress in recent years, creating a generic
object tracker is still rather challenging due to real-world
phenomena such as illumination changes, background clutter, fast object motion changes, and occlusions.
Although some application domains allow us to incorporate strong assumptions about the target (e.g. pedestrian
tracking [11, 36, 37, 40]), it is often desirable to build a
generic tracker which can readily be used for arbitrary object classes. Such model-free online trackers neither apply
pre-learned object models nor exploit class-specific prior
knowledge. Instead, a representative object model must be
∗ Both authors contributed equally.

#25

#292

#725

#40

#167

#250

#64

#180

#348

Figure 1: Comparison of the proposed approach with the
state-of-the-art trackers ACT, DSST, and KCF. The example frames show the VOT14 basketball, car, and polarbear
sequences, respectively. Best viewed in color.
learned given a single input frame with a (possibly noisy)
initial object annotation, e.g. an axis-aligned bounding box.
Among earlier tracking approaches, color histograms
(e.g. [12, 34, 35]) were a common method for appearance description. However, over the last decade the research focus has shifted to trackers based on well engineered features such as HOG (e.g. [13, 23]), correlation filters (e.g. [10, 22]), and more complex color features, such
as color attributes [14]. Such trackers have been shown to
achieve excellent performance on recent benchmark evaluations (e.g. [27]), whereas trackers based on standard color
models yield inferior performance.
In contrast to this development, we argue that trackers
based on standard color representations can still achieve
state-of-the-art performance. We exploit the observation
that color-based trackers tend to drift towards nearby regions with similar appearance. Using an adaptive object
model which is able to suppress such regions, we can significantly reduce the drifting problem, yielding robust and
reliable tracking results. Due to the favorable simplicity of
our representation, it is well suited for time-critical applications such as surveillance and robotics.
Our contributions are as follows. We present a discrimi-

