Precise Accuracy / Robustness Tradeoffs in Regression: Case of General Norms

Elvis Dohmatob 1 Meyer Scetbon 2

Abstract

However, the case of linear regression is relatively understudied. Recently, in the setting of Euclidean-norm attacks on isotropic features, (Javanmard et al., 2020) has
initiated a theoretical study of a possible tradeoff between
standard risk (a.k.a. generalization error) and adversarial
risk (a.k.a. robust generalization error) for linear regression
with isotropic features, where an adversary is allowed to attack the input data point at test-time. The authors computed
exact Pareto optimal curves that reveal a tradeoff between
standard and adversarial risk.

In this paper, we investigate the impact of testtime adversarial attacks on linear regression
models and determine the optimal level of robustness that any model can reach while maintaining a given level of standard predictive performance (accuracy). Through quantitative estimates, we uncover fundamental tradeoffs between adversarial robustness and accuracy in different regimes. We obtain a precise characterization which distinguishes between regimes where
robustness is achievable without hurting standard
accuracy and regimes where a tradeoff might be
unavoidable. Our findings are empirically confirmed with simple experiments that represent a
variety of settings. This work covers feature covariance matrices and attack norms of any nature,
extending previous works in this area.

Our work mostly considers the following question:
Question 1. In the context of linear regression, if a model
has ”small” standard risk, how ”small” can its adversarial
risk be? Is it possible to be robust while being accurate?
In the context of classification, an analogous question was
considered in (Tsipras et al., 2019), where the authors
constructed a high-dimensional problem for which every
model with standard accuracy 1 − ϵ has adversarial accuracy at most cϵ, where c is an absolute constant. Such a
result is reminiscent of a tradeoff between accuracy and robustness, and our results have the same flavor.

1. Introduction
Machine learning models are known to be highly sensitive to small perturbations known as adversarial examples (Szegedy et al., 2013), which are often imperceptible to humans. While various strategies such as adversarial
training (Madry et al., 2018) can mitigate this vulnerability
empirically, the situation remains highly problematic for
many safety-critical applications like autonomous vehicles
or health, and motivates a better theoretical understanding
of what mechanisms may be causing this.

Summary of Our Contributions. The main contributions of this work precise quantitative estimates which distinguishes between regimes where robustness is achievable
without hurting standard accuracy and regimes where a
tradeoff might be unavoidable. Importantly, unlike previous works like (Javanmard et al., 2020; Xing et al., 2021),
our analysis applies to general attack norms (not just Euclidean) and covariance matrices (not just isotropic). Our
main findings can be broken down as follows.

From a theoretical perspective, the case of classification
is rather well-understood. (Tsipras et al., 2019) showed
that adversarial robustness could be at odds with accuracy.
The hardness of classification under adversarial attacks has
been crisply characterized (Bhagoji et al., 2019; Bubeck
et al., 2018). In the special case of linear classification,
explicit lower-bounds on sample complexity have been obtained (Schmidt et al., 2018; Bhattacharjee et al., 2021).

• Analytic Formula for Optimal Robustness. As a function of the attack strength, we obtain analytic estimates of the optimal adversarial risk. Importantly,
the model which attains optimal robustness is a regularized version of the generative model (the labelling
function) with explicit regularization parameter. In the
special case of Euclidean-norm attacks, it is a ridge
estimator, and we recover a simplified formulation of
the result obtained in (Xing et al., 2021).

1
Meta FAIR 2 Microsoft Research. Correspondence to: Elvis
Dohmatob <dohmatob@meta.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

• Free Lunch and Tradeoffs for Robustness. At any
given attack strength, we establish a threshold on the
1

