Neuro-Visualizer: A Novel Auto-Encoder-Based Loss Landscape Visualization
Method With an Application in Knowledge-Guided Machine Learning

Mohannad Elhamod 1 Anuj Karpatne 1

Abstract

and biases) on a low-dimensional embedding space, usually
1-D (Goodfellow et al., 2014) or 2-D (Li et al., 2018), to
qualitatively assess generalization performance and training
convergence. A seminal work that established loss landscape visualization as an investigative tool in the field is
that by (Li et al., 2018). This work introduced the approach
of projecting model parameters to random planes in low
dimensions (usually 2D), to visualize and assess the quality
of the loss surface at the vicinity of a converged model, including whether the loss surface is ill-regularized and filled
with local minima.

In recent years, there has been a growing interest in visualizing the loss landscape of neural
networks. Linear landscape visualization methods, such as principal component analysis, have
become widely used as they intuitively help researchers study neural networks and their training process. However, these linear methods suffer from limitations and drawbacks due to their
lack of flexibility and low fidelity at representing the high dimensional landscape. In this
paper, we present a novel auto-encoder-based
non-linear landscape visualization method called
Neuro-Visualizer that addresses these shortcoming and provides useful insights about neural network loss landscapes. To demonstrate its potential, we run experiments on a variety of problems
in two separate applications of knowledge-guided
machine learning (KGML). Our findings show
that Neuro-Visualizer outperforms other linear
and non-linear baselines and helps corroborate,
and sometime challenge, claims proposed by machine learning community. All code and data used
in the experiments of this paper can be found at
the link below 1 .

However, when it comes to visualizing multiple models
(e.g., the set of models forming a training trajectory), the
selection of the projection plane becomes more challenging
as the chosen plane should capture “interesting” properties
of the loss landscape for the entire set of models, not just
a single one. Naturally, the most common way for finding
this plane is by performing a Principal Component Analysis (PCA) on the set of models, selecting the two main
principal components, and visualizing the landscape on that
2D plane such that it passes through the trajectory’s final
model (Li et al., 2018). Another approach is to use the two
eigenvectors with the highest eigenvalues (Chatzimichailidis
et al., 2019; Yao et al., 2020). Despite how helpful these
projections can be, each of these practices have their own
advantages and disadvantages, as detailed below.
First, since training trajectories do not necessarily fit on a
2-D plane, the use of linear projection methods such as PCA
yield loss surfaces that are mostly accurate at the point of
intersection, which is generally the trajectory’s final model,
but drop in accuracy as we move away from that point.
Second, while some previous works on loss landscape visualization have used non-linear methods such as UMAP
and t-SNE (Huang et al., 2020), SHEAP (Shires & Pickard,
2021), and PHATE (Horoi et al., 2022), these methods are
more suitable for visualizing the relationship between models (e.g., model clustering) instead of visualizing landscapes
of model trajectories. Third, other non-linear approaches
such as Locally Linear Embeddings (LLE) (Roweis & Saul,
2000), and Laplacian Eigen-maps (Wang, 2012) suffer from
the lack of an inverse transform, making them unsuitable
for landscape visualization because constructing the loss

1. Introduction
Understanding the loss landscape of deep neural network
has attracted much attention in recent years, both from theoretical and visualization standpoints. In this work, we focus
on the problem of loss landscape visualization, which is
the practice of plotting a neural network’s loss function
w.r.t its high-dimensional model parameters (i.e., weights
1

Department of Computer Science, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA. Correspondence to: Mohannad Elhamod <elhamod@vt.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
https://github.com/elhamod/
NeuroVisualizer

1

