Non-clairvoyant Scheduling with Partial Predictions

Ziyad Benomar 1 2 Vianney Perchet 1 3
in competitive analysis and online algorithms (Borodin &
El-Yaniv, 2005). In this paradigm, decisions must be made
in an environment where the parameters governing the outcome are unknown or might evolve over time.

Abstract
The non-clairvoyant scheduling problem has
gained new interest within learning-augmented
algorithms, where the decision-maker is equipped
with predictions without any quality guarantees.
In practical settings, access to predictions may be
reduced to specific instances, due to cost or data
limitations. Our investigation focuses on scenarios where predictions for only B job sizes out of
n are available to the algorithm. We first establish near-optimal lower bounds and algorithms in
the case of perfect predictions. Subsequently, we
present a learning-augmented algorithm satisfying the robustness, consistency, and smoothness
criteria, and revealing a novel tradeoff between
consistency and smoothness inherent in the scenario with a restricted number of predictions.

Due to the inherent difficulty of the problems in competitive analysis, the performance of any online algorithm stays
bounded away from that of the optimal offline algorithm.
However, the ascent of machine learning motivated the incorporation of predictions in algorithm design, which started in
works such as (Munoz & Vassilvitskii, 2017; Kraska et al.,
2018), then was formalized in (Lykouris & Vassilvtiskii,
2018) and (Purohit et al., 2018). Since then, learningaugmented algorithms became a popular research topic and
had multiple applications (Mitzenmacher & Vassilvitskii,
2022). The outcome of these algorithms depends both on the
parameters of the problem and the quality of the predictions.
They are required to have a performance that is near-optimal
when the predictions are accurate (consistency), near the
worst-case performance without advice if the predictions
are arbitrarily erroneous (robustness), and that degrades
smoothly as the prediction error increases (smoothness).

1. Introduction
Optimal job scheduling is a longstanding and actively studied class of optimization problems (Panwalkar & Iskander, 1977; Lenstra & Rinnooy Kan, 1978; Graham et al.,
1979; Martel, 1982; Cheng & Sin, 1990; Lawler et al., 1993;
Pinedo, 2012), with applications in various domains spanning from supply chain management (Hall & Potts, 2003;
Ivanov et al., 2016) to operating systems (Jensen et al.,
1985; Ramamritham & Stankovic, 1994; Steiger et al., 2004).
A particular setting is preemptive single-machine scheduling (Pinedo, 2012; Baker & Trietsch, 2013), where n jobs
i ∈ [n] must be executed on the same machine, with the
possibility of interrupting a job and resuming it afterward,
and the objective is to minimize the sum of their completion times. An algorithm is called clairvoyant if it has
initial access to the job sizes, otherwise, it is called nonclairvoyant (Motwani et al., 1994). The design of nonclairvoyant scheduling algorithms is a classical problem

In practice, predictions often incur costs and, at times, are
infeasible due to the lack of data. It is, therefore, crucial to
understand the limitations and the feasible improvements
with a restrained number of predictions in scenarios with
multiple unknown variables. This question was first investigated for the caching problem (Im et al., 2022), and very
recently for metrical task systems (Sadek & Elias, 2024), in
settings where the algorithm is allowed to query a limited
number of predictions. It was also explored for the scheduling problem (Benomar & Perchet, 2023), assuming that the
decision-maker can query the true sizes of B jobs out of n.

The authors present a 2 − B(B−1)
n(n−1) -competitive algorithm,
and they give a lower bound on the competitive ratio of
any algorithm only when B = o(n). The case of imperfect
predictions, however, is not examined.
In non-clairvoyant scheduling, besides the querying model
studied in the works mentioned above, predictions of the
sizes of certain jobs i ∈ I may be available, where I ⊂ [n],
perhaps derived from previous executions of similar tasks.
Assuming that I is a subset of [n] of size B, taken uniformly at random, we examine the limitations and possible
improvements of non-clairvoyant algorithms.

1

ENSAE, FAIRPLAY joint team, CREST, Palaiseau, France
2
Ecole polytechnique, Palaiseau, France 3 Criteo AI Lab, FAIRPLAY joint team, Paris, France. Correspondence to: Ziyad Benomar <ziyad.benomar@ensae.fr>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

