Agnostic Sample Compression Schemes for Regression

Idan Attias 1 Steve Hanneke 2 Aryeh Kontorovich 1 Menachem Sadigurschi 1

Abstract

size m) and good to mean “consistent with the sample” specifies the classic realizable sample compression problem for
VC classes. The feasibility of the latter was an open problem between its being posed by Littlestone and Warmuth
(1986b) and its positive resolution by Moran & Yehudayoff
(2016), with various intermediate steps in between (Floyd,
1989; Helmbold, Sloan, and Warmuth, 1992; Floyd and Warmuth, 1995b; Ben-David and Litman, 1998; Kuzmin and
Warmuth, 2007; Rubinstein, Bartlett, and Rubinstein, 2009;
Rubinstein and Rubinstein, 2012; Chernikov and Simon,
2013; Livni and Simon, 2013; Moran, Shpilka, Wigderson,
and Yehudayoff, 2017). A stronger form of this problem,
where small means O(d) (or even exactly d), remains open
(Warmuth, 2003).

We obtain the first positive results for bounded
sample compression in the agnostic regression setting with the ℓp loss, where p ∈ [1, ∞]. We construct a generic approximate sample compression
scheme for real-valued function classes exhibiting
exponential size in the fat-shattering dimension
but independent of the sample size. Notably, for
linear regression, an approximate compression of
size linear in the dimension is constructed. Moreover, for ℓ1 and ℓ∞ losses, we can even exhibit
an efficient exact sample compression scheme of
size linear in the dimension. We further show that
for every other ℓp loss, p ∈ (1, ∞), there does
not exist an exact agnostic compression scheme
of bounded size. This refines and generalizes a
negative result of David, Moran, and Yehudayoff
(2016) for the ℓ2 loss. We close by posing general
open questions: for agnostic regression with ℓ1
loss, does every function class admit an exact compression scheme of polynomial size in the pseudodimension? For the ℓ2 loss, does every function
class admit an approximate compression scheme
of polynomial size in the fat-shattering dimension? These questions generalize Warmuth’s classic sample compression conjecture for realizablecase classification (Warmuth, 2003).

David, Moran, and Yehudayoff (2016) recently generalized
the definition of compression scheme to the agnostic case,
where it is required that the function reconstructed from the
compression set obtains an average loss on the full data set
nearly as small as the function in the class that minimizes
this quantity. In Remark 2.2, we give a strong motivation for
this criterion by arguing an equivalence to the generalization
ability of the compression-based learning algorithm. Under
this definition, David et al. (2016) extended the realizablecase result for VC classes to cover the agnostic case as well:
a bounded-size compression scheme for the former implies
such a scheme (in fact, of the same size) for the latter. They
also generalized from binary to multiclass concept families,
with the graph dimension in place of VC-dimension. Proceeding to real-valued function classes, David et al. (2016)
came to a starkly negative conclusion: they established that
there is no constant-size exact agnostic sample compression
scheme for linear functions under the ℓ2 loss. (Realizable
linear regression in Rd trivially admits sample compression
of size d + 1, under any loss, by selecting a minimal subset
that spans the data.)

1. Introduction
Sample compression is a central problem in learning theory,
whereby one seeks to retain a “small” subset of the labeled
sample that uniquely defines a “good” hypothesis. Quantifying small and good specifies the different variants of the
problem. For instance, in the classification setting, taking
small to mean “constant size” (i.e., depending only on the
VC-dimension d of the concept class but not on the sample

Main results. We are the first to construct bounded sample
compression schemes for agnostic regression with ℓp loss,
p ∈ [1, ∞]. Table 1 summarizes our contributions in the
context of previous results. We refer to an α-approximate
compression as one where the function reconstructed from
the compression set achieves an average error at most α compared to the optimal function in the class. We consider the
sample compression to be exact when we precisely recover
this error. See Equations (3) and (4) for formal definitions.

1

Department of Computer Science, Ben-Gurion University,
Israel 2 Department of Computer Science, Purdue University, USA.
Correspondence to: Idan Attias <idanatti@post.bgu.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

