Stochastic Interpolants with Data-Dependent Couplings

Michael S. Albergo * 1 Mark Goldstein * 2 Nicholas M. Boffi 2 Rajesh Ranganath 2 3 Eric Vanden-Eijnden 2

Abstract
Generative models inspired by dynamical transport of measure – such as flows and diffusions
– construct a continuous-time map between two
probability densities. Conventionally, one of these
is the target density, only accessible through samples, while the other is taken as a simple base
density that is data-agnostic. In this work, using
the framework of stochastic interpolants, we formalize how to couple the base and the target densities, whereby samples from the base are computed
conditionally given samples from the target in a
way that is different from (but does not preclude)
incorporating information about class labels or
continuous embeddings. This enables us to construct dynamical transport maps that serve as conditional generative models. We show that these
transport maps can be learned by solving a simple
square loss regression problem analogous to the
standard independent setting. We demonstrate
the usefulness of constructing dependent couplings in practice through experiments in superresolution and in-painting. The code is available
at https://github.com/interpolants/couplings.

Figure 1: Examples. Super-resolution and in-painting
results computed with our formalism.

a standard Gaussian. In some formulations, such as scorebased diffusion (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Song & Ermon,
2020; Ho et al., 2020b; Song et al., 2020; Singhal et al.,
2023), a Gaussian base density is intrinsically tied to the
process achieving the transport. In others, including flow
matching (Lipman et al., 2022a; Chen & Lipman, 2023),
rectified flow (Liu et al., 2022b; 2023b), and stochastic interpolants (Albergo & Vanden-Eijnden, 2022; Albergo et al.,
2023), a Gaussian base is not required, but is often chosen
for convenience. In these cases, the choice of Gaussian base
represents an absence of prior knowledge about the problem
structure, and existing works have yet to fully explore the
strength of base densities adapted to the target.

1. Introduction
Generative models such as normalizing flows and diffusions
sample from a target density ρ1 by continuously transforming samples from a base density ρ0 into the target. This
transport is accomplished by means of an ordinary differential equation (ODE) or stochastic differential equation
(SDE), which takes as initial condition a sample from ρ0
and produces at time t = 1 an approximate sample from
ρ1 . Typically, the base density is taken to be something
simple, analytically tractable, and easy to sample, such as

In this work, we introduce a general formulation of stochastic interpolants in which a base density is produced via
a coupling, whereby samples of this base are computed
conditionally given samples from the target. We construct
a continuous-time stochastic process that interpolates between the coupled base and target, and we characterize the
resulting transport by identification of a continuity equation
obeyed by the time-dependent density. We show that the
velocity field defining this transport can be estimated by solution of an efficient, simulation-free square loss regression
problem analogous to standard, data-agnostic interpolant

*

Equal contribution 1 Center for Cosmology and Particle
Physics, New York University 2 Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University 3 Center for Data Science,
New York University. Correspondence to: Michael S. Albergo
<albergo@nyu.edu>, Mark Goldstein <goldstein@nyu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

