SelMatch: Effectively Scaling Up Dataset Distillation via Selection-Based
Initialization and Partial Updates by Trajectory Matching

Yongmin Lee 1 Hye Won Chung 1

Abstract

such as high computational costs and memory requirements.

Dataset distillation aims to synthesize a small
number of images per class (IPC) from a large
dataset to approximate full dataset training with
minimal performance loss. While effective in
very small IPC ranges, many distillation methods become less effective, even underperforming random sample selection, as IPC increases.
Our examination of state-of-the-art trajectorymatching based distillation methods across various IPC scales reveals that these methods struggle to incorporate the complex, rare features of
harder samples into the synthetic dataset even
with the increased IPC, resulting in a persistent
coverage gap between easy and hard test samples. Motivated by such observations, we introduce SelMatch, a novel distillation method
that effectively scales with IPC. SelMatch uses
selection-based initialization and partial updates
through trajectory matching to manage the synthetic dataset’s desired difficulty level tailored
to IPC scales. When tested on CIFAR-10/100
and TinyImageNet, SelMatch consistently outperforms leading selection-only and distillation-only
methods across subset ratios from 5% to 30%.

A prominent technique in this field is dataset distillation,
also known as dataset condensation (Wang et al., 2018; Zhao
et al., 2020; Zhao & Bilen, 2021; 2023; Cazenavette et al.,
2022). This method distills a large dataset into a smaller,
synthetic one. Data distillation has shown remarkable performance in image classification tasks, especially at extremely
small scale, compared to coreset selection methods (Chen
et al., 2010; Sener & Savarese, 2018; Mirzasoleiman et al.,
2020; Killamsetty et al., 2021a). For example, the Matching
Training Trajectories (MTT) algorithm (Cazenavette et al.,
2022) achieves 71.6% accuracy on a simple ConvNet (Gidaris & Komodakis, 2018) using only 1% of the CIFAR-10
dataset (Krizhevsky et al., 2009), closely approaching the
84.8% accuracy of the full dataset. This remarkable efficiency arises from the optimization process, where synthetic
samples are optimally learned in a continuous space, instead
of being directly selected from the original dataset.
However, recent studies indicate that many dataset distillation methods lose effectiveness and can even underperform
compared to random sample selection as the scale of the
synthetic dataset or images per class (IPC) increases (Cui
et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2023; Guo et al., 2023). This is
counterintuitive, considering the greater optimization freedom that distillation provides over discrete sample selection.
Specifically, DATM (Guo et al., 2023) investigated this
phenomenon by analyzing the training trajectories of the
state-of-the-art MTT method, noting how the effectiveness
of distilled datasets is significantly influenced by the stage
of the training trajectories the method focuses on during synthesizing the dataset; particularly, easy patterns learned in
early trajectories and hard patterns in later stages distinctly
impact MTT’s performance across different IPCs.

1. Introduction
Dataset reduction, essential for data-efficient learning, involves synthesizing or selecting a smaller number of samples from a large dataset, while ensuring that models trained
on this reduced dataset still perform comparably or occur
minimal performance reduction compared to those trained
with the full dataset. This approach addresses challenges
associated with training neural networks on large datasets,

We further examine the MTT method across varying IPC,
by comparing the coverage of easy versus hard real samples
by the synthetic dataset as IPC increases, revealing that the
distillation method fails to adequately incorporate the rare
features of hard samples to the synthetic dataset even with
the increased IPC. This leads to a consistent coverage gap
between easy vs. hard test samples, highlighting that the
reduced efficacy of dataset distillation methods at larger
IPC ranges is partially attributed to their tendency to focus

1
School of Electrical Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of
Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, South Korea. Correspondence to: Yongmin Lee <lym7505@kaist.ac.kr>, Hye Won
Chung <hwchung@kaist.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

