Adversarially Robust Deep Multi-View Clustering:
A Novel Attack and Defense Framework
Haonan Huang 1 2 Guoxu Zhou 1 3 Yanghang Zheng 1 Yuning Qiu 2 Andong Wang 2 Qibin Zhao 2 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
The increasing accumulation of real-world data from various
sources, coupled with diverse feature extractors, highlights
the critical role of multi-view learning (Fang et al., 2023).
Integrating varied features, ranging from heterogeneous data
to visual descriptors, for the same object has become pivotal.
In unsupervised scenarios, multi-view clustering (MVC)
has become an important tool aiming at the exploration of
complementary and consistent information between different views to partition data samples (Huang et al., 2023c).
Traditional MVC techniques, including matrix factorization (Huang et al., 2023a;b), spectral methods (Lu et al.,
2022), and subspace clustering (Cao et al., 2015), focus
on minimizing a predefined clustering objective function
using specific distance metrics. However, these methods
often underperform with high-dimensional data and demand
extensive computational resources (Yan et al., 2021).

Deep Multi-view Clustering (DMVC) stands out
as a widely adopted technique aiming at enhanced
clustering performance by leveraging diverse data
sources. However, the critical issue of vulnerability to adversarial attacks is unexplored due to
the lack of well-defined attack objectives. To fill
this crucial gap, this paper is the first work to
investigate the possibility of adversarial attacks
on DMVC models. Specifically, we introduce
an adversarial attack with Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) with the aim to maximally
change the complementarity and consistency of
multiple views, thus leading to wrong clustering. Building upon this adversarial context, in
the realm of defense, we propose a novel Adversarially Robust Deep Multi-View Clustering by
leveraging adversarial training. Based on the analysis from an information-theoretic perspective, we
design an Attack Mitigator that provides a foundation to guarantee the adversarial robustness of our
DMVC models. Experiments conducted on multiview datasets confirmed that our attack framework
effectively reduces the clustering performance of
the target model. Furthermore, our proposed adversarially robust method is also demonstrated
to be an effective defense against such attacks.
This work is a pioneer in exploring adversarial threats and advancing both theoretical understanding and practical strategies for robust multiview clustering. Code is available at https:
//github.com/libertyhhn/AR-DMVC.

To overcome these limitations, early deep clustering models
utilized deep neural networks for dimensionality reduction,
facilitating more efficient clustering (Wang et al., 2015;
Huang et al., 2019). This evolution has led to significant advancements in deep multi-view clustering (DMVC), where
state-of-the-art models now consistently outperform traditional methods on various benchmarks (Hassani & Khasahmadi, 2020; Lin et al., 2023; Cui et al., 2023). Despite the
demonstrated effectiveness of DMVC models across diverse
domains, its vulnerability to adversarial attacks has not been
well understood and explored yet. This issue is particularly
prominent in safety-critical applications, where real-world
data often faces threats from adversarial entities determined
to deceive or disrupt machine learning models (Madry et al.,
2018; Croce & Hein, 2020). Thus, our work is motivated
by the first scientific question Q1: How to effectively attack
DMVC models?
When facing attacks, it is equally important to study the
adversarial robustness of the models. However, there is
little research on the adversarial robustness of DMVC models. Although a series of adversarial DMVC algorithms (Li
et al., 2019; Zhou & Shen, 2020; Wang et al., 2023) has
been studied, they are not related to adversarial attack and
defense of DMVC. Its primary focus has been on addressing
clustering challenges with clean multi-view data and does

1

School of Automation, Guangdong University of Technology,
Guangzhou, CHINA 2 RIKEN AIP, Tokyo, JAPAN 3 Key Laboratory of Intelligent Detection and the Internet of Things in Manufacturing, Ministry of Education, Guangzhou, CHINA. Correspondence to: Guoxu Zhou <gx.zhou@gdut.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

