A New Theoretical Perspective on Data Heterogeneity in Federated Optimization

Jiayi Wang 1 Shiqiang Wang 2 Rong-Rong Chen 1 Mingyue Ji 1

Abstract

region where FedAvg can outperform mini-batch
SGD even when the gradient divergence can be
arbitrarily large. Our findings are validated using
experiments.

In federated learning (FL), data heterogeneity
is the main reason that existing theoretical
analyses are pessimistic about the convergence
rate. In particular, for many FL algorithms,
the convergence rate grows dramatically when
the number of local updates becomes large,
especially when the product of the gradient
divergence and local Lipschitz constant is large.
However, empirical studies can show that more
local updates can improve the convergence rate
even when these two parameters are large, which
is inconsistent with the theoretical findings. This
paper aims to bridge this gap between theoretical
understanding and practical performance by
providing a theoretical analysis from a new
perspective on data heterogeneity. In particular,
we propose a new and weaker assumption
compared to the local Lipschitz gradient
assumption, named the heterogeneity-driven
pseudo-Lipschitz assumption. We show that
this and the gradient divergence assumptions
can jointly characterize the effect of data
heterogeneity. By deriving a convergence upper
bound for FedAvg and its extensions, we show
that, compared to the existing works, local
Lipschitz constant is replaced by the much smaller
heterogeneity-driven pseudo-Lipschitz constant
and the corresponding convergence upper bound
can be significantly reduced for the same number
of local updates, although its order stays the
same. In addition, when the local objective
function is quadratic, more insights on the
impact of data heterogeneity can be obtained
using the heterogeneity-driven pseudo-Lipschitz
constant. For example, we can identify a

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) has emerged as an important
technique for locally training machine learning models over
geographically distributed workers. It has advantages in
improving training efficiency and preserving data privacy. In
this paper, we consider the following optimization problem
in FL:
)
(
N
1 X
Fi (x) ,
(1)
min f (x) :=
x
N i=1
where N is the number of workers; Fi (x) is the expected
loss function of worker i given by1
Fi (x) := Eni ∼Di [ℓ(x; ni )],

(2)

where ℓ(·) is the loss function, ni is the random data sample
on worker i, and Di is the data distribution on worker i. In
addition, we use D to denote the global data distribution.
In FL, each worker performs I > 1 local iterations using
its local dataset to reduce the communication cost, which is
called local updates. Federated averaging (FedAvg), also
known as local stochastic gradient descent (local SGD),
is one of the most popular algorithms to solve the above
optimization problem (McMahan et al., 2017). In addition
to FedAvg, a number of FL algorithms (Yu et al., 2019a;
Karimireddy et al., 2020; Reddi et al., 2020; Li et al., 2020b;
Wang et al., 2020a;b) have been proposed, whereas the
core mechanism, local updates, is still the foundation of FL.
Nevertheless, existing theoretical analyses are pessimistic
on the convergence error caused by local updates. It is
unclear if performing a large number of local updates can
improve the convergence rate when the gradient divergence
is large or data are highly non-IID/heterogeneous. This will
be explained in detail as follows.

1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA. 2 IBM T.
J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA.
Correspondence to: Jiayi Wang <jiayi.wang@utah.edu>,
Shiqiang Wang <wangshiq@us.ibm.com>, Rong-Rong Chen
<rchen@utah.edu>, Mingyue Ji <mingyue.ji@utah.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

The objective function can be extended to weighted average
by multiplying each local objective function by a possibly distinct
constant.

1

