How Spurious Features Are Memorized:
Precise Analysis for Random and NTK Features

Simone Bombari 1 Marco Mondelli 1

Abstract

present in the training data, which are not predictive for
the sampling distribution. An extensive empirical effort has
aimed at mitigating this phenomenon (Plumb et al., 2022;
Chang et al., 2021). In fact, the benefits of solving this problem range from robustness to distribution-shift (Geirhos
et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2021), fairness (Zliobaite, 2015),
and data-privacy (Leino & Fredrikson, 2020). However,
avoiding to overfit spurious features is not always feasible, since memorization can be optimal for accuracy and
over-parameterized models often exhibit their best performance when trained long enough to achieve 0 training error
(Nakkiran et al., 2020; Feldman, 2020).

Deep learning models are known to overfit and
memorize spurious features in the training dataset.
While numerous empirical studies have aimed at
understanding this phenomenon, a rigorous theoretical framework to quantify it is still missing.
In this paper, we consider spurious features that
are uncorrelated with the learning task, and we
provide a precise characterization of how they
are memorized via two separate terms: (i) the
stability of the model with respect to individual
training samples, and (ii) the feature alignment
between the spurious feature and the full sample. While the first term is well established in
learning theory and it is connected to the generalization error in classical work, the second one
is, to the best of our knowledge, novel. Our key
technical result gives a precise characterization
of the feature alignment for the two prototypical
settings of random features (RF) and neural tangent kernel (NTK) regression. We prove that the
memorization of spurious features weakens as the
generalization capability increases and, through
the analysis of the feature alignment, we unveil
the role of the model and of its activation function. Numerical experiments show the predictive
power of our theory on standard datasets (MNIST,
CIFAR-10).

In this regard, a related (but separate) body of work has
characterized the role of benign overfitting (Belkin, 2021;
Bartlett et al., 2020), and it has precisely described the indistribution generalization of interpolating models, such as
random features and neural tangent kernels (Mei & Montanari, 2022; Ghorbani et al., 2021; Montanari & Zhong,
2022). However, this powerful theoretical machinery does
not cover the memorization of spurious features, as noise
is generally modelled to be in the labels, rather than in the
input data. More generally, while practical work has tried to
understand the impact of spurious features and disentangle
them from core features in deep learning models (Hermann
& Lampinen, 2020; Singla & Feizi, 2022), theoretical approaches remain predominantly directed to understand how
learning is impacted by the complexity of the features (Qiu
et al., 2023), or the degree of overparameterization (Sagawa
et al., 2020), without capturing the role of the architecture.

1. Introduction

Our paper bridges this gap, offering an analytically tractable
framework to understand and quantify the memorization of
spurious features. We consider a setting similar to (Yang
et al., 2022), and we in particular look at the case where
the spurious features are not correlated with the true label
of the sample (thus the term memorization). Formally, we
model the sample z as composed by two distinct parts, i.e.,
z ≡ [x, y], where x is the core feature and y the spurious
one, see Figure 1 for an illustration. The memorization of
spurious features is captured by the correlation between the
true label g of the training sample and the output of the
model evaluated on the spurious sample z s ≡ [−, y], where
“−” corresponds to removing the core feature x (e.g., replacing it with all zeros). In fact, z s is independent of the label

Neural networks often use features that are not inherently
relevant for the intended task. This phenomenon can be
caused by positive spurious correlations between certain patterns and the learning task (Geirhos et al., 2020; Xiao et al.,
2021), but it occurs even when the patterns are rare (Yang
et al., 2022) or simply irrelevant (Hermann & Lampinen,
2020), leading the model to memorize spurious relations
1
Institute of Science and Technology, Austria. Correspondence
to: Simone Bombari <simone.bombari@ista.ac.at>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

