PAPM: A Physics-aware Proxy Model for Process Systems

Pengwei Liu 1 Zhongkai Hao 2 Xingyu Ren 1 Hangjie Yuan 1 Jiayang Ren 3 Dong Ni 1

Abstract

cal simulations, which are often computationally intensive,
especially in scenarios necessitating frequent model queries
like reverse engineering forward simulation (Dijkstra &
Luijten, 2021) and optimization design (Gramacy, 2020).
Recent advancements in data-driven methods have paved the
way to tackle computational challenges more effectively (Lu
et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020; Kochkov et al., 2021; Stachenfeld et al., 2021; Hao et al., 2023b). As shown in Fig. 1
(left), these methods input multiple conditions of process
systems to output time-dependent solutions, serving as the
proxy model for process systems. Through adopting a supervised learning-from-data paradigm, remarkable advancements in calculation speeds have been achieved—several
orders of magnitude faster than traditional numerical simulations. This has led to significant savings in computational
costs. While data-driven methods are powerful, they face
two primary limitations: 1) a dependence on extensive labeled datasets, which contrasts sharply with the high computational costs of numerical simulations, and 2) a presumption of train-test uniformity that leads to poor generalization,
especially in out-of-sample scenarios like time extrapolation. This poor generalization arises from an overemphasis
on the inductive biases of network architectures based on
labels, rather than a strict adherence to fundamental physical
laws (Li et al., 2021; Brandstetter et al., 2022).

In the context of proxy modeling for process systems, traditional data-driven deep learning approaches frequently encounter significant challenges, such as substantial training costs induced
by large amounts of data, and limited generalization capabilities. As a promising alternative,
physics-aware models incorporate partial physics
knowledge to ameliorate these challenges. Although demonstrating efficacy, they fall short
in terms of exploration depth and universality.
To address these shortcomings, we introduce a
physics-aware proxy model (PAPM) that fully
incorporates partial prior physics of process systems, which includes multiple input conditions
and the general form of conservation relations,
resulting in better out-of-sample generalization.
Additionally, PAPM contains a holistic temporalspatial stepping module for flexible adaptation
across various process systems. Through systematic comparisons with state-of-the-art pure datadriven and physics-aware models across five twodimensional benchmarks in nine generalization
tasks, PAPM notably achieves an average performance improvement of 6.7%, while requiring
fewer FLOPs, and just 1% of the parameters compared to the prior leading method.

To ameliorate high training costs and limited generalizability, a more promising strategy, known as physics-informed
deep learning (PIDL), involves prior knowledge, such as fundamental physical laws, into neural networks (NNs). This
integration enhances the sample efficiency and generalizability of NNs, proving particularly vital in scenarios with
limited labeled data (Li et al., 2021; Hao et al., 2022; Meng
et al., 2022; Cuomo et al., 2022). One of the typical methods considers complete physical laws as the loss function
of NNs to construct proxy models, such as PINNs (Raissi
et al., 2019) for specific conditions, PI-DeepONet (Wang
et al., 2021), and PINO (Li et al., 2021) for multiple sets of
conditions. However, the real-world applicability of these
methods is limited by an incomplete understanding of the
underlying physics of specific process systems, making it
challenging to derive complete physics laws.

1. Introduction
From molecular dynamics to turbulent flows, process systems are essential in numerous scientific and engineering
domains (Cameron & Hangos, 2001). Computational modeling and simulation are crucial for understanding their complex temporal-spatial dynamics, enabling precise predictions and informed decisions across various fields. However,
these valuable insights are provided by traditional numeri1
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China 2 Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China 3 University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada.
Correspondence to: Dong Ni
<dni@zju.edu.cn>.

Another common approach, termed as “physics-aware”
models, offers a promising solution for this scenario by
incorporating partial prior knowledge alongside a small

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

