Position: Why We Must Rethink Empirical Research in Machine Learning

Moritz Herrmann 1 2 F. Julian D. Lange 1 2 Katharina Eggensperger 3 Giuseppe Casalicchio 4 2 Marcel Wever 5 2
Matthias Feurer 4 2 David Rügamer 4 2 Eyke Hüllermeier 5 2 Anne-Laure Boulesteix 1 2 Bernd Bischl 4 2
does not replicate has far-reaching epistemic∗ and practical
consequences. From an epistemological∗ point of view, it
means that research results are unreliable and, to some extent, it calls into question progress in the field. In practice,
it may jeopardize applied empirical researchers’ confidence
in experimental results and discourage them from applying
ML methods, even though these novel approaches might be
beneficial. For example, ML is increasingly being used in
the medical domain, and this is often promising in terms of
patient benefit. However, there are also examples indicating that applied researchers (are starting to) have concerns
about ML being used in this high-stakes area. Consider, for
example, this quite drastic warning by Dhiman et al. (2022,
p. 2): “Machine learning is often portrayed as offering many
advantages [...]. However, these advantages have not yet
materialised into patient benefit [...]. Given the increasing
concern about the methodological quality and risk of bias
of prediction model studies [emphasis added], caution is
warranted and the lack of uptake of models in medical practice is not surprising.” That is, if the ML community does
not improve rigor in empirical methodological research, we
think there may be a risk of a backlash against the use of
ML in practice.
In general, there is a growing body of empirical evidence
showing that conclusions drawn from experimental results
in ML were overly optimistic at the time of publication and
could not be replicated in subsequent studies. For example,
Melis et al. (2018, p. 1) “arrive at the somewhat surprising
conclusion that standard LSTM architectures, when properly
regularized, outperform more recent models”; Henderson
et al. (2018, p. 3213) found for deep reinforcement learning “that both intrinsic (e.g. random seeds, environment
properties) and extrinsic sources (e.g. hyperparameters,
codebases) of non-determinism can contribute to difficulties
in reproducing baseline algorithms”; Christodoulou et al.
(2019, p. 12) found in a systematic review “no performance
benefit of machine learning over logistic regression for clinical prediction models”; Elor & Averbuch-Elor (2022, p. 1)
found in their study on data balancing in classification “that
balancing does not improve prediction performance for the
strong” classifiers; see also Lucic et al. (2018), Riquelme
et al. (2018), Raff (2019), Herrmann et al. (2020), Ferrari Dacrema et al. (2021), Marie et al. (2021), Buchka
et al. (2021), Narang et al. (2021), van den Goorbergh et al.

Abstract
We warn against a common but incomplete understanding of empirical research in machine learning that leads to non-replicable results, makes
findings unreliable, and threatens to undermine
progress in the field. To overcome this alarming situation, we call for more awareness of the
plurality of ways of gaining knowledge experimentally but also of some epistemic limitations.
In particular, we argue most current empirical machine learning research is fashioned as confirmatory research while it should rather be considered
exploratory.

1. The Non-Replicable ML Research Enigma
In his Caltech commencement address “Cargo Cult
Science”∗ ,1 Richard Feynman (1974) described how researchers employ practices that conflict with scientific principles to adhere to a certain way of doing things. This
position paper warns against similar tendencies in empirical research in machine learning (ML) and calls for a
mindset change to address methodological and epistemic
challenges of experimentation.
There is ML research that does not replicate. From an
empirical scientific perspective, non-replicable research is a
fundamental problem. As Karl Popper (1959/2002, p. 66)
phrased it: “non-reproducible single occurrences are of no
significance to science.”2 Consequently, ML research that
1

Institute for Medical Information Processing, Biometry, and
Epidemiology, Faculty of Medicine, LMU Munich, Munich,
Germany 2 Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML), Munich, Germany 3 University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany
4
Department of Statistics, LMU Munich, Munich, Germany
5
Institute of Informatics, LMU Munich, Munich, Germany. Correspondence to: Moritz Herrmann <moritz.herrmann@lmu.de>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
As our paper contains some jargon, we have included a glossary in the appendix; asterisks (∗) in the text denote covered terms.
2
Reproducible here does not refer to exact computational reproducibility∗ but generally to arriving at the same scientific conclusions, termed replicability∗ in this paper.

1

