Zero-Shot Unsupervised and Text-Based Audio Editing Using DDPM Inversion

Hila Manor 1 Tomer Michaeli 1

Abstract

In the image domain, some works proposed to train from
scratch text-guided models for editing (Brooks et al., 2023),
or to use test-time optimization to control the generation or
to fine-tune a pre-trained text-to-image model (Gal et al.,
2022; Kim et al., 2022; Kawar et al., 2023; Ruiz et al., 2023;
Zhang et al., 2023b). Other works demonstrated that high
quality results can be obtained with zero-shot editing methods that employ pre-trained text-to-image models (Meng
et al., 2021; Huberman-Spiegelglas et al., 2024; Tumanyan
et al., 2023; Wu & De la Torre, 2023), avoiding the heavy
computational burden of test-time optimization. In the audio
domain, text-based editing has only very recently started
gaining traction. Recent works either train models from
scratch for specific editing tasks (Copet et al., 2023; Han
et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023), or apply test-time optimization (Paissan et al., 2023; Plitsis et al., 2024). To date,
zero-shot editing for audio signals has only been illustrated
in the AudioLDM work (Liu et al., 2023a), using the naive
SDEdit (Meng et al., 2021) approach.

Editing signals using large pre-trained models,
in a zero-shot manner, has recently seen rapid
advancements in the image domain. However,
this wave has yet to reach the audio domain. In
this paper, we explore two zero-shot editing techniques for audio signals, which use DDPM inversion with pre-trained diffusion models. The
first, which we coin ZEro-shot Text-based Audio (ZETA) editing, is adopted from the image
domain. The second, named ZEro-shot UnSupervized (ZEUS) editing, is a novel approach for
discovering semantically meaningful editing directions without supervision. When applied to
music signals, this method exposes a range of musically interesting modifications, from controlling
the participation of specific instruments to improvisations on the melody. Samples and code can
be found on our examples page.

In this paper we explore two approaches for zero-shot audio
editing with pre-trained audio DDMs, one based on text
guidance and the other based on semantic perturbations
that are found in an unsupervised manner. Our zero-shot
text-guided audio (ZETA) editing technique allows a wide
range of manipulations, from changing the style or genre
of a musical piece to changing specific instruments in the
arrangement (Fig. 1(c),(d)), all while maintaining high perceptual quality and semantic similarity to the source signal.
Our zero-shot unsupervised (ZEUS) technique allows generating e.g., interesting variations in melody that adhere to
the original key, rhythm, and style, but are impossible to
achieve through text guidance (Fig. 1(a),(b)).

1. Introduction
Creative media creation has seen a dramatic transformation with the recent advancements in text-based generative models, particularly those based on denoising diffusion models (DDMs) (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al.,
2020; Song et al., 2021a). While progress has been initially
made in image synthesis (Ramesh et al., 2021; Rombach
et al., 2022), generative models for the audio domain have
recently captured increased interest. Indeed, transformer
based models such as MusicGen (Copet et al., 2023) and MusicLM (Agostinelli et al., 2023), and diffusion based models
such as AudioLDM (Liu et al., 2023a) and TANGO (Ghosal
et al., 2023), now enable nonprofessional users to effortlessly create short musical excerpts and audio effects.

Our methods are based on the recently introduced editfriendly DDPM inversion method (Huberman-Spiegelglas
et al., 2024), which we use for extracting latent noise vectors
corresponding to the source signal. To generate the edited
signal, we use those noise vectors in a DDPM sampling process (Ho et al., 2020), while drifting the diffusion towards
the desired edit. In our text-based method, we achieve this
by changing the text prompt supplied to the denoiser model.
In our unsupervised method, we perturb the output of the
denoiser in the directions of the top principal components
(PCs) of the posterior, which we efficiently compute based
on Manor & Michaeli (2024). As we show, these perturba-

To allow more fine-grained manipulations, a lot of attention
has been recently devoted to editing of signals using DDMs.
1

Faculty of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Technion –
Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel. Correspondence to:
Hila Manor <hila.manor@campus.technion.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

