Maestro: Uncovering Low-Rank Structures via Trainable Decomposition

Samuel Horváth 1 Stefanos Laskaridis 2 Shashank Rajput 3 Hongyi Wang 4

Abstract

1. Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have been a large
driver for AI breakthroughs in recent years. However, these models have been getting increasingly
large as they become more accurate and safe. This
means that their training becomes increasingly
costly and time-consuming and typically yields a
single model to fit all targets. Various techniques
have been proposed in the literature to mitigate
this, including pruning, sparsification, or quantization of model weights and updates. While achieving high compression rates, they often incur significant computational overheads at training or lead
to non-negligible accuracy penalty. Alternatively,
factorization methods have been leveraged for
low-rank compression of DNNs. Similarly, such
techniques (e.g., SVD) frequently rely on heavy
iterative decompositions of layers and are potentially sub-optimal for non-linear models, such as
DNNs. We take a further step in designing efficient low-rank models and propose M AESTRO, a
framework for trainable low-rank layers. Instead
of iteratively applying a priori decompositions,
the low-rank structure is baked into the training
process through L O D, a low-rank ordered decomposition. Not only is this the first time importance
ordering via sampling is applied on the decomposed DNN structure, but it also allows selecting
ranks at a layer granularity. Our theoretical analysis demonstrates that in special cases L O D recovers the SVD decomposition and PCA . Applied
to DNNs, M AESTRO enables the extraction of
lower footprint models that preserve performance.
Simultaneously, it enables the graceful trade-off
between accuracy-latency for deployment to even
more constrained devices without retraining.

Deep Learning has been experiencing an unprecedented
uptake, with models achieving a (super-)human level of
performance in several tasks across modalities, giving birth
to even more intelligent assistants (Radford et al., 2023) and
next-gen visual perception and generative systems (Radford
et al., 2021). However, the price of this performance is that
models are getting significantly larger, with training and
deployment becoming increasingly costly (Laskaridis et al.,
2024). Therefore, techniques from Efficient ML become
evermore relevant (Wan et al., 2023), and a requirement for
deployment in constrained devices, such as smartphones or
IoT devices (Laskaridis et al., 2022).
Typical techniques to compress the network involve i) quantization, i.e., reducing precision of the model (Wang et al.,
2019) or communicated updates (Seide et al., 2014; Alistarh et al., 2017), ii) pruning the model during training,
e.g., through Lottery Ticket Hypothesis (LTH) (Frankle
& Carbin, 2019), iii) sparsification of the network representation and updates, i.e., dropping the subset of coordinates (Suresh et al., 2017; Alistarh et al., 2018) or iv) lowrank approximation (Wang et al., 2021; Dudziak et al.,
2019), i.e. keeping the most relevant ranks of the decomposed network. Despite the benefits during deployment,
that is a lower footprint model, in many cases, the overhead
during training time or the accuracy degradation can be
non-negligible. Moreover, many techniques can introduce
multiple hyperparameters or the need to fine-tune to recover
the lost accuracy.
In this work, we focus training low-rank factorization. Specifically, we pinpoint the challenges of techniques (Wang et al., 2021; 2023) when decomposing the
parameters of each layer in low-rank space and the need to
find the optimal ranks for each one at training time. To solve
this, we propose L O D (Low-rank ordered Decomposition),
a non-trivially extended version of Ordered Dropout technique from Horváth et al. (2021), applied to progressively
find the optimal decomposition for each layer of a DNN
while training (Fig. 1). Critical differences to prior work
include i) the non-uniformity of the search space (i.e. we
allow for different ranks per layer), ii) the trainable aspect of
the decomposition to reflect the data distribution, and iii) the
gains to training and deployment time without sacrificing

1
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence (MBZUAI), Abu Dhabi, UAE 2 Brave Software, London, UK 3 DataBricks, San Fransisco, USA 4 Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA. Correspondence to: Samuel
Horváth <samuel.horvath@mbzuai.ac.ae>, Stefanos Laskaridis
<mail@stefanos.cc>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

