Auctionformer: A Unified Deep Learning Algorithm for Solving Equilibrium
Strategies in Auction Games

Kexin Huang † 1 Ziqian Chen 2 Xue Wang 2 Chongming Gao 1 Jinyang Gao 2 Bolin Ding 2 Xiang Wang ‡ 1

Abstract

2008; Chen, 2017). Notably, online advertising has witnessed an exponential surge in trading volume, amounting
to an astonishing 209.7 billion in recent decades, facilitated
by sophisticated auction mechanisms (Interactive Advertising Bureau & PwC, 2023). A typical auction includes two
components, the bidders and the mechanism. Illustratively,
consider a classic single-item auction where bidders are
availed information related to the underlying value of the
item on offer. Based on this revelation, each bidder is tasked
with setting a price he/she is willing to pay for the item.
After collecting all bid prices, the highest bidder wins the
item at the price by predetermined mechanisms.

Auction games have been widely used in plenty
of trading environments such as online advertising and real estate. The complexity of real-world
scenarios, characterized by diverse auction mechanisms and bidder asymmetries, poses significant
challenges in efficiently solving for equilibria.
Traditional learning approaches often face limitations due to their specificity to certain settings
and high resource demands. Addressing this, we
introduce Auctionformer, an efficient transformerbased method to solve equilibria of diverse auctions in a unified framework. Leveraging the flexible tokenization schemes, Auctionformer translates varying auction games into a standard token
series, making use of renowned Transformer architectures. Moreover, we employ Nash error as
the loss term, sidestepping the need for underlying equilibrium solutions and enabling efficient
training and inference. Furthermore, a few-shot
framework supports adaptability to new mechanisms, reinforced by a self-supervised fine-tuning
approach. Extensive experimental results affirm
the superior performance of Auctionformer over
contemporary methods, heralding its potential for
broad real-world applications.

While researchers achieved theoretical equilibria in certain
specific auction environments (Vickrey & William, 1961;
Jackson & Swinkels, 2005; Athey & Haile, 2002), the field
underwent a paradigm shift with the adoption of learning
approaches. These methods, including no-regret learning (Feng et al., 2021; Bichler et al., 2021; Kohring et al.,
2023; Deng et al., 2022) and multi-agent reinforcement
learning (Kolumbus & Nisan, 2022; Banchio & Skrzypacz,
2022), have fostered the development of (approximate)
equilibrium strategies by leveraging learning approaches to
either mitigate regret or augment expected rewards (Bichler
et al., 2022; Badanidiyuru et al., 2021; Nedelec et al., 2021).
Nonetheless, these approaches are mainly specifically
designed to solve a unique auction setting, such as a fixed
number of bidders and/or fixed distributions, and are both
time and resource-intensive.
In a related domain, the area of auction design has witnessed
the successful application of deep learning techniques
(Dütting et al., 2021; 2024), notably attention-based
architectures, showcasing their potential for flexible input
handling and generalizability (Ivanov et al., 2022). This
raises a pivotal question:

1. Introduction
Auctions serve as a cornerstone in various trading environments including art acquisitions (Louargand & McDaniel,
1991), radio spectrum allocations (Chen et al., 2010), real
estate sales (Mayer, 1998), and online advertising (Bigler,
†
Work done at Alibaba ‡ Xiang Wang is also affiliated with Institute of Dataspace, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
1
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
2
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Ziqian
Chen <eric.czq@alibaba-inc.com>, Xue Wang <xue.w@alibabainc.com>.

Can a trained deep learning model efficiently compute approximate equilibria for any mechanism only with finetuning?
Motivated by this question and drawing inspiration from the
remarkable successes of Transformer models (Vaswani et al.,
2017; Ivanov et al., 2022), we introduce Auctionformer, a
Transformer model to solve general auction games. Auction-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

