Unlock the Cognitive Generalization of Deep Reinforcement Learning
via Granular Ball Representation

Jiashun Liu 1 Jianye Hao† 1 Yi Ma 1 Shuyin Xia† 2

Abstract

Simple scenario with reward function
1. Train here

The policies learned by humans in simple scenarios can be deployed in complex scenarios with
the same task logic through limited feature alignment training, a process referred to as cognitive
generalization or systematic generalization. Thus,
a plausible conjecture is that unlocking cognitive
generalization in DRL could enable effective generalization of policies from simple to complex scenarios through reward-agnostic fine-tuning. This
would eliminate the need for designing reward
functions in complex scenarios, thus reducing
environment-building costs. In this paper, we propose a general framework to enhance the cognitive generalization ability of standard DRL methods. Our framework builds a cognitive latent
space in a simple scenario, then segments the
latent space to cluster samples with similar environmental influences into same subregion. During
the fine-tuning in the complex scenario, the policy uses cognitive latent space to align the new
sample with the same subregion sample collected
from the simple scenario and approximates the
rewards and Q values of the new samples for policy update. Based on this framework, we propose
Granular Ball Reinforcement Leaning (GBRL), a
practical algorithm via Variational Autoencoder
(VAE) and Granular Ball Representation. GBRL
achieves effective policy generalization on various difficult scenarios with the same task logic.

Complex scenario without reward

2. Deploy here

same task logic
No finetune in
complex scenario

I‘m not good at dealing with policy generalizations
between scenarios that are too different.

Zero-shot generalization
Allow fine-tuning in complex scenarios.
Finetune in
complex scenario

I need the reward function. But designing the
complex and dense reward function can be costly

Few-shot generalization

Finetune in
complex scenario

I use reward-agnostic fine-tuning to achieve policy
generalization across different difficulty scenarios.

Cognitive generalization

Figure 1. A motivational demonstration of cognitive generalization
on maze tasks. The bottom part shows the test scores for the
complex maze scenario. Cognitive generalization enables simple
scenario policies to be effectively deployed to complex scenarios
with the same task logic via reward-agnostic fine-tuning.

quential decision-making tasks ranging from games (Mnih
et al., 2013) to robotic control (Kaufmann et al., 2023). Notably, the effect of standard reinforcement learning relies
on high-quality environments for training, such as accurate
dynamic modeling of complex scenarios and well-designed
reward functions (Sutton & Barto, 1999). As a result, deploying a policy learned in a simple scenario to a complex task with the same task logic (e.g., larger map, more
branches and obstacles) becomes challenging (Kirk et al.,
2023), which is a manifestation of low generalization ability.
In contrast, humans can achieve this by mentally alignment
simple task policy with complex scenario features. Brain
science encapsulates this process as cognitive generalization (Lake & Baroni, 2023). Thus, a plausible conjecture
is that unlocking the cognitive generalization capabilities
of DRL may improve the performance of the pre-trained
policy in the complex scenario of the same task logic.

1. Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has witnessed striking
empirical achievements in agents’ training on difficult se1
COLLAGE OF INTELLIGENCE AND COMPUTING,Tianjin University, China 2 CQUPT, China. Correspondence to: Jianye Hao <jianye.hao@tju.edu.cn>, Shuyin Xia
<xia shuyin@@cqupt.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

