Improved Communication-Privacy Trade-offs in L2 Mean Estimation under
Streaming Differential Privacy

Wei-Ning Chen 1 Berivan Isik 1 Peter Kairouz 2 Albert No 3 Sewoong Oh 2 4 Zheng Xu 2

Abstract

This process typically involves the server iteratively gathering essential local model updates (such as noisy gradients)
from the client side and subsequently updating the global
model. While FL embodies the principle of data minimization by only requesting the minimal information necessary
for model training, these local model updates may still contain sensitive information. As a result, additional privacy
protection is necessary to prevent the trained model from
possibly revealing individual information. Moreover, with
the increase of model size, the exchange of local model
updates becomes both memory and computation-intensive,
leading to substantial latency and impeding the efficiency
of training cycles. Consequently, it is desired to devise
robust privacy protection mechanisms that simultaneously
optimize communication efficiency.

We study L2 mean estimation under central differential privacy and communication constraints, and
address two key challenges: firstly, existing mean
estimation schemes that simultaneously handle
both constraints are usually optimized for L∞ geometry and rely on random rotation or Kashin’s
representation to adapt to L2 geometry, resulting
in suboptimal leading constants in mean square errors (MSEs); secondly, schemes achieving orderoptimal communication-privacy trade-offs do not
extend seamlessly to streaming differential privacy (DP) settings (e.g., tree aggregation or matrix factorization), rendering them incompatible
with DP-FTRL type optimizers. In this work, we
tackle these issues by introducing a novel privacy
accounting method for the sparsified Gaussian
mechanism that incorporates the randomness inherent in sparsification into the DP noise. Unlike
previous approaches, our accounting algorithm
directly operates in L2 geometry, yielding MSEs
that fast converge to those of the uncompressed
Gaussian mechanism. Additionally, we extend
the sparsification scheme to the matrix factorization framework under streaming DP and provide a
precise accountant tailored for DP-FTRL type optimizers. Empirically, our method demonstrates
at least a 100x improvement of compression for
DP-SGD across various FL tasks.

In this paper, we study the L2 mean estimation1 , a core
sub-routine in the majority of FL schemes, subject to joint
communication and differential privacy (DP) (Dwork et al.,
2006) constraints. We consider two major types of DP
optimization settings: (1) the classic DP-SGD type approach (Abadi et al., 2016) where independent DP noise
is injected in each round of training, and (2) the DP-FTRL
type approach (Guha Thakurta & Smith, 2013; Kairouz
et al., 2021b; Denisov et al., 2022) where the DP noise is
correlated across training rounds, the structure of which is
intricately designed based on certain matrix factorization.
There has been a long thread of literature on distributed
mean estimation (DME) under either or both privacy and
communication constraints (Suresh et al., 2017; Konečnỳ
et al., 2016; Agarwal et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2020; 2023;
Shah et al., 2022; Feldman & Talwar, 2021; Isik et al.,
2023a; Asi et al., 2023). Recent work by Chen et al. (2023)
points out that, to achieve order-optimal mean square errors (MSEs) under joint constraints, it becomes imperative
to integrate the inherent randomness utilized in compression (e.g., in sampling, sketching, or projection) into privacy analysis. Essentially, the implicit “compression noise”
should be leveraged to amplify the DP guarantees, resulting

1. Introduction
In federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al., 2016; Konečnỳ
et al., 2016; Kairouz et al., 2021c), a server executes a
specific learning task on data that is kept on clients’ devices, avoiding the explicit collection of local raw datasets.
*

Equal contribution 1 Stanford University 2 Google 3 Yonsei University 4 University of Washington. Correspondence to: Wei-Ning
Chen <wnchen@stanford.edu>.

1
Here, L2 refers to the L2 geometry of the local model updates,
i.e., ∥gi ∥2 ≤ ∆2 for all client i. This condition is typically
maintained through the L2 clipping step of the differential privacy
mechanism.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

