Robust Graph Matching when Nodes are Corrupt

Taha Ameen 1 Bruce Hajek 1

Abstract

Graph matching can be viewed as a noisy version of the
graph isomorphism problem, and is motivated by real-world
networks often being correlated but non-identical. For instance, the interaction graphs of two social networks (such
as Twitter and Flickr) are correlated because users are likely
to connect with the same people in both networks. Indeed,
it was shown in (Narayanan & Shmatikov, 2009) that the
identities of some nodes in the Twitter graph, despite being anonymized, could be recovered simply by matching
to the Flickr network. Another example is protein-protein
interaction (PPI), where the interactome of an organism is
constructed by connecting two interacting proteins with an
edge. The interactomes of two closely related species are
then correlated through a latent correspondence. Matching
these interactomes allows the identification of conserved
functional components between the two species (Singh et al.,
2008; Bandyopadhyay et al., 2006).

Two models are introduced to study the problem
of matching two correlated graphs when some
of the nodes are corrupt. In the weak model, a
random subset of nodes in one or both graphs
can interact randomly with their network. For
this model, it is shown that no estimator can correctly recover a positive fraction of the corrupt
nodes. Necessary conditions for any estimator
to correctly identify and match all the uncorrupt
nodes are derived, and it is shown that these conditions are also sufficient for the k-core estimator.
In the strong model, an adversarially selected subset of nodes in one or both graphs can interact
arbitrarily with their network. For this model, detection of corrupt nodes is impossible. Even so,
we show that if only one of the networks is compromised, then under appropriate conditions, the
maximum overlap estimator can correctly match a
positive fraction of nodes albeit without explicitly
identifying them.

All these networks are more complicated than correlated
Erdős-Rényi graphs, and so designing robust algorithms
is paramount in practice. In a sense, algorithms for graph
matching may themselves be viewed as robust algorithms
for graph isomorphism, with the extent of robustness quantified through tolerance to edge-corruptions. In the present
work, it is argued that robustness towards node-corruptions
is also an important factor to consider when designing algorithms. For instance, a user’s Twitter account may get
hacked, causing them to connect and disconnect arbitrarily with other users. Similarly, a protein in a PPI network
may interact randomly with other proteins due to a variety of factors. For example, the popular Yeast two-hybrid
method constructs a PPI network by pairwise examining
the interaction between two proteins by fusing them both
to a transcription binding domain in the yeast cell (Fionda,
2019). However, if one of the proteins is itself an unknown
transcription factor, then false positive interactions may be
recorded. Conversely, if it is toxic to the cell, or requires
post-translational modifications that do not take place in
yeast cells, then false negatives can occur (Koh et al., 2012).

1. Introduction
Graph matching is the problem of finding the latent correspondence between two edge-correlated networks, i.e recovering (unknown) node identities in a graph by matching to a
correlated graph with (known) node identities. It is a ubiquitous problem in machine learning with applications to social
networks (Narayanan & Shmatikov, 2009; 2008), biological
networks (Singh et al., 2008; Kazemi et al., 2016), computer
vision (Schellewald & Schnörr, 2005), natural language processing (Haghighi et al., 2005), and graph neural network
based machine translation (Xu et al., 2019). Over a decade
of progress has led to a sound understanding of the fundamental limits of graph matching in the case of correlated
Erdős-Rényi graphs; an overview is provided in Section 1.1.
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, and the
Coordinated Science Laboratory, University of Illinois UrbanaChampaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA. Correspondence to: Taha
Ameen <tahaa3@illinois.edu>.

These phenomena are better captured by node corruptions
than edge corruptions. Here, the number of corrupted node
pairs may even be quadratic in the size of the graph, but
there is a spatial clustering of the noise: each corrupted edge
has at least one end point in a subset of corrupted nodes.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

