Position: Rethinking Post-Hoc Search-Based Neural Approaches for Solving
Large-Scale Traveling Salesman Problems

Yifan Xia 1 † Xianliang Yang 2 Zichuan Liu 1 † Zhihao Liu 3 † Lei Song 2 Jiang Bian 2

Abstract
ATT-GCN
DIMES
DIFUSCO
SoftDist (ours)

Solution Cost

Recent advancements in solving large-scale
traveling salesman problems (TSP) utilize the
heatmap-guided Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS)
paradigm, where machine learning (ML) models generate heatmaps, indicating the probability
distribution of each edge being part of the optimal solution, to guide MCTS in solution finding.
However, our theoretical and experimental analysis raises doubts about the effectiveness of MLbased heatmap generation. In support of this, we
demonstrate that a simple baseline method can
outperform complex ML approaches in heatmap
generation. Furthermore, we question the practical value of the heatmap-guided MCTS paradigm.
To substantiate this, our findings show its inferiority to the LKH-3 heuristic despite the paradigm’s
reliance on problem-specific, hand-crafted strategies. For the future, we suggest research directions focused on developing more theoretically
sound heatmap generation methods and exploring
autonomous, generalizable ML approaches for
combinatorial problems. The code is available for
review: https://github.com/xyfffff/
rethink_mcts_for_tsp.

Pareto Front (w/o SoftDist)
Pareto Front (w/ SoftDist)

Inference Latency

Figure 1. Relative performance comparison of ML-based methods with and without SoftDist. Inference Latency represents the
heatmap generation time, with lower being better. Solution Quality
represents the effectiveness of TSP solutions generated through
MCTS guided by the heatmaps, with higher being better.

grating machine learning (ML) for solving TSP, exemplified
by Bello et al. (2016); Kool et al. (2019); da Costa et al.
(2020). However, these methods often lack scalability and
become highly inefficient when applied to large-scale TSPs
due to the exponentially growing action space, the quadratic
computational complexity of self-attention mechanisms, and
the issue of sparse rewards on large graphs (Vaswani et al.,
2017; Bengio et al., 2021; Joshi et al., 2022).
Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS) is a versatile and adaptive
algorithm widely applied across various domains (Browne
et al., 2012; Silver et al., 2016; 2017). Its recent combination
with ML, in efforts like ATT-GCN (Fu et al., 2021), DIMES
(Qiu et al., 2022), UTSP (Min et al., 2023), and DIFUSCO
(Sun & Yang, 2023), represents a novel approach, known as
heatmap-guided MCTS, for solving large-scale TSPs. These
methods typically involve ML models generating heatmaps
for TSP instances, assigning probabilities to each edge as
potential parts of solutions, rather than directly generating
TSP solutions. MCTS then utilizes these heatmaps as priors
for edge selection to generate the final TSP solutions. However, the non-differentiable and time-consuming nature of
the MCTS process complicates its direct integration into the
training loss function of ML models. Consequently, there’s
a necessity for surrogate loss functions, typically designed
heuristically, to facilitate ML model training. These surrogate losses aim to approximate the original TSP objective
for a more feasible training process, but this heuristic ap-

1. Introduction
The traveling salesman problem (TSP) is a classic optimization challenge with significant applications in logistics, network design, and the broader field of operations
research (OR). Traditionally addressed through exact algorithms like Concorde (Applegate et al., 2009) and heuristic algorithms such as LKH-3 (Helsgaun, 2017; Taillard &
Helsgaun, 2019), recent years have seen a shift towards inte†
Work done during internship at MSRA. 1 Nanjing University,
Nanjing, China 2 Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China 3 Institute
of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
Correspondence to: Jiang Bian <jiang.bian@microsoft.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

