Expand-and-Cluster:
Parameter Recovery of Neural Networks

Flavio Martinelli 1 Berfin Şimşek 1 2 Wulfram Gerstner * 1 Johanni Brea * 1

Abstract

Şimşek et al., 2024). Recent advances in the theory of
artificial neural networks indicate that the loss function is
rough – i.e. predominantly populated by saddle points – for
networks of minimal size (Şimşek et al., 2021), but becomes
effectively convex in the limit of infinitely large hidden layers (Jacot et al., 2018; Chizat & Bach, 2018; Du et al., 2019;
Rotskoff & Vanden-Eijnden, 2022). In a teacher-student
setup, where teacher and student share the same architecture,
the complexity of the loss landscape is linked to the ratio
between the amount of permutation-induced critical points
(zero gradients, non-zero loss) and the number of global
minima at zero population loss (Şimşek et al., 2021).
Importantly, as the width of the student increases, this ratio
undergoes a substantial change: from much larger than
one to very close to zero; suggesting that already for mild
overparameterisation the amount of interconnected global
minima largely dominates the amount of critical points
(Cooper, 2018; Şimşek et al., 2021). This is consistent with
our empirical observations: without overparameterisation,
students trained to imitate the target (teacher) network get
stuck in local high-loss minima. Instead, if we expand the
student width to four times the width of the target network
we can reliably reach near-zero loss (Fig. 4). At zero loss,
target and student networks are functionally identical; but
they are networks of different sizes and parameters. Here
we ask the following question: “Is it possible to recover the
weights and width of the target network from (near-zero)
loss, overparameterised students?”

Can we identify the weights of a neural network
by probing its input-output mapping? At first
glance, this problem seems to have many
solutions because of permutation, overparameterisation and activation function symmetries.
Yet, we show that the incoming weight vector of
each neuron is identifiable up to sign or scaling,
depending on the activation function. Our novel
method ‘Expand-and-Cluster’ can identify layer
sizes and weights of a target network for all
commonly used activation functions. Expandand-Cluster consists of two phases: (i) to relax
the non-convex optimisation problem, we train
multiple overparameterised student networks to
best imitate the target function; (ii) to reverse
engineer the target network’s weights, we employ
an ad-hoc clustering procedure that reveals the
learnt weight vectors shared between students –
these correspond to the target weight vectors. We
demonstrate successful weights and size recovery
of trained shallow and deep networks with less
than 10% overhead in the layer size and describe
an ‘ease-of-identifiability’ axis by analysing 150
synthetic problems of variable difficulty.

1. Introduction

To answer this question, we first characterise the equivalence class of zero-loss overparameterised students – i.e.
all possible weight structures that can preserve functional
equivalence of a given hidden layer. Three types of symmetries arise at the neuron level: (i) Permutation symmetries:
student neurons copying the weights of teacher neurons
can be found in arbitrary order within the hidden layer;
(ii) Overparameterisation symmetries: redundant neuron
groups can duplicate input weights to imitate a teacher neuron or cancel each others’ contribution. (iii) Activation
function symmetries: even, odd or scaling symmetries in the
activation function give rise to combinations of neurons that
degenerate into constant or linear outputs, weight vectors of
opposite signs with respect to teacher neurons or scaling factors transferred to adjacent layers; and combinations thereof.

It is known since the 1980s that finding a solution to the
XOR problem with gradient descent is easier with a larger
hidden layer, even though a minimal network with two hidden neurons is theoretically sufficient to solve the problem
(Rumelhart et al., 1986). Indeed, even very small networks
have a non-convex loss function (Fukumizu & Amari, 2000;
Mei et al., 2018; Frei et al., 2020; Yehudai & Ohad, 2020;
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Life Sciences and Computer Sciences, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland. 2 Center for Data
Science, NYU, New York, United States. Correspondence to:
Flavio Martinelli <flavio.martinelli@epfl.ch>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

