Optimal Kernel Choice for Score Function-based Causal Discovery

Wenjie Wang 1 2 Biwei Huang 3 Feng Liu 4 Xinge You 5 Tongliang Liu 6 Kun Zhang 2 7 Mingming Gong 1 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Understanding causal structures is a fundamental scientific problem that has been extensively explored in various disciplines, such as social science (Antonakis & Lalive,
2011), biology (Londei et al., 2006), and economics (Moneta et al., 2013). While conducting randomized experiments
are widely regarded as the most effective method to identify
causal structures, their application is often constrained by
ethical, technical, or cost-related reasons (Spirtes & Zhang,
2016). Consequently, there is a pressing need to develop
causal discovery methods that can infer causal structures
only from uncontrolled observational data. In recent years,
score-based methods have emerged as a promising approach,
enabling significant advancements in the field of causal discovery (Zhang et al., 2018; Vowels et al., 2022).

Score-based methods have demonstrated their effectiveness in discovering causal relationships by
scoring different causal structures based on their
goodness of fit to the data. Recently, Huang et al.
(2018) proposed a generalized score function that
can handle general data distributions and causal relationships by modeling the relations in reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS). The selection
of an appropriate kernel within this score function is crucial for accurately characterizing causal
relationships and ensuring precise causal discovery. However, the current method involves manual
heuristic selection of kernel parameters, making
the process tedious and less likely to ensure optimality. In this paper, we propose a kernel selection method within the generalized score function
that automatically selects the optimal kernel that
best fits the data. Specifically, we model the generative process of the variables involved in each
step of the causal graph search procedure as a mixture of independent noise variables. Based on this
model, we derive an automatic kernel selection
method by maximizing the marginal likelihood of
the variables involved in each search step. We conduct experiments on both synthetic data and realworld benchmarks, and the results demonstrate
that our proposed method outperforms heuristic
kernel selection methods.

Score-based methods are commonly employed for causal
discovery by evaluating candidate causal graphs based on
the specific criteria. Various search strategies, including traditional discrete search-based methods (Chickering, 2002;
Silander & Myllymäki, 2006; Yuan & Malone, 2013) and
the recent continuous optimization-based methods (Zheng
et al., 2018; Yu et al., 2019; Zhu et al., 2019; Zheng et al.,
2020), are then utilized to search for the graph with the optimal score. Therefore, score-based methods require assuming specific statistical models for causal relationships and
data distributions, such as the BIC score (Schwarz, 1978),
MDL score (Adriaans & van Benthem, 2008) and BGe score
(Geiger & Heckerman, 1994) only for linear-Gaussian models and some for other explicit model classes (Bühlmann
et al., 2014; Hyvärinen & Smith, 2013; Sokolova et al.,
2014). And such assumptions may limit their applicability
in real-world scenarios.

1

School of Mathematics and Statistics, The University of Melbourne, Australia 2 Department of Machine Learning, Mohamed
bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, United Arab Emirates 3 Halicioğlu Data Science Institute (HDSI), University of
California, San Diego, United States 4 School of Computing and
Information Systems, The University of Melbourne, Australia
5
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China 6 School
of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of
Sydney, Australia 7 Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon
University, United States. Correspondence to: Mingming Gong
<mingming.gong@unimelb.edu.au>.

Recently, Huang et al. (2018) proposed a generalized score
function that can handle diverse causal relationships and
data distributions. This approach utilizes conditional crosscovariance operator (Fukumizu et al., 2004) to transform
the general conditional independence test into a regression
model selection problem. The proposed score function assumes a causal relationship in RKHS, where the response
variable are first projected through a pre-defined kernel function. And then, it is assumed that these fixed features are
generated following a nonlinear additive model from their
parent variables. Although their proposed score function

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

