Bipartite Matching in Massive Graphs: A Tight Analysis of EDCS

Amir Azarmehr * 1 Soheil Behnezhad * 1 Mohammad Roghani * 2

Abstract

1. Introduction

Maximum matching is one of the most fundamental combinatorial optimization problems with
applications in various contexts such as balanced
clustering, data mining, resource allocation, and
online advertisement. In many of these applications, the input graph is massive. The sheer size
of these inputs makes it impossible to store the
whole graph in the memory of a single machine
and process it there. Graph sparsification has been
an extremely powerful tool to alleviate this problem. In this paper, we study a highly successful
and versatile sparsifier for the matching problem:
the edge-degree constrained subgraph (EDCS) introduced first by Bernstein & Stein 2015. The
EDCS has a parameter β ≥ 2 which controls
the density of the sparsifier. It has been shown
through various proofs in the literature that by
picking a subgraph with O(nβ) edges, the EDCS
includes a matching of size at least 2/3 − O(1/β)
times the maximum matching size. As such, by increasing β the approximation ratio of EDCS gets
closer and closer to 2/3. In this paper, we propose
a new approach for analyzing the approximation
ratio of EDCS. Our analysis is tight for any value
of β. Namely, we pinpoint the precise approximation ratio of EDCS for any sparsity parameter β.
Our analysis reveals that one does not necessarily
need to increase β to improve approximation, as
suggested by previous analysis. In particular, the
best choice turns out to be β = 6, which achieves
an approximation ratio of .677! This is arguably
surprising as it is even better than 2/3 ∼ .666, the
bound that was widely believed to be the limit for
EDCS.

Maximum matching is one of the most fundamental combinatorial optimization problems. Recall that a matching in a
graph is a collection of edges that do not share any vertices.
A maximum matching is a matching of the largest possible
size.
The matching problem finds applications in various contexts
such as data mining, resource allocation, online advertisement, bioinformatics, and many others. For instance, maximum matching can improve the quality of data clustering
(Assadi et al., 2019b), it can produce fair k-center clustering
(Jones et al., 2020), or can be used to discover subgraphs for
bioinformatics applications (Berger et al., 2008; Langmead
& Donald, 2004). In most of these applications, the input
graph is massive. The sheer size of these inputs makes it
impossible to store the whole graph in the memory of a
single machine and process it there. This has motivated a
large and beautiful body of work over the past two decades
on large-scale algorithms for this problem.
Graph Sparsification: Graph sparsification is a powerful
tool to process massive graphs. A graph sparsifier receives
an n-vertex graph that may have as many as Ω(n2 ) edges
and sparsifies it into a sparse subgraph, say with O(n) edges,
that preserves some property of it. Graph sparsifiers have
been instrumental tools for various graph problems. Cut
sparsifiers (Nagamochi & Ibaraki, 1992), spectral sparsifiers (Spielman & Teng, 2011), and spanners (Abboud &
Bodwin, 2017) are some famous examples. Graph sparsifiers did not find many applications for matchings until
nearly a decade ago when Bernstein & Stein 2015 introduced the edge-degree constrained subgraph (EDCS). See
in particular the nice paper of Assadi & Bernstein 2019 for
an in-depth introduction to EDCS and an overview of some
of its applications.

*

Equal contribution 1 Khoury College of Computer Science, Northeastern University, Boston, USA 2 Department
of Management Science and Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, USA. Correspondence to: Amir Azarmehr
<azarmehr.a@northeastern.edu>,
Soheil
Behnezhad
<s.behnezhad@northeastern.edu>,
Mohammad Roghani
<roghani@stanford.edu>.

Over the years, the EDCS has been successfully applied
to a variety of large-scale settings including the massively
parallel computations (MPC) setting which is a common
theoretical model of MapReduce-style computation (Assadi
et al., 2019a), the dynamic setting (Bernstein & Stein, 2015;
Behnezhad & Khanna, 2022; Roghani et al., 2022), the
streaming setting (Bernstein, 2020; Assadi & Behnezhad,
2021), the sublinear time setting (Behnezhad et al., 2023;

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

