Rapid Learning without Catastrophic Forgetting in the Morris Water Maze

Raymond L Wang 1 Jaedong Hwang 1 Akhilan Boopathy 1 Ila R Fiete 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Animals can rapidly learn new tasks that are conceptually
similar to previously encountered tasks, but have different
inputs and surface-level details; simultaneously, they retain
the ability to solve the previous tasks. Neural modeling of
this process of rapid conceptual knowledge transfer with
retention of past learning has been limited. In some ways,
rapid learning and learning retention seem to be in opposition: the former requires fast adaptation of parameters while
the latter requires stable parameters. In machine learning,
models tend to focus on either solving rapid learning and
transfer, or on continual learning without forgetting; models
tend not to do well at both.

Animals can swiftly adapt to novel tasks, while
maintaining proficiency on previously trained
tasks. This contrasts starkly with machine learning models, which struggle on these capabilities.
We first propose a new task, the sequential Morris
Water Maze (sWM), which extends a widely used
task in the psychology and neuroscience fields
and requires both rapid and continual learning.
It has frequently been hypothesized that inductive biases from brains could help build better
ML systems, but the addition of constraints typically hurts rather than helping ML performance.
We draw inspiration from biology to show that
combining 1) a content-addressable heteroassociative memory based on the entorhinal-hippocampal
circuit with grid cells that retain shared acrossenvironment structural representations and hippocampal cells that acquire environment-specific
information; 2) a spatially invariant convolutional
network architecture for rapid adaptation across
unfamiliar environments; and 3) the ability to
perform remapping, which orthogonalizes internal representations; leads to good generalization,
rapid learning, and continual learning without
forgetting, respectively. Our model outperforms
ANN baselines from continual learning contexts
applied to the task. It retains knowledge of past
environments while rapidly acquiring the skills to
navigate new ones, thereby addressing the seemingly opposing challenges of quick knowledge
transfer and sustaining proficiency in previously
learned tasks. These biologically motivated results may point the way toward ML algorithms
with similar properties.

Here, we build a biologically motivated neural model to
solve a sequential version of the classic Morris Water Maze
task (Morris, 1981; Vorhees & Williams, 2006), in which
a rodent must find and then navigate to a submerged platform in a pool of cloudy water across multiple trials starting from different positions. We term our variant of this
task the sequential Morris Water Maze (sWM) task. This
task necessitates sequential learning across multiple unique
environments, each characterized by a different platform
location. Within a single environment, the task demands
two generalizations from the agent. First, it must generalize
its learning from a variety of starting locations. Second,
it must rapidly adapt to changes in the goal locations. In
our sequential version of the task, an additional layer of
complexity is introduced. Here, the agent is required to
learn new environments while preserving knowledge of the
previous ones. This requirement tests the agent’s ability
to avoid catastrophic forgetting, a significant challenge in
machine learning. Thus, the sWM task not only involves
the aforementioned intra-environment generalization and
adaptation but also inter-environment learning and memory
retention.
Conventional unstructured neural networks suffer from
catastrophic forgetting: a phenomenon where networks
trained on a sequence of tasks fail to perform well on previously trained tasks (McCloskey & Cohen, 1989). Unstructured neural networks generally also lack an intrinsic ability
to generalize rapidly to unseen tasks. Networks that perform rapid task transfer are typically extensively trained on
a large number of related tasks (e.g. using multi-task learn-

1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Correspondence to:
Raymond L Wang <rlwang@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

