Bounded and Uniform Energy-based Out-of-distribution Detection for Graphs

Shenzhi Yang 1 Bin Liang 2 An Liu 1 Lin Gui 3 Xingkai Yao 1 Xiaofang Zhang 1

Abstract
Given the critical role of graphs in real-world
applications and their high-security requirements,
improving the ability of graph neural networks
(GNNs) to detect out-of-distribution (OOD)
data is an urgent research problem. The recent
work GNNSAFE (Wu et al., 2023) proposes a
framework based on the aggregation of negative
energy scores that significantly improves the
performance of GNNs to detect node-level
OOD data. However, our study finds that score
aggregation among nodes is susceptible to
extreme values due to the unboundedness of the
negative energy scores and logit shifts, which
severely limits the accuracy of GNNs in detecting
node-level OOD data. In this paper, we propose
NODESAFE: reducing the generation of extreme
scores of nodes by adding two optimization terms
that make the negative energy scores bounded
and mitigate the logit shift. Experimental results
show that our approach dramatically improves
the ability of GNNs to detect OOD data at the
node level, e.g., in detecting OOD data induced
by Structure Manipulation, the metric of FPR95
(lower is better) in scenarios without (with) OOD
data exposure are reduced from the current SOTA
by 28.4% (22.7%). The code is available via
https://github.com/ShenzhiYang2000/NODESAFE.

(a) Out-of-Distribution

(b) In-Distribution

(c) Score Variance Reduction
Figure 1. Visualization of negative energy scores of different nodes.
(a) OOD data generated by Structure Manipulation (Wu et al.,
2023), dark colors indicate higher scores, and arrows between
nodes indicate the direction of score aggregation. (b) ID dataset
for Cora, dark colors indicate lower scores. (c) Score frequency
density plots show our motivation: lowering the variance of scores
can better categorize ID and OOD data.

1. Introduction
clouds (Shi & Rajkumar, 2020), and chemical analysis (De Cao & Kipf, 2018). This has attracted a great deal
of interest from researchers, who have developed several
advanced models, such as the GCN(Kipf & Welling, 2016),
GAT(Veličković et al., 2017), JKNet (Xu et al., 2018), MixHop (Abu-El-Haija et al., 2019), etc. However, there are concerns regarding the security issues that may arise when applying graph neural networks. During training, it is assumed
that both the training and testing data are in-distribution (ID).
However, this assumption may not always hold, as data can
change at any time. When graph neural networks encounter
out-of-distribution (OOD) data, they may make incorrect
predictions, potentially leading to serious consequences.

The graph is an essential data structure widely used in various real-world domains, such as knowledge graphs (Baek
et al., 2020), social networks (Fan et al., 2019), point
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow
University, Suzhou, China 2 Department of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management, The Chinese University
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China 3 Department of Informatics, King’s College London, London, UK. Correspondence
to: Bin Liang <bin.liang@cuhk.edu.hk>, Xiaofang Zhang
<xfzhang@suda.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

