SAM as the Guide: Mastering Pseudo-Label Refinement in Semi-Supervised
Referring Expression Segmentation

Danni Yang * 1 Jiayi Ji * 1 Yiwei Ma 1 Tianyu Guo 1 Haowei Wang 1 2 Xiaoshuai Sun 1 Rongrong Ji 1

Abstract

Input

In this paper, we introduce SemiRES, a semisupervised framework that effectively leverages a
combination of labeled and unlabeled data to perform RES. A significant hurdle in applying semisupervised techniques to RES is the prevalence
of noisy pseudo-labels, particularly at the boundaries of objects. SemiRES incorporates the Segment Anything Model (SAM), renowned for its
precise boundary demarcation, to improve the accuracy of these pseudo-labels. Within SemiRES,
we offer two alternative matching strategies: IoUbased Optimal Matching (IOM) and Composite
Parts Integration (CPI). These strategies are designed to extract the most accurate masks from
SAM’s output, thus guiding the training of the
student model with enhanced precision. In instances where a precise mask cannot be matched
from the available candidates, we develop the
Pixel-Wise Adjustment (PWA) strategy, guiding the student model’s training directly by the
pseudo-labels. Extensive experiments on three
RES benchmarks—RefCOCO, RefCOCO+, and
G-Ref reveal its superior performance compared
to fully supervised methods. Remarkably, with
only 1% labeled data, our SemiRES outperforms
the supervised baseline by a large margin, e.g.
+18.64% gains on RefCOCO val set. The project
code is available at https://github.com/
nini0919/SemiRES.

Baseline

IoU=0.63

“goose on right”

SemiRES

GT

IoU=0.93

Noisy&Incomplete

(a) An example visualization of semi-supervised baseline and our proposed SemiRES

(b) The labeling cost of at different ratios

(c) The Overall IoU comparison on RefCOCO

Figure 1. (a) A large number of noisy and incomplete cases exist
in pseudo-labels. The proposed SemiRES can address this issue.
(b) Analysis shows labeling a small portion of RefCOCO data
can greatly reduce costs. (c) Our method substantially improves
performance, even with a small number of annotated samples.

1. Introduction
Referring Expression Segmentation (RES) has attracted considerable attention from the fields of vision and language
research (Hu et al., 2016; Chen et al., 2019b; Huang et al.,
2020; Liu et al., 2019; 2023b). Unlike common visual
grounding tasks such as phrase localization (Bajaj et al.,
2019; Chen et al., 2017; Dogan et al., 2019; Plummer et al.,
2015; 2017) and referring expression comprehension (Yang
et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2018; Deng et al., 2021; Kamath et al.,
2021; Huang et al., 2021), RES requires precise pixel-level
segmentation of an object within an image, as directed by a
referring expression, which goes beyond simple bounding
box identification.

*

Equal contribution 1 Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted
Perception and Efficient Computing, Ministry of Education of
China, School of Informatics, Xiamen University, 361005, P.R.
China. 2 Youtu Lab, Tencent, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to:
Xiaoshuai Sun <xssun@xmu.edu.cn>.

Despite advancements, the high demand for labeled data
presents a significant barrier to the deployment of RES,
particularly in domains where labeling is prohibitively expensive, such as medical imaging and autonomous driving.
The labor intensity of the task is underscored by findings

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

