Surprisingly Strong Performance Prediction with Neural Graph Features

Gabriela Kadlecová 1 2 Jovita Lukasik 3 Martin Pilát 1 Petra Vidnerová 2 Mahmoud Safari 4 Roman Neruda 2
Frank Hutter 4 5
by predicting their performance based on a small number of
sampled and trained networks (White et al., 2021b). Since
these prediction models still require some networks to be
trained and in some cases even include an overhead when
fitting on the sampled train set, other, even more efficient
techniques were needed. As an answer, zero-cost proxies
have been recently proposed as a variant that does not require any network training (Abdelfattah et al., 2021; Tanaka
et al., 2020; Mellor et al., 2021). For every network, these
proxies need mostly a single mini-batch of data to compute a score that correlates with the true performance of
the network after full training on the downstream task of
interest.

Abstract
Performance prediction has been a key part of
the neural architecture search (NAS) process, allowing to speed up NAS algorithms by avoiding resource-consuming network training. Although many performance predictors correlate
well with ground truth performance, they require
training data in the form of trained networks. Recently, zero-cost proxies have been proposed as
an efficient method to estimate network performance without any training. However, they are
still poorly understood, exhibit biases with network properties, and their performance is limited.
Inspired by the drawbacks of zero-cost proxies,
we propose neural graph features (GRAF), simple to compute properties of architectural graphs.
GRAF offers fast and interpretable performance
prediction while outperforming zero-cost proxies
and other common encodings. In combination
with other zero-cost proxies, GRAF outperforms
most existing performance predictors at a fraction
of the cost.

However, the reason for the correlation is still underexplored.
Furthermore, Krishnakumar et al. (2022) even discovered
biases between these proxies and network properties like
the number of skip-connections. On the large number of
various tasks that a NAS method should be able to solve
nowadays (Duan et al., 2021), zero-cost proxies show inconsistent performances and most of these proxies even have
a lower average correlation with the network performance
than simple metrics, such as flops (White et al., 2022;
Krishnakumar et al., 2022). In addition, most performance
prediction methods lack interpretability. This is in particular
an important property that would eventually allow us to determine what architectural properties drive the performance
for a given task.

1. Introduction
With the rising popularity of deep learning with applications
across different domains, finding a well-performing neural
network architecture for a given application has become a
key problem. The field of Neural Architecture Search (NAS)
automatizes the process and has gained noticeable attention
in the past years (Elsken et al., 2019; White et al., 2023).
Due to the high costs of neural network training, speedup
techniques are a key component of the NAS process. One of
these techniques is based on performance predictors – models that help us to reduce the number of trained architectures

To address these limitations of zero-cost proxies, we first
examine in an in-depth analysis the reason behind the zerocost proxy biases, showing that it is in some cases a direct
dependency rather than an actual correlation. Inspired by
that, we take advantage of these biases and propose in this
paper neural graph features – simple to compute network
properties like operation counts or node degrees. We show
that using the proposed neural graph features as an input to
several (simple) prediction models provides strong and interpretable performance prediction on several tasks, ranging
from the common accuracy prediction to hardware metrics
prediction and lastly to (multi-objective) robustness prediction.

1

Charles University, Faculty of Mathematics and Physics
The Czech Academy of Sciences, Institute of Computer Science 3 University of Siegen 4 University of Freiburg 5 ELLIS
Institute Tübingen. Correspondence to: Gabriela Kadlecová
<gabi.kadlecova@outlook.com>.
2

Our main contributions are summarized as follows:

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1. We examine biases in zero-cost proxies (ZCP) and
1

