Achieving Margin Maximization Exponentially Fast
via Progressive Norm Rescaling

Mingze Wang 1 Zeping Min 1 Lei Wu 1 2

Abstract

out needing any explicit regularization (Neyshabur et al.,
2014; Zhang et al., 2017). This phenomenon implies that
the “implicit bias” of SGD plays a crucial role in ensuring the efficacy of deep learning; therefore, revealing the
underlying mechanism is of paramount importance.

In this work, we investigate the marginmaximization bias exhibited by gradient-based
algorithms in classifying linearly separable data.
We present an in-depth analysis of the specific
properties of the velocity field associated with
(normalized) gradients, focusing on their role in
margin maximization. Inspired by this analysis,
we propose a novel algorithm called Progressive
Rescaling Gradient Descent (PRGD) and show
that PRGD can maximize the margin at an exponential rate. This stands in stark contrast to
all existing algorithms, which maximize the margin at a slow polynomial rate. Specifically, we
identify mild conditions on data distribution under which existing algorithms such as gradient
descent (GD) and normalized gradient descent
(NGD) provably fail in maximizing the margin efficiently. To validate our theoretical findings, we
present both synthetic and real-world experiments.
Notably, PRGD also shows promise in enhancing
the generalization performance when applied to
linearly non-separable datasets and deep neural
networks.

Soudry et al. (2018) investigated implicit bias of GD for
classifying linearly separable data with linear models. They
showed that GD trained with exponentially-tailed loss functions can implicitly maximize the ℓ2 -margin during its convergence process, ultimately locating a max-margin solution.
This discovery offers valuable insights into the superior generalization performance often observed with GD, as larger
margins are generally associated with better generalization (Boser et al., 1992; Bartlett et al., 2017). However, the
rate at which GD maximizes the margin has been shown to
be merely O(1/ log t) (Soudry et al., 2018). This naturally
leads to the question: can we design a better gradient-based
algorithm to accelerate the margin maximization. In the
pursuit of this, Nacson et al. (2019b); Ji & Telgarsky (2021)
has demonstrated that employing GD with aggressively lossscaled step sizes can achieve polynomial rates in margin
maximization. Notably, Ji & Telgarsky (2021) specifically
established that the rate of NGD is O(1/t). Building on this,
Ji et al. (2021) further introduced a momentum-based gradient method by applying Nesterov acceleration to the dual
formulation of this problem, which achieves a remarkable
margin-maximization rate of O(log t/t2 ) and Wang et al.
(2022b) further improved it to O(1/t2 ), currently standing
as the state-of-the-art algorithm for this problem.

1. Introduction
In modern machine learning, models are often overparameterized in the sense that they can easily interpolate
all training data, giving rise to a loss landscape with many
global minima. Although all these minima yield zero training loss, their generalization ability can vary significantly.
Intriguingly, it is often observed that Stochastic Gradient
Descent (SGD) and its variants consistently converge to
solutions with favorable generalization properties even with-

Our Contributions. In this paper, we begin by introducing a toy dataset to elucidate the causes of inefficiency in
GD/NGD and to clarify the underlying intuition for accelerating margin maximization. Subsequently, we demonstrate
that these insights are applicable to a broader range of scenarios.

1
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University, Beijing,
China 2 Center for Machine Learning Research, Peking University,
Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Mingze Wang <mingzewang@stu.pku.edu.cn>, Lei Wu <leiwu@math.pku.edu.cn>.

• We reveal that the rate of directional convergence and
margin maximization is governed by the centripetal
velocity–the component orthogonal to the max-margin
direction. We show that under mild conditions on
data distribution, NGD and GD will inevitably be
trapped in a region where the centripetal velocity

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

