To Each (Textual Sequence) Its Own:
Improving Memorized-Data Unlearning in Large Language Models

George-Octavian Bărbulescu 1 Peter Triantafillou 1

Abstract

information verbatim as it exists in the training corpus when
prompts are carefully designed. This, in turn, violates privacy regardless of any sophisticated adversarial attacks.
These problems are juxtaposed against laws and regulations
protecting the rights of individuals to be forgotten (RTBF)
(Mantelero, 2013; Graves et al., 2021), that is, to have their
information removed from the LLM. A straightforward approach to achieve this would be to retrain the LLM from
‘scratch’. Alas, this is infeasible in the context of LLMs,
even with small/medium-sized models (millions of parameters). The problem is further exacerbated by the fact that
the tendency of LLMs to regurgitate training data increases
proportionally with the number of model parameters (Carlini et al., 2022b). Hence, the need to research efficient
removal mechanisms of memorized data from pretrained
LLMs, without requiring training the LLMs from scratch.

LLMs have been found to memorize training textual sequences and regurgitate verbatim said sequences during text generation time. This fact
is known to be the cause of privacy and related
(e.g., copyright) problems. Unlearning in LLMs
then takes the form of devising new algorithms
that will properly deal with these side-effects of
memorized data, while not hurting the model’s
utility. We offer a fresh perspective towards this
goal, namely, that each textual sequence to be forgotten should be treated differently when being
unlearned based on its degree of memorization
within the LLM. We contribute a new metric for
measuring unlearning quality, an adversarial attack showing that SOTA algorithms lacking this
perspective fail for privacy, and two new unlearning methods based on Gradient Ascent and Task
Arithmetic, respectively. A comprehensive performance evaluation across an extensive suite of NLP
tasks then mapped the solution space, identifying
the best solutions under different scales in model
capacities and forget set sizes and quantified the
gains of the new approaches.

As mentioned, LLMs have been shown to (i) memorize and
(ii) emit memorized training data at generation time, which
causes privacy and copyright problems. As an example,
GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) has been shown to generate
PII information verbatim, raising significant concerns given
its wide commercial usage (Heikkilä, 2022). Interestingly,
memorized training data points can also decrease the quality
of the model (Zhang et al., 2021b), by linking tokens which
do not have a general meaning or a justifiable factual association, but only belong to an entity or an individual. But,
given that memorization is the root cause of these problems,
how can one intuitively define ‘memorization’? For LLMs,
typically, if there exists a sufficient overlap between a training data point and a generated text response, then that data
point is considered to have been memorized (Tirumala et al.,
2022; Carlini et al., 2021; 2022b).

1. Introduction
LLMs are models typically built over transformer architectures and trained on a vast corpus of data (with up to trillions
of tokens) (Radford et al., 2019; Chowdhery et al., 2023;
Gao et al., 2020; Fedus et al., 2022; Kassem et al., 2023).
Massive training data and a (lengthy) training process allow LLMs to establish factual associations and memorize
language semantics and grammar (Zhang et al., 2021b).

The focus of this research is to enrich LLMs with the ability
to unlearn memorized textual sequences (a.k.a. training data
points, examples, or samples), while satisfying three constraints: First, do so while maintaining the model’s utility
for downstream applications unrelated to the forgotten information. Second, do so without having access to the rest of
the pre-training dataset, as this may be either intractable or
too large/costly to fine-tune over. Third, do so while avoiding the aforementioned problems with respect to privacy,
copyrights, etc. As a real-world example, consider the need

Unfortunately, previous research has shown that LLMs
memorized training examples which causes them to emit
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Warwick,
Coventry, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: George-Octavian
Bărbulescu <george-octavian.barbulescu@warwick.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

