Identification and Estimation for Nonignorable Missing Data:
A Data Fusion Approach

Zixiao Wang 1 AmirEmad Ghassami 2 Ilya Shpitser 3

Abstract

random (MNAR) (Fielding et al., 2008; Schafer & Graham,
2002). A classic example of a scenario with MNAR data
occurs in longitudinal studies, where, due to the treatment’s
toxicity, some patients may become too ill to visit the clinic,
leading to the situation where the outcome of certain patients with circumstances associated with those outcomes
are more likely to be lost to follow-up (Ibrahim et al., 2012).

We consider the task of identifying and estimating a parameter of interest in settings where data
is missing not at random (MNAR). In general,
such parameters are not identified without strong
assumptions on the missing data model. In this
paper, we take an alternative approach and introduce a method inspired by data fusion, where
information in the MNAR dataset is augmented
by information in an auxiliary dataset subject to
missingness at random (MAR). We show that
even if the parameter of interest cannot be identified given either dataset alone, it can be identified
given pooled data, under two complementary sets
of assumptions. We derive inverse probability
weighted (IPW) estimators for identified parameters under both sets of assumptions, and evaluate
the performance of our estimation strategies via
simulation studies, and a data application.

Existing MNAR models typically impose constraints on
target distribution and its missingness mechanism, ensuring
the parameter of interest can be identified. This approach
goes back to the work of (Heckman, 1979), who proposed
an outcome-selection model based on parametric modeling
of outcome variable and missing pattern. (Little, 1993) introduced the pattern-mixture model where one needs to specify
the distribution for each missing data pattern independently.
Other related work involves permutation model (Robins,
1997), the discrete choice model (Tchetgen Tchetgen et al.,
2018), the block-sequential MAR model (Zhou et al., 2010),
the no self-censoring (NSC) model (Shpitser, 2016; Sadinle
& Reiter, 2017; Malinsky et al., 2021), the instrumental
variable approaches (Miao et al., 2015; Tchetgen Tchetgen
& Wirth, 2017), and approaches based on graphical models
(Mohan et al., 2013; Bhattacharya et al., 2019; Nabi et al.,
2020) just to name a few.

1. Introduction
Missing data is a pervasive and challenging issue in various applications of statistical inference, such as healthcare,
economics, and the social sciences. Data are said to be
missing at random (MAR) when the mechanism of missingness depends only on the observed data. Strategies to
deal with MAR have been extensively investigated in the
literature (Dempster et al., 1977; Robins et al., 1994; Tsiatis,
2006; Little & Rubin, 2019). In many practical settings,
MAR is not a realistic assumption. Instead, missingness
often depends on variables that are themselves missing or
unobserved. Such settings are said to exhibit nonignorable
missingness, with the resulting data being missing not at

In some applications where MNAR data is present, researchers may have access to additional auxiliary data on
informative variables that are themselves not missing, or
missing given a simpler missingness process. Hence, it is
of interest to investigate combining the information in the
available datasets. Such a data fusion strategy is natural in
many applications: for example, surveys of HIV patients
containing sensitive questions (such as those on sexual history) with high degree of missingness may be augmented
with other sources of information with simpler missingness
mechanisms, such as electronic health records. Similarly,
our methods are inspired by settings where large, poorly
structured datasets are enhanced by smaller, well-curated
datasets, such as combining electronic health record data
on patients, which often exhibits complex non-ignorable
missingness patterns, with observational study data on similar patients, where missingness is like at random due to
standard study attrition.

1
Department of Biostatistics Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 2 Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Boston
University, Boston, MA 3 Department of Computer Science, Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD. Correspondence to: Zixiao Wang <zwang383@jh.edu>, AmirEmad Ghassami <ghassami@bu.edu>, Ilya Shpitser <ilyas@cs.jhu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

