Revealing Vision-Language Integration in the Brain with Multimodal Networks

Vighnesh Subramaniam 1 2 Colin Conwell 3 Christopher Wang 1 2 Gabriel Kreiman 4 Boris Katz 1 2
Ignacio Cases 1 2 Andrei Barbu 1 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
We expand the use of deep neural networks for understanding the brain from unimodal models, which can be used
to investigate language and vision regions in isolation, to
multimodal models, which can be used to investigate visionlanguage integration. Beginning with work in the primate
ventral visual stream (Yamins et al., 2014; Schrimpf et al.,
2020), this practice now includes the study of both the human vision and language cortex alike (Chang et al., 2019;
Allen et al., 2021; Bhattasali et al., 2020; Nastase et al.,
2021; Schrimpf et al., 2021; Goldstein et al., 2021; 2022;
Lindsay, 2021; Caucheteux & King, 2022; Conwell et al.,
2023). These studies, however, focus on a single modality of
input — vision alone or language alone. Yet, much of what
humans do fundamentally requires multimodal integration.

We use (multi)modal deep neural networks
(DNNs) to probe for sites of multimodal integration in the human brain by predicting stereoencephalography (SEEG) recordings taken while
human subjects watched movies. We operationalize sites of multimodal integration as regions
where a multimodal vision-language model predicts recordings better than unimodal language,
unimodal vision, or linearly-integrated languagevision models. Our target DNN models span different architectures (e.g., convolutional networks
and transformers) and multimodal training techniques (e.g., cross-attention and contrastive learning). As a key enabling step, we first demonstrate
that trained vision and language models systematically outperform their randomly initialized counterparts in their ability to predict SEEG signals.
We then compare unimodal and multimodal models against one another. Because our target DNN
models often have different architectures, number
of parameters, and training sets (possibly obscuring those differences attributable to integration),
we carry out a controlled comparison of two models (SLIP and SimCLR), which keep all of these
attributes the same aside from input modality. Using this approach, we identify a sizable number
of neural sites (on average 141 out of 1090 total
sites or 12.94%) and brain regions where multimodal integration seems to occur. Additionally,
we find that among the variants of multimodal
training techniques we assess, CLIP-style training
is the best suited for downstream prediction of the
neural activity in these sites.

As a product of the unimodal focus, we have learned far
less about the correspondence between biological and artificial neural systems tasked with processing visual and
linguistic input simultaneously. Here, we seek to address
this gap by using performant, pretrained multimodal deep
neural network (DNN) models (ALBEF (Li et al., 2021),
BLIP (Li et al., 2022b), Flava (Singh et al., 2022), SBERT
(Reimers & Gurevych, 2019a), BEIT (Bao et al., 2021), SimCSE (Gao et al., 2021), SIMCLR (Chen et al., 2020), CLIP
(Radford et al., 2021), SLIP (Mu et al., 2021)) to predict
neural activity in a large-scale stereoelectroencephalography (SEEG) dataset consisting of neural responses (from
intracranial electrodes) to the images (frames) and dialog
of popular movies (Yaari et al., 2022). Our primary goal
in this work is to use systematic comparisons between the
neural predictivity of unimodal and multimodal models to
probe for sites of vision-language integration in the brain.
Our work make the following contributions:
1. We introduce a rigorous, multi-stage statistical analysis
to compare multimodal models against neural data,
against one another, and against unimodal models. In
tandem, we release a code toolbox to perform this
analysis and enable future work.
2. We demonstrate that this approach is sufficiently robust to distinguish randomly initialized from trained
vision, language, and multimodal models. Previous
work, especially in the prediction of language-evoked

1
MIT CSAIL 2 CBMM 3 Department of Cognitive Science,
Johns Hopkins University 4 Boston Children’s Hospital, Harvard
Medical School. Correspondence to: Vighnesh Subramaniam
<vsub851@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

