Infinite-Horizon Distributionally Robust Regret-Optimal Control

Taylan Kargin * 1 Joudi Hajar * 1 Vikrant Malik * 1 Babak Hassibi 1

Abstract

known probability distribution (Hassibi et al., 1999). However, in practical scenarios, the true distribution is often
estimated from sampled data, introducing vulnerability to
inaccurate models. On the other hand, robust control minimizes the worst-case cost across potential disturbance realizations, such as those with bounded energy or power (H∞
control) (Zhou et al., 1996). While this ensures robustness,
it can be overly conservative. Two recent approaches have
emerged to tackle this challenge.

We study the infinite-horizon distributionally robust (DR) control of linear systems with quadratic
costs, where disturbances have unknown, possibly
time-correlated distribution within a Wasserstein2 ambiguity set. We aim to minimize the worstcase expected regret—the excess cost of a causal
policy compared to a non-causal one with access to future disturbance. Though the optimal
policy lacks a finite-order state-space realization
(i.e., it is non-rational), it can be characterized
by a finite-dimensional parameter. Leveraging
this, we develop an efficient frequency-domain
algorithm to compute this optimal control policy
and present a convex optimization method to construct a near-optimal state-space controller that
approximates the optimal non-rational controller
in the H∞ -norm. This approach avoids solving a
computationally expensive semi-definite program
(SDP) that scales with the time horizon in the
finite-horizon setting.

Regret-Optimal (RO) Control. Introduced by (Sabag
et al., 2021; Goel & Hassibi, 2023), this framework offers a
promising strategy to tackle both stochastic and adversarial
uncertainties. It defines regret as the performance difference
between a causal control policy and a clairvoyant, noncausal one with perfect knowledge of future disturbances.
In the full-information setting, RO controllers minimize the
worst-case regret across all bounded energy disturbances
(Sabag et al., 2021; Goel & Hassibi, 2023). The infinitehorizon RO controller also takes on a state-space form, making it conducive to efficient real-time computation (Sabag
et al., 2021).
Extensions of this framework have been investigated in
various settings, including measurement-feedback control
(Goel & Hassibi, 2021a; Hajar et al., 2023b), dynamic environments (Goel & Hassibi, 2021b), safety-critical control
(Martin et al., 2022; Didier et al., 2022), filtering (Sabag
& Hassibi, 2022; Goel & Hassibi, 2023), and distributed
control (Martinelli et al., 2023). While these controllers effectively emulate the performance of non-causal controllers
in worst-case disturbance scenarios, they may exhibit excessive conservatism when dealing with stochastic ones.

1. Introduction
Addressing uncertainty is a core challenge in decisionmaking. Control systems inherently encounter various uncertainties, such as external disturbances, measurement errors, model disparities, and temporal variations in dynamics
(van der Grinten, 1968; Doyle, 1985). Neglecting these
uncertainties in policy design can result in considerable performance decline and may lead to unsafe and unintended
behavior (Samuelson & Yang, 2017).

Distributionally Robust (DR) Control. In contrast to traditional approaches such as H2 or H∞ and RO control
that focus on a single distribution or worst-case disturbance
realization, the DR framework addresses uncertainty in disturbances by considering ambiguity sets – sets of plausible
probability distributions (Yang, 2020; Kim & Yang, 2023;
Hakobyan & Yang, 2022; Taskesen et al., 2023; Aolaritei
et al., 2023a;b; Brouillon et al., 2023). This methodology
aims to design controllers with robust performance across
all probability distributions within a given ambiguity set.
The size of the ambiguity set provides control over the desired robustness against distributional uncertainty, ensuring
that the resulting controller is not excessively conservative.

Traditionally, the challenge of uncertainty in control systems has been predominantly approached through either
stochastic or robust control frameworks (Kalman, 1960;
Zames, 1981; Doyle et al., 1988). Stochastic control (e.g.,
Linear–Quadratic–Gaussian (LQG) or H2 -control) aims to
minimize an expected cost, assuming disturbances follow a
*
Equal contribution 1 California Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Taylan Kargin <tkargin@caltech.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

