COPAL: Continual Pruning in Large Language Generative Models

Srikanth Malla 1 Joon Hee Choi 1 Chiho Choi 1

Abstract

0.6

Adapting pre-trained large language models to
different domains in natural language processing
requires two key considerations: high computational demands and model’s inability to continual adaptation. To simultaneously address both
issues, this paper presents COPAL (COntinual
Pruning in Adaptive Language settings), an algorithm developed for pruning large language generative models under a continual model adaptation
setting. While avoiding resource-heavy finetuning or retraining, our pruning process is guided by
the proposed sensitivity analysis. The sensitivity
effectively measures model’s ability to withstand
perturbations introduced by the new dataset and
finds model’s weights that are relevant for all encountered datasets. As a result, COPAL allows
seamless model adaptation to new domains while
enhancing the resource efficiency. Our empirical evaluation on a various size of LLMs show
that COPAL outperforms baseline models, demonstrating its efficacy in efficiency and adaptability.

0.5
Perplexity BWT

0.4
0.3

Sparsity Ratio vs Perplexity BWT
COPAL (mean)
Wanda (mean)
SparseGPT (mean)
COPAL (max)
Wanda (max)
SparseGPT (max)

0.2
0.1
0.0
0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 0.35 0.40 0.45 0.50
Sparsity Ratio

Figure 1: Motivation: average (mean) and worst (max) case
scenarios of backward transfer (BWT) in perplexity with
increase in sparsity ratio in unstructured continual pruning
of LLaMA-7B

certain tasks or domains, they may not exhibit the same
level of performance when confronted with data that deviate significantly from what they were trained on (known as
”catastrophic forgetting”).

1. Introduction
The advent of Large Language Models (LLMs) such as
GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) and LLaMA (Touvron et al.,
2023) has been a landmark in natural language processing
(NLP). Adapting these pre-trained LLMs to diverse domains
has offered unprecedented capabilities in various NLP tasks
including language understanding and generation (Gururangan et al., 2020). However, there are two primary challenges
associated with this approach: (i) extensive computational
requirements; and (ii) limited model adaptability. Considering the large-scale models and datasets, the retraining
procedure necessitates considerable computational effort,
which often limits its feasibility in resource-constrained environments. Moreover, once the models are updated for

Traditional methods have tackled these challenges separately
from different standpoints, either utilizing neural network
pruning (Frantar & Alistarh, 2023) or adopting continual
learning techniques (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017). The former
(i.e., pruning) suggests to eliminate less critical connections (Frankle & Carbin, 2018) or structural elements (He
et al., 2017) of the neural network, being beneficial in enhancing the efficiency of model inference. However, it
inherently lacks a flexibility in continually adapting to new
information over time, as pruning involves domain-specific
training (Liu et al., 2020) or calibration (Frantar & Alistarh,
2023) procedure. On the other hand, the latter (i.e., continual learning) aims to adapt models to evolving data streams,
accommodating new tasks and knowledge without catastrophic forgetting. With its need for finetuning on a series of
datasets, this approach does not alleviate the ongoing concern of substantial computational costs for model execution.
Contrary to this trend, few research efforts (Dekhovich et al.,
2023) have been recently made by applying pruning meth-

1

Samsung Semiconductor, San Jose, USA. Correspondence
to: Joon Hee Choi <jh4.choi@samsung.com>, Chiho Choi
<chiho1.choi@samsung.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

