Generalization Bound and New Algorithm for Clean-Label Backdoor Attack

Lijia Yu 1 2 Shuang Liu 3 4 Yibo Miao 3 4 Xiao-Shan Gao 3 4 5 Lijun Zhang 1 2 4

Abstract

ing procedure can only minimize the empirical error on
a given finite training set Dtr i.i.d. P
sampled from DS , i.e.
b
b
̸=
E(x,y)∈Dtr [1(F(x)
̸= y)] = |D1tr | (x,y)∈Dtr 1(F(x)
y). A theoretical way to ensure generalizability is to control
the generalization gap between population error and empirical error, and an upper bound of such a gap is called the
generalization bound. The learning algorithm has generalizability if the generalization bound approaches zero when
the size of the training set is sufficiently large.

The generalization bound is a crucial theoretical
tool for assessing the generalizability of learning
methods and there exist vast literatures on generalizability of normal learning, adversarial learning,
and data poisoning. Unlike other data poison attacks, the backdoor attack has the special property
that the poisoned triggers are contained in both
the training set and the test set and the purpose
of the attack is two-fold. To our knowledge, the
generalization bound for the backdoor attack has
not been established. In this paper, we fill this
gap by deriving algorithm-independent generalization bounds in the clean-label backdoor attack
scenario. Precisely, based on the goals of backdoor attack, we give upper bounds for the clean
sample population errors and the poison population errors in terms of the empirical error on the
poisoned training dataset. Furthermore, based on
the theoretical result, a new clean-label backdoor
attack is proposed that computes the poisoning
trigger by combining adversarial noise and indiscriminate poison. We show its effectiveness in a
variety of settings.

Classic generalization bounds were given in terms of the
VC-dimension or the Rademacher complexity (Mohri et al.,
2018). Recently, algorithm-independent generalization
bounds depending on the size of the DNNs were given
(Harvey et al., 2017; Neyshabur et al., 2017; Bartlett et al.,
2019). Algorithm-dependent generalization bounds were
given in the algorithmic stability setting (Hardt et al., 2016;
Kuzborskij & Lampert, 2018; Xing et al., 2021; Xiao et al.,
2022) as well as in the optimality setting of the training algorithm (Arora et al., 2019; Cao & Gu, 2019; Ji & Telgarsky,
2020), for normal training as well as adversarial training.
However, these generalization bounds are for clean training
dataset and cannot be applied to poisoned training dataset,
because poisoned datasets do not satisfy the i.i.d. condition,
which is necessary for generalizability. There exist works
in generalizability under data poisoning attack. Wang et al.
(2021) showed optimal convergence of SGD under poison
attack for depth two networks. Hanneke et al. (2022) gave
the optimal learning error for certain poison attack.

1. Introduction
The generalization bound is a key theoretical tool for assessing the generalizability of a learning method. Let Fb be the
classification result of a neural network F. Then the main
purpose of a learning algorithm is to minimize the population error on the data distribution DS , i.e. E(F, DS ) =
b
E(x,y)∼DS [1(F(x)
̸= y)]. On the other hand, the train-

Unlike other poison attacks, the backdoor attack has the
special property that the poisoned trigger is contained both
in the training set and in the test set and its goal is twofold: to keep high accuracy on clean data and output given
label for data containing the trigger. As far as we know,
generalization bound under backdoor poison attack has not
yet been established. In this paper, we give generalization
bounds in the clean-label backdoor attack setting and use
the bounds to design more effective poison attacks.

1
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China 2 State Key Laboratory of Computer Science 3 Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China 4 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China 5 Kaiyuan
International Mathematical Sciences Institute. Correspondence
to: Xiao-Shan Gao <xgao@mmrc.iss.ac.cn>, Lijun Zhang
<zhanglj@ios.ac.cn>.

Clean-label backdoor attack is an important poisoning attack
method (Turner et al., 2018; Barni et al., 2019; Saha et al.,
2020; Liu et al., 2020; Doan et al., 2021a; Ning et al., 2021;
Zeng et al., 2022), where poison triggers are added to a
subset of the training set Dtr without altering their labels to
obtain the poisoned training set DP . The goal of the attack

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

