Handling Heterogeneous Curvatures in Bandit LQR Control

Yu-Hu Yan 1 2 Jing Wang 1 2 Peng Zhao 1 2

Abstract

where xt , ut denote the state and action, A, B are the system
transition matrices, and ξt is the disturbance. The system
evolves for T rounds, and at the t-th round, the learner
selects an action ut and observes the next state xt+1 . The
goal of LQR is to minimize the following cumulative cost:

We investigate online Linear Quadratic Regulator
(LQR) with bandit feedback and semi-adversarial
disturbances. Previous works assume costs with
homogeneous curvatures (i.e., with a uniform
strong convexity lower bound), which can be hard
to satisfy in many real scenarios and prohibits
adapting to true curvatures for better performance.
In this paper, we initiate the study of bandit LQR
control with heterogeneous cost curvatures, aiming to strengthen the algorithm’s adaptivity. To
achieve this, we reduce the problem to bandit
convex optimization with memory via a “withhistory” reduction to avoid hard-to-control truncation errors. Then we provide a novel analysis
for an important stability term that appeared in
both regret and memory, using Newton decrement
developed in interior-point methods. The analysis enables us to guarantee memory-related terms
introduced in the reduction and also provide a simplified analysis for handling heterogeneous curvatures in bandit convex optimization. Finally, we
achieve interpolated guarantees that can not only
recover existing bounds for convex and quadratic
costs but also attain new implications for cases of
corrupted and decaying quadraticity.

min
π∈Π

T
X

ct (xπt , uπt ) ≜

t=1

T
X

xπt ⊤ Qt xπt +

t=1

T
X

uπt ⊤ Rt uπt ,

t=1

where ct (·, ·) represents the quadratic cost, parameterized
by the time-varying, positive semi-definite matrices Qt , Rt .
Here, xπt , uπt denote the state and action generated by a
specific policy π, chosen from a policy class Π. In the online
version of LQR, the learner aims to minimize the gametheoretic policy regret (Dekel et al., 2012), which depicts the
excess cumulative cost against the best policy in hindsight:
R EGTC ≜

T
X
t=1

ct (xt , ut ) − min
π∈Π

T
X

ct (xπt , uπt ),

(1.1)

t=1

where xt , ut are produced by the online algorithm.
In this work, we investigate online LQR in the case
where the system transition matrices A, B are known,
the learner only obtains a scalar cost in each round
(also known as bandit feedback in online learning), and
the disturbances are semi-adversarial — a mixture of
stochastic and adversarial parts.√In this setup, Sun et al.
e T ) regret bound, up to
(2023) obtained an optimal O(
logarithmic factors. Moreover, when the cost functions are
generally convex, this problem intersects with recent studies
in online non-stochastic control (Hazan and Singh, 2022).
Notably,
√ the pioneering work (Agarwal et al., 2019) attained
e T ) regret bound through a novel reduction to onan O(
line convex optimization with memory (Anava et al., 2015).
The most related studies to ours, particularly in the bandit
setup, are those by (Gradu et al., 2020; Cassel and Koren,
e 3/4 ) regret bound for
2020). The authors obtained an O(T
Lipschitz and convex cost functions with adversarial disturbances, with Cassel and Koren (2020) further achieving an
e 2/3 ) result for smooth cost functions.
improved O(T

1. Introduction
There have been extensive studies on Linear Quadratic Regulator (LQR) and the more general Linear Quadratic Gaussian (LQG) (Bellman, 1954; Kalman, 1960; Abbasi-Yadkori
and Szepesvári, 2011; Lewis et al., 2012; Cohen et al., 2018;
Dean et al., 2018; Mania et al., 2019). Specifically, LQR
considers controlling the following linear dynamical system:
xt+1 = Axt + But + ξt ,
1
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, China 2 School of Artificial Intelligence,
Nanjing University, China. Correspondence to: Peng Zhao
<zhaop@lamda.nju.edu.cn>.

The latest work for bandit
√ LQR control (Sun et al., 2023)
−1
has achieved an e
O(αmin
T ) regret, where αmin is the minimum cost curvatures, i.e., Qt , Rt ⪰ αt I and αmin =
mint αt . While optimal in T , it presents unfavorable curvature considerations for two reasons: (i) the learner must have

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

