Subsampling is not Magic: Why Large Batch Sizes Work for Differentially
Private Stochastic Optimisation

Ossi Räisä * 1 Joonas Jälkö * 1 Antti Honkela 1

Abstract

the output of the algorithm. Due to the formal guarantee
provided by DP, there is a great deal of interest in training
deep learning models with a DP variant of stochastic gradient descent (DP-SGD) (Song et al., 2013; Bassily et al.,
2014; Abadi et al., 2016).

We study how the batch size affects the total gradient variance in differentially private stochastic
gradient descent (DP-SGD), seeking a theoretical explanation for the usefulness of large batch
sizes. As DP-SGD is the basis of modern DP
deep learning, its properties have been widely
studied, and recent works have empirically found
large batch sizes to be beneficial. However, theoretical explanations of this benefit are currently
heuristic at best. We first observe that the total
gradient variance in DP-SGD can be decomposed
into subsampling-induced and noise-induced variances. We then prove that in the limit of an infinite
number of iterations, the effective noise-induced
variance is invariant to the batch size. The remaining subsampling-induced variance decreases
with larger batch sizes, so large batches reduce
the effective total gradient variance. We confirm
numerically that the asymptotic regime is relevant
in practical settings when the batch size is not
small, and find that outside the asymptotic regime,
the total gradient variance decreases even more
with large batch sizes. We also find a sufficient
condition that implies that large batch sizes similarly reduce effective DP noise variance for one
iteration of DP-SGD.

One of the key properties of DP is so called subsampling
amplification (Li et al., 2012; Beimel et al., 2014). Broadly
speaking, subsampling the data before applying a DP mechanism adds an additional layer of protection to the data
samples, leading to stronger privacy guarantees for a fixed
amount of added noise. Quantifying the gains from subsampling amplification (Abadi et al., 2016; Zhu & Wang, 2019;
Koskela et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2022) has been a crucial
component in making algorithms such as DP-SGD work
under strict privacy guarantees.
In non-DP gradient descent, subsampling the gradients has
been shown to provide better generalization on many occasions (Hardt et al., 2016; Mou et al., 2018; Kleinberg
et al., 2018). The reason for the improved generalization is
that the subsampling-induced noise allows the optimization
to avoid collapsing into a local optimum early on (Keskar
et al., 2017). However, when optimizing with DP-SGD,
many works have shown that the large batch sizes actually
provide better performance compared to heavy subsampling
of the training data (McMahan et al., 2018; De et al., 2022;
Mehta et al., 2023). This suggests that there are some fundamental differences in how the level of subsampling affects
the performance of non-private and private SGD.
We focus on the Poisson subsampled Gaussian mechanism,
which is the basis for the privacy analysis of DP-SGD. The
privacy analysis can be done with several different upper
bounds (Abadi et al., 2016; Zhu & Wang, 2019; Koskela
et al., 2020), but we only look at the tight analysis that gives
the smallest possible privacy bounds for the subsampled
Gaussian mechanism. The tight analysis is what modern
numerical privacy accountants (Koskela et al., 2020; 2021;
Gopi et al., 2021; Doroshenko et al., 2022; Alghamdi et al.,
2023) approximate.

1. Introduction
As deep learning models are being trained on ever larger
datasets, the privacy of the subjects of these training datasets
is a growing concern. Differential privacy (DP) (Dwork
et al., 2006b) is a property of an algorithm that formally
quantifies the privacy leakage that can result from releasing
*
1
Equal contribution
Department of Computer Science, University of Helsinki.
Correspondence to:
Ossi
Räisä
<ossi.raisa@helsinki.fi>,
Joonas
Jälkö
<joonas.jalko@helsinki.fi>.

In Poisson subsampling, each datapoint is included with
probability q, called the subsampling rate, which is proportional to the expected batch size. The total gradient variance

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

