Implicit Bias of Policy Gradient in Linear Quadratic Control:
Extrapolation to Unseen Initial States

Noam Razin I * Yotam Alexander I * Edo Cohen-Karlik I Raja Giryes I Amir Globerson I II Nadav Cohen I

Abstract

where test data is drawn from a different distribution than
that of the training data. In modern regimes the training
objective is often underdetermined — i.e. it admits multiple
solutions (parameter assignments fitting training data) that
differ in their performance on test data — and the extent to
which a learned solution generalizes is determined by an
implicit bias of the training algorithm (Neyshabur, 2017;
Vardi, 2023). Remarkably, variants of gradient descent frequently converge to solutions with excellent in-distribution
generalization (Zhang et al., 2017), which in some cases
extends to out-of-distribution generalization (Miller et al.,
2021). The implicit bias of gradient descent has accordingly
attracted vast theoretical interest, with existing analyses
focusing primarily on the basic framework of supervised
learning (see, e.g., Neyshabur et al. (2014); Gunasekar et al.
(2017); Soudry et al. (2018); Arora et al. (2019); Ji & Telgarsky (2019a;b); Woodworth et al. (2020); Razin & Cohen
(2020); Lyu & Li (2020); Lyu et al. (2021); Pesme et al.
(2021); Razin et al. (2021; 2022); Frei et al. (2023b;a); Andriushchenko et al. (2023); Abbe et al. (2023)).

In modern machine learning, models can often fit
training data in numerous ways, some of which
perform well on unseen (test) data, while others do not. Remarkably, in such cases gradient
descent frequently exhibits an implicit bias that
leads to excellent performance on unseen data.
This implicit bias was extensively studied in supervised learning, but is far less understood in
optimal control (reinforcement learning). There,
learning a controller applied to a system via gradient descent is known as policy gradient, and
a question of prime importance is the extent to
which a learned controller extrapolates to unseen
initial states. This paper theoretically studies the
implicit bias of policy gradient in terms of extrapolation to unseen initial states. Focusing on the
fundamental Linear Quadratic Regulator (LQR)
problem, we establish that the extent of extrapolation depends on the degree of exploration induced by the system when commencing from initial states included in training. Experiments corroborate our theory, and demonstrate its conclusions on problems beyond LQR, where systems
are non-linear and controllers are neural networks.
We hypothesize that real-world optimal control
may be greatly improved by developing methods
for informed selection of initial states to train on.

1

As opposed to supervised learning, little is known about the
implicit bias of gradient descent in the challenging framework of optimal control (see overview of related work in
Appendix A). In optimal control — which in its broadest
form is equivalent to reinforcement learning — the goal is
to learn a controller (also known as policy) that will steer
a given system (also known as environment) such that a
given cost is minimized (or equivalently, a given reward is
maximized) (Sontag, 2013). Algorithms that learn a controller by directly parameterizing it and setting its parameters through gradient descent are known as policy gradient
methods. For implementing such methods, gradients with
respect to controller parameters are either estimated via
sampling (Williams, 1992), or, in cases where differentiable
forms for the system and cost are at hand, the gradients may
be computed through analytic differentiation (see, e.g., Hu
et al. (2019); Qiao et al. (2020); Clavera et al. (2020); Mora
et al. (2021); Gillen & Byl (2022); Howell et al. (2022); Xu
et al. (2022); Wiedemann et al. (2023)).

Introduction

The ability to generalize from training data to unseen test
data is a core aspect of machine learning. Broadly speaking, there are two types of generalization one may hope for:
(i) in-distribution generalization, where test data is drawn
from the same distribution as training data; and (ii) outof-distribution generalization, also known as extrapolation,
*
Equal contribution I Tel Aviv University II Google. Correspondence to: Noam Razin <noamrazin@mail.tau.ac.il>, Yotam
Alexander <yotama@mail.tau.ac.il>.

An issue of prime importance in optimal control (and reinforcement learning) is the extent to which a learned controller extrapolates to initial states unseen in training. Indeed, in real-world settings training is often limited to few
initial states, and a deployed controller is likely to encounter

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

