Position: Automatic Environment Shaping is the Next Frontier in RL

Younghyo Park * 1 Gabriel B. Margolis * 1 Pulkit Agrawal 1

Abstract

uation – robots need to be useful to be deployed, but for
them to be useful requires collecting enough data to train a
controller that creates value. The real question, therefore, is
bootstrapping data collection.

Many roboticists dream of presenting a robot with
a task in the evening and returning the next morning to find the robot capable of solving the task.
What is preventing us from achieving this? Simto-real reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved
impressive performance on challenging robotics
tasks, but requires substantial human effort to set
up the task in a way that is amenable to RL. It’s
our position that algorithmic improvements in policy optimization and other ideas should be guided
towards resolving the primary bottleneck of shaping the training environment, i.e., designing observations, actions, rewards and simulation dynamics.
Most practitioners don’t tune the RL algorithm,
but other environment parameters to obtain a desirable controller. We posit that scaling RL to
diverse robotic tasks will only be achieved if the
community focuses on automating environment
shaping procedures.

A natural way to collect data is by teleoperating a robot
to perform diverse tasks. However, this paradigm is challenging to scale as the human effort grows linearly with
the amount of data that needs to be gathered. To ease data
collection, recent works have made teleoperation more capable and easier (Zhao et al., 2023; Fu et al., 2024), but
it doesn’t change the linear scaling. At some point in the
future, it is plausible that we will have enough data to train
a large model that will reduce the number of demonstrations
required to learn a new task and make the human effort
sub-linear. However, we are far from that point. The primary reason is that policies obtained via supervised learning
on a small dataset of demonstrations (i.e., learning from
demonstration) have limited robustness and generalization
and, therefore, cannot be used to collect data autonomously
in more diverse settings.
In theory, given a reward function or by inferring a reward
function from the demonstrations, autonomous data collection is possible using reinforcement learning (RL). It has
been hard to realize this promise of RL because training
in the real world often requires babysitting the robot to
ensure safe operation, ensuring the reward function is not
hacked, performing resets, and the data inefficiency of RL
algorithms means they run for a long time before useful
behaviors are discovered. Real-world RL training is an active area of research (Luo et al., 2024), and recent work
has shown the plausibility of learning locomotion behaviors
from real-world RL training (Wu et al., 2023; Lei et al.,
2023). However, real-world RL is yet to achieve state-ofthe-art robotic controllers, which means the data it generates
is sub-optimal.

1. Introduction
The advent of foundation models for speech, vision, and language processing has revolutionized Artificial Intelligence.
It is widely believed that robotics is the next frontier, and
the race to develop a foundation model for robotics is ongoing. The critical challenge in this pursuit is the limited
availability of robotic data: trajectories of observations and
robot actions. This starkly contrasts with computer vision
and natural language processing, where large amounts of
readily available internet data can be used. One way to
gather robotic data is to deploy robots for many tasks in
diverse environments. However, such deployment is only
feasible if robots create value, i.e., successfully solve the
task often enough. The result is a chicken-and-the-egg sit*

A related line of work bypasses the difficulty of training in
the real world by training with RL in simulation and then
successfully deploying policies in reality (i.e., sim-to-real
RL). Such training has achieved state-of-the-art behaviors
across many robot morphologies and complex tasks involving legged locomotion (Miki et al., 2022; Ji et al., 2023;
Hoeller et al., 2023; Zhuang et al., 2023; Cheng et al., 2023;
Jenelten et al., 2024), dexterous manipulation (Andrychow-

Equal contribution 1 Improbable AI Lab, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to:
Younghyo Park <younghyo@mit.edu>, Gabriel B. Margolis
<gmargo@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

