MMPareto: Boosting Multimodal Learning with Innocent Unimodal Assistance

Yake Wei 1 Di Hu 1 2

Abstract

(2022) pointed out the imbalanced multimodal learning
problem, where most multimodal models cannot jointly
utilize all modalities well and the utilization of each modality is imbalanced. This problem has raised widely attention
recently (Zhang et al., 2024). Several methods have been
proposed to improve the training of worse learnt modality
with additional module (Wang et al., 2020) or modalityspecific training strategy (Peng et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2022;
Wei et al., 2024). These methods often have one common
sense that targetedly improves unimodal training. Among
them, multitask-like methods that directly add unimodal
learning objectives besides the multimodal joint learning
objective, exhibit their superior effectiveness for alleviating
this imbalanced multimodal learning problem (Wang et al.,
2020; Du et al., 2023; Fan et al., 2023).

Multimodal learning methods with targeted unimodal learning objectives have exhibited their
superior efficacy in alleviating the imbalanced
multimodal learning problem. However, in this
paper, we identify the previously ignored gradient conflict between multimodal and unimodal
learning objectives, potentially misleading the unimodal encoder optimization. To well diminish
these conflicts, we observe the discrepancy between multimodal loss and unimodal loss, where
both gradient magnitude and covariance of the
easier-to-learn multimodal loss are smaller than
the unimodal one. With this property, we analyze Pareto integration under our multimodal scenario and propose MMPareto algorithm, which
could ensure a final gradient with direction that is
common to all learning objectives and enhanced
magnitude to improve generalization, providing
innocent unimodal assistance. Finally, experiments across multiple types of modalities and
frameworks with dense cross-modal interaction
indicate our superior and extendable method performance. Our method is also expected to facilitate multi-task cases with a clear discrepancy
in task difficulty, demonstrating its ideal scalability. The source code and dataset are available at https://github.com/GeWu-Lab/
MMPareto_ICML2024.

However, behind the effective performance, we observe a
previously ignored risk in model optimization under this
widely used multitask-like scenario, potentially limiting
model ability. Every coin has two sides. Unimodal learning
objectives undeniably effectively enhance the learning of
corresponding modalities. Meanwhile, the optimization of
parameters in unimodal encoder is influenced by both multimodal joint learning objective and its own unimodal learning
objective. This entails the need to minimize two learning
objectives concurrently, but usually, there does not exist a
set of parameters that could satisfy this goal. Consequently,
these multimodal and unimodal learning objectives could
have conflict during optimization. In Figure 1a, we take an
example of the video encoder on the widely used Kinetics
Sounds dataset. As the results, negative cosine similarity
indicates that multimodal and unimodal gradients indeed
have conflicts in direction during optimization. Especially,
these conflicts at the early training stage could substantially
harm the model ability (Liu et al., 2020). Hence the primary
multimodal learning is potentially disturbed.

1. Introduction
People are immersed in a variety of sensors, encompassing sight, sound, and touch, which has sparked multimodal
learning (Baltrušaitis et al., 2018; Lin et al., 2023), and
audio-visual learning (Wei et al., 2022). Although many
multimodal methods have revealed effectiveness, Peng et al.

To avoid optimization conflicts, it is essential to integrate
both gradients well, making the unimodal gradient not affect
the primary multimodal training but assist it. This necessity
naturally accords with the idea of Pareto method (Sener &
Koltun, 2018), which aims to find a steep gradient direction that benefits all objectives and finally converges to a
trade-off state of them. As Figure 1b, on one of the representative multi-task cases, semantic segmentation and depth
estimation tasks on Cityscapes (Cordts et al., 2016) dataset,

1
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University
of China, Beijing, China 2 Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data
Management and Analysis Methods, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Di Hu <dihu@ruc.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

