DUPLEX: Dual GAT for Complex Embedding of Directed Graphs

Zhaoru Ke * 1 2 Hang Yu * 2 Jianguo Li 2 Haipeng Zhang 1

Abstract

(a)

(b)

Degree Distribution of Cora-ml

(c)

directed (in-)
directed (out-)
undirected

Current directed graph embedding methods build
upon undirected techniques but often inadequately
capture directed edge information, leading to
challenges such as: (1) Suboptimal representations for nodes with low in/out-degrees, due
to the insufficient neighbor interactions; (2) Limited inductive ability for representing new nodes
post-training; (3) Narrow generalizability, as
training is overly coupled with specific tasks.
In response, we propose DUPLEX, an inductive framework for complex embeddings of directed graphs. It (1) leverages Hermitian adjacency matrix decomposition for comprehensive
neighbor integration, (2) employs a dual GAT
encoder for directional neighbor modeling, and
(3) features two parameter-free decoders to decouple training from particular tasks. DUPLEX
outperforms state-of-the-art models, especially
for nodes with sparse connectivity, and demonstrates robust inductive capability and adaptability across various tasks. The code is available at
https://github.com/alipay/DUPLEX.

௔

௔

௕

௕

௖

௖

ௗ

ௗ

௘

௘

Figure 1. (a) Many nodes in real digraphs have zero in/out-degree.
(b) Separating in/out-degree yields more low-degree nodes compared to the total degree that disregards direction. (c) Lack of
in-neighbors hinders the dual embedding methods in capturing
node c’s source role.

sentations are then applied to a variety of predictive tasks,
such as link prediction and node classification. While the
research on graph embeddings has achieved notable success,
the primary focus has been on undirected graphs, which
often fail to capture the intricate directional relationships
inherent in many real-world networks.
Take, for example, the realm of social media, where users
(nodes) follow one another, creating a digraph (directed
graph) of influence and information flow. In this scenario,
a directed edge from user u to user v implies that user u
follows user v, but not necessarily vice versa. The directionality of these edges encodes significant information about
user behavior, influence patterns, and community structure.
The need for digraph embedding (DGE) methods that can
proficiently encode such asymmetrical structures is evident,
yet the development of an effective DGE framework must
also navigate several key desiderata to ensure practicality
and utility:

1. Introduction
Graphs, as a powerful and versatile data structure, have
cemented their importance across a myriad of domains, including social science (Hu et al., 2017), recommendation
systems (Wu et al., 2022), bioinformatics (Yue et al., 2020),
traffic prediction (Zheng et al., 2020), financial and risk
analysis (Yang et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2022). At the heart of
graph analytics lies the concept of graph embedding, which
seeks to encode complex, high-dimensional graph structures
into compact, low-dimensional vector spaces. These repre-

d1. Performance Across Various Node Degrees: Social
networks are characterized by a wide disparity in user connectivity. An efficacious DGE method should consistently
represent both influential personalities and average individuals, irrespective of the network’s sparsity. This challenge
is more pronounced in digraphs, where the separation of
in and out neighbors often results in a higher proportion of
nodes with a skewed degree distribution compared to their
undirected counterparts (illustrated in Figure 1(a)-(b)).

*
Equal contribution. This work was done when Zhaoru
1
Ke was a research intern at Ant Group.
School
of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, China 2 Ant Group, China.
Correspondence to:
Haipeng Zhang <zhanghp@shanghaitech.edu.cn>, Jianguo Li
<lijg.zero@antgroup.com>.

d2. Transductive and Inductive Learning: The fluidity
of social networks, marked by the continual arrival and
departure of users, demands a DGE method capable of
both updating embeddings for current users (transductive
learning) and seamlessly extending to new users (inductive

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

