Improved Operator Learning by Orthogonal Attention

Zipeng Xiao 1 Zhongkai Hao 2 Bokai Lin 1 Zhijie Deng 1 Hang Su 2

Abstract

Courant et al., 1967), etc. Due to the infinite-dimensional
nature of the function space, traditional numerical solvers
often rely on discretizing the data domain. However, this
introduces a balance between efficiency and accuracy: finer
discretization offers higher precision but at the expense of
greater computational complexity.

This work presents orthogonal attention for constructing neural operators to serve as surrogates
to model the solutions of a family of Partial Differential Equations (PDEs). The motivation is
that the kernel integral operator, which is usually
at the core of neural operators, can be reformulated with orthonormal eigenfunctions. Inspired
by the success of the neural approximation of
eigenfunctions (Deng et al., 2022b), we opt to
directly parameterize the involved eigenfunctions
with flexible neural networks (NNs), based on
which the input function is then transformed by
the rule of kernel integral. Surprisingly, the resulting NN module bears a striking resemblance
to regular attention mechanisms, albeit without
softmax. Instead, it incorporates an orthogonalization operation that provides regularization during
model training and helps mitigate overfitting, particularly in scenarios with limited data availability.
In practice, the orthogonalization operation can
be implemented with minimal additional overheads. Experiments on six standard neural operator benchmark datasets comprising both regular
and irregular geometries show that our method
can outperform competing baselines with decent
margins.

Deep learning methods have shown promise in lifting such
a trade-off (Li et al., 2020) thanks to their high inference
speed and expressiveness. Specifically, physics-informed
neural networks (PINNs) (Raissi et al., 2019) first combine
neural networks (NNs) with physical principles for PDE
solving. Yet, PINNs approximate the solution associated
with a certain PDE instance and hence cannot readily adapt
to problems with different yet similar setups. By learning a
map between the input condition and the PDE solution in a
data-driven manner, neural operators manage to solve a family of PDEs, with the DeepONet (Lu et al., 2019) as a representative example. Fourier Neural Operators (FNOs) (Li
et al., 2020; Tran et al., 2023; Li et al., 2022; Wen et al.,
2022; Grady et al., 2022; Gupta et al., 2021; Xiong et al.,
2023) shift the learning to Fourier space to enhance speed
while maintaining efficacy through the utilization of the
Fast Fourier Transform (FFT). Since the development of
attention mechanism (Vaswani et al., 2017), considerable
effort has been devoted to developing attention-based neural
operators to improve expressiveness and address irregular
mesh (Cao, 2021; Li et al., 2023a; Ovadia et al., 2023; Fonseca et al., 2023; Hao et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023b).
Despite the considerable progress made in neural operators,
there remain non-trivial challenges in its practical applications. On the one hand, the training targets of neural
operators are usually acquired from classical PDE solvers,
which can be computationally demanding. For instance, simulations for tasks like airfoils can require about 1 CPU-hour
per sample (Li et al., 2022). On the other hand, complex
deep models are prone to deteriorate when confronted with
limited training data.

1. Introduction
Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) are essential tools
for modeling and describing intricate dynamics in scientific and engineering domains (Zachmanoglou & Thoe,
1986). Solving the PDEs routinely rely on well-established
numerical approaches such as finite element methods
(FEM) (Zienkiewicz et al., 2005), finite difference methods
(FDM) (Thomas, 2013), spectral methods (Ciarlet, 2002;
1
Qing Yuan Research Institute, SEIEE, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University 2 Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Tsinghua University.
Correspondence to: Zhijie Deng <zhijied@sjtu.edu.cn>, Hang
Su <suhangss@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

This work aims to develop a novel neural operator that inherently accommodates proper regularization to cope with the
challenges in the processing of PDE data. We start from the
observations that the kernel integral operator, a core module of the solving operator of PDEs, can be rewritten with
orthonormal eigenfunctions. Such an expansion substan-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

