Online Speculative Decoding

Xiaoxuan Liu 1 Lanxiang Hu 2 Peter Bailis 3 Alvin Cheung 1 Zhijie Deng 4 Ion Stoica 1 Hao Zhang 2
Resume from t3_correct to generate subsequent tokens

Abstract

t1

Speculative decoding is a pivotal technique to accelerate the inference of large language models
(LLMs) by employing a smaller draft model to
predict the target model’s outputs. However, its efficacy can be limited due to the low predictive accuracy of the draft model, particularly when faced
with diverse text inputs and a significant capability gap between the draft and target models. We
introduce online speculative decoding to address
this challenge. The main idea is to continuously
update the (multiple) draft model(s) on observed
user query data. Adapting to query distribution
mitigates the shifts between the training distribution of the draft model and the query distribution,
enabling the draft model to more accurately predict the target model’s outputs. We develop a prototype of online speculative decoding based on
knowledge distillation and evaluate it using both
synthetic and real query data. The results show
a substantial increase in the token acceptance
rate by 0.1 to 0.65, bringing 1.42× to 2.17× latency reduction. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/LiuXiaoxuanPKU/OSD.

Prompt

Draft Model
(student)

t2

t3

Proposal token
probability distribution

Update Model when
size(Buffer) > Threshold_size or
elapsed time > Threshold_time
Distance metric: KL/Reverse KL/ JSD

t1

Target Model
(teacher)

t2

t3_correct

Verification

Buffer

(
,
)
t3
t3_correct
(Draft, target) probability distribution
…………

Figure 1. Overview of online speculative decoding (OSD) framework: For each prompt, the draft model suggests multiple tokens
and the target model performs the verification. If the student proposes incorrect tokens, both the draft and target distributions are
stored in a buffer. Once the buffer exceeds a size limit or is too
old, the draft model is updated by calculating the loss between the
draft and target distributions using various distance metrics.

token of the response. An emerging solution to reduce the
latency is speculative decoding (Leviathan et al., 2023)—it
employs a small draft model to speculate multiple output
tokens of the target (large) model, and then lets the target
LLM verify these speculations in parallel. If the verification
of a token fails, the large model must recompute from that
point. Therefore, the performance of speculative decoding
largely depends on the speculation accuracy of the draft
model (also known as the token acceptance rate). In the
presence of diverse text inputs, the accuracy of the speculations is often not very high, due to the capability gap
between the draft and target models. Employing a larger,
more accurate draft model, however, defeats the purpose of
speculative decoding as it will increase latency.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) such as GPT-4 (OpenAI,
2023) and LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023a;b) are rapidly reinventing today’s applications. Many companies are racing to
deploy LLMs in online services, such as search, chatbots,
and virtual assistants. Since most of these services demand
low latency, optimizing LLM serving latency directly translates into better quality of service and cost reduction.

To address this challenge, we introduce a novel method,
online speculative decoding (OSD), to periodically finetune
the draft model based on the corrections of the target model.
OSD aims to reduce query latency while preserving the
compact size of the draft model.
First, OSD employs knowledge distillation within speculative decoding to enhance the alignment between the draft
and target models. Speculative decoding involves the draft
model proposing potential tokens with their respective probability distributions. The target model then assesses these
suggestions, correcting discrepancies to ensure that the outputs remain consistent with those produced without the draft
model. This correction mechanism serves as an effective
way for the draft model to assimilate and learn from this
enriched information. Compared to conventional label finetuning, knowledge distillation offers a significant advantage

The latency of today’s LLM service is unfortunately very
high, primarily because serving a user query requires multiple serial evaluations of the LLM, each generating only one
1

UC Berkeley 2 UCSD 3 Google Inc. 4 SJTU. Correspondence
to: Hao, Zhang <haozhang@ucsd.edu>, Zhijie, Deng <zhijied@sjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

