Noise-Adaptive Confidence Sets for Linear Bandits and Application to Bayesian
Optimization

Kwang-Sung Jun 1 Jungtaek Kim 2

Abstract

observed features so that the rewards obtained from those
decisions would be maximized.1 Specifically, at each time
step t = 1, 2, . . . , n, the learner is given an arm set Xt ⊂ Rd
and chooses an arm xt ∈ Xt to observe a reward

Adapting to a priori unknown noise level is a very
important but challenging problem in sequential
decision-making as efficient exploration typically
requires knowledge of the noise level, which is
often loosely specified. We report significant
progress in addressing this issue for linear bandits in two respects. First, we propose a novel
confidence set that is ‘semi-adaptive’ to the unknown sub-Gaussian parameter σ∗2 in the sense
that
p the (normalized) confidence width scales with
dσ∗2 + σ02 where d is the dimension and σ02 is
the specified sub-Gaussian parameter (known)
2
that can be much larger than
p σ∗ . This is a significant improvement over dσ02 of the standard
confidence set of Abbasi-Yadkori et al. (2011), especially when d is large. We show that this leads
to an improved regret bound in linear bandits.
Second, for bounded rewards, we propose a novel
variance-adaptive confidence set that has much
improved numerical performance upon prior art.
We then apply this confidence set to develop, as
we claim, the first practical variance-adaptive linear bandit algorithm via an optimistic approach,
which is enabled by our novel regret analysis technique. Both of our confidence sets rely critically
on ‘regret equality’ from online learning. Our empirical evaluation in diverse Bayesian optimization tasks shows that our proposed algorithms
demonstrate better or comparable performance
compared to existing methods.

yt = ⟨xt , θ∗ ⟩ + ηt ,

(1)

where θ∗ ∈ Rd is unknown, ηt | Ft−1 is a zeromean stochastic noise, and Ft−1 := σ(x1 , y1 , . . . , xt−1 ,
yP
t−1 , xt ). The goal is to maximize the cumulative reward
n
t=1 yt . The standard theoretical performance measure is
cumulative pseudo-regret (or simply ‘regret’) defined as
Regn :=

n
X
t=1

⟨xt,∗ , θ∗ ⟩ − ⟨xt , θ∗ ⟩,

(2)

where xt,∗ = arg maxx∈Xt ⟨x, θ∗ ⟩ is the arm with the highest mean reward. The significance of this problem lies in
its wide applicability, ranging from recommendation systems (Li et al., 2010) to online advertising (Avadhanula et al.,
2021) where the learner must balance between exploration
(acquiring information about the model) and exploitation
(pulling the arm estimated to give high reward).
A critical aspect of the linear bandit problem is the fact that
an algorithm requires prior knowledge of the noise level
(or an upper bound of it) and that its performance critically
depends on the specified noise level rather than the actual
noise level. In this paper, we make significant progress in
addressing this issue by proposing two algorithms that can
semi or fully adapt to the actual noise level in two different
setups.
The first setup is when the noise ηt | Ft−1 is σ∗2 -subGaussian where the sub-Gaussian parameter specified to
the algorithm is σ02 that can be much larger than σ∗2 . We
propose a novel linear bandit algorithm called LOSAN (Linear Optimism with Semi-Adaptivity to Noise). The critical
ingredient for this algorithm is a novel confidence set whose
(normalized) confidence width contains
p online variance estimators and is no larger than Õ( dσ∗2 + σ02 ) with high
probability where p
Õ hides polylogarithmic factors. This is
no worse than Õ( dσ02 + σ02 ) of the standard confidence

1. Introduction
In linear bandits (Abe & Long, 1999; Auer, 2002; Dani
et al., 2008; Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011), the learner faces
the challenge of making judicious sequential decisions with
1
University of Arizona 2 University of Pittsburgh. Correspondence to: Kwang-Sung Jun <kjun@cs.arizona.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1
The implementation of our proposed methods is available at
https://github.com/jungtaekkim/LOSAN-LOFAV.

1

