H-Consistency Guarantees for Regression

Anqi Mao 1 Mehryar Mohri 2 1 Yutao Zhong 1

Abstract

when training with a loss function distinct from the target
squared loss?

We present a detailed study of H-consistency
bounds for regression. We first present new theorems that generalize the tools previously given to
establish H-consistency bounds. This generalization proves essential for analyzing H-consistency
bounds specific to regression. Next, we prove
a series of novel H-consistency bounds for surrogate loss functions of the squared loss, under
the assumption of a symmetric distribution and
a bounded hypothesis set. This includes positive
results for the Huber loss, all `p losses, p ≥ 1, the
squared -insensitive loss, as well as a negative
result for the -insensitive loss used in Support
Vector Regression (SVR). We further leverage
our analysis of H-consistency for regression and
derive principled surrogate losses for adversarial
regression (Section 5). This readily establishes
novel algorithms for adversarial regression, for
which we report favorable experimental results in
Section 6.

Addressing this question can have significant implications
in the design of regression algorithms. It can also strongly
benefit the design of useful surrogate losses for other related
problems, such as adversarial regression, as we shall see.
The statistical properties of surrogate losses have been
extensively studied in the past. In particular, the Bayesconsistency of various convex loss functions, including margin-based surrogate losses in binary classification
(Zhang, 2004a; Bartlett, Jordan, and McAuliffe, 2006), and
other loss function families for multi-classification (Zhang,
2004b; Tewari & Bartlett, 2007; Steinwart, 2007), has been
examined in detail.
However, prior work by Long & Servedio (2013) has highlighted the limitations of Bayes-consistency, since it does
not account for the hypothesis set adopted. They established
that for some hypothesis sets and distributions, algorithms
minimizing Bayes-consistent losses may retain a constant
expected error, while others minimizing inconsistent losses
tend to have an expected error approaching zero. This indicates the significant role of the chosen hypothesis set in
consistency.

1. Introduction

Recent seminal work by Awasthi, Mao, Mohri, and Zhong
(2022a;b) and Mao, Mohri, and Zhong (2023f;c;e;b) has
analyzed H-consistency bounds for broad families of surrogate losses in binary classication, multi-class classification,
structured prediction, and abstention (Mao et al., 2023a).
These bounds are more informative than Bayes-consistency
since they are hypothesis set-specific and do not require the
entire family of measurable functions. Moreover, they offer
finite sample, non-asymptotic guarantees. In light of these
recent guarantees, the following questions naturally arise:
Can we derive a non-asymptotic analysis of regression taking into account the hypothesis set? How can we benefit
from that analysis?

Learning algorithms often optimize loss functions that differ from the originally specified task. In classification,
this divergence typically arises due to the computational
intractability of optimizing the original loss or because it
lacks certain desirable properties like differentiability or
smoothness. In regression, the shift may occur because the
surrogate loss used exhibits more favorable characteristics,
such as handling outliers or ensuring sparser solutions. For
instance, the Huber loss and `1 loss are used to mitigate
the impact of outliers since the squared loss is known to
be sensitive to the presence of outliers, while -insensitive
losses promote sparsity. But, what guarantees do we have
1
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York,
NY; 2 Google Research, New York, NY. Correspondence
to: Anqi Mao <aqmao@cims.nyu.edu>, Mehryar Mohri
<mohri@google.com>, Yutao Zhong <yutao@cims.nyu.edu>.

While there is some previous work exploring Bayesconsistency in regression (Caponnetto, 2005; Christmann
& Steinwart, 2007; Steinwart, 2007), we are not aware of
any prior H-consistency bounds or similar finite sample
guarantees for surrogate losses in regression, such as, for
example, the Huber loss or the squared -insensitive loss.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

