Straight-Through Meets Sparse Recovery: the Support Exploration Algorithm

Mimoun Mohamed 1 2 François Malgouyres 3 Valentin Emiya 1 Caroline Chaux 4

Abstract

the learning procedure Minimize F (Hq (w)) relies on the
w
computational graph:

The straight-through estimator (STE) is commonly used to optimize quantized neural networks, yet its contexts of effective performance
are still unclear despite empirical successes. To
make a step forward in this comprehension, we
apply STE to a well-understood problem: sparse
support recovery. We introduce the Support Exploration Algorithm (SEA), a novel algorithm promoting sparsity, and we analyze its performance
in support recovery (a.k.a. model selection) problems. SEA explores more supports than the stateof-the-art, leading to superior performance in experiments, especially when the columns of A are
strongly coherent. The theoretical analysis considers recovery guarantees when the linear measurements matrix A satisfies the Restricted Isometry
Property (RIP). The sufficient conditions of recovery are comparable but more stringent than those
of the state-of-the-art in sparse support recovery.
Their significance lies mainly in their applicability
to an instance of the STE.

w

Hq

wq

F

loss

Given a step-size η, the update of w is performed as w ←
∂F
w − η ∂w
|wq . The motivation, as explained in (Hinton,
q
∂H

2012; Bengio et al., 2013), is that since ∂wq |w is either
undefined or 0, we cannot backpropagate using the chain
∂F ◦H
∂H
∂F
|wq ∂wq |w . The STE makes the coarse
rule ∂w q |w = ∂w
q
∂F ◦H

∂F
approximation ∂w q |w ≈ ∂w
|wq to backpropagate the
q
gradient through the piecewise-constant operator Hq . Many
subsequent works improve these methods in various aspects
(Yuan & Agaian, 2023; Sayed et al., 2023).

Although STE achieves state-of-the-art performance in training quantized weights for neural networks, it is poorly understood and has not been investigated beyond the context
of quantization. We introduce an STE principle for sparsification, leading to a novel algorithm named the Support
Exploration Algorithm (SEA) and present experimental evidence of its benefits in challenging, coherent settings such
as spike deconvolution, as well as in systematic experiments
like the phase transition diagram, see Figure 1. Additionally, we establish theoretical guarantees for the STE-based
algorithm.

1. Introduction
Straight-through estimator. The use of quantized neural
networks spares memory, energy, and computing resources
during inference, making them essential for embedding neural networks (Yuan & Agaian, 2023; Sayed et al., 2023). An
effective strategy is to learn the quantized weights. Seminal
works (Courbariaux et al., 2015; Hubara et al., 2016a) rely
on full-precision weights w that evolve in the parameter
space, while quantized weights wq = Hq (w) are obtained
by applying a piecewise-constant quantization operator Hq .
Denoting by F the computational chain from wq to the loss,
1
Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, LIS, Marseille, France 2 Aix
Marseille Univ, CNRS, I2M, Marseille, France 3 Institut de
Mathématiques de Toulouse ; UMR5219 , Université de Toulouse ;
CNRS , UPS IMT F-31062 Toulouse Cedex 9, France 4 CNRS,
IPAL, Singapour. Correspondence to: Mimoun Mohamed
<mimoun.mohamed@lis-lab.fr>.

Figure 1. Overview of the main results. Left: phase transition
diagram showing the recovery limits in dimension n = 500 while
sparsity k and number of observations m varies (the higher, the
better, see details in Section 5.1). Right: spike deconvolution
in dimension m = n = 500 - Average distance between the
supports of the solution x∗ and the estimations obtained from
various algorithms, plotted against the sparsity level k (the lower,
the better, see details in Section 5.2).

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

