On the Trajectory Regularity of ODE-based Diffusion Sampling

Defang Chen 1 2 Zhenyu Zhou 1 2 Can Wang 1 2 Chunhua Shen 3 Siwei Lyu 4

Abstract
Diffusion-based generative models use stochastic
differential equations (SDEs) and their equivalent
ordinary differential equations (ODEs) to establish a smooth connection between a complex data
distribution and a tractable prior distribution. In
this paper, we identify several intriguing trajectory
properties in the ODE-based sampling process of
diffusion models. We characterize an implicit denoising trajectory and discuss its vital role in forming the coupled sampling trajectory with a strong
shape regularity, regardless of the generated content. We also describe a dynamic programmingbased scheme to make the time schedule in sampling better fit the underlying trajectory structure.
This simple strategy requires minimal modification to any given ODE-based numerical solvers
and incurs negligible computational cost, while
delivering superior performance in image generation, especially in 5 ∼ 10 function evaluations.

Figure 1. A geometric picture of ODE-based sampling in diffusion
models. Each initial sample (from the noise distribution) starts
from a big sphere and converges to the final sample (in the data
manifold) along a regular sampling trajectory, which is controlled
by an implicit denoising trajectory.

defined as the gradient of the log data density w.r.t. the input (Hyvärinen, 2005; Lyu, 2009; Raphan & Simoncelli,
2011; Vincent, 2011), irrespective of the model’s specific
configurations. Training such a model involves learning
the score function, which is achievable by developing a
noise-dependent denoising model. This model is trained to
minimize the mean square error in data reconstruction for
the data-noise pairings generated during the forward process (Kingma et al., 2021; Karras et al., 2022). To generate
data, diffusion-based generative models solve the acquired
score-based backward SDE through a numerical solver. Recent research has shown that the backward SDE can be
effectively replaced by an equivalent probability flow ordinary differential equation (PF-ODE), preserving identical
marginal distributions (Song et al., 2021c;a; Lu et al., 2022a;
Zhang & Chen, 2023; Zhou et al., 2023). This deterministic ODE-based generation reduces the need for stochastic
sampling to just the randomness in the initial sample selection, thereby simplifying and granting more control over the
entire generative process (Song et al., 2021a;c). Under the
PF-ODE formulation, starting from white Gaussian noise,
the sampling trajectory is formed by running a numerical
solver with discretized time steps. These steps collectively
constitute the time schedule used in sampling.

1. Introduction
Diffusion-based generative models (Sohl-Dickstein et al.,
2015; Song & Ermon, 2019; Ho et al., 2020; Song et al.,
2021c) have gained significant attention and achieved remarkable results in image (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Rombach et al., 2022), audio (Kong et al., 2021), video (Ho et al.,
2022; Blattmann et al., 2023), and notably in text-to-image
synthesis (Saharia et al., 2022; Ruiz et al., 2023; Podell et al.,
2024; Esser et al., 2024). These models introduce noise into
data through a forward process and subsequently generate
data by sampling via a backward process. Both processes
are characterized and modeled using stochastic differential
equations (SDEs) (Song et al., 2021c). In diffusion-based
generative models, the pivotal element is the score function,
1

State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang University, China 2 Hangzhou High-Tech Zone (Binjiang)
Blockchain and Data Security Research Institute, China 3 Zhejiang
University, China 4 University at Buffalo, USA. Correspondence
to: Can Wang <wcan@zju.edu.cn>.

Despite the impressive generative capabilities exhibited by
diffusion-based models, many mathematical and statistical
aspects of these models remain veiled in mystery, largely
due to the complex nature of SDEs and neural network
models, and the substantial data dimensions involved. In
particular, empirical studies indicate an intriguing regularity in the sampling trajectories of PF-ODE based diffusion

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

