Coprocessor Actor Critic: A Model-Based Reinforcement
Learning Approach For Adaptive Brain Stimulation

Michelle Pan * 1 Mariah Schrum * 1 Vivek Myers 1 Erdem Bıyık 2 Anca Dragan 1
et al., 2013b). In patients who suffer from conditions such
as Parkinson’s disease and dystonia, brain stimulation has
the ability to steer neural activity towards activity regions
which manifest in reduced disease symptoms (Hu & Stead,
2014; Groiss et al., 2009). Adaptive brain stimulation can be
employed not just to guide neural activity towards specific
activity patterns but can also aid impaired patients in accomplishing external task objectives (Bryan et al., 2022; Cunha
et al., 2015). Stroke patients are one patient population that
can benefit from this aspect of brain stimulation. Stroke
patients suffer injury to the brain that often results in loss of
motor control and an inability to complete basic tasks, such
as reaching for and grasping an object (Hatem et al., 2016).
Stroke patients often struggle with these seemingly simple
motor tasks due to stroke-induced lesions in the brain that
can interrupt the propagation of neurological signals within
and between cortical modules (Ingwersen et al., 2021; Choi
et al., 2023). Due to the resultant motor deficits, a patient
may recognize the target location and intend to move their
arm to the perceived position, but struggle to do so (Choi
et al., 2023). Adaptive brain stimulation exhibits potential
for reducing motor impairment and restoring lost function
via adaptive stimulation, enabling these patients to operate
more effectively in the world (Elias et al., 2018; Ganguly
et al., 2022).

Abstract
Adaptive brain stimulation can treat neurological
conditions such as Parkinson’s disease and poststroke motor deficits by influencing abnormal neural activity. Because of patient heterogeneity, each
patient requires a unique stimulation policy to
achieve optimal neural responses. Model-free reinforcement learning (MFRL) holds promise in
learning effective policies for a variety of similar control tasks, but is limited in domains like
brain stimulation by a need for numerous costly
environment interactions. In this work we introduce Coprocessor Actor Critic, a novel, modelbased reinforcement learning (MBRL) approach
for learning neural coprocessor policies for brain
stimulation. Our key insight is that coprocessor
policy learning is a combination of learning how
to act optimally in the world and learning how
to induce optimal actions in the world through
stimulation of an injured brain. We show that our
approach overcomes the limitations of traditional
MFRL methods in terms of sample efficiency and
task success and outperforms baseline MBRL approaches in a neurologically realistic model of an
injured brain.

In this work, we investigate the development of neural coprocessors to deliver adaptive brain stimulation for rehabilitation using an in silico model of brain injury. Neural
coprocessors rely on artificial intelligence techniques to
learn a brain stimulation policy that appropriately shapes
neural activity based upon the current state of the patient
(Rao, 2019). An effective coprocessor policy can compensate for lost mobility and paretic motor deficits post-stroke
(Bryan et al., 2022). However, there are several challenges
in developing an effective coprocessor policy. Because of
the heterogeneity of patients’ brains, their disease manifestation, and the location of the stimuli, the optimal coprocessor
policy is unique for each patient (Visanji et al., 2022). Furthermore, due to the complexity of the brain, closed-loop
coprocessor policies are difficult to hand-engineer (Oehrn
et al., 2023). Instead, individualized coprocessor policies
may be learned through interaction with the patient to ensure that the coprocessor aligns seamlessly with the unique

1. Introduction
A neural coprocessor is a form of brain-computer interface
(BCI) that can transmit signals to and from the brain (Rao,
2019; Oehrn et al., 2023). These interfaces can be used
to treat a variety of neurological conditions by influencing abnormal neural activity (Lozano et al., 2019; Little
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Sciences, UC Berkeley 2 Department of Computer
Science, University of Southern California. Correspondence to:
Michelle Pan <michellepan@berkeley.edu>.

We make our code public at https://github.com/
michelllepan/neural-coprocessors.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

