Better Safe than Sorry: Pre-training CLIP against
Targeted Data Poisoning and Backdoor Attacks

Wenhan Yang 1 Jingdong Gao 1 Baharan Mirzasoleiman 1

1. Introduction

Abstract
Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP)
on large image-caption datasets has achieved remarkable success in zero-shot classification and
enabled transferability to new domains. However, CLIP is extremely more vulnerable to targeted data poisoning and backdoor attacks, compared to supervised learning. Perhaps surprisingly, poisoning 0.0001% of CLIP pre-training
data is enough to make targeted data poisoning attacks successful. This is four orders of magnitude
smaller than what is required to poison supervised
models. Despite this vulnerability, existing methods are very limited in defending CLIP models
during pre-training. In this work, we propose
a strong defense, S AFE C LIP, to safely pre-train
CLIP against targeted data poisoning and backdoor attacks. S AFE C LIP warms up the model by
applying unimodal contrastive learning (CL) on
image and text modalities separately. Then, it divides the data into safe and risky sets, by applying
a Gaussian Mixture Model to the cosine similarity
of image-caption pair representations. S AFE C LIP
pre-trains the model by applying the CLIP loss
to the safe set and applying unimodal CL to image and text modalities of the risky set separately.
By gradually increasing the size of the safe set
during pre-training, S AFE C LIP effectively breaks
targeted data poisoning and backdoor attacks without harming the CLIP performance. Our extensive experiments on CC3M, Visual Genome and
MSCOCO demonstrate that S AFE C LIP significantly reduces the success rate of targeted data
poisoning attacks from 93.75% to 0% and that of
various backdoor attacks from up to 100% to 0%,
without harming CLIP’s performance1 .

Pre-training large vision-language models on extensive
image-caption data crawled from the internet has achieved
remarkable success in zero-shot classification and robustness to distribution shift. CLIP learns image and text representations in a shared space by maximizing the agreement
between the paired image-text representations, and minimizing the agreement between the unpaired ones. This alleviates the need for high-quality annotations and allows scaling
up the pre-training data to millions (Radford et al., 2021)
and billions of examples (Jia et al., 2021). Despite its superior performance, CLIP is extremely vulnerable to targeted
data poisoning and backdoor attacks, where an adversary
injects a subset of malicious examples in the training data
to change the prediction of particular examples at test time.
Perhaps surprisingly, poisoning only 0.0001% and 0.01% of
the pre-training data is enough to make targeted data poisoning and backdoor attacks successful, respectively (Carlini
et al., 2023; Carlini & Terzis, 2021). Considering that the
large pre-training data of CLIP is often crawled from the
internet, such attacks are very easy to perform in practice.
Despite this vulnerability, protecting CLIP against targeted
data poisoning and backdoor attacks during pre-training has
remained largely unaddressed. The only recently proposed
method, RoCLIP, aims to disassociate the poisoned imagecaption pairs during pre-training by pairing each image
representation with its most similar caption representation
in a random caption pool (Yang & Mirzasoleiman, 2023).
However, RoCLIP can suffer significant performance drop
in downstream performance, limiting its real-world application. Two other methods proposed to clean an already poisoned pre-trained CLIP, by fine-tuning on a clean data of the
same scale as pre-training (Yang et al., 2023), or fine-tuning
on a clean subset of pre-training data using contrastive learning on image and text modalities (Bansal et al., 2023). The
first method is clearly not applicable to pre-training, and the
second one even increases the attack success rate if applied
during pre-training on poisoned data, as confirmed in (Yang
& Mirzasoleiman, 2023).

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, 90024. Correspondence to: Wenhan Yang <hangeryang18@g.ucla.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
Code can be found at https://github.com/

Protecting CLIP against targeted data poisoning and backBigML-CS-UCLA/SafeCLIP

1

