Ensemble Pruning for Out-of-distribution Generalization

Fengchun Qiao 1 Xi Peng 1

Abstract

et al., 2019; Qiao et al., 2020). Although numerous algorithms have been proposed to improve OoD generalization,
recent studies (Wiles et al., 2021; Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz,
2020; Koh et al., 2021) indicate that no single model consistently outperforms others across all theoretical or empirical
contexts, and many perform worse than the standard baseline of empirical risk minimization (Vapnik, 1999).

Ensemble of deep neural networks has achieved
great success in hedging against single-model
failure under distribution shift. However, existing techniques suffer from producing redundant
models, limiting predictive diversity and yielding
compromised generalization performance. Existing ensemble pruning methods can only guarantee predictive diversity for in-distribution data,
which may not transfer well to out-of-distribution
(OoD) data. To address this gap, we propose
a principled optimization framework for ensemble pruning under distribution shifts. Since the
annotations of test data are not available, we
explore relationships between prediction distributions of the models, encapsulated in a topology graph. By incorporating this topology into
a combinatorial optimization framework, complementary models with high predictive diversity
are selected with theoretical guarantees. Our approach is model-agnostic and can be applied on
top of a broad spectrum of off-the-shelf ensembling methods for improved generalization performance. Experiments on common benchmarks
demonstrate the superiority of our approach in
both multi- and single-source OoD generalization. The source codes are publicly available at:
https://github.com/joffery/TEP.

Ensemble learning (Dong et al., 2020) emerges as a promising approach by leveraging the diversity of multiple models
to mitigate the risk of single-model failure under distribution
shifts. This diversity originates from variations in initialization (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017), architectures (Li et al.,
2022), and training processes (Wortsman et al., 2022; Ramé
et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2024). However, due to the lack
of access to data from target distributions during training,
current methods tend to generate an excessive number of
models in the hope of ensuring diversity at test time. These
methods often lead to the creation of redundant models, and
merely combining all models can reduce their complementary strengths against the target distribution, resulting in
suboptimal generalization performance (see Fig. 1).
This underscores the importance of ensemble pruning (Tsoumakas et al., 2009), a process that involves selectively choosing an optimal subset from a pool of pretrained models. Ensemble pruning aims to retain models
that are most complementary to each other to enhance overall performance. Both theoretical analyses and empirical
studies (Martinez-Munoz et al., 2008; Caruana et al., 2004)
support the effectiveness of ensemble pruning in boosting
the generalization ability of ensembles, a concept sometimes referred to as the “many-could-be-better-than-all” theorem (Zhou et al., 2002). Existing pruning methods typically utilize supervised diversity metrics based on training
or validation data to inform the selection process. However,
this approach encounters difficulties with data exhibiting
distribution shifts, as the diversity metrics applicable to indistribution data may not be relevant for out-of-distribution
data. Consequently, the problem of efficiently pruning redundant models to improve performance when faced with
distribution shifts remains an unexplored problem.

1. Introduction
Despite the documented successes, the complex prediction
rules learned by modern machine learning (ML) models,
such as deep neural networks, are vulnerable to out-ofdistribution (OoD) data. This means that an ML model,
while highly accurate on average, may fail dramatically
when faced with rare or unseen data distributions (Sagawa
1

DeepREAL Lab, Department of Computer and Information
Sciences, University of Delaware, DE, USA. Correspondence to:
Xi Peng <xipeng@udel.edu>.

In this paper, we introduce a novel post-hoc optimization approach designed to prune redundant models at test
time, thereby enhancing generalization to out-of-distribution

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

