AttNS: Attention-Inspired Numerical Solving For Limited Data Scenarios

Zhongzhan Huang 1 2 Mingfu Liang 3 Shanshan Zhong 1 Liang Lin 1 2

Abstract

approaches leverage high-resolution data to learn corrections (Um et al., 2020) for low-resolution numerical solutions. They aim to combine the strengths of both techniques
– the reliability of classical numerical methods and the expressive power of neural networks – to mitigate the inherent
speed-accuracy trade-off in solving differential equations.
For example, for an ordinary differential equation (ODE)

We propose the attention-inspired numerical
solver (AttNS), a concise method that helps the
generalization and robustness issues faced by the
AI-Hybrid numerical solver in solving differential equations due to limited data. AttNS is inspired by the effectiveness of attention modules
in Residual Neural Networks (ResNet) in enhancing model generalization and robustness for conventional deep learning tasks. Drawing from
the dynamical system perspective of ResNet, We
seamlessly incorporate attention mechanisms into
the design of numerical methods tailored for the
characteristics of solving differential equations.
Our results on benchmarks, ranging from highdimensional problems to chaotic systems, showcase AttNS consistently enhancing various numerical solvers without any intricate model crafting.
Finally, we analyze AttNS experimentally and
theoretically, demonstrating its ability to achieve
strong generalization and robustness while ensuring the convergence of the solver. This includes
requiring less data compared to other advanced
methods to achieve comparable generalization
errors and better prevention of numerical explosion issues when solving differential equations.
https://github.com/dedekinds/NeurVec.

du(t)/dt = f [u(t)], u(0) = c0 ,

(1)

where u(t) is a time-dependent d-dimensional state and the
c0 ∈ Rd is initial condition. The forward AHS of Eq. (1)
can usually (Dresdner et al., 2022) be written as
un+1 = un + S(f , un , ∆tc )∆tc + Net(un |ϕ, Df ), (2)
|
{z
} |
{z
}
Low-resolution term

Correction term

where Net(·) is a neural network with learnable parameters ϕ, S(·) is a numerical integration scheme Df denotes
the high-resolution data, i.e., the data with high-precision
generated by fine step size ∆tf . A coarse step size, ∆tc , accelerates computation, and the associated decrease in accuracy is compensated by the correction term Net(un |ϕ, Df )
trained by Df , achieving a good balance between speed and
accuracy in solving differential equations.
However, the performance of current AHS is heavily reliant
on the quantity of high-quality training data due to the datadriven deep learning approach adopted by the correction
term, and the obtaining of sufficient training data is very
expensive. For instance, if we use data with ∆tf = 0.001
to train the correction term for ∆tc = 0.1, generating a
single trajectory of data would require over 100× additional
computations, which are hard to be accelerated by parallelization due to the iterative nature of Eq.(2). Besides,
the high demand for data imposed by complex equations
(Huang et al., 2023b) further exacerbates the acquisition
cost. Given these challenges, we ask a critical question:

1. Introduction
The AI-Hybrid numerical solvers (AHS) are emerging methods (Mishra, 2018; San & Maulik, 2018; Bar-Sinai et al.,
2019; Kochkov et al., 2021; Subel et al., 2021; Bruno et al.,
2022; List et al., 2022; Dresdner et al., 2022; Frezat et al.,
2022; Huang et al., 2023b; Xu et al., 2023) for solving
differential equations, designed to integrate classical numerical techniques with deep learning technology. These

Can we improve the AHS for effective computations even in
limited data scenarios?
To answer this question, in this paper, we conduct a comprehensive analysis using the ODE shown in Eq. (1) as
examples. First, we present the specific challenges for AHS
in limited data scenarios in Section 2.3. In addition to the
inherent generalization issues of neural networks due to limited data, robustness issues (Liang et al., 2022) related to
chaos in solving differential equations need to be carefully

1

Sun Yat-sen University, China 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
3
Northwestern University, USA. Correspondence to: Liang Lin
<linliang@ieee.org>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

