Tilt your Head: Activating the Hidden Spatial-Invariance of Classifiers

Johann Schmidt 1 Sebastian Stober 1

Abstract

frozen
classifier

without ITS

Deep neural networks are applied in more and
more areas of everyday life. However, they still
lack essential abilities, such as robustly dealing
with spatially transformed input signals. Approaches to mitigate this severe robustness issue
are limited to two pathways: Either models are implicitly regularised by increased sample variability
(data augmentation) or explicitly constrained by
hard-coded inductive biases. The limiting factor of
the former is the size of the data space, which renders sufficient sample coverage intractable. The
latter is limited by the engineering effort required
to develop such inductive biases for every possible
scenario. Instead, we take inspiration from human
behaviour, where percepts are modified by mental
or physical actions during inference. We propose
a novel technique to emulate such an inference
process. This is achieved by traversing a sparsified
inverse transformation tree during inference using
parallel energy-based evaluations. Our proposed
inference algorithm, called Inverse Transformation Search (ITS), is model-agnostic and equips
the model with zero-shot pseudo-invariance to
spatially transformed inputs. We evaluated our
method on several benchmark datasets, including a
synthesised ImageNet test set. ITS outperforms the
utilised baselines on all zero-shot test scenarios.

Inverse Transformation Search (ITS)
Pre-Processing during Inference

step forward

tilt head

rectified output

frozen
classifier

Figure 1. Inspired by the human recognition process for perturbed
inputs, we propose a novel inference framework coined Inverse
Transformation Search (ITS). Similar to humans transforming the
given input mentally or physically by tilting their heads or stepping
forward, for instance. Instead of the usual likelihood estimation of
a given sample, the pre-trained model can evaluate different input
transformations before a final decision is made. The output of this
process is the most familiar transformation of the query.

in diverse, dynamic environments. This requires the
models to learn intricate functions that generalise to all the
variations presented in the data. It was shown that modern
vision models break even under minor input perturbations
(Engstrom et al., 2019), posing severe risks for real-world
applications. Each new variation (dimension) scales the
data space exponentially, known as the combinatorial
explosion. Sampling in such spaces gets progressively harder
(curse of dimensionality). For instance, consider an object
from infinitely many perspectives. In a standard image
classification task, all these variations have the same label
assigned. Using 2D spatial transformations, these variations
bring only redundant information. Hence, considering
every conceivable variant is impractical, computationally
infeasible, and even useless in terms of information gain. If
a model can correctly predict an object from all perspectives,
it is (pseudo-)invariant to these perspective changes.

1. Introduction
A primary objective in Deep learning is to develop models
that exhibit robust generalisation during inference (commonly evaluated using test sets). To improve generalisation,
models are trained with data sets of increasing variability
and size. However, this often requires using larger models
(Chefer et al., 2022). As novel datasets more closely mirror
real-world scenarios, models undergo rigorous assessments

Data-driven Pseudo-Invariance Over recent years, data
augmentation (Hernández-Garcı́a & König, 2018; Shorten
& Khoshgoftaar, 2019) has become a routine instrument
for increasing generalisation. The main drivers for this
development are its simplicity and model agnosticism. Data
augmentation enriches a dataset by applying transformations
or modifications to existing data points. Augmented training
data acts as an explicit Frobenius norm regularizer (LeJeune
et al., 2019) promoting the extraction of consistent class features (Huang et al., 2021). Models either learn transformed

1

Artificial Intelligence Lab, Otto-von-Guericke University,
Magdeburg, Germany. Correspondence to: Johann Schmidt <johann.schmidt@ovgu.de>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

