Bringing Motion Taxonomies to Continuous Domains
via GPLVM on Hyperbolic Manifolds

Noémie Jaquier 1 Leonel Rozo 2 Miguel González-Duque 3 Viacheslav Borovitskiy 4 Tamim Asfour 1

Abstract

humans move and interact with their environment to then
generate biologically-inspired motions and behaviors of
robotic hands, arms, humanoids, or animated characters.
In this endeavor, researchers have proposed to structure
and categorize human hand grasps and body poses into
hierarchical classifications known as taxonomies. Their
structure depends on the sensory variables considered to
categorize human motions and the interactions with the
environment, as well as on associated qualitative measures.

Human motion taxonomies serve as high-level hierarchical abstractions that classify how humans
move and interact with their environment. They
have proven useful to analyse grasps, manipulation skills, and whole-body support poses. Despite substantial efforts devoted to design their
hierarchy and underlying categories, their use
remains limited. This may be attributed to the
lack of computational models that fill the gap between the discrete hierarchical structure of the taxonomy and the high-dimensional heterogeneous
data associated to its categories. To overcome
this problem, we propose to model taxonomy data
via hyperbolic embeddings that capture the associated hierarchical structure. We achieve this
by formulating a novel Gaussian process hyperbolic latent variable model that incorporates the
taxonomy structure through graph-based priors
on the latent space and distance-preserving back
constraints. We validate our model on three different human motion taxonomies to learn hyperbolic
embeddings that faithfully preserve the original
graph structure. We show that our model properly
encodes unseen data from existing or new taxonomy categories, and outperforms its Euclidean
and VAE-based counterparts. Finally, through
proof-of-concept experiments, we show that our
model may be used to generate realistic trajectories between the learned embeddings.

Different taxonomies have been proposed in the area of human and robot grasping (Cutkosky, 1989; Feix et al., 2016;
Abbasi et al., 2016; Stival et al., 2019). Feix et al. (2016) introduced a hand grasp taxonomy whose structure was mainly
defined by the hand pose and the type of contact with the
object. As such taxonomy heavily depends on subjective
qualitative measures, Stival et al. (2019) proposed a quantitative tree-like hand grasp taxonomy based on muscular
and kinematic patterns. A similar data-driven approach was
used to design a grasp taxonomy based on contact forces
in (Abbasi et al., 2016). Bullock et al. (2013) introduced a
hand-centric manipulation taxonomy that classifies manipulation skills according to the type of contact with the objects
and the object motion imparted by the hand. A different
strategy was developed by Paulius et al. (2019), who designed a manipulation taxonomy based on a categorization
of contacts and motion trajectories. Humanoid robotics also
made significant efforts to analyze human motions, thus
proposing taxonomies as high-level abstractions of human
motion configurations. For example, Borràs et al. (2017)
analyzed the contacts between the human limbs and the environment to design a whole-body support pose taxonomy.

1. Introduction

Besides their analytical purpose in biomechanics or robotics,
some of the aforementioned taxonomies were employed
for modeling grasp actions (Romero et al., 2010; Lin &
Sun, 2015), for planning contact-aware whole-body pose
sequences (Mandery et al., 2016a), and for learning manipulation skills embeddings (Paulius et al., 2020). However,
despite most of these taxonomies carry a well-defined hierarchical structure, it was often overlooked. First, these
taxonomies were usually employed for classification tasks
where only the tree leaves were used to define target classes,
disregarding the full taxonomy structure (Feix et al., 2016;

Robotic systems or virtual characters that exhibit humanor animal-like capabilities are often inspired by biological
insights (Siciliano & Khatib, 2016). In the particular context
of motion generation, it is first necessary to understand how
1

Karlsruhe Institute of Technology 2 Bosch Center for Artificial
Intelligence 3 University of Copenhagen 4 ETH Zürich. Correspondence to: Noémie Jaquier <noemie.jaquier@kit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

