Projection-Free Online Convex Optimization with Time-Varying Constraints

Dan Garber 1 Ben Kretzu 1
(throughout all rounds) feasible convex set K ⊂ Rn 1 , which
we will also assume to be compact (as is often standard).
After choosing xt , a scalar loss ft (xt ) is incurred, where
ft : Rn → R is some arbitrary convex loss function (assumed for sake of analysis to be chosen adversarially). The
standard goal is, on the course of the T rounds, to choose
feasible actions
PxT1 , . . . , xT such that the
PTregret, given by
the difference t=1 ft (xt ) − minx∈K t=1 ft (x), grows
(as a function of T ) only at a sublinear rate (the slower the
better).

Abstract
We consider the setting of online convex optimization with adversarial time-varying constraints in
which actions must be feasible w.r.t. a fixed constraint set, and are also required on average to approximately satisfy additional time-varying constraints. Motivated by scenarios in which the fixed
feasible set (hard constraint) is difficult to project
on, we consider projection-free algorithms that
access this set only through a linear optimization
oracle (LOO). We present an algorithm that, on
a sequence of length T and using overall T calls
to the LOO, guarantees Õ(T 3/4 ) regret w.r.t. the
losses and O(T 7/8 ) constraints violation (ignoring all quantities except for T ). In particular, these
bounds hold w.r.t. any interval of the sequence.
This algorithm however also requires access to
an oracle for minimizing a strongly convex nonsmooth function over a Euclidean ball. We present
a more efficient algorithm that does not require the
latter optimization oracle but only first-order access to the time-varying constraints, and achieves
similar bounds w.r.t. the entire sequence. We extend the latter to the setting of bandit feedback
and obtain similar bounds (as a function of T ) in
expectation.

In the particular setting considered in this work — OCO
with time-varying constraints, we assume that besides the
hard and fixed constraint given by the set K to which
all played points must belong, there are additional soft
and time-varying constraints given by convex functions
g1 , . . . , gT ∈ Rn → R, where gt is revealed at the end of
round t and encodes the constraint gt (x) ≤ 0. In this setting
the standard goal is two folded: I. to guarantee sublinear
regret w.r.t. the loss functions f1 , . . . , fT against the best
action in hindsight in the intersection of the hard constraint
and all soft constraints, i.e., to guarantee that
T
T
X
X
ft (xt ) −
min
ft (x) = o(T ), (1)
x∈K: gt (x)≤0 ∀t∈[T ]

t=1

t=1

and II. to guarantee that the cumulative violation of the soft
constraints is also sublinear in T , i.e., that
T
X
gt+ (xt ) := max{gt (xt ), 0} = o(T ).
(2)
t=1

Here, gt+ (x) := max{gt (x), 0} is introduced to prevent a

1. Introduction

natural undesired phenomenon in which strongly satisfying
some constraints can compensate strongly violating others.

We consider a particular setting of the well studied paradigm
for sequential prediction known as online convex optimization (OCO) (Hazan, 2019; Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2012). In
(standard) OCO, a decision maker is required to iteratively
choose an action — some point xt on each round t (the total
number of rounds T is finite and assumed for simplicity to
be known in advanced), which must belong to some fixed

This setting was recently studied in (Yi et al., 2022; Guo
et al., 2022; Castiglioni et al., 2022; Neely & Yu, 2017;
Cao & Liu, 2018). The state-of-the-art bounds with fullinformation (i.e., ft (·), gt (·) become known to the √
algorithm
at the end of each round t) for this setting are O( T ) for
the regret (as given in (1)) and O(T 3/4 ) for the constraint
violation (as given in (2)), see for instance (Guo et al., 2022).

1

Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel. Correspondence to: Ben Kretzu <benkretzu@campus.technion.ac.il>,
Dan Garber <dangar@technion.ac.il>.

However, previous works require as a sub-routine to solve
on each iteration a convex optimization problem that is at

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1
for ease of presentation we consider the underlying space to
be Rn , however any finite-dimensional Euclidean space is suitable

1

