WorkArena: How Capable are Web Agents at
Solving Common Knowledge Work Tasks?

Alexandre Drouin * 1 2 Maxime Gasse * 1 2 Massimo Caccia 1 Issam H. Laradji 1
Manuel Del Verme 2 Tom Marty 1 2 David Vazquez 1 Nicolas Chapados 1 2 Alexandre Lacoste 1

Abstract

streamline these tasks ensuring accessibility for everyone.
While Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) have
facilitated programmatic interactions with software, the
resulting automated assistants often lack transparency, are
difficult for users to inspect, and are not universally available.
In contrast, assistants that directly manipulate UIs (UI
assistants) offer greater transparency and are more amenable
to human oversight. Most notably, because the user can give
and take back control over the UI at any point, UI assistants
can provide varying levels of automation ranging from
partial assistance (such as finding a menu or filling a form) to
complete task execution (like placing an order), akin to the
six levels of automation in autonomous driving (SAE, 2021).

We study the use of large language model-based
agents for interacting with software via web
browsers. Unlike prior work, we focus on measuring the agents’ ability to perform tasks that span
the typical daily work of knowledge workers utilizing enterprise software systems. To this end, we
propose WorkArena, a remote-hosted benchmark
of 33 tasks based on the widely-used ServiceNow
platform. We also introduce BrowserGym, an
environment for the design and evaluation of such
agents, offering a rich set of actions as well as multimodal observations. Our empirical evaluation
reveals that while current agents show promise
on WorkArena, there remains a considerable gap
towards achieving full task automation. Notably,
our analysis uncovers a significant performance
disparity between open and closed-source LLMs,
highlighting a critical area for future exploration
and development in the field.

Recent advancements in the fields of large language and vision models have seen the rapid development of UI assistants,
particularly web agents acting through a browser (Furuta
et al., 2023; Kim et al., 2023; Gur et al., 2023b). The range
of web tasks explored in the literature varies from simple
UI commands such as selecting specific menu elements on
toy web pages (Liu et al., 2018; Shi et al., 2017a), to more
complex requests such as “Checkout merge requests assigned
to me”, on real-world websites like Reddit and GitLab (Zhou
et al., 2023). Yet, one area in which web agents can be particularly impactful and remain unexplored is enterprise software.
In the workplace, where repetitive tasks are common,
enterprise software often prioritizes functionality over user
experience, leading to inefficiencies and long learning curves
for workers. Our work addresses this gap, and investigates
the potential of web agents in enterprise settings to improve
accessibility, user experience, and worker productivity.

1. Introduction
Graphical User Interfaces (UIs) are the predominant medium
through which people interact with software, serving as
a crucial gateway to the digital world. While they have
evolved to become more intuitive, featuring generic and
universal components like forms, lists, and buttons, UIs
can still make complex or repetitive tasks burdensome
for users. While being more and more intuitive, those
complex UIs also became inadvertedly more and more
discriminative for visually-impaired users. An ideal user
experience would involve automated assistants that can

To this end, we introduce WorkArena, a benchmark developed on the widely-used ServiceNow platform (ServiceNow,
2023). ServiceNow is a comprehensive cloud-based platform
that offers solutions for automating and managing digital
workflows across various enterprise functions, including IT
service management, human resources, customer service,
and security operations. In 2023 their customer base counted
over 7,000 companies worldwide, including 85% of the
Fortune 500 companies (Mastantuono, 2023). Within these
firms alone, the ServiceNow platform potentially impacts
over 12 million individuals, not including broader public

*
Equal contribution 1 ServiceNow Research 2 Mila – Quebec AI Research Institute. Correspondence to: Alexandre
Drouin <alexandre.drouin@servicenow.com>, Maxime Gasse
<maxime.gasse@servicenow.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

