TIC-TAC: A Framework for Improved Covariance Estimation
in Deep Heteroscedastic Regression

Megh Shukla 1 Mathieu Salzmann 1 2 Alexandre Alahi 1

Abstract

the true mean and covariance are sample dependent and
unknown. Deep heteroscedastic regression learns this distribution by predicting the mean and covariance through two
neural networks, which are jointly optimized to minimize
the negative log-likelihood. However, recent results in deep
heteroscedastic regression show that this joint optimization
leads to sub-optimal convergence.

Deep heteroscedastic regression involves jointly
optimizing the mean and covariance of the
predicted distribution using the negative loglikelihood. However, recent works show that
this may result in sub-optimal convergence due
to the challenges associated with covariance estimation. While the literature addresses this by
proposing alternate formulations to mitigate the
impact of the predicted covariance, we focus on
improving the predicted covariance itself. We
study two questions: (1) Does the predicted covariance truly capture the randomness of the predicted mean? (2) In the absence of supervision,
how can we quantify the accuracy of covariance
estimation? We address (1) with a Taylor Induced Covariance (TIC), which captures the randomness of the predicted mean by incorporating
its gradient and curvature through the second order Taylor polynomial. Furthermore, we tackle
(2) by introducing a Task Agnostic Correlations
(TAC) metric, which combines the notion of correlations and absolute error to evaluate the covariance. We evaluate TIC-TAC across multiple
experiments spanning synthetic and real-world
datasets. Our results show that not only does TIC
accurately learn the covariance, it additionally facilitates an improved convergence of the negative
log-likelihood. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/vita-epfl/TIC-TAC

This challenge is primarily attributed to covariance estimation in heteroscedastic regression (Skafte et al., 2019).
Recent studies show that the gradient of incorrect variance
predictions significantly hinders optimization, and address
this by proposing alternate formulations to mitigate its impact during optimization (Skafte et al., 2019; Seitzer et al.,
2022; Stirn et al., 2023; Immer et al., 2023). While these
approaches aim at regularizing the covariance, this begets
the question: Can we improve upon the predicted covariance? We argue that the current parameterization for the
covariance may not truly explain the randomness of the
predicted mean. Indeed, we observe in Figure 1 that in the
absence of direct supervision, the predicted variance may
take on arbitrary values leading to sub-optimal convergence.
Moreover, evaluating the covariance is challenging without
ground-truth labels. Optimization metrics such as the likelihood are not a direct measure for the covariance since they
also incorporate the performance of the mean estimator.
Hence, this paper studies covariance estimation in deep heteroscedastic regression. We distill the challenges into two
problems: (1) How do we model the covariance to explain
the randomness of the prediction? (2) How do we evaluate
the predicted covariance in the absence of annotations?
Our first contribution, the Taylor Induced Covariance
(TIC), explains the randomness of the prediction through
its gradient and curvature. We develop a closed-form approximation for the covariance of the prediction through its
second order Taylor polynomial. Modeling the covariance
through the gradient and curvature quantifies the variation
in the prediction within a small neighborhood of the input.
TIC when learnt through the negative log-likelihood not
only captures the underlying correlations but also improves
the convergence of the negative log-likelihood.

1. Introduction
Modeling the target distribution is an important design
choice in heteroscedastic regression. Typically, the target is
assumed to follow a multivariate normal distribution, where
1

École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
Swiss Data Science Center (SDSC).
Correspondence to: Megh Shukla <megh.shukla@epfl.ch>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Our second contribution, the Task Agnostic Correlations
(TAC), addresses the lack of a direct metric to evaluate the
1

