Stop Regressing: Training Value Functions via
Classification for Scalable Deep RL

Jesse Farebrother * 1 2 Jordi Orbay 1 Quan Vuong 1 Adrien Ali Taïga 1 Yevgen Chebotar 1 Ted Xiao 1
Alex Irpan 1 Sergey Levine 1 Pablo Samuel Castro 1 3 Aleksandra Faust 1 Aviral Kumar 1 Rishabh Agarwal * 1 3

Abstract

ers (Vaswani et al., 2017) – classification problems seem
to be particularly amenable to effective training with large
neural networks. Even when regression appears natural, reframing the problem as one of classification often improves
performance (Torgo & Gama, 1996; Rothe et al., 2018;
Rogez et al., 2019). This involves converting real-valued
targets into categorical labels and minimizing categorical
cross-entropy rather than the mean-squared error. Several
hypotheses have been proposed to explain the superiority of
this approach, including stable gradients (Imani & White,
2018; Imani et al., 2024), better representations (Zhang et al.,
2023), implicit bias (Stewart et al., 2023), and handling imbalanced data (Pintea et al., 2023) – suggesting potential
utility beyond supervised regression.

Value functions are an essential component in
deep reinforcement learning (RL), that are typically trained via mean squared error regression to
match bootstrapped target values. However, scaling value-based RL methods to large networks has
proven challenging. This difficulty is in stark contrast to supervised learning: by leveraging a crossentropy classification loss, supervised methods
have scaled reliably to massive networks. Observing this discrepancy, in this paper, we investigate
whether the scalability of deep RL can also be
improved simply by using classification in place
of regression for training value functions. We
show that training value functions with categorical
cross-entropy significantly enhances performance
and scalability across various domains, including
single-task RL on Atari 2600 games, multi-task
RL on Atari with large-scale ResNets, robotic
manipulation with Q-transformers, playing Chess
without search, and a language-agent Wordle task
with high-capacity Transformers, achieving stateof-the-art results on these domains. Through
careful analysis, we show that categorical crossentropy mitigates issues inherent to value-based
RL, such as noisy targets and non-stationarity. We
argue that shifting to categorical cross-entropy for
training value functions can substantially improve
the scalability of deep RL at little-to-no cost.

Unlike trends in supervised learning, value-based reinforcement learning (RL) methods primarily rely on regression. For example, deep RL methods such as deep Qlearning (Mnih et al., 2015) and actor-critic (Mnih et al.,
2016) use a regression loss, such as mean-squared error, to
train a value function from continuous scalar targets. While
these value-based deep RL methods, powered by regression losses, have led to high-profile results (Silver et al.,
2017), it has been challenging to scale them up to large
networks, such as high-capacity transformers. This lack
of scalability has been attributed to several issues (Kumar
et al., 2021; 2022; Agarwal et al., 2021; Lyle et al., 2022;
Le Lan et al., 2023), but what if simply reframing the regression problem as classification can enable the same
level of scalability achieved in supervised learning?
In this paper, we extensively study the efficacy of various methods for deriving classification labels for training
a value-function with a categorical cross-entropy loss. Our
findings reveal that training value-functions with crossentropy substantially improves the performance, robustness, and scalability of deep RL methods compared to
traditional regression-based approaches. The most notable method (HL-Gauss; Imani & White, 2018) leads to
consist performance improvements in single-task RL on
Atari; 1.8 − 2.1× performance in multi-task setups on
Atari (Kumar et al., 2023; Ali Taïga et al., 2023); 40% better performance in the language-agent task of Wordle (Snell

1. Introduction
A clear pattern emerges in deep learning breakthroughs
– from AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) to Transform*

Equal contribution 1 Google DeepMind 2 Mila, McGill
University 3 Mila, Université de Montréal. Correspondence
to: Jesse Farebrother <jfarebro@cs.mcgill.ca>, Aviral Kumar
<aviralkumar@google.com>, Rishabh Agarwal <rishabhagarwal@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

