Generalizing Orthogonalization for Models with Non-Linearities

David Rügamer 1 2 Chris Kolb 1 2 Tobias Weber 1 2 Lucas Kook 3 Thomas Nagler 1 2

Abstract

wanted behaviors in these algorithms. In particular, the presence of biases in model predictions and learned representations can lead to unintended consequences that transcend the
technological sphere, impacting societal norms and ethical
considerations. For example, Glocker et al. (2023b) and Weber et al. (2023) realized that predictions of convolutional
networks trained for chest X-ray pathology classification are
heavily affected by implicitly encoded racial information,
leading to potentially inaccurate or unfair medical assessments.

The complexity of black-box algorithms can lead
to various challenges, including the introduction
of biases. These biases present immediate risks
in the algorithms’ application. It was, for instance, shown that neural networks can deduce
racial information solely from a patient’s X-ray
scan, a task beyond the capability of medical experts. If this fact is not known to the medical
expert, automatic decision-making based on this
algorithm could lead to prescribing a treatment
(purely) based on racial information. While current methodologies allow for the “orthogonalization” or “normalization” of neural networks with
respect to such information, existing approaches
are grounded in linear models. Our paper advances the discourse by introducing corrections
for non-linearities such as ReLU activations. Our
approach also encompasses scalar and tensorvalued predictions, facilitating its integration into
neural network architectures. Through extensive
experiments, we validate our method’s effectiveness in safeguarding sensitive data in generalized
linear models, normalizing convolutional neural
networks for metadata, and rectifying pre-existing
embeddings for undesired attributes.

In this paper, we stress the necessity of addressing these
challenges and propose several solutions, focusing on what
has been termed “orthogonalization” or “normalization” of
neural networks in the literature (see, e.g., Lu et al., 2021;
Rügamer, 2023). These approaches can be used to adjust
predictions, prevent unequal treatment of population subgroups, protect from unintentionally revealing sensitive information, or ensure the interpretability of black-box models.

1.1. Related Literature
Classical Orthogonalization In contrast to research investigating network weight dependencies (see, e.g., Huang
et al., 2020), the orthogonalization discussed in this work
is usually motivated as a normalization operation or correction method. Lu et al. (2021), e.g., proposed the so-called
metadata normalization network, which applies a layer-wise
orthogonalization to remove metadata information from layers. Similarly, He et al. (2019) study an orthogonalization
procedure to encourage fair learning by removing protected
information from feature representations. To circumvent
training instabilities caused by dependence on the batch
size, Vento et al. (2022) propose to cast the metadata normalization as a bi-level problem optimized using a penalty
approach. Kaiser et al. (2022) use the same idea to incorporate fairness in automated decision-making systems
for labor market data. A related but different problem is
addressed by Rügamer et al. (2023), who propose an orthogonalization cell to preserve effect identifiability and thereby
interpretability. This idea was then also adapted to other
model classes (Baumann et al., 2021; Kopper et al., 2021).
Further, orthogonalization can also be used as a debiasing
technique (e.g., in graph neural networks, Palowitch & Perozzi, 2020). Similar to our work, orthogonalization can be

1. Introduction
In the burgeoning landscape of artificial intelligence and
deep learning, black-box algorithms have become a centerpiece for driving advances in many fields of application.
These powerful and often inscrutable models offer impressive predictive capabilities, but their complexity also gives
rise to challenges that cannot be overlooked. One of the
most urgent contemporary challenges is the correction of un1

Department of Statistics, LMU Munich, Munich, Germany
Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML), Munich, Germany 3 Institute for Statistics and Mathematics, Vienna University
of Economics and Business, Vienna, Austria. Correspondence to:
David Rügamer <david@stat.uni-muenchen.de>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

