Gradual Divergence for Seamless Adaptation: A Novel Domain Incremental
Learning Method

0.08

Domain incremental learning (DIL) poses a significant challenge in real-world scenarios, as models
need to be sequentially trained on diverse domains
over time, all the while avoiding catastrophic forgetting. Mitigating representation drift, which
refers to the phenomenon of learned representations undergoing changes as the model adapts
to new tasks, can help alleviate catastrophic forgetting. In this study, we propose a novel DIL
method named DARE, featuring a three-stage
training process: Divergence, Adaptation, and
REfinement. This process gradually adapts the
representations associated with new tasks into the
feature space spanned by samples from previous
tasks, simultaneously integrating task-specific decision boundaries. Additionally, we introduce a
novel strategy for buffer sampling and demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method,
combined with this sampling strategy, in reducing representation drift within the feature encoder. This contribution effectively alleviates
catastrophic forgetting across multiple DIL benchmarks. Furthermore, our approach prevents sudden representation drift at task boundaries, resulting in a well-calibrated DIL model that maintains
the performance on previous tasks. 1

0.06

MSE

Abstract

DER++
DARE

0.04
0.02
0

50

100 150 200 250

Steps

Accuracy on Task 1

Kishaan Jeeveswaran 1 Elahe Arani * 1 2 Bahram Zonooz * 1

60

55
50
45
40
0

1

2

3

4

Training epochs on task 2

Figure 1. Relationship between representation drift and task 1 accuracy on DN4IL dataset with buffer size 50. The representations of
buffered samples, mainly belonging to the first domain, experience
an abrupt drift at the task boundary, which is directly associated
with the decrease in accuracy.

tonomous driving and robotics, where data distribution can
shift due to factors like changing weather condition and location (Mirza et al., 2022). Deep neural networks (DNNs)
suffer from the problem of catastrophic forgetting, where
the weights of the network associated with old tasks are
overwritten by new information, resulting in a decline in
performance for previously learned tasks.
Various approaches have been proposed to alleviate catastrophic forgetting, which can be grouped into three main
categories: interleaving past task samples during new task
learning (Experience Replay) (Ratcliff, 1990; Rebuffi et al.,
2017), constraining the change in weights of DNNs pertinent to past tasks (Regularization) (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017;
Li & Hoiem, 2017), or expanding the architecture with new
branches for learning new tasks without overwriting existing task parameters (Architecture Expansion) (Rusu et al.,
2016; Fernando et al., 2017). Although experience replay
has been shown to effectively mitigate catastrophic forgetting, it does not explicitly address drift in representations at
task boundaries caused by the disruption of clustered representations corresponding to previously learned tasks (Caccia
et al., 2022). Representation drift is directly correlated with
performance drop on old tasks and contributes significantly
to catastrophic forgetting (see Figure 1).

1. Introduction
Domain incremental learning (DIL) is a subset of continual learning (CL) that addresses the challenge of acquiring
knowledge from new domains or tasks in an incremental
manner without forgetting previously acquired knowledge.
DIL holds significance in real-world applications like au*
Equal contribution 1 Dep. of Mathematics and Computer Science, Eindhoven University of Technology, NL 2 Wayve Technologies Ltd, London, UK. Correspondence to: <j.kishaan@tue.nl>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
Code at https://github.com/NeurAI-Lab/DARE.

DNNs aim to acquire clustering representations for similar
classes in each task. However, the clusters formed by previous tasks may shift when learning new classes, resulting in
1

