Rethinking Independent Cross-Entropy Loss For Graph-Structured Data

Rui Miao 1 Kaixiong Zhou 2 Yili Wang 1 Ninghao Liu 3 Ying Wang 4 Xin Wang 1 *

Abstract

2014; Fan et al., 2019), biological networks (Diao et al.,
2022; Wang et al., 2024; Shen et al., 2024b), recommender
system (He et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2022). Graph neural
networks (GNNs) have been extensively explored to learn
the complex connectivity information and node features in
an end-to-end manner. Particularly, GNNs follow a message
passing strategy and learn the representation of each node by
iteratively aggregating the representations of its neighbors
and combining with itself, which facilitate various downstream tasks including node classification (Kipf & Welling,
2017; Gasteiger et al., 2018), link prediction (Grover &
Leskovec, 2016), and graph classification (Lee et al., 2019;
Zhou et al., 2021b).

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have exhibited prominent performance in learning graphstructured data. Considering node classification
task, based on the i.i.d assumption among node
labels, the traditional supervised learning simply
sums up cross-entropy losses of the independent
training nodes and applies the average loss to optimize GNNs’ weights. But different from other
data formats, the nodes are naturally connected.
It is found that the independent distribution modeling of node labels restricts GNNs’ capability
to generalize over the entire graph and defend
adversarial attacks. In this work, we propose a
new framework, termed joint-cluster supervised
learning, to model the joint distribution of each
node with its corresponding cluster. We learn the
joint distribution of node and cluster labels conditioned on their representations, and train GNNs
with the obtained joint loss. In this way, the datalabel reference signals extracted from the local
cluster explicitly strengthen the discrimination
ability on the target node. The extensive experiments demonstrate that our joint-cluster supervised learning can effectively bolster GNNs’ node
classification accuracy. Furthermore, being benefited from the reference signals which may be free
from spiteful interference, our learning paradigm
significantly protects the node classification from
being affected by the adversarial attack.

Despite the persistent efforts in feature learning, label dependencies among nodes receives inadequate attentions.
Considering the node classification task with GNNs, decision making is modeled by independent conditional distribution P (yi |zi ), where yi and zi are the label and
learned feature of a specific node and its cross-entropy
loss is CE(yi , P (yi |zi )). However, it is notorious that
such independent decision making of node label exacerbates following issues. Overfitting: The overly minimization of cross-entropy loss prefers the higher prediction probabilities (i.e., over-confident decision) on the
small set of training nodes, resulting in poor generalization on the rest of graph(Weigend, 1994; Guo et al., 2017).
Susceptibility to adversarial attacks: The over-confident
GNNs underestimate their uncertainties, which is often
leveraged by adversarial attacker to craft input examples that
lie in uncertain regions but have different labels (Szegedy
et al., 2013). This presents a challenge to calibrate GNNs’
training and hence generate robust decision making.

1. Introduction

On the other hand, the decision making based on i.i.d
assumption of node label is not in line with the graphstructured data, where nodes tend to connect with “similar” neighbors to form some clusters. The i.i.d assumption
factorizes the joint distribution into a product of multiple
preQ
diction densities: P (y1 , · · · , yn |z1 , · · · , zn ) = P (yi |zi ).
This straightforward factorization fails to comprehensively
account for the inherent node correlations. Although the
message passing learns the neighborhood-aware node features, the label dependencies are thrown out during node
inference. Just like human experts making decisions with
other data-label pairs as reference signals, GNN models

Graph-structured data is ubiquitous in a broad spectrum of
application domains, such as social networks (Perozzi et al.,
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University, China.
Institute for Medical Engineering Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA. 3 School of Computing, University
of Georgia, USA. 4 College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, China. Correspondence to: Xin Wang <xinwang@jlu.edu.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

