Diffusion Models Encode the Intrinsic Dimension of Data Manifolds
Jan Pawel Stanczuk * 1 Georgios Batzolis * 1 Teo Deveney 2 Carola-Bibiane Schönlieb 1

Abstract

hypothesis (Fefferman et al., 2013). The dimension of this
manifold is called intrinsic dimension (ID), while the highdimensional space in which the data resides is known as the
ambient space, with its dimensionality called the ambient
dimension.

In this work, we provide a mathematical proof
that diffusion models encode data manifolds by
approximating their normal bundles. Based on
this observation we propose a novel method for
extracting the intrinsic dimension of the data manifold from a trained diffusion model. Our insights
are based on the fact that a diffusion model approximates the score function i.e. the gradient
of the log density of a noise-corrupted version of
the target distribution for varying levels of corruption. We prove that as the level of corruption
decreases, the score function points towards the
manifold, as this direction becomes the direction
of maximal likelihood increase. Therefore, at
low noise levels, the diffusion model provides us
with an approximation of the manifold’s normal
bundle, allowing for an estimation of the manifold’s intrinsic dimension. To the best of our
knowledge our method is the first estimator of
intrinsic dimension based on diffusion models
and it outperforms well established estimators in
controlled experiments on both Euclidean and
image data. The code is available at https:
//github.com/GBATZOLIS/ID-diff.

The manifold hypothesis has guided the development of
modern high-dimensional data modelling techniques, such
as Variational auto-encoders (VAEs) (Kingma and Welling,
2013), Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014) and M-flows (Brehmer and Cranmer,
2020).
The estimation of ID holds significant importance in the
machine learning community due to its applicability in both
theoretical and practical problems (Campadelli et al., 2015).
From a theoretical perspective, the ID is essential as it directly affects the convergence rates of fundamental statistical quantities (Weed and Bach, 2019). The higher the ID, the
more data is needed for a model to generalize well beyond
the training set (Campadelli et al., 2015; Pope et al., 2021),
hence knowing the ID has numerous implications for the
generalization and data efficiency of machine learning models (Kim et al., 2019; Kpotufe, 2011). From practical point
of view, ID is crucial for a wide range of dimensionality
reduction methods (Campadelli et al., 2015). Additionally,
understanding the data’s ID can help in fine-tuning the latent
dimension of models such as GANs, VAEs or M-flows.
In recent years, diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al.,
2015; Ho et al., 2020a) emerged as a new class of deep
generative models capable of capturing complex highdimensional distributions without relying on the notion of
data manifold or prior knowledge of the data’s ID. Our research reveals that diffusion models encode data manifolds
via their normal bundle. Intriguingly, we find that while diffusion models do not explicitly rely on the ID, these models
estimate it implicitly.

1. Introduction
Many modern real-world datasets contain a large number of
variables, often exceeding the number of observations. This
poses a major challenge in modelling them, due to the curse
of dimensionality. Despite this complexity, due to the numerous relationships and symmetries among variables, even
high-dimensional data often concentrates around a lowerdimensional manifold, a concept known as the manifold
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Applied Mathematics
and Theoretical Physics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge,
United Kingdom 2 Department of Mathematical Sciences, University of Bath, Bath, United Kingdom. Correspondence to:
Jan Stanczuk <jan.stanczuk@gmail.com>, Georgios Batzolis
<gb511@cam.ac.uk>.

As discussed in (Song et al., 2020; Ho et al., 2020a), diffusion models perform score matching (Hyvärinen, 2005) and,
therefore, contain the information about the gradient of the
log-density of the data distribution. We prove that near the
data manifold, the gradient of the log-density is orthogonal
to the manifold itself. This key observation serves as a tool
for deducing the manifold’s dimension.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

In our study, we investigate three categories of ID estima1

