W EB LINX: Real-World Website Navigation with Multi-Turn Dialogue

Xing Han Lù * 1 2 Zdeněk Kasner * 1 3 Siva Reddy 1 2 4

Abstract

👩 Create a task for a Career
Fair on Google calendar

💻 say("Sure!")

We propose the problem of conversational web
navigation, where a digital agent controls a web
browser and follows user instructions to solve realworld tasks in a multi-turn dialogue fashion. To
support this problem, we introduce W EB LINX
– a large-scale benchmark of 100K interactions
across 2300 expert demonstrations of conversational web navigation. Our benchmark covers a
broad range of patterns on over 150 real-world
websites and can be used to train and evaluate
agents in diverse scenarios. Due to the magnitude of information present, Large Language
Models (LLMs) cannot process entire web pages
in real-time. To solve this bottleneck, we design
a retrieval-inspired model that efficiently prunes
HTML pages by ranking relevant elements. We
use the selected elements, along with screenshots
and action history, to assess a variety of models for their ability to replicate human behavior
when navigating the web. Our experiments span
from small text-only to proprietary multimodal
LLMs. We find that smaller finetuned decoders
surpass the best zero-shot LLMs (including GPT4V), but also larger finetuned multimodal models
which were explicitly pretrained on screenshots.
However, all finetuned models struggle to generalize to unseen websites. Our findings highlight
the need for large multimodal models that can
generalize to novel settings. Our code, data and
models are available for research: https://mcgillnlp.github.io/weblinx.

💻 load("calendar.google.com")

💻 say("Do you want to add any
description?")

👩 Yes, please add "Bring
multiple copies of my resume"
as the note.
💻 input( <div> , "Bring multiple
copies of my resume")

💻 click( <div> )
💻 click( <span> )

💻 input( <input> , "Career Fair")
💻 say("Task created. Anything
else I can assist you with?")

👩 No. That's all for now.

Figure 1: An example of the conversational web navigation task.
The instructor (blue) communicates with the navigator (grey)
using only natural language. The latter controls the browser, having
access to screenshots and textual website representation.

1

Introduction

Proprietary conversational assistants like ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2022) are capable of more than just conversing; they
can also browse websites through plugins (OpenAI, 2023d;
Pinsky, 2023), allowing them to perform actions and provide more useful responses. However, this capability is
limited: the plugins must be developed separately for each
website and may not cover all of a website’s functionality.
This limitation raises an important research question: can
we leverage the models behind those assistants to navigate
websites directly in the user’s browser, while retaining their
conversational capabilities?

*

Equal contribution 1 Mila Quebec AI Institute 2 McGill University 3 Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics, Charles University 4 Facebook CIFAR AI Chair. Correspondence to: Xing
Han Lù <xing.han.lu@mail.mcgill.ca>, Zdeněk Kasner <kasner@ufal.mff.cuni.cz>, Siva Reddy <siva.reddy@mila.quebec>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Motivated by this question, we define the real-world prob1

