Multiply-Robust Causal Change Attribution

Victor Quintas-Martinez 1 2 Mohammad Taha Bahadori 3 Eduardo Santiago 3 Jeff Mu 3 David Heckerman 3

Abstract

In the causal change attribution problem, we observe two
samples of data, including an outcome and multiple explanatory variables. We are also given a causal Directed Acyclic
Graph (DAG) that encodes the prior expert knowledge about
the causal conditional (in-)dependence relationships among
the variables in the data. The objective is to assign a score
to each of the causal mechanisms in this DAG that quantifies its contribution to the change in the distribution of
the outcome. Although in many instances we observe a
change over time, we want to emphasize that our methods
apply to more general settings involving a comparison of
two samples — for example, differences between groups
(e.g., females and males) or geographical locations (e.g.,
East vs. West Coast of the US).

Comparing two samples of data, we observe a
change in the distribution of an outcome variable. In the presence of multiple explanatory
variables, how much of the change can be explained by each possible cause? We develop a
new estimation strategy that, given a causal model,
combines regression and re-weighting methods
to quantify the contribution of each causal mechanism. Our proposed methodology is multiply
robust, meaning that it still recovers the target parameter under partial misspecification. We prove
that our estimator is consistent and asymptotically normal. Moreover, it can be incorporated
into existing frameworks for causal attribution,
such as Shapley values, which will inherit the consistency and large-sample distribution properties.
Our method demonstrates excellent performance
in Monte Carlo simulations, and we show its usefulness in an empirical application. Our method is
implemented as part of the Python library DoWhy
(Sharma & Kiciman, 2020; Blöbaum et al., 2022).

The contribution of each causal mechanism is generally very
difficult to disentangle. We need to characterize what the
distribution of the outcome variable would have been if we
shifted only some causal mechanisms, but left others unchanged. This is a counterfactual distribution, which is not
directly observable in the data. We overcome this fundamental challenge by employing a combination of regression and
re-weighting methods. Moreover, our estimating equation is
multipy robust, in the sense that it still recovers the parameters of interest even if some components of the model are
misspecified. We show that our estimator is consistent and
asymptotically normal under weak conditions on the ML
algorithms used to learn the regression and the weights. The
asymptotic variance is also consistently estimable, allowing
us to compute valid standard errors, confidence intervals and
p-values. To obtain these results we build on the existing
double/debiased ML literature (Chernozhukov et al., 2018a;
2021; 2023).

1. Introduction
Analysts are often interested in identifying and quantifying
the contribution of multiple possible causes of change to the
performance metrics of large-scale systems, such as sales
volume, throughput, or retention rate. As an example, a
manufacturer compares data from 2023 and 2022 and realizes that net sales have increased. However, many factors
have changed between these two time periods, including
the characteristics of the product, competitors’ prices, or
market conditions. How much did each of these variables
contribute to the increase in average sales? This is a change
attribution question. When policymakers and business leaders are interested in using these insights for future changes,
the change attribution problem necessarily becomes causal.

There is a large body of work on the attribution problem
(Efron, 2020; Yamamoto, 2012; Dalessandro et al., 2012),
some of which has studied causal attribution (Liu et al.,
2023; Lu et al., 2023; Mougan et al., 2023; Zhao et al.,
2023; Berman, 2018; Ji et al., 2016; Dawid et al., 2014;
Shao & Li, 2011). An important branch of the literature
has focused on developing suitable definitions of the contribution of each variable, e.g., with variations of Shapley
values (Janzing et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2023; Budhathoki
et al., 2022; Jung et al., 2022; Sharma et al., 2022) or optimal transport methods (Kulinski & Inouye, 2023), while
remaining agnostic about estimation. Our contribution is

1

MIT Department of Economics. 2 This work was completed
while VQM was an intern at Amazon. 3 Amazon. Correspondence
to: Victor Quintas-Martinez <vquintas@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

