Private Truly-Everlasting Robust-Prediction

Uri Stemmer 1

Abstract

Definition 1.1 (Dwork et al. (2006)). Let A be a randomized
algorithm whose input is a dataset. Algorithm A is (ε, δ)differentially private (DP) if for any two datasets D, D′ that
differ on one row (such datasets are called neighboring)
and for any event F it holds that Pr[A(D) ∈ F ] ≤ eε ·
Pr[A(D′ ) ∈ F ] + δ.

Private everlasting prediction (PEP), recently introduced by Naor et al. [2023], is a model for
differentially private learning in which the learner
never publicly releases a hypothesis. Instead, it
provides black-box access to a “prediction oracle”
that can predict the labels of an endless stream of
unlabeled examples drawn from the underlying
distribution. Importantly, PEP provides privacy
both for the initial training set and for the endless
stream of classification queries. We present two
conceptual modifications to the definition of PEP,
as well as new constructions exhibiting significant
improvements over prior work. Specifically, we
incorporate robustness against poisoning attacks
into the definition of PEP; we present a relaxed
privacy definition, suitable for PEP, that allows
us to disconnect the privacy parameter δ from
the number of total time steps T ; and we present
new constructions for axis-aligned rectangles and
decision-stumps exhibiting improved sample complexity and runtime.

Unfortunately, it is now known that private learning can
require significantly more resources than non-private learning, which can be very prohibitive. In fact, there are simple
cases where private learning is known to be impossible, even
though they are trivial without the privacy constraint. One
such example is the class of all 1-dimensional threshold
functions over the real line (Bun et al., 2015; Alon et al.,
2022). In addition, there are cases where private learning is
possible, but provably requires significantly more runtime
than non-private learning (under cryptographic assumptions)
(Bun & Zhandry, 2016).
The line of work on private prediction, introduced by Dwork
& Feldman (2018), offers a different perspective on private
learning that circumvents some these barriers. Specifically,
in private prediction we consider a setting where the private
learning algorithm does not output a hypothesis. Instead, it
provides black-box access to a “prediction oracle” that can
be used to predict the labels of fresh (unlabeled) examples
from the underlying distribution. Works on private prediction1 showed that, informally, for any concept class C there
is a private prediction algorithm that can answer m “predic√
tion queries” given a training set of size ≈ VC(C) · m.
Note, however, that the number of “prediction queries” here
is at most quadratic in the size of the initial training set.
This hinders the acceptance of private prediction as a viable
alternative to private learning, as with the latter we obtain
a privatized hypothesis that could be used to predict the labels infinitely many points. There are also empirical results
showing that when the number of required predictions is
large, then private prediction can be inferior to classical private learning (van der Maaten & Hannun, 2020). To tackle
this, Naor et al. (2023) introduced the notion of private
everlasting prediction (PEP) that supports an unbounded
number of prediction queries. To achieve this, Naor et al.
(2023) allowed the content of the black-box to constantly

1. Introduction
The line of work on private learning, introduced by Kasiviswanathan et al. (2011), aims to understand the computational and statistical aspects of PAC learning while providing
strong privacy protections for the training data. Recall that a
(non-private) PAC learner is an algorithm that takes a training set containing classified random examples and returns a
hypothesis that should be able to predict the labels of fresh
examples from the same distribution. A private PAC learner
must achieve the same goal while guaranteeing differential
privacy w.r.t. the training data. Intuitively, this means that
the produced hypothesis should not be significantly affected
by any particular labeled example. Formally, the definition
of differential privacy is as follows.
1
Tel Aviv University and Google Research, Israel. Correspondence to: Uri Stemmer <u@uri.co.il>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1
See, e.g., (Dwork & Feldman, 2018; Bassily et al., 2018;
Nandi & Bassily, 2020; Dagan & Feldman, 2020).

1

