Allocation Requires Prediction Only if Inequality Is Low

Ali Shirali 1 Rediet Abebe* 2 Moritz Hardt* 3

Abstract

units (i.e., neighborhoods, hospitals, and schools) can then
target individuals within the units crudely. While such baseline methods can be cheaper, easier to implement, and less
contested, they are also feared to be wasteful compared to
prediction-based allocations.1

Algorithmic predictions are emerging as a promising solution concept for efficiently allocating societal resources. Fueling their use is an underlying
assumption that such systems are necessary to
identify individuals for interventions. We propose
a principled framework for assessing this assumption: Using a simple mathematical model, we
evaluate the efficacy of prediction-based allocations in settings where individuals belong to larger
units such as hospitals, neighborhoods, or schools.
We find that prediction-based allocations outperform baseline methods using aggregate unit-level
statistics only when between-unit inequality is
low and the intervention budget is high. Our results hold for a wide range of settings for the price
of prediction, treatment effect heterogeneity, and
unit-level statistics’ learnability. Combined, we
highlight the potential limits to improving the efficacy of interventions through prediction.

We propose a principled framework for assessing this fundamental assumption and evaluating the efficacy of individual prediction-based systems. We present a simple mathematical model to compare prediction-based versus unitbased allocations. The former method relies on individuals’ predicted welfare, while the latter uses aggregate unitlevel statistics and coarse information within the units. We
show that prediction leads to superior allocations only when
between-unit inequality is low, and the allocation budget
is high. (See Fig. 1 for a high-level view of inequality and
budget regimes covered in our results.) Our analyses cover a
broad range of settings for the price of prediction, treatment
effect heterogeneity, and unit-level statistics’ learnability.
Budget
High

1

Introduction

Predictive systems are emerging as a promising solution concept for allocating societal resources. Often, such systems
output individual risk scores for undesirable outcomes like
eviction, poor health, and school dropout to assist decisionmakers in targeting individuals with greater precision. In
doing so, an underlying assumption is that individual predictions are necessary for efficient identification. See, e.g.,
(Bruce et al., 2011; Cuccaro-Alamin et al., 2017; Kleinberg
et al., 2018).

Low
Low

1

Gini index

Figure 1. Sufficient conditions for a dominant unit-level allocation
(green) and nondominated unit-level allocation (red). We define a
high budget in relation to the cost of treating the whole population
and a low budget in relation to the cost of prediction. See Fig. 7
for a quantitative version of this figure.

By contrast, decision-makers can use baseline allocation
schemes by proportioning their resources using aggregate
welfare information such as neighborhood eviction, hospital readmission, or school dropout rates. These larger
*

High

1.1

Our Results

1

Equal contribution
University of California, Berkeley
Harvard Society of Fellows 3 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen and Tübingen AI Center. Correspondence
to: Ali Shirali <shirali ali@berkeley.edu>.

At a high level, we contrast two allocation mechanisms:
Individual-level allocation (ILA) predicts welfare, which
falls in [0, 1], and treats individuals in ascending order
of their predicted welfare. Unit-level allocation (ULA),

2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1
See the discussion in (Johnson & Zhang, 2022; Moon & Guha,
2024).

1

