Can Machines Learn the True Probabilities?
Jinsook Kim 1

Abstract

The outline of the proof is as follows. After defining some
main concepts, we identify the necessary condition for any
machine to learn the true objective probabilities. From this
necessary condition, we derive the theorem that learning
implies the true guarantee of well-calibration. Roughly
speaking, “truly guaranteed well-calibration” means the
following: when a machine collects data according to its
subjective forecast along a stochastic path in which the associated events occur, the empirical frequency of the collected
data matches the very probabilistic forecast of the machine
with the true probability P - one. Now that the machine
forecasts must indeed be true when the machine learns the
true probabilities, this calibration property can then be understood as a calibration version of the strong law of large
numbers without the independence assumption.

When there exists uncertainty, AI machines are
designed to make decisions so as to reach the
best expected outcomes. Expectations are based
on true facts about the objective environment the
machines interact with, and those facts can be encoded into AI models in the form of true objective
probability functions. Accordingly, AI models
involve probabilistic machine learning in which
the probabilities should be objectively interpreted.
We prove under some basic assumptions when machines can learn the true objective probabilities,
if any, and when machines cannot learn them.

Note that there exist connections here among machine forecasting, well-calibration, and machine learning. While proving our thesis, therefore, we establish connections between
the true guarantee of well-calibration and various settings of
the real forecasting games between Nature and a machine.
In this game, what Nature forecasts are the true objective
probabilities, while what the machine forecasts are its own
subjective probabilities. The machine loses when Nature
deviates from the probabilistic forecasts of the machine.
Bridged by the property of truly guaranteed well-calibration,
we then prove whether the machine learns the true probabilities or not under various settings of forecasting games.

1. Introduction
In the standard AI model under uncertainty, how to measure the degree of uncertainty matters. This paper is about
treating such measures in the form of probabilities. In particular, we focus on the true objective probabilities, if any.
There are various probabilistic contexts in which the true
objective probabilities matter. For example, causal relations
of physical events are widely regarded as objective features
of the world. Therefore, when causal relations are to be
understood in terms of probabilities mainly due to various
regularity issues, a probabilistic causal model should include an objective probability function that measures the
true objective values about our world.

With this proof, we provide the fundamental scope and limit
of learning the true probabilities by AI machines. One important implication is that machines can relax the independent assumption among data to learn the true probabilities
but cannot relax the assumption of identical distribution
such as stationarity or ergodicity along a stochastic path
where any associated events occur. Another implication is
to show that the problem of computability is directly connected to the problem of complexity in the case of learning
the true probabilities.

This paper addresses the question of whether machines can
learn the true objective probabilities from the data to perform such probabilistic reasoning. Under some basic assumptions, we prove that machines can learn the true objective probabilities if and only if the probabilities are directly
observable by them. Roughly speaking, a true probability is
directly observable by a machine when it can calculate the
probability by the empirical frequency of a true population
given to it.

2. Notations and Definitions

1

Underwood International College, Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea.
Correspondence to: Jinsook Kim
<jki76364@gmail.com>.

In this section, we define some main concepts including
“machine learning” and “true objective probability”. Adopting terminologies from (Nilsson, 2011) and (Boolos et al.,
2002), let us first define a machine as an artifact or device

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

