Disentanglement Learning via Topology

Nikita Balabin * 1 Daria Voronkova * 1 2 Ilya Trofimov 1 Evgeny Burnaev 1 2 Serguei Barannikov 1 3

Abstract
We propose TopDis (Topological Disentanglement), a method for learning disentangled representations via adding a multi-scale topological
loss term. Disentanglement is a crucial property of data representations substantial for the explainability and robustness of deep learning models and a step towards high-level cognition. The
state-of-the-art methods are based on VAE and
encourage the joint distribution of latent variables to be factorized. We take a different perspective on disentanglement by analyzing topological properties of data manifolds. In particular, we optimize the topological similarity for
data manifolds traversals. To the best of our
knowledge, our paper is the first one to propose
a differentiable topological loss for disentanglement learning. Our experiments have shown that
the proposed TopDis loss improves disentanglement scores such as MIG, FactorVAE score, SAP
score, and DCI disentanglement score with respect to state-of-the-art results while preserving
the reconstruction quality. Our method works in
an unsupervised manner, permitting us to apply it
to problems without labeled factors of variation.
The TopDis loss works even when factors of variation are correlated. Additionally, we show how
to use the proposed topological loss to find disentangled directions in a trained GAN.

Figure 1. The TopDis pipeline process involves the following
steps: encoding a batch of data samples, applying shift in a latent code, decoding both the original and the shifted latents, and
finally calculating the TopDis loss between the two resulting point
clouds, for details see Section 3.2.

gio et al., 2013; Cohen & Welling, 2014; Kulkarni et al.,
2015; Chen et al., 2016; Higgins et al., 2017; Tran et al.,
2021; Feng et al., 2018; Gonzalez-Garcia et al., 2018), have
been shown to be beneficial in a variety of areas within
machine learning. One key benefit of disentangled representations is that they enable effective domain adaptation, which refers to the ability of a model to generalize to
new domains or tasks. Studies have shown that disentangled representations can improve performance in unsupervised domain adaptation (Yang et al., 2019; Peebles et al.,
2020; Zou et al., 2020). Additionally, disentangled representations have been shown to be useful for zero-shot and
few-shot learning, which are techniques for training models
with limited labeled data (Bengio et al., 2013). Disentangled representations have also been shown to enable controllable image editing, which is the ability to manipulate
specific aspects of an image while keeping the rest of the
image unchanged (Wei et al., 2021; Wang & Ponce, 2021).
This type of control can be useful in a variety of applications, such as image synthesis, style transfer, and image
manipulation.

1. Introduction
Learning disentangled representations is a fundamental
challenge in deep learning, as it has been widely recognized that achieving interpretable and robust representations is crucial for the success of machine learning models (Bengio et al., 2013). Disentangled representations, in
which each component of the representation corresponds
to one factor of variation (Desjardins et al., 2012; Ben-

Furthermore, disentangled representations are also believed to be a vital component for achieving high-level cognition. High-level cognition refers to the ability of a model
to understand and reason about the world, and disentangled representations can play a key role in achieving this
goal (Bengio, 2018).

*

Equal contribution 1 Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Moscow, Russia 2 AIRI, Moscow, Russia 3 CNRS, IMJ,
Paris Cité University Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024.
Copyright 2024 by the author(s).

One line of research for finding disentangled representations is to modify the Variational Autoencoder (VAE)
(Kingma & Welling, 2013) using some intuition, formal1

