Position: Compositional Generative Modeling
A Single Model is Not All You Need

Yilun Du 1 Leslie Kaelbling 1

Abstract

GPT-4
Training FLOPs

Large monolithic generative models trained on
massive amounts of data have become an increasingly dominant approach in AI research. We argue
that we should instead construct large generative
systems by composing smaller generative models
together. We show how such a compositional generative approach enables us to learn distributions
in a more data-efficient manner, enabling generalization to parts of the data distribution unseen
at training time. We further show how this enables us to program and construct new generative
models for tasks completely unseen at training.
Finally, we show that in many cases, we can discover compositional components from data.

1025
PALM 540B
1024

PALM 2

Gopher

GPT-3.5

2022

2023

GPT-3
2021

2024

Figure 1. Rising Size and Cost of Models. While much of AI
research has focused on constructing increasingly larger monolithic
models, training costs are exponentially rising by a factor of 3 every
year with current models already costing several hundred million
dollars per training run. Data from (Epoch, 2023).

Inference costs of such gigantic models are also prohibitive,
requiring large computational clusters and a cost of several
dollars for longer queries and answers (OpenAI).

1. Introduction

In addition, adapting such large models to new task distributions is difficult. Directly fine-tuning larger models
is often prohibitively expensive, requiring a large computation cluster and an often difficult-to-acquire fine-tuning
dataset. Other works have explored leveraging language and
a set of in-context examples to teach models new distributions, but such adaptation is limited to settings that are well
expressed using a set of language instructions that are further roughly similar to the distributions already seen during
training (Yadlowsky et al., 2023).

In the past two years, increasingly large generative models
have become a dominant force in AI research, with compelling results in natural language (Brown et al., 2020),
computer vision (Rombach et al., 2022) and decisionmaking (Reed et al., 2022). Much of the AI research field
has now focused on scaling and constructing increasingly
large generative models (Hoffmann et al., 2022), developing
tools to build even larger models (Dao et al., 2022; Kwon
et al., 2023), and studying how properties emerge as these
models scale in size (Lu et al., 2023; Schaeffer et al., 2023).

In this paper, we argue that as an alternative to studying
how to scale and construct increasingly large monolithic
generative models, we should instead construct complex
generative models compositionally from simpler models.
Each constituent model captures the probability distribution of a subset of variables of the distribution of interest,
which are combined to model the more complex full distribution. Individual distributions are therefore much simpler and
computationally modeled with both fewer parameters and
learnable from less data. Furthermore, the combined model
can generalize to unseen portions of the data distribution as
long as each constituent dimension is locally in distribution.

Despite significant scaling in generative models, existing
models remain far from intelligent, exhibiting poor reasoning ability (Tamkin et al., 2021), extensive hallucinations (Zhang et al., 2023b), and poor understanding of commonsense relationships in images (Figure 2) (Majumdar
et al., 2023). Despite this, large models have already been
trained on most of the existing data on the Internet and
have reached the limits of modern computational hardware,
costing hundreds of millions of dollars to train (Figure 1).
1

Gemini Ultra

1026

MIT. Correspondence to: Yilun Du <yilundu@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Such compositional generative modeling enables us to effectively represent the sparsity and symmetry naturally found
1

