Structured Chemistry Reasoning with Large Language Models

Siru Ouyang 1 Zhuosheng Zhang 2 Bing Yan 3 Xuan Liu 1 Yejin Choi 4 5 Jiawei Han 1 Lianhui Qin 5 6

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) excel in diverse
areas, yet struggle with complex scientific reasoning, especially in the field of chemistry. Different
from the simple chemistry tasks (e.g., molecule
classification) addressed in previous studies, complex chemistry problems require not only vast
knowledge and precise calculation, but also compositional reasoning about rich dynamic interactions of different concepts (e.g., temperature
changes). Our study shows that even advanced
LLMs, like GPT-4, can fail easily in different
ways. Interestingly, the errors often stem not
from a lack of domain knowledge within the
LLMs, but rather from the absence of an effective reasoning structure that guides the LLMs to
elicit the right knowledge, incorporate the knowledge in step-by-step reasoning, and iteratively
refine results for further improved quality. On
this basis, we introduce S TRUCT C HEM, a simple yet effective prompting strategy that offers
the desired guidance and substantially boosts the
LLMs’ chemical reasoning capability. Testing
across four chemistry areas—quantum chemistry,
mechanics, physical chemistry, and kinetics—
S TRUCT C HEM substantially enhances GPT-4’s
performance, with up to 30% peak improvement.
Our analysis also underscores the unique difficulties of precise grounded reasoning in science
with LLMs, highlighting a need for more research in this area. Code is available at https:
//github.com/ozyyshr/StructChem.

Figure 1. Proportions (%) of four error types ( #errors / #all-cases)
for GPT-4 and S TRUCT C HEM. S TRUCT C HEM substantially reduces the reasoning error.

various sectors including industrial production (Öztürk et al.,
2020), pharmaceuticals (Singhal et al., 2023), and education (Graulich et al., 2022). Recent studies have shown
promising results of large language models (LLMs) solving
simple chemistry problems (Figure 2(a)), such as molecule
classification (Edwards et al., 2022) and property prediction (Yang et al., 2019; Feinberg et al., 2018).
On the other hand, however, more complex chemistry reasoning problems still pose significant challenges to frontier
LLMs like GPT-4. As shown in Figure 2(b), a complex
problem requires not only understanding individual concepts (e.g., molecule property) as in previous tasks, but
rather their rich dynamic interactions in different contexts,
involving extensive domain knowledge (e.g., chemical formulae1 ), precise scientific computing, and compositional
step-by-step reasoning. As a result, LLMs are prone to different forms of errors when solving these problems, such
as applying incorrect knowledge, making miscalculations,
or following flawed reasoning processes, as illustrated in
Figure 2(c).
Interestingly, as shown in Figure 1 and discussed in Section 5, LLMs oftentimes have encoded necessary knowledge
for a given chemistry problem. The key shortfall, however,
lies in the absence of a sophisticated reasoning structure
that helps elicit the relevant knowledge from the LLMs, and
guides them to perform precise step-by-step reasoning with
the knowledge.

1. Introduction
Artificial intelligence (AI) holds the promise of transforming the field of chemistry (Baum et al., 2021), impacting
*
Equal contribution 1 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3 New York University 4 University
of Washington 5 Allen Institute for AI 6 University of California SanDiego. Correspondence to: Lianhui Qin <lianhui@ucsd.edu>.
2

Motivated by this, we introduce S TRUCT C HEM, a sim-

st

1

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

“Formulae” and “formulas” are both correct plurals of “formula”, with “formulae” being preferred in scientific writing, per
Garner’s Modern English Usage.

1

