Symmetry Induces Structure and Constraint of Learning

Liu Ziyin 1

Abstract

Tibshirani, 2021), scale symmetry (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015)
and rotation symmetry (Ziyin et al., 2023b). In physics,
symmetries are regarded as fundamental organizing principles of nature, and systems with symmetries exhibit rich
and hierarchical behaviors (Anderson, 1972). However, existing works study specific symmetries case-by-case, and no
unifying theory exists to understand the role of symmetries
in affecting the learning of neural networks. In this work,
we take a neutral stance and show that the common types
of symmetries can be understood in a unified theoretical
framework of what we call the “mirror symmetries”, where
every symmetry is proved to lead to a special structure and
constraint of optimization.

Due to common architecture designs, symmetries exist extensively in contemporary neural networks. In this work, we unveil the importance
of the loss function symmetries in affecting, if
not deciding, the learning behavior of machine
learning models. We prove that every mirrorreflection symmetry, with reflection surface O,
in the loss function leads to the emergence of a
constraint on the model parameters θ: OT θ = 0.
This constrained solution becomes satisfied when
either the weight decay or gradient noise is large.
Common instances of mirror symmetries in deep
learning include rescaling, rotation, and permutation symmetry. As direct corollaries, we show
that rescaling symmetry leads to sparsity, rotation
symmetry leads to low rankness, and permutation symmetry leads to homogeneous ensembling.
Then, we show that the theoretical framework can
explain intriguing phenomena, such as the loss
of plasticity and various collapse phenomena in
neural networks, and suggest how symmetries can
be used to design an elegant algorithm to enforce
hard constraints in a differentiable way.

Since we will also discuss stochastic aspects of learning,
we study a generic twice-differentiable non-negative persample loss function:
ℓγ = ℓ0 (θ, x) + γ∣∣θ∣∣2 ,

where x is a minibatch or a single data point of arbitrary
dimension and sampled from a training set. θ is the model
parameter, and γ is the weight decay. ℓ0 assumes the definition of the model architecture and is the data-dependent
part of the loss. Training with stochastic gradient descent
(SGD), we sample a set of x and compute the gradient of
the averaged per-sample loss over the set. The per-sample
loss averaged over the training set is the empirical risk:
Lγ (θ) ∶= Ex [ℓγ ]. Training with gradient descent (GD), we
compute the gradient with respect to Lγ . All the results we
derive for ℓγ directly carry over to Lγ . Also, because the
sampling over x is equivalent to a sampling of ℓ, we omit x
from the equations unless necessary.

1. Introduction
Modern neural networks are so large that they contain an
astronomical number of neurons and connections layered
in a highly structured manner. This design of modern architectures and loss functions means that there are a lot of
redundant parameters in the model and that the loss functions are often invariant to hidden, nonlinear, and nonperturbative transformations of the model parameters. We call
these invariant transformations the “symmetries” of the loss
function. Common examples of symmetries in the loss function include the permutation symmetry (Simsek et al., 2021;
Entezari et al., 2021; Hou et al., 2019), rescaling symmetry
(Dinh et al., 2017; Saxe et al., 2013; Neyshabur et al., 2014;
1
MIT, NTT Research.
<ziyinl@mit.edu>.

(1)

The main contributions are the following:
1. we identify a general class of symmetry, the mirror reflection symmetry, that treats all common types of symmetry
in a coherent framework;
2. we prove that every mirror symmetry leads to a constraint on the parameters, and when weight decay is
used (or when the gradient noise is large), SGD training tends to converge to these constrained symmetric
solutions;
3. we apply the theory to understand phenomena related to
common symmetries such as rescaling, rotation symmetry, and permutation symmetry.

Correspondence to: Liu Ziyin

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

