MLIP: Efficient Multi-Perspective Language-Image Pretraining
with Exhaustive Data Utilization
Yu Zhang 1 Qi Zhang * 1 Zixuan Gong * 1 Yiwei Shi 2 Yepeng Liu 3 Duoqian Miao 1
Yang Liu 4 Ke Liu 5 Kun Yi 6 Wei Fan 7 Liang Hu 1 Changwei Wang 8

Abstract
Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP)
has achieved remarkable success, leading to rapid
advancements in multimodal studies. However,
CLIP faces a notable challenge in terms of inefficient data utilization. It relies on a single
contrastive supervision for each image-text pair
during representation learning, disregarding a
substantial amount of valuable information that
could offer richer supervision. Additionally, the
retention of non-informative tokens leads to increased computational demands and time costs,
particularly in CLIP’s ViT image encoder. To address these issues, we propose Multi-Perspective
Language-Image Pretraining (MLIP). In MLIP,
we leverage the frequency transform’s sensitivity to both high and low-frequency variations,
which complements the spatial domain’s sensitivity limited to low-frequency variations only.
By incorporating frequency transforms and tokenlevel alignment, we expand CILP’s single supervision into multi-domain and multi-level supervision, enabling a more thorough exploration of
informative image features. Additionally, we introduce a token merging method guided by comprehensive semantics from the frequency and spatial domains. This allows us to merge tokens to
multi-granularity tokens with a controllable compression rate to accelerate CLIP. Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of our design.

Figure 1. (a) A distorted image. (b) An objective error map. The
house and the sky regions are easily observable, and those on textural regions (e.g. rocks) are less noticeable, i.e., HVS is much more
sensitive to the low-frequency variations than the high-frequency
variations. (c) The original images and spectrums of the same
lying cat in different scenes. It shows spectrum is pretty effective
in extracting and differentiating features such as the complexity
and noise of a scene (the high-frequency variations).

1. Introduction
In recent times, multimodal study (Xu et al., 2024a; Zhang
et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2024b; Lin et al., 2023) has gained significant popularity, leading to rapid advancements in VisionLanguage Pre-training (VLP). One noteworthy development
is Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP) (Radford
et al., 2021), which has demonstrated remarkable performance across a range of downstream tasks. CLIP achieves
this by training on 400 million image-text pairs with a contrastive mechanism to effectively bring the representations
of intra-pairs closer together while pushing apart those of
inter-pairs. However, upon closer examination, it is evident
that CLIP encounters a significant obstacle in terms of inefficient data utilization. For example, only one contrastive
supervision is utilized for each pair during the forward process, thereby leaving substantial uni-modal and cross-modal
information untapped, which can potentially enhance representation. Additionally, the presence of non-informative
tokens leads to increased computational requirements and
time costs, especially in CLIP’s image encoder, i.e., a Vision Transformer (ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020). This
additional workload hampers cross-modality alignment and
significantly slows down the overall training speed of CLIP.

*
Equal contribution 1 Tongji University 2 University of Bristol
University of Florida 4 National University of Defense Technology
5
National Clinical Research Center for Mental Disorders & National Center for Mental Disorders, Beijing Anding Hospital, Capital Medical University 6 Beijing Institute of Technology 7 University
of Oxford 8 Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences.
Correspondence to: Duoqian Miao <dqmiao@tongji.edu.cn>, Ke
Liu <liuke0222@126.com>.
3

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

