Toward Adaptive Reasoning in Large Language Models with Thought Rollback

Sijia Chen 1 Baochun Li 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Large Language Models, initially designed for text generation with autoregression, are widely recognized to excel
in a diverse array of natural language processing (NLP)
tasks. Yet, at a particular model scale, their reasoning abilities, particularly in scaled-up versions like GPT-4 (OpenAI,
2023) and Llama 2 (Touvron et al., 2023), heavily depend
on prompt engineering. With well-crafted prompts — even
just a simple Let’s think step by step (Kojima et al., 2022)
— LLMs are able to perform step-by-step reasoning and
achieved noteworthy success in mathematical, symbolic,
and common sense tasks. With reasoning, LLMs are capable of producing coherent language sequences, called
thoughts, which serve as intermediate reasoning steps toward solving the problem at hand. Extended from simple
chain reasoning (Wei et al., 2022) with linear left-to-right
thoughts, more complex reasoning became feasible in recent works by establishing thought structures that resembled
trees (Yao et al., 2023) and graphs (Besta et al., 2023; Zhang
et al., 2023; Luo et al., 2024).

Large language models (LLMs) have been routinely used to solve various tasks using step-bystep reasoning. However, the structure of intermediate reasoning steps, or thoughts, is rigid and
unidirectional, such as chains, trees, or acyclicdirected graphs. Consequently, the resulting inflexible and forward-only reasoning may not address challenging tasks and fail when the LLM
frequently gives false responses, i.e., “hallucinations”. This paper proposes a new reasoning
framework, called Thought Rollback (TR), allowing LLMs to adaptively build thought structure while maintaining effective reasoning toward
problem-solving under “hallucinations”. The
core mechanism of TR is rolling back thoughts,
which allows LLMs to perform error analysis on
thoughts, and thus roll back to any previously
mistaken thought for revision. Subsequently,
by including such trial-and-error in the prompt
to guide the LLM, each rollback leads to one
more reliable reasoning path. Therefore, starting with a simple prompt without human annotations, LLM with TR adaptively and gradually
explores thoughts for a correct solution. Comprehensive experiments on mathematical problems and multi-task reasoning demonstrate the
state-of-the-art performance of TR in terms of
problem-solving rate and interaction cost. For
instance, the solving rate of GPT-4 with TR outperforms the current best by 9% on the MATH
dataset. The source code is available under the
folder examples/ThoughtRollback of https://
github.com/iQua/llmpebase.

However, existing thought structures are unidirectional and
thus allow a forward-only reasoning process, meaning that
thoughts are generated sequentially from the start to the end.
The efficacy of this reasoning process hinges on a redundant
and, consequently, inefficient thought structure, requiring
thorough explorations of each thought before progressing to
the next. One major drawback of forward-only reasoning is
that errors can propagate quickly (Yu et al., 2024). Consider
the common case where one thought is incorrect or inaccurate: with forward-only reasoning, all thoughts derived from
it can be misled. Even with revisions based on step-by-step
evaluations (Weng et al., 2023), such propagation of errors
can introduce further deviations from the correct path of reasoning, since LLMs have been found to confidently provide
false information (i.e., “hallucinations” or “laziness”) (Jiang
et al., 2023).
Indeed, humans also provide false information as frequently
and randomly as LLMs do during reasoning but can still
solve challenging problems eventually. This is attributed
to adaptive reasoning, in which one does not pre-defined
a fixed structure for thoughts and does not simply deduce
forward but adaptively adjusts the thought structure after
evaluating errors during reasoning. Such reasoning enables

1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Correspondence to:
Sijia Chen <sjia.chen@mail.utoronto.ca>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

