Bayesian Design Principles for Offline-to-Online Reinforcement Learning

Hao Hu * 1 Yiqin Yang * 2 Jianing Ye 1 Chengjie Wu 1 Ziqing Mai 1 Yujing Hu 3 Tangjie Lv 3 Changjie Fan 3
Qianchuan Zhao 4 Chongjie Zhang 5

Abstract

walker2d-medium-v2

120
Episode Return

Offline reinforcement learning (RL) is crucial
for real-world applications where exploration can
be costly or unsafe. However, offline learned
policies are often suboptimal, and further online
fine-tuning is required. In this paper, we tackle
the fundamental dilemma of offline-to-online
fine-tuning: if the agent remains pessimistic, it
may fail to learn a better policy, while if it becomes optimistic directly, performance may suffer from a sudden drop. We show that Bayesian
design principles are crucial in solving such a
dilemma. Instead of adopting optimistic or pessimistic policies, the agent should act in a way
that matches its belief in optimal policies. Such
a probability-matching agent can avoid a sudden performance drop while still being guaranteed to find the optimal policy. Based on our
theoretical findings, we introduce a novel algorithm that outperforms existing methods on various benchmarks, demonstrating the efficacy of
our approach. Overall, the proposed approach
provides a new perspective on offline-to-online
RL that has the potential to enable more effective
learning from offline data. Our code is public
online at https://github.com/YiqinYang/BOORL.

100
80
BOORL (ours)
TD3+BC → TD3
TD3+BC → TD3+BC

60
40
0.00

0.25

0.50
0.75
Million Steps

1.00

Figure 1: Fine-tuning dilemma in offline-to-online setting.
if the algorithm remains pessimistic as it does in offline
algorithms, the agent learns slowly due to a lack of exploration (green). Conversely, when the algorithm is optimistic,
the agent’s performance may suffer from a sudden drop due
to inefficient use of offline knowledge and radical exploration (orange). We adopt a probability-matching approach
to attain a fast and robust performance improvement (blue).

preference alignment (Ouyang et al., 2022). However, online RL algorithms rely on a significant amount of exploration, which can be time-consuming and expensive. Offline
RL (Levine et al., 2020) tackles such a problem by utilizing
previously collected data and has gained increasing attention
in recent years, with the potential to leverage large-scale
and diverse datasets (Kumar et al., 2022). However, offline
learned policies can be sub-optimal and generalize poorly
due to insufficient data and overoptimization (Gao et al.,
2023), necessitating further online fine-tuning.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has shown impressive success
in solving complex decision-making problems such as board
games (Silver et al., 2016) and video games (Mnih et al.,
2013), and has been applied to many real-world problems
like plasma control (Degrave et al., 2022), and human

To address this challenge, a hybrid approach (Nair et al.,
2020; Lee et al., 2022; Song et al., 2022) has been proposed,
enabling sample-efficient learning utilizing both previously
collected data and online environments. Pure online or offline strategies are known to fail on the offline-to-online
(off-to-on) transition, and various solutions have been proposed, including a balanced replay buffer (Lee et al., 2022;
Ball et al., 2023), ensembling (Lee et al., 2022; Ball et al.,
2023), and value calibration (Nakamoto et al., 2023). However, there is a lack of a theoretical understanding of the
optimistic-pessimistic dilemma, as depicted in Figure 1, and

*
Equal contribution 1 Institute for Interdisciplinary Sciences,
Tsinghua University, China 2 Institute of Automation, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, China 3 Fuxi AI Lab, Netease, Inc.,
Hangzhou, China 4 Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China 5 Washington University in St. Louis, USA. Correspondence to: Hao Hu <huh22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

