Accelerating Look-ahead in Bayesian Optimization:
Multilevel Monte Carlo is All You Need
Shangda Yang * 1 Vitaly Zankin 1 Maximilian Balandat 2 Stefan Scherer 2
Kevin Carlberg 2 Neil Walton * 3 1 Kody J. H. Law * 2 1

Abstract

The choice of acquisition function is crucial in the design of
BO algorithms. Typical myopic acquisition functions such
as upper confidence bound (Auer et al., 2002; Auer, 2002;
Srinivas et al., 2009), expected improvement (EI) (Močkus,
1975; Jones et al., 1998), entropy search (Hennig & Schuler,
2012), and predictive entropy search (Hernández-Lobato
et al., 2014) only consider the immediate reward of the decision. They do not trade off the depth of decision-making
with the computational budget. By contrast, a multi-step
acquisition function looks into the future and will optimize
over the planning horizon by formulating the problem as a
Markov decision process (MDP). This can substantially reduce the number of required function evaluations (González
et al., 2016; Wu & Frazier, 2019; Yue & Kontar, 2020; Lee
et al., 2020; Jiang et al., 2020a;b). However, the complexity
of approximating such acquisition functions increases exponentially with the number of look-ahead steps for current
methods, which limits their use.

We leverage multilevel Monte Carlo (MLMC)
to improve the performance of multi-step lookahead Bayesian optimization (BO) methods that
involve nested expectations and maximizations.
Often these expectations must be computed
by Monte Carlo (MC). The complexity rate
of naive MC degrades for nested operations,
whereas MLMC is capable of achieving the
canonical MC convergence rate for this type
of problem, independently of dimension and
without any smoothness assumptions. Our
theoretical study focuses on the approximation improvements for two- and three-step
look-ahead acquisition functions, but, as we
discuss, the approach is generalizable in various
ways, including beyond the context of BO.
Our findings are verified numerically and the
benefits of MLMC for BO are illustrated on
several benchmark examples. Code is available at

The goal of this paper is to improve the computational
complexity of approximating look-ahead acquisition
functions.

https://github.com/Shangda-Yang/MLMCBO.

Multi-step look-ahead acquisition functions have traditionally been optimized by nesting optimization and Monte
Carlo (MC) estimations, whereas we leverage a nested
Sample Average Approximation (SAA) (Balandat et al.,
2020), which facilitates the application of deterministic
higher-order optimization methods. Standard MC (without nested operations) requires O(ε−2 ) samples to achieve
mean-squared-error (MSE) of ε. For just one nested operation, the sample complexity of MC with SAA is at least
O(ε−3 ) and O(ε−4 ) in the worst case, depending on the
smoothness of the integrand. For k nested operations, the
cost for MC grows exponentially in k to O(ε−2(k+1) ), leading to a curse of dimensionality.

1. Introduction
Bayesian optimization (BO) is a global optimization method
for expensive-to-evaluate black-box functions that generally
have unknown structures. In this setting, only the function
value is observed for a given input value. BO works by constructing a probabilistic surrogate model, often a Gaussian
process (GP), for the black-box function and then iteratively
updating the surrogate model, guided by the optimization
of an acquisition function, until some stopping criterion is
achieved. See Frazier (2018); Shahriari et al. (2015) for a
detailed review of BO.

This paper is the first to apply the MLMC framework to
Bayesian Optimization, thereby improving the performance
of look-ahead methods. MLMC for expectations of approximations, such as nested MC, works by constructing a
telescoping sum of estimators from low accuracy to high
accuracy (Giles, 2015). Computational complexity is reduced by performing most simulations with low-accuracy

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Mathematics, University of Manchester 2 Meta Platforms, Inc. 3 Durham University Business School. Correspondence to: Shangda Yang
<shangda.yang@manchester.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

