Iterated Denoising Energy Matching for Sampling from Boltzmann Densities

Tara Akhound-Sadegh * 1 2 3 Jarrid Rector-Brooks * 1 3 4 Avishek Joey Bose * 1 3 5 Sarthak Mittal 1 4
Pablo Lemos 1 3 4 6 7 Cheng-Hao Liu 1 2 3 Marcin Sendera 1 4 8 Siamak Ravanbakhsh 1 2 9 Gauthier Gidel 1 4 9
Yoshua Bengio 1 4 9 Nikolay Malkin 1 4 Alexander Tong 1 3 4
Replay buffer B

Abstract
Efficiently generating statistically independent
samples from an unnormalized probability distribution, such as equilibrium samples of many-body
systems, is a foundational problem in science. In
this paper, we propose I TERATED D ENOISING
E NERGY M ATCHING (iDEM), an iterative algorithm that uses a novel stochastic score matching
objective leveraging solely the energy function
and its gradient—and no data samples—to train
a diffusion-based sampler. Specifically, iDEM
alternates between (I) sampling regions of high
model density from a diffusion-based sampler
and (II) using these samples in our stochastic
matching objective to further improve the sampler.
iDEM is scalable to high dimensions as the
inner matching objective, is simulation-free,
and requires no MCMC samples. Moreover, by
leveraging the fast mode mixing behavior of diffusion, iDEM smooths out the energy landscape
enabling efficient exploration and learning of an
amortized sampler. We evaluate iDEM on a suite
of tasks ranging from standard synthetic energy
functions to invariant n-body particle systems.
We show that the proposed approach achieves
state-of-the-art performance on all metrics and
trains 2 − 5× faster, which allows it to be the first
method to train using energy on the challenging
55-particle Lennard-Jones system.

simulation-based
outer loop
integrate reverse
SDE of 𝑠𝜃

sample

simulation-free
inner loop

Diffusion sampler
𝑠𝜃 (𝑥 𝑡 , 𝑡)
≈ ∇ log 𝑝 𝑡

optimize 𝑠𝜃 at 𝑥 𝑡
using DEM
(Fig. 2)

add noise
Sample 𝑥 0

Noisy samples 𝑥 𝑡

Figure 1. iDEM fits a diffusion sampler to a target distribution
given by an unnormalized density. In the outer loop, iDEM populates a buffer with samples from the current model sθ . In the inner
loop, iDEM uses the DEM objective (§3.1) to regress sθ to an
estimate of the score at noised samples from the buffer. The inner
loop is simulation-free, i.e., requires no SDE integration.

putational approaches have been employed to tackle this
significant problem, yielding a multitude of applications
across various scientific domains, such as spin-lattice
states (Li & Wang, 2018; Nicoli et al., 2020), nuclear
physics (Albergo et al., 2019), and proteins (Jumper et al.,
2021; Bose et al., 2024). In this work, we focus on sampling
from the (target) equilibrium distribution µtarget of manybody systems, e.g., molecules, with density proportional
to a Boltzmann-type distribution µtarget (x) ∝ exp(−E(x))
with the specific goal of efficiently drawing samples that
cover all modes of the complex and dimensionless energy E.
Moreover, the density µtarget associated with the system is
symmetric as the energy E function is invariant to rotations,
reflections, and permutations of particles in 3D space.

1. Introduction
A fundamental task in probabilistic inference is drawing
samples from an unnormalized probability density. Com*

Equal contribution 1 Mila – Québec AI Institute 2 McGill University 3 Dreamfold 4 Université de Montréal 5 University of Oxford 6 Ciela Institute 7 Center for Computational Astrophysics, Flatiron Institute 8 Jagiellonian University 9 CIFAR. Correspondence
to: <{jarrid.rector-brooks,tara.akhoundsadegh}@mila.quebec>.

Unlike the typical machine learning settings where the
starting point is a dataset, learning to sample in many of
these scientific settings is especially challenging as we
often have little to no initial samples from µtarget , or the

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

