Post-hoc Part-prototype Networks

Andong Tan 1 Fengtao Zhou 1 Hao Chen 1 2
Backpropagation

Abstract
Post-hoc explainability methods such as GradCAM are popular because they do not influence
the performance of a trained model. However,
they mainly reveal “where” a model looks at for
a given input, fail to explain “what” the model
looks for (e.g., what is important to classify a bird
image to a Scott Oriole?). Existing part-prototype
networks leverage part-prototypes (e.g., characteristic Scott Oriole’s wing and head) to answer both
“where” and “what”, but often under-perform their
black box counterparts in the accuracy. Therefore, a natural question is: can one construct a
network that answers both “where” and “what”
in a post-hoc manner to guarantee the model’s
performance? To this end, we propose the first
post-hoc part-prototype network via decomposing
the classification head of a trained model into a
set of interpretable part-prototypes. Concretely,
we propose an unsupervised prototype discovery
and refining strategy to obtain prototypes that can
precisely reconstruct the classification head, yet
being interpretable. Besides guaranteeing the performance, we show that our network offers more
faithful explanations qualitatively and yields even
better part-prototypes quantitatively than prior
part-prototype networks.

Global
Interpretation

Gradient

Input

Apply

1. Post-hoc Explainability Methods

Performance

Model Modification

Global
Interpretation

Interpretation
Layer

DNN Model

Prototypes

wing

Re-train

belly
head
This Looks Like …

2. Prototype-based Methods
Features Discover Prototypes

wing

Bird

Prediction

Local
Interpretation

Refine

…

cls. head

belly
head

Local
Interpretation
Performance
Global
Interpretation
Local
Interpretation

This Looks Like …

3. Post-hoc Part-prototype Networks

Performance

Figure 1. Prior post-hoc methods such as Grad-CAM (Selvaraju
et al., 2017) fall short in answering “what the model looks for” (a
type of global interpretability) for transparent decision making. On
the other hand, prior part-prototype based models often sacrifice
the performance. Our post-hoc part-prototype network is the first
model offering part-prototype based global interpretability for
decision making, while guaranteeing the prediction performance.

Existing post-hoc methods such as Grad-CAM (Selvaraju
et al., 2017) can explain a trained model (the name posthoc comes from explaining a model after it is trained) by
generating a heatmap indicating where the model looks at.
These methods are popular because they do not influence
the model’s performance. However, they have been shown
to fail, or only marginally help in recent human-centered
psychophysics experiments (Colin et al., 2022; Kim et al.,
2022), mainly due to their failures to indicate what the model
is looking for to make certain decisions (Fel et al., 2023).
As a concrete example, given an image of a bird, GradCAM (Selvaraju et al., 2017) only indicates that a model
is looking at some foreground areas of the input (a type of
local interpretability as the explanation is locally valid to a
certain input), but fails to tell what visual features in these
areas are driving the decision (Rudin, 2019; Chen et al.,
2019). Therefore, they can not explain “what is generally
important for the model to classify a bird into a Scott Oriole”
(a type of global interpretability as the explanation will be
globally valid in the whole input space) (Schwalbe & Finzel,
2023).

1. Introduction
In the past years, deep learning based models such as Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) and Vision Transformer
(ViT) have achieved impressive performance in computer
vision tasks (He et al., 2016; Dosovitskiy et al., 2020; Girshick, 2015; Ronneberger et al., 2015). However, the interpretability of these black-box models has always been a
major concern and limits their real-world deployments.
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Hong
Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China
2
Center for Aging Science, HKUST, Hong Kong, China. Correspondence to: Hao Chen <jhc@cse.ust.hk>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

