Getting the most out of your tokenizer for pre-training and domain adaptation

Gautier Dagan 1 Gabriel Synnaeve 2 Baptiste Rozière 2

Abstract
Tokenization is an understudied and often neglected component of modern LLMs. Most published works use a single tokenizer for all experiments, often borrowed from another model,
without performing ablations or analysis to optimize tokenization. Moreover, the tokenizer is
generally kept unchanged when fine-tuning a base
model. In this paper, we show that the size, pretokenization regular expression, and training data
of a tokenizer can significantly impact the model’s
generation speed, effective context size, memory
usage, and downstream performance. We train
specialized Byte-Pair Encoding code tokenizers,
and conduct extensive ablations on the impact of
tokenizer design on the performance of LLMs
for code generation tasks such as HumanEval
and MBPP, and provide recommendations for tokenizer hyper-parameters selection and switching
the tokenizer in a pre-trained LLM. We perform
our experiments on models trained from scratch
and from pre-trained models, verifying their applicability to a wide range of use-cases. We find that
when fine-tuning on more than 50 billion tokens,
we can specialize the tokenizer of a pre-trained
LLM to obtain large gains in generation speed
and effective context size.

Figure 1. Three ways to increase in-domain compression in a BPE
tokenizer with their respective trade-offs.

on other hyper-parameters or modeling features. Hence,
practitioners often report results based on a single set of
tokenizer hyper-parameters.
This is especially true for projects fine-tuning a pre-trained
LLM for a specific task or domain. The tokenizer of the base
model is generally unchanged, leading to tokenizers being
applied to domains for which they are sub-optimal, hurting
efficiency and potentially the performance of the final model.
For instance, Code Llama (Rozière et al., 2023) re-uses the
tokenizer that was used by its base model, Llama 2 (Touvron
et al., 2023b), which uses the tokenizer from the original
Llama model (Touvron et al., 2023a). This means that
Code Llama, while being a popular model fine-tuned on a
domain specific task, is still limited by the decisions taken
during the pre-training of the original base model. However,
higher-compression code tokenizers exist. For instance, the
InCoder (Fried et al., 2023) tokenizer is trained on source
code, has a larger vocabulary size, and uses less restrictive
pre-processing rules. As a result, it uses 25% less tokens
than the Llama tokenizer on average when encoding source
code (see Table 1).

1. Introduction
Tokenizers transform raw sequences of text into tokens, and
are an essential part of most modern language models. They
are generally built using the Byte-Pair Encoding (BPE) algorithm (Sennrich et al., 2016), and more rarely with the
Unigram algorithm (Kudo, 2018). Building a tokenizer is
one of the first steps of any language modeling project. Modifying the tokenizer impacts everything downstream, and
is generally more cumbersome than performing ablations

Efficiency in token usage can have a significant impact
on LLM inference and training. In the context of modern
LLMs, where the inference budget is non-negligible (Touvron et al., 2023a), enhancements in compression like these
lead to more efficient inference in both FLOPS and memory
usage. Compression also increases the effective context
length of the model, defined as the number of characters the

1

University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK 2 Meta AI,
Paris, France. Correspondence to: Gautier Dagan <gautier.dagan@ed.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

