MusicRL: Aligning Music Generation to Human Preferences

Geoffrey Cideron 1 Sertan Girgin 1 Mauro Verzetti 1 Damien Vincent 1 Matej Kastelic 1 Zalán Borsos 1
Brian McWilliams 1 Victor Ungureanu 1 Olivier Bachem 1 Olivier Pietquin 2 Matthieu Geist 2
Léonard Hussenot 1 Neil Zeghidour 3 Andrea Agostinelli 1

1. Introduction

Abstract
We propose MusicRL, the first music generation
system finetuned from human feedback. Appreciation of text-to-music models is particularly
subjective since the concept of musicality as well
as the specific intention behind a caption are userdependent (e.g. a caption such as “upbeat workout music” can map to a retro guitar solo or a
technopop beat). Not only this makes supervised
training of such models challenging, but it also
calls for integrating continuous human feedback
in their post-deployment finetuning. MusicRL is
a pretrained autoregressive MusicLM (Agostinelli
et al., 2023) model of discrete audio tokens finetuned with reinforcement learning to maximize
sequence-level rewards. We design reward functions related specifically to text-adherence and audio quality with the help from selected raters, and
use those to finetune MusicLM into MusicRL-R.
We deploy MusicLM to users and collect a substantial dataset comprising 300,000 pairwise preferences. Using Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF), we train MusicRL-U,
the first text-to-music model that incorporates human feedback at scale. Human evaluations show
that both MusicRL-R and MusicRL-U are preferred to the baseline. Ultimately, MusicRL-RU
combines the two approaches and results in the
best model according to human raters. Ablation
studies shed light on the musical attributes influencing human preferences, indicating that text
adherence and quality only account for a part of
it. This underscores the prevalence of subjectivity
in musical appreciation and calls for further involvement of human listeners in the finetuning of
music generation models. Website with samples.

Generative modeling of music has experienced a leap forward: while it was until recently either limited to the fine
modeling of individual instruments (Engel et al., 2017;
Défossez et al., 2018; Engel et al., 2020) or the coarse generation of polyphonic music (Dhariwal et al., 2020), models
can now handle open-ended, high-fidelity text-controlled
music generation (Forsgren & Martiros, 2022; Agostinelli
et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023; Copet et al., 2023). In particular, text-to-music systems such as MusicLM (Agostinelli
et al., 2023) and MusicGen (Copet et al., 2023) build on
audio language models, as they cast the generative process
as an autoregressive prediction task in the discrete representation space of a neural audio codec (Zeghidour et al., 2022;
Défossez et al., 2022). While this approach has demonstrated its ability to generate realistic speech (Borsos et al.,
2023a; Wang et al., 2023; Borsos et al., 2023b), sound
events (Kreuk et al., 2022) and music, it suffers from a few
shortcomings. First, the next-token prediction task used
to train these systems — while generic enough to model
arbitrary audio signals — lacks any prior knowledge about
musicality that could bias those towards generating music
that is more appealing to listeners. Second, while the temperature sampling used at inference allows for generating
diverse audio from a single text caption, this diversity is
only desirable along certain axes such as melody or performance, while musicality and adherence to the prompt
should remain consistently high.
These fundamental issues of autoregressive generative models have been extensively observed and addressed in the
context of language modeling. For example, several works
have explored finetuning machine translation models to
maximize the BLEU score (Ranzato et al., 2016; Wu et al.,
2016) or summarization models to improve the relevant
ROUGE metric (Ranzato et al., 2016; Wu & Hu, 2018; Roit
et al., 2023). Such metrics are typically sequence-level,
and evaluate the output of a non-differentiable sampling
process (e.g., greedy decoding, temperature sampling).
This is typically circumvented by using a reinforcement
learning method which models the metric of interest of a
reward function and the generative model as a policy. The
underlying algorithmic similarity between such text gen-

1

Google DeepMind 2 Now at Cohere 3 Now at Kyutai. Correspondence to: Geoffrey Cideron <gcideron@google.com>, Andrea Agostinelli <agostinelli@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

