ReDiffuser: Reliable Decision-Making Using a Diffuser
with Confidence Estimation
Nantian He 1 Shaohui Li 1 Zhi Li 1 Yu Liu 2 You He 2

Abstract

of diffusion models. In these works, the diffusion models generate state and action trajectories through iterative
denoising.

The diffusion model has demonstrated impressive
performance in offline reinforcement learning.
However, non-deterministic sampling in diffusion
models can lead to unstable performance. Furthermore, the lack of confidence measurements makes
it difficult to evaluate the reliability and trustworthiness of the sampled decisions. To address these
issues, we present ReDiffuser, which utilizes confidence estimation to ensure reliable decisionmaking. We achieve this by learning a confidence function based on Random Network Distillation. The confidence function measures the
reliability of sampled decisions and contributes
to quantitative recognition of reliable decisions.
Additionally, we integrate the confidence function
into task-specific sampling procedures to realize
adaptive-horizon planning and value-embedded
planning. Experiments show that the proposed
ReDiffuser achieves state-of-the-art performance
on standard offline RL datasets.

The diffusion models originally designed for image and
video generation are highly non-deterministic. The iterative
denoising process is decided by dozens of random samples
from noisy distributions. Thus, the generative model provides different images and videos for the given prompts.
However, in offline decision making, the non-determinism
results in significant variations in the decisions if there is a
slight change in any of the sampling steps. Thus, the decision policy can be significantly influenced by the random
seed and the computing platform, which can be an issue in
critical scenarios such as robotic manipulation and medical
surgery.
The reliability of the diffusion model has recently been
studied in image generation. These methods (Angelopoulos et al., 2022; Horwitz & Hoshen, 2022; Teneggi et al.,
2023) offer the lower and upper bounds for each generated
pixel, and the ground truth is guaranteed to fall within these
bounds with a given probability. However, these methods
cannot be directly applied in offline RL since the previously
collected data may be suboptimal and lack the ground truth.

1. Introduction

In this paper, we present ReDiffuser, a diffusion-based offline reinforcement learning method that achieves reliable
decision-making by leveraging Random Network Distillation (RND) (Burda et al., 2019). An RND-based confidence
function is learned from the historical trajectories of pretrained Diffuser (Janner et al., 2022), which evaluates the
similarity between the current decision and statistically reliable decisions. Specifically, we propose task-specific methods for gathering historical trajectories on goal-conditioned
and reward-maximization tasks. For goal-conditioned tasks,
we collect historical trajectories with diverse horizons to
accommodate variable-length planning. Thus, the confidence measurement can adaptively choose the decisions
with appropriate horizons. For reward-maximization tasks,
historical trajectories are selected from the high-value trajectories. Therefore, we can achieve value-embedded planning
that selects decisions with low risks and high values. Evaluation of the standard benchmark D4RL (Fu et al., 2020)
shows that the proposed ReDiffuser outperforms Diffuser

Offline reinforcement learning (RL) methods learn policies
from previously collected data instead of interacting with
the environment. Traditional offline RL methods suffer from
the deadly triad, limited data, and reward sparsity problems.
Instead, recent work formulates offline RL as a sequence
modeling problem and achieves superior performance on
various tasks. In particular, diffusion-based offline RL methods (Janner et al., 2022; Ajay et al., 2023; Wang et al.,
2022; Liang et al., 2023; Ni et al., 2023; Zhao & Grover,
2023; Li et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024) show impressive
improvement by exploiting the powerful modeling ability
1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua
University, Shenzhen, China 2 Department of Electronics, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Yu Liu <liuyu77360132@126.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

