Certifiably Byzantine-Robust Federated Conformal Prediction

Mintong Kang 1 Zhen Lin 1 Jimeng Sun 1 2 Cao Xiao 3 Bo Li 1 4

Abstract

Li et al., 2022b), quantifying the uncertainty of model
predictions has become essential, especially in safetyconscious domains such as healthcare and medicine (Ahmad et al., 2018; Erickson et al., 2017; Kompa et al., 2021).
For example, in sleep medicine domain, accurately classifying sleep stages (typically on EEG recordings) is crucial
for understanding sleep disorders. Analogous to a human
expert who may offer multiple possible interpretations of a
single recording, it is desirable for a DNN to provide not
just a singular prediction but a set of possible outcomes. In
constructing such prediction sets, we often consider the following coverage guarantee: the prediction set should contain the true outcome with a pre-specified probability (e.g.
90%). Conformal prediction (Shafer & Vovk, 2008; Balasubramanian et al., 2014; Romano et al., 2020) demonstrates the capacity to provide such statistical guarantees
for any black-box DNN with exchangeable data.

Conformal prediction has shown impressive capacity in constructing statistically rigorous prediction sets for machine learning models with exchangeable data samples. The siloed datasets,
coupled with the escalating privacy concerns related to local data sharing, have inspired recent innovations extending conformal prediction into federated environments with distributed
data samples. However, this framework for distributed uncertainty quantification is susceptible
to Byzantine failures. A minor subset of malicious clients can significantly compromise the
practicality of coverage guarantees. To address
this vulnerability, we introduce a novel framework Rob-FCP, which executes robust federated conformal prediction, effectively countering
malicious clients capable of reporting arbitrary
statistics in the conformal calibration process.
We theoretically provide the conformal coverage
bound of Rob-FCP in the Byzantine setting and
show that the coverage of Rob-FCP is asymptotically close to the desired coverage level. We also
propose a malicious client number estimator to
tackle a more challenging setting where the number of malicious clients is unknown to the defender. We theoretically show the precision of
the malicious client number estimator. Empirically, we demonstrate the robustness of Rob-FCP
against various portions of malicious clients under multiple Byzantine attacks on five standard
benchmark and real-world healthcare datasets.

Meanwhile, the demand for training machine learning
models on large-scale and diverse datasets necessitates
model training across multiple sites and institutions. Federated learning (Konečnỳ et al., 2016; Smith et al., 2017;
McMahan et al., 2017; Bonawitz et al., 2019; Yang et al.,
2019; Kairouz et al., 2021) offers an effective approach to
collaboratively train a global model while preserving data
privacy, as it enables training with distributed data samples
without the requirement of sharing the raw data. For example, multiple hospitals (“clients”) could jointly train a
global clinical risk prediction model without sharing raw
patient data. However, this introduces a unique challenge:
the existence of malicious or negligent clients can negatively affect the training/testing of the global model.
Recently, federated conformal prediction (FCP) methods
(Lu & Kalpathy-Cramer, 2021; Lu et al., 2023; Plassier
et al., 2023; Humbert et al., 2023) provide rigorous bounds
on the coverage rate with distributed data samples. However, FCP demonstrates vulnerability to Byzantine failures
(Lamport et al., 2019), which are caused by uncontrollable
behaviors of malicious clients. For example, a hospital’s
data could be corrupted with incorrect or even fabricated
medical information due to human negligence or deliberate manipulation of data statistics (such as age, gender, or
disease prevalence). In the Byzantine federated setting, the
prediction coverage guarantees of FCP are broken, and the
empirical marginal coverage is downgraded severely, even

1. Introduction
As deep neural networks (DNNs) achieved great success
across multiple fields (He et al., 2016; Vaswani et al., 2017;
1
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA 2 Carle’s
Illinois College of Medicine, USA 3 GE Healthcare, USA
4
University of Chicago, USA. Correspondence to: Mintong Kang
<mintong2@illinois.edu>, Bo Li <lbo@illinois.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

