Position: Standardization of Behavioral Use Clauses is Necessary for the
Adoption of Responsible Licensing of AI

Daniel McDuff 1 2 Tim Korjakow 1 3 Scott Cambo Jesse Josua Benjamin 1 4 Jenny Lee 1 Yacine Jernite 5
Carlos Muñoz Ferrandis 6 Aaron Gokaslan 7 Alek Tarkowski 8 Joseph Lindley 1 4 A. Feder Cooper 9 7
Danish Contractor

1. Introduction

Abstract

Openness is a tenet of scientific research and plays an
important role in the development of new technologies. By
making assets available to third parties, scientific results
can be verified, and systems can be interrogated, tested and
audited (Resnick, 2006; von Krogh & Spaeth, 2007). In
AI, significant advances have been made possible thanks
to the open sharing of data, code, models, and applications (Gokaslan et al., 2019; 2023; Workshop et al., 2022;
Raffel et al., 2020; Rombach et al., 2022; Touvron et al.,
2023). The fact that researchers and developers can use,
modify or extend what others have built enables an important form of AI decentralization and supports accessibility.

Growing concerns over negligent or malicious
uses of AI have increased the appetite for tools
that help manage the risks of the technology. In
2018, licenses with behaviorial-use clauses (commonly referred to as Responsible AI Licenses)
were proposed to give developers a framework for
releasing AI assets while specifying their users to
mitigate negative applications. As of the end of
2023, on the order of 40,000 software and model
repositories have adopted responsible AI licenses
licenses. Notable models licensed with behavioral
use clauses include BLOOM (language) and
LLaMA2 (language), Stable Diffusion (image),
and GRID (robotics). This paper explores why
and how these licenses have been adopted, and
why and how they have been adapted to fit
particular use cases. We use a mixed-methods
methodology of qualitative interviews, clustering
of license clauses, and quantitative analysis of
license adoption. Based on this evidence we take
the position that responsible AI licenses need standardization to avoid confusing users or diluting
their impact. At the same time, customization of
behavioral restrictions is also appropriate in some
contexts (e.g., medical domains). We advocate
for “standardized customization” that can meet
users’ needs and can be supported via tooling.

However, openness has also come with significant tensions,
particularly for pretrained (so-called base or foundation)
models. On the one hand, these models can be used in a variety of domains, often with little or no finetuning (Radford
et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020). On the other, this versatility
means that they can be used by different actors in ways that
are not aligned with the applications intended by their creators (Lee et al., 2023). Some of these uses may be overtly
harmful (e.g., generating content to deceive or harass a person/people) and others may present unintended higher risks
(e.g., generating diagnoses that may sometimes be inaccurate or biased, extracting PII from training data) (Fergusson
et al., 2023; Nasr et al., 2023; Brundage et al., 2022). Not
only is there potential for harm, in decentralized systems
downstream uses can present challenges for accountability
and recourse as there is no no clear defacto or centralized
authority making oversight decisions (Cooper et al., 2022;
2023).

*

Equal contribution 1 Responsible AI Licenses 2 University of
Washington, USA 3 Technical University of Berlin 4 Lancaster
University 5 Hugging Face 6 Alinia AI 7 Cornell University
8
Open Future Foundation 9 The Center for Generative AI,
Law, and Policy Research. Correspondence to: Daniel McDuff <dmcduff@uw.edu>, Danish Contractor <danishcontractor@outlook.com>.

Usage restrictions on contractual agreements. The release of assets by private organizations is usually accompanied by a provider-user contractual agreement. Users must
agree to provider specified terms for unhindered and continued access to the service. While traditionally such terms
were geared towards compliance with laws, mitigating legal
risks and protecting intellectual property, some AI providers
have begun to include additional clauses that govern usage.
For example, Open AI’s policies disallow generation of

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

