QuIP#: Even Better LLM Quantization with
Hadamard Incoherence and Lattice Codebooks
Albert Tseng * 1 Jerry Chee * 1 Qingyao Sun 2 Volodymyr Kuleshov 1 Christopher De Sa 1

Abstract

7

Wikitext2 Perplexity (ctx 4096)

Post-training quantization (PTQ) reduces the
memory footprint of LLMs by quantizing their
weights to low-precision. In this work, we introduce QuIP#, a weight-only PTQ method that
achieves state-of-the-art results in extreme compression regimes (≤ 4 bits per weight) using three
novel techniques. First, QuIP# improves QuIP’s
(Chee et al., 2023) incoherence processing by using the randomized Hadamard transform, which
is faster and has better theoretical properties. Second, QuIP# uses vector quantization to take advantage of the ball-shaped sub-Gaussian distribution that incoherent weights possess: specifically, we introduce a set of hardware-efficient
codebooks based on the highly symmetric E8
lattice, which achieves the optimal 8-dimension
unit ball packing. Third, QuIP# uses fine-tuning
to improve fidelity to the original model. Our
experiments show that QuIP# outperforms existing PTQ methods, enables new behaviors in
PTQ scaling, and supports fast inference. Our
code can be found at https://github.com/
Cornell-RelaxML/quip-sharp.

6

5
QuIP# 2 Bit
QuIP# 3 Bit
4

QuIP# 4 Bit
AQLM ~2 Bit
Theoretical Lossless (FP16) 4 Bit

3

QuIP 2 Bit
5E+10
1E+11
Model Size (Bits)

Figure 1. QuIP# offers unprecedented quantization quality at extreme compression ratios. QuIP# 3-bit models also scale better
than theoretically lossless 4-bit models, a previously unseen result.

et al., 2023b). This massive memory footprint motivates research into lossless LLM compression methods.
Post-training quantization (PTQ) linearly reduces the memory footprint of models by storing trained weights with
less precision. For example, Llama 2 70B only requires
< 20GB of memory when quantized to 2 bits. This not only
lets large models fit on smaller devices, but also enables
faster throughput in memory bound settings such as autoregressive decoding. However, existing quantization methods either do not scale to extreme compression ratios (Shao
et al., 2024) or have expensive decoding schemes (Egiazarian et al., 2024), motivating the development of both good
and fast PTQ methods.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have driven rapid advances
across diverse fields such as natural language processing
(Touvron et al., 2023b), scientific modeling (Nguyen et al.,
2023), and program synthesis (Rozière et al., 2024). However, the massive size of these models poses significant challenges to their deployment. For example, the largest model
in the Llama 2 family has 70B parameters, and requires
140GB of GPU memory in native 16-bit precision (Touvron
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Cornell University 2 Department of Operations Research and Information Engineering, Cornell University. Correspondence
to: Albert Tseng <albert@cs.cornell.edu>, Jerry Chee <jerrychee@cs.cornell.edu>.

In this work, we introduce QuIP#, a weight-only PTQ
method that achieves a new state-of-the-art in model quantization. QuIP# improves over existing work via three
techniques: incoherence processing, lattice codebooks, and
fine-tuning. Incoherence processing is a principled form
of outlier suppression that produces approximately Gaussian distributed weight matrices (Chee et al., 2023). QuIP#

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

