Deep Fusion: Efficient Network Training via Pre-trained Initializations

Hanna Mazzawi 1 Xavi Gonzalvo 1 Michael Wunder 1 Sammy Jerome 1 Benoit Dherin 2

Abstract

developing efficient training methods to address the challenges associated with the high computational costs and
energy consumption during the training process (Narayanan
et al., 2021).

In recent years, deep learning has made remarkable progress in a wide range of domains, with a
particularly notable impact on natural language
processing tasks. One of the challenges associated with training deep neural networks in the
context of LLMs is the need for large amounts
of computational resources and time. To mitigate
this, network growing algorithms offer potential
cost savings, but their underlying mechanisms are
poorly understood. We present two notable contributions in this paper. First, we present Deep
Fusion, an efficient approach to network training that leverages pre-trained initializations of
smaller networks. Second, we propose a theoretical framework using backward error analysis to
illustrate the dynamics of mid-training network
growth. Our experiments show how Deep Fusion is a practical and effective approach that not
only accelerates the training process but also reduces computational requirements, maintaining
or surpassing traditional training methods’ performance in various NLP tasks and T5 model sizes.
Finally, we validate our theoretical framework,
which guides the optimal use of Deep Fusion,
showing that with carefully optimized training dynamics, it significantly reduces both training time
and resource consumption.

While some studies (Kaplan et al., 2020; Touvron et al.,
2023; Zhou et al., 2023) discuss that a balance of data and
model size is important, it’s undeniable that larger models
often yield better performance (Chowdhery et al., 2022).
Several experiments and publications have demonstrated
that as model size increases, the performance on various
natural language processing tasks continues to improve (Devlin et al., 2018; Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020).
This trend is evident in the progression of LLMs, such as
BERT, GPT-2, GPT-3, and PaLM where each successive
generation is larger and achieves better results across a wide
range of benchmarks (Gu et al., 2021a).
Advancements in LLM efficiency have been driven by a
variety of innovative techniques that enable faster training
or inference without sacrificing performance. One such approach is model compression, which has been shown to reduce LLM size without significant loss in accuracy (Ganesh
et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2022; Kwon et al., 2022). Similarly, adaptive computation time methods have been proposed to dynamically allocate computational resources during LLM training, leading to improved efficiency (Graves,
2016). Techniques such as layer-wise adaptive rate scaling
(LARS) and layer-wise adaptive rate control (LARC) have
demonstrated accelerated convergence in LLMs by adapting
learning rates on a per-layer basis (You et al., 2017b;a).
Moreover, recent studies have explored the potential of
mixed-precision training, where lower-precision computation is employed during the training process to speed up
training and reduce memory requirements (Micikevicius
et al., 2017). One technique attracting more interest lately is
network growing, which is based on increasing transformer
size during training. This approach has been shown to speed
up training in various studies (Shen et al., 2022; Gong et al.,
2019; Yao et al., 2023; Gu et al., 2021b; Li et al., 2023),
while others report similar or even lower performance compared to standard training methods (Kaddour et al., 2023).
However, these methods are not well understood and add
complexity to the already challenging process of training
large language models, both in terms of implementation and
correct deployment.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have significantly advanced
the state of the art in various natural language processing
tasks, including text generation, translation, summarization,
and question answering. However, training these models
demands substantial amounts of data and computational resources. As a result, there has been a growing interest in
1

Google Research, New York, NY, USA 2 Google, Sunnyvale, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Hanna Mazzawi <mazzawi@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

