First-Order Manifold Data Augmentation for Regression Learning

Ilya Kaufman 1 Omri Azencot 1

Abstract

many that classification and regression problems should be
treated differently (Muthukumar et al., 2021). Particularly,
the differences between classification and regression are
actively explored in the context of regularization. Regularizing neural networks to improve their performance on new
samples has received a lot of attention in the past few years.
One of the main reasons for this increased interest is that
most of the recent successful neural models are overparameterized. Namely, the amount of learnable parameters is
significantly larger than the number of available training
samples (Allen-Zhu et al., 2019a;b), and thus regularization
is often necessary to alleviate overfitting issues. Recent
studies on overparameterized linear models identify conditions under which overfitting is “benign” in regression
(Bartlett et al., 2020), and uncover the relationship between
the choice of loss functions in classification and regression
tasks (Muthukumar et al., 2021). Still, the regularization of
deep neural regression networks is not well understood.

Data augmentation (DA) methods tailored to specific domains generate synthetic samples by applying transformations that are appropriate for
the characteristics of the underlying data domain,
such as rotations on images and time warping on
time series data. In contrast, domain-independent
approaches, e.g. mixup, are applicable to various data modalities, and as such they are general
and versatile. While regularizing classification
tasks via DA is a well-explored research topic,
the effect of DA on regression problems received
less attention. To bridge this gap, we study the
problem of domain-independent augmentation
for regression, and we introduce FOMA: a new
data-driven domain-independent data augmentation method. Essentially, our approach samples
new examples from the tangent planes of the train
distribution. Augmenting data in this way aligns
with the network tendency towards capturing the
dominant features of its input signals. We evaluate FOMA on in-distribution generalization and
out-of-distribution robustness benchmarks, and
we show that it improves the generalization of
several neural architectures. We also find that
strong baselines based on mixup are less effective in comparison to our approach. Our code is
publicly available at https://github.com/
azencot-group/FOMA

In this work, we focus on regularizing deep models via Data
Augmentation (DA), where data samples are artificially generated and used during training. In general, DA techniques
can be categorized into domain-dependent (DD) methods
and domain-independent (DI) approaches. The former are
specific for a certain data modality such as images or text,
whereas the latter typically do not depend on the data format.
Numerous DD- and DI-DA approaches are available for
classification tasks (Shorten & Khoshgoftaar, 2019; Shorten
et al., 2021), and many of them consistently improve over
non-augmented models. Unfortunately, DI-DA for regression problems is underexplored. Recent works on linear
models study the connection between the DA policy and
optimization (Hanin & Sun, 2021), as well as the generalization effects of linear DA transformations (Wu et al., 2020).
We contribute to this line of work by proposing and analyzing a new domain-independent data augmentation method
for nonlinear deep regression, and by testing our approach
on in-distribution generalization and out-of-distribution robustness tasks (Yao et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Classification and regression problems primarily differ in
their output’s domain. In classification, we have a finite
set of labels, whereas in regression, the range is an infinite
set of quantities—either discrete or continuous. In classical
work (Devroye et al., 2013), classification is argued to be
“easier” than regression, but more generally, it is agreed by

Many strong data augmentation methods were proposed
in the past few years. Particularly relevant to our study is
the family of mixup-based techniques that are commonly
used in classification applications. The original method,
mixup (Zhang et al., 2017), produces convex combinations of training samples, promoting linear behavior for

1

Department of Computer Science, Ben-Gurion University of
the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel. Correspondence to: Ilya Kaufman
<ilyakau@post.bgu.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

