Iterative Data Smoothing: Mitigating Reward Overfitting
and Overoptimization in RLHF

Banghua Zhu 1 Michael I. Jordan 1 Jiantao Jiao 1

Abstract

particular, Reinforcement Learning with Human Feedback
(RLHF) proposes to use human assessments as a reward
function from pairwise or multi-wise comparisons of model
responses, and then fine-tune the language model based on
the learned reward functions (Ziegler et al., 2019; Ouyang
et al., 2022; Schulman et al., 2022).

Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback
(RLHF) is a pivotal technique that aligns language
models closely with human-centric values. The
initial phase of RLHF involves learning human
values using a reward model from ranking data.
It is observed that the performance of the reward
model degrades after one epoch of training, and
optimizing too much against the learned reward
model eventually hinders the true objective. This
paper analyzes potential reasons behind the issues,
and designs improved reward learning algorithm
termed ’Iterative Data Smoothing’ (IDS). The
core idea is that during each training epoch, we
not only update the model with the data, but
also update the date using the model, replacing
hard labels with soft labels. Our empirical
findings highlight the superior performance of
this approach over the traditional methods.

Following on from a supervised learning stage, a typical
RLHF protocol involves two main steps:
• Reward learning: Sample prompts from a prompt
dataset and generate multiple responses for the same
prompt. Collect human preference data in the form
of pairwise or multi-wise comparisons of different
responses. Train a reward model based on the
preference data.
• Policy learning: Fine-tune the current LLM based on
the learned reward model with reinforcement learning
algorithms.
Although RLHF has been successful in practice (Bai
et al., 2022; Ouyang et al., 2022; Dubois et al., 2023),
it is not without flaws, and indeed the current reward
training paradigm grapples with significant value-reward
mismatches. There are two major issues with the current
paradigm:

1. Introduction
Recent progress on Large Language Models (LLMs) is
having a transformative effect not only in natural language
processing but also more broadly in a range of AI
applications (Radford et al., 2019; Chowdhery et al., 2022;
Brown et al., 2020; Touvron et al., 2023; Bubeck et al.,
2023; Schulman et al., 2022; OpenAI, 2023; Anthropic,
2023). A key ingredient in the roll-out of LLMs is the
fine-tuning step, in which the models are brought into
closer alignment with specific behavioral and normative
goals. When no adequately fine-tuned, LLMs may exhibit
undesirable and unpredictable behavior, including the
fabrication of facts or the generation of biased and toxic
content (Perez et al., 2022; Ganguli et al., 2022). The current
approach towards mitigating such problems is to make use
of reinforcement learning based on human assessments. In

• Reward overfitting: During the training of the reward
model, it has been observed that the test cross-entropy
loss of the reward model can deteriorate after one epoch
of training (Ouyang et al., 2022).
• Reward overoptimization: When training the policy
model to maximize the reward predicted by the learned
model, it has been observed that the ground-truth
reward can increase when the policy is close in KL
divergence to the initial policy, but decrease with
continued training (Gao et al., 2023).

1
Department of EECS, University of California, Berkeley.
Correspondence to: Banghua Zhu <banghua@berkeley.edu>.

In this paper, we investigate these issues in depth. We
simplify the formulation of RLHF to a multi-armed bandit
problem and make attempt to explain and reproduce the
overfitting and overoptimization phenomena. We leverage

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

