Careful with that Scalpel: Improving Gradient Surgery with an EMA

Yu-Guan Hsieh 1 James Thornton 1 Eugene Ndiaye 1 Michal Klein 1 Marco Cuturi 1 Pierre Ablin 1

Abstract

est, such as performance on another dataset, robustness, or
model calibration. In all of these cases, one aims to train the
neural network by minimizing a training loss Lmain while
keeping an eye on an auxiliary metric or loss Laux .

Beyond minimizing a single training loss, many
deep learning estimation pipelines rely on an auxiliary objective to quantify and encourage desirable properties of the model (e.g. performance
on another dataset, robustness, agreement with
a prior). Although the simplest approach to incorporating an auxiliary loss is to sum it with
the training loss as a regularizer, recent works
have shown that one can improve performance by
blending the gradients beyond a simple sum; this
is known as gradient surgery. We cast the problem as a constrained minimization problem where
the auxiliary objective is minimized among the set
of minimizers of the training loss. To solve this
bilevel problem, we follow a parameter update
direction that combines the training loss gradient
and the orthogonal projection of the auxiliary gradient to the training gradient. In a setting where
gradients come from mini-batches, we explain
how, using a moving average of the training loss
gradients, we can carefully maintain this critical
orthogonality property. We demonstrate that our
method, Bloop, can lead to much better performances on NLP and vision experiments than other
gradient surgery methods without EMA.

Optimization trade-offs. Our focus in this paper is on
methods that achieve the best possible trade-off between
training and auxiliary losses, using a hyper-parameter λ ≥ 0
to control that trade-off: λ = 0 corresponds to training
on Lmain exclusively, while increasing λ usually decreases
Laux at the expense of Lmain . Using the auxiliary loss as a
regularizer results in the mixed training method, arguably
the simplest approach to control that trade-off:
min Lmain (θ) + λLaux (θ).
θ

Mixed training, however, runs into optimization issues if the
directions of the largest curvature of the training loss and
that of the auxiliary loss are not aligned — see Section 3.3
for an example.
The Simple Bilevel Approach. Provided that modern deep
neural networks are inherently overparameterized, leading
to multiple minimizers, an ideal solution would be to find
the minimizer of Lmain that achieves the smallest auxiliary
loss. This corresponds to solving Equation 1 in the limit
where λ → 0, and can also be expressed as the following
simple bilevel problem (Dempe et al., 2010):
min Laux (θ) s.t. θ ∈ arg min Lmain (θ).

1. Introduction

to:

Pierre

(2)

Problem (2) is a constrained optimization problem on the
set of minimizers of Lmain , a high-dimensional set with
no clear structure, except when Lmain is convex, in which
case several provably convergent approaches have been proposed (Sabach & Shtern, 2017; Gong & Liu, 2021; Cao
et al., 2023). However, to the best of our knowledge, these
methods have not been applied to training neural networks,
where these convergence guarantees do not hold.

Overparameterized neural networks trained on large datasets
admit multiple solutions with the same optimal training loss
(Cooper, 2018; Li et al., 2018). Although these parameters
may seem equivalent when viewed through their training
loss, they result in different functions, which may exhibit
starkly different behaviors on unseen data points. Practitioners are usually interested in generalization — one would
rather use the network with lower test loss between two
networks — but there are countless other metrics of inter1
Apple.
Correspondence
<p ablin@apple.com>.

(1)

Connections to Multi-Task Learning. The problem of
simultaneously optimizing the main and auxiliary loss is
also a special case of multi-task learning (Caruana, 1997)
involving only two tasks. Many of the approaches proposed
to tackle this problem more efficiently rely on the idea of
gradient surgery, which stitches together and possibly modify the gradients of both losses when they disagree (Yu et al.,

Ablin

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

