Provable Multi-Task Representation Learning by Two-Layer ReLU Neural
Networks
Liam Collins 1 Hamed Hassani 2 Mahdi Soltanolkotabi 3 Aryan Mokhtari 1 Sanjay Shakkottai 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Recent empirical results have demonstrated huge successes
in pretraining large neural networks (NNs) on many tasks
with gradient-based algorithms (Crawshaw, 2020; Zhang
& Yang, 2021; Wang et al., 2023b). These works suggest
that the quality of the pretrained representation improves
with the number of pretraining tasks, yet this phenomenon
remains not well understood from a theoretical standpoint.
Specifically, the natural questions of why nonlinear NNs
learn effective feature representations when pretrained on
multiple tasks with gradient-based methods and how the
number of pretraining tasks affect the downstream performance of these representations remain largely unanswered.

An increasingly popular machine learning
paradigm is to pretrain a neural network (NN) on
many tasks offline, then adapt it to downstream
tasks, often by re-training only the last linear
layer of the network. This approach yields strong
downstream performance in a variety of contexts,
demonstrating that multitask pretraining leads to
effective feature learning. Although several recent
theoretical studies have shown that shallow NNs
learn meaningful features when either (i) they are
trained on a single task or (ii) they are linear, very
little is known about the closer-to-practice case
of nonlinear NNs trained on multiple tasks. In
this work, we present the first results proving that
feature learning occurs during training with a nonlinear model on multiple tasks. Our key insight
is that multi-task pretraining induces a pseudocontrastive loss that favors representations that
align points that typically have the same label
across tasks. Using this observation, we show
that when the tasks are binary classification tasks
with labels depending on the projection of the data
onto an r-dimensional subspace within the d ≫ rdimensional input space, a simple gradient-based
multitask learning algorithm on a two-layer ReLU
NN recovers this projection, allowing for generalization to downstream tasks with sample and
neuron complexity independent of d. In contrast,
we show that with high probability over the draw
of a single task, training on this single task cannot
guarantee to learn all r ground-truth features.

Significant progress has been made in theoretically understanding the dynamics of NNs trained with gradient-based
methods in recent years, especially in regards to proving that
shallow NNs can learn meaningful features when trained
with gradient descent and its variants (Damian et al., 2022;
Shi et al., 2022; Abbe & Sandon, 2020; Abbe et al., 2022;
Allen-Zhu et al., 2019a; Bai & Lee, 2019; Li et al., 2020;
Daniely & Malach, 2020; Barak et al., 2022; Telgarsky,
2022; Akiyama & Suzuki, 2022; Zhou et al., 2021). However, these results are limited to single-task settings, so they
cannot explain the improvements in model performance
seen by pretraining on many tasks. While a few studies
show the representation learning benefits of multi-task pretraining with gradient-based algorithms (Argyriou et al.,
2006; Thekumparampil et al., 2021; Collins et al., 2022b;a;
Saunshi et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2021; Chua et al., 2021;
Bullins et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2022), these analyses study
only linear models; it is not clear whether they can generalize to even simple non-linear NNs.
In this work, we aim to bridge this gap by analyzing the
training dynamics of a two-layer ReLU network pretrained
with a generic gradient-based multi-task learning algorithm
on many binary classification tasks. Following the aforementioned line of work, we suppose the existence of a groundtruth low-dimensional subspace that for all tasks preserves
all information in the input data relevant to its label. We ask
whether a variant of gradient descent applied to this multitask setting can learn a representation that projects the input
data onto the ground-truth subspace. Learning such a repre-

1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas, USA 2 Department
of Electrical and Systems Engineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA 3 Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, University of Southern California,
Los Angeles, California, USA. Correspondence to: Liam Collins
<liamc@utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

