Relaxing the Accurate Imputation Assumption in Doubly Robust Learning
for Debiased Collaborative Filtering

Haoxuan Li 1 Chunyuan Zheng 1 Shuyi Wang 2 Kunhan Wu 3 Hao Wang 4
Peng Wu 5 Zhi Geng 5 Xu Chen 6 Xiao-Hua Zhou 1

Abstract
Recommender system aims to recommend items
or information that may interest users based on
their behaviors and preferences. However, there
may be sampling selection bias in the data collection process, i.e., the collected data is not a representative of the target population. Many debiasing
methods are developed based on pseudo-labelings.
Nevertheless, the validity of these methods relies heavily on accurate pseudo-labelings (i.e., the
imputed labels), which is difficult to satisfy in
practice. In this paper, we theoretically propose
several novel doubly robust estimators that are
unbiased when either (a) the pseudo-labelings deviate from the true labels with an arbitrary userspecific inductive bias, item-specific inductive
bias, or a combination of both, or (b) the learned
propensities are accurate. We further propose a
propensity reconstruction learning approach that
adaptively updates the constraint weights using
an attention mechanism and effectively controls
the variance. Extensive experiments show that
our approach outperforms the state-of-the-art on
one semi-synthetic and three real-world datasets.

Figure 1. Inaccuracy of imputed ratings on the large scale industrial dataset K UAI R EC. The user (item)-side mean absolute error
(MAE) is the average difference between the imputed rating and
the true rating on all the observed interactions for user u (item i).

Yang et al., 2021; Saito and Nomura, 2022; Yang et al.,
2023; Wang et al., 2023c), and similar findings occur with
tasks such as post-view click-through & conversion rate
(CTCVR) prediction (Ma et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2022a),
and uplift modeling (Saito et al., 2019; Sato et al., 2019;
2020). Since the labels are observable only in the collected
data and missing in the target population, this poses a great
challenge to achieve unbiased learning (Wang et al., 2020a).
To address this problem, the error-imputation-based (EIB)
methods (Hernández-Lobato et al., 2014) first impute the
missing labels and then train the prediction model using both
the observed labels and pseudo-labelings. However, as the
pseudo-labeling model is trained with observed data while
deployed in the missing data, it is difficult to obtain accurate
pseudo-labelings, leading to sub-optimal performance (Dai
et al., 2022). The inverse-propensity-scoring (IPS) methods
inversely weight the prediction error for each sample with
observed rating using the propensity of collecting user rating (Schnabel et al., 2016), but it is empirically difficult to
set proper propensity scores and theoretically has greater
variance (Saito, 2020). By utilizing both pseudo-labeling
and propensity models, the doubly robust (DR) methods are
proposed to weaken the unbiasedness condition of the EIB
and IPS estimators (Wang et al., 2019), with many enhanced
DR approaches developed (Guo et al., 2021; Dai et al., 2022;
Wang et al., 2022a; Song et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023a; Zhang
et al., 2024). The advantage of DR estimators is attributed
to the property of double robustness, i.e., it is unbiased if
either the learned propensities or the pseudo-labelings are
accurate. We summarize the unbiasedness condition of the
previous debiasing estimators in Table 1 (see Appendix A

1. Introduction
By analyzing users’ historical behaviors and preferences,
recommender system (RS) predicts and recommends items
or information that users may like (Rui et al., 2022; Li et al.,
2024). However, as users are free to choose which item to
rate, the collected data is always not a representative of the
target population (or inference space) (Schnabel et al., 2016;
1

Peking University 2 University of Pennsylvania 3 Carnegie
Mellon University 4 Zhejiang University 5 Beijing Technology
and Business University 6 Renmin University of China. Correspondence to: Xu Chen, Xiao-Hua Zhou <xu.chen@ruc.edu.cn,
azhou@math.pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

