Recovering the Pre-Fine-Tuning Weights of Generative Models

Eliahu Horwitz 1 Jonathan Kahana 1 Yedid Hoshen 1

Abstract

To illustrate our setting, let us consider a Large Language
Model (LLM). While the pre-trained version of the LLM
exhibits advanced language understanding and generation
capabilities, it is unaligned with human preference and is
often deemed unsafe (Ouyang et al., 2022; Touvron et al.,
2023). These unsafe models can be used for example to get
instructions for building a bomb or other malicious activities.
To improve instruction following and enhance safety, model
creators perform an alignment fine-tuning stage. Usually,
only the aligned version of the LLM is published, and the
recovery of the original Pre-FT unsafe weights, is implicitly
assumed to be impossible. While for existing models the
recovery of the Pre-FT weights poses a security and safety
vulnerability; for future superhuman models, it may lead to
catastrophic consequences.

The dominant paradigm in generative modeling
consists of two steps: i) pre-training on a largescale but unsafe dataset, ii) aligning the pretrained model with human values via fine-tuning.
This practice is considered safe, as no current
method can recover the unsafe, pre-fine-tuning
model weights. In this paper, we demonstrate
that this assumption is often false. Concretely, we
present Spectral DeTuning, a method that can recover the weights of the pre-fine-tuning model using a few low-rank (LoRA) fine-tuned models. In
contrast to previous attacks that attempt to recover
pre-fine-tuning capabilities, our method aims to
recover the exact pre-fine-tuning weights. Our
approach exploits this new vulnerability against
large-scale models such as a personalized Stable Diffusion and an aligned Mistral. The code
is available at https://vision.huji.ac.
il/spectral_detuning/.

Motivated by the above, we propose the task of Pre-FineTuning Weight Recovery. In this paper, we tackle this task in
cases where multiple LoRA fine-tuned flavors of the same
source model are available. We present an overview of our
setting in Figure 1. This task is particularly timely due to
two trends: i) Popular foundation models come in multiple
flavors. E.g., LLaMA 2, Code LLaMA, Code LLaMAPython, Code LLaMA-Instruct. ii) LoRA is becoming a
key component for creating SoTA models (Lin et al., 2024;
Sidahmed et al., 2024). These two trends have not yet
merged, i.e, we are not aware of multi-flavored foundational
models that use LoRA alignment fine-tuning. Here, we
bring to the attention of the community the risks and perils
involved in merging these trends.

1. Introduction
A key paradigm in deep learning is to first pre-train a foundation model (Touvron et al., 2023; Roziere et al., 2023)
on a large, general-purpose dataset and then fine-tune the
model for a specific task. Fine-tuning is used for critical
applications including model safety (Perez et al., 2022),
alignment to human preferences and values (Ouyang et al.,
2022; Christiano et al., 2017; Rafailov et al., 2023), providing privacy guarantees (Yu et al., 2021), personalization
(Ruiz et al., 2023a), and more (Burns et al., 2023; Zhang
et al., 2023a). In this paper, we identify a vulnerability
in fine-tuned models, wherein the pre-fine-tuning (Pre-FT)
weights, i.e., the model weights before the fine-tuning stage,
can be recovered using a small number of models fine-tuned
via low-rank adaptation (LoRA) (Hu et al., 2021).

We present Spectral DeTuning, a method that recovers the
Pre-FT weights with remarkably high precision using iterative low-rank matrix factorization. To enhance optimization
stability and accelerate convergence, we introduce a rank
scheduler that progressively increases the rank of the factorized matrices during optimization. A key distinction from
prior attacks on model alignment (Carlini et al., 2023; Wei
et al., 2023; Zou et al., 2023) is that Spectral DeTuning
prioritizes restoring the exact Pre-FT weights over Pre-FT
functionalities. It also does not require running inference
through the model. This is advantageous as i) it does not
require training data ii) it is highly parallelizable, e.g., on a
cluster of desktop GPUs such as RTX2080 our method can
recover the Pre-FT weights of a Mistral-7B model in under
five minutes.

1

School of Computer Science and Engineering
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel. Correspondence to:
Eliahu Horwitz <eliahu.horwitz@mail.huji.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

