Deep Neural Room Acoustics Primitive

Yuhang He 1 Anoop Cherian 2 Gordon Wichern 2 Andrew Markham 1

Abstract

tics (Long, 2014), audio-based virtual and augmented reality (Verron et al., 2010; Brinkman et al., 2015) and geometric room structure estimation from audio (Kuster, 2008).
One prominent primitive is to identify the sound propagation
dynamics underpinning the room that models the interaction
of sound waves with entities in the room during its propagation from a source position to a receiver position. Due to the
nature of sound waves, this interaction between sound and
the room is highly complex and is sensitive to: (i) the sound
source and receiver positions, (ii) room architecture, (iii)
geometric layout, including furniture placement, and (iv)
material properties. Further, sound waves undergo reflection,
scattering, and absorption, complicating their dynamics. All
of these challenges make quantifying and measuring sound
propagation primitives laborious and difficult, especially
using classical methods (Szöke et al., 2019).

The primary objective of room acoustics is to
model the intricate sound propagation dynamics
from any source to receiver position within enclosed 3D spaces. These dynamics are encapsulated in the form of a 1D room impulse response (RIR). Precisely measuring RIR is difficult due to the complexity of sound propagation
encompassing reflection, diffraction, and absorption. In this work, we propose to learn a continuous neural room acoustics field that implicitly
encodes all essential sound propagation primitives for each enclosed 3D space, so that we can
infer the RIR corresponding to arbitrary sourcereceiver positions unseen in the training dataset.
Our framework, dubbed DeepNeRAP, is trained in
a self-supervised manner without requiring direct
access to RIR ground truth that is often needed
in prior methods. The key idea is to design two
cooperative acoustic agents to actively probe a 3D
space, one emitting and the other receiving sound
at various locations. Analyzing this sound helps
to inversely characterize the acoustic primitives.
Our framework is well-grounded in the fundamental physical principles of sound propagation,
including reciprocity and globality, and thus is
acoustically interpretable and meaningful. We
present experiments on both synthetic and realworld datasets, demonstrating superior quality in
RIR estimation against closely related methods.

The acoustic effects of a room scene can be well modeled
as a linear time-invariant (LTI) system (Gardner, 1998) and
thus the sound propagation primitive can be expressed as
a one dimensional room impulse response (RIR) function.
The received signal can then be obtained by convolving the
source sound with the RIR. Due to the complex nature of
sound propagation as described above, the RIR is extremely
nonsmooth and arbitrarily long in the time domain. Existing
RIR measurement methods either require one to physically
collect a discrete RIR in the room scene by sending an
impulse sound (e.g., starter pistol, balloon exploding, etc.)
or chirp sound at one position and recording the response
at another, or to approximate the RIR using geometry or
wave-based approaches (Savioja & Svensson, 2015; Bilbao
& Hamilton, 2017). While, the former approach based on
physical measurements is inefficient and unscalable (e.g., an
RIR is available only at the measured locations), the latter
approximation methods are computationally expensive and
require detailed knowledge of the room scene acoustics.
Recent works (Ratnarajah et al., 2022; Luo et al., 2022;
Steinmetz et al., 2021) propose to learn RIRs with deep
neural networks in a fully supervised manner, but assume
access to massive RIR datasets and evaluate in small room
scene (Straub et al., 2019) settings.

1. Introduction
Acoustically characterizing an enclosed room scene (Kuttruff, 1979) demands estimating all the acoustic primitives related to the physical space and is key in enabling a
wide range of applications, including architectural acousWork done while YH was interning at MERL. 1 Department of
Computer Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK 2 Mitsubishi
Electric Research Labs, Cambridge, MA, US. Correspondence to:
Yuhang He <yuhang.he@cs.ox.ac.uk>.

In this work, we take a fresh look at the sound propagation primitive estimation problem. Given the challenge in
directly deriving the sound propagation primitive, we propose an indirect framework for which data is much more

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

