Box Facets and Cut Facets of Lifted Multicut Polytopes

Lucas Fabian Naumann 1 Jannik Irmai 1 Shengxian Zhao 1 2 Bjoern Andres 1 2
xf

Abstract
0

The lifted multicut problem has diverse applications in the field of computer vision. Exact algorithms based on linear programming require an
understanding of lifted multicut polytopes. Despite recent progress, two fundamental questions
about these polytopes have remained open: Which
lower box inequalities define facets, and which
cut inequalities define facets? In this article, we
answer the first question by establishing conditions that are necessary, sufficient and efficiently
decidable. Toward the second question, we show
that deciding facet-definingness of cut inequalities is NP-hard. This completes the analysis of
canonical facets of lifted multicut polytopes.

e2

e1

0

1

0

f
0

1
0

1

1

1

1
1

x e2

x e1

Figure 1. Depicted on the left is a graph G = (V, E) with E =
b = (V, E ∪ F ) of G with F =
{e1 , e2 } and an augmentation G
{f }. Depicted in the middle are the four feasible solutions to the
lifted multicut problem with respect to G and b
G. Depicted on the
right is the lifted multicut polytope ΞGGb . The figure is adopted
from Andres et al. (2023).

time steps, a cluster represents the time-continuous track
of an object moving through time, and variables for nonneighboring nodes are used to reward similar occurrences
apart in time being in the same cluster, i.e. being connected
by a path of edges E whose variables get assigned 0 (Tang
et al., 2017). For the special case of no variables corresponding to non-neighboring nodes (F = ∅), the lifted multicut
problem specializes to the multicut problem (Deza et al.,
1992; Chopra & Rao, 1993) and the correlation clustering
problem (Bansal et al., 2004; Demaine et al., 2006).

1. Introduction
The lifted multicut problem (Keuper et al., 2015) is a combinatorial optimization problem whose feasible solutions
relate one-to-one to the clusterings of a graph. A clustering
or decomposition of a graph G = (V, E) is a partition Π of
the node set V such that for every U ∈ Π the subgraph of G
induced by U is connected. Horňáková et al. (2017) cast the
lifted multicut problem in the form of a binary linear program in which costs are associated to binary variables xuw
that indicate for pairs of distinct nodes u, w ∈ V whether
these nodes are in the same cluster, xuw = 0, or in distinct
clusters, xuw = 1.

In the following, we formally introduce the described binary
linear program formulation of the lifted multicut problem:
Definition 1.1. (Horňáková et al., 2017, Def. 9) For any
b =
connected graph G = (V, E), any augmentation G
(V, E ∪ F ) with E ∩ F = ∅, and any c ∈ RE∪F , the
instance of the (minimum cost) lifted multicut problem has
the form
(
)
X
min
ce xe x ∈ XGGb
(1)

Such variables are introduced for neighboring nodes
(elements of E), but also for some non-neighboring nodes
(elements of F , formally defined later) which allows to reward or penalize nodes being in the same cluster without
changing the set of feasible clusterings. This property is
employed, for example, in multiple object tracking, where
nodes V represent object occurrences at different time steps,
edges E only occur between occurrences in consecutive

e∈E∪F

with XGGb the set of all x ∈ {0, 1}E∪F that satisfy the
following linear inequalities that we discuss in Section 3:
X
∀C ∈ cycles(G) ∀e ∈ EC : xe ≤
xe′
(2)
e′ ∈EC \{e}

1

Faculty of Computer Science, TU Dresden 2 Center for Scalable Data Analytics and AI, Dresden/Leipzig. Correspondence to:
Bjoern Andres <bjoern.andres@tu-dresden.de>.

∀uw ∈ F ∀P ∈ uw-paths(G) : xuw ≤

X

xe

(3)

e∈EP

∀uw ∈ F ∀δ ∈ uw-cuts(G) : 1 − xuw ≤

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

X
(1 − xe ) .
e∈δ

(4)
1

