A Neural-Preconditioned Poisson Solver for
Mixed Dirichlet and Neumann Boundary Conditions

Kai Weixian Lan 1 Elias Gueidon 2 Ayano Kaneda 3 Julian Panetta 1 Joseph Teran 1

Abstract

metric positive definite and sparse systems of equations are
notoriously ill-conditioned. Fast Fourier Transforms (Cooley & Tukey, 1965) are optimal for these problems when
discretized on trivial geometric domains, but they are not
applicable for practical domain shapes. Direct methods
like Cholesky factorization (Golub & Loan, 2012) resolve
conditioning issues but suffer from loss of sparsity/fill-in
and are prohibitively costly in practice when per-time-step
refactoring is necessary (e.g., with changing domain shape
or coefficients). Iterative methods like preconditioned conjugate gradient (PCG) (Saad, 2003) and multigrid (Brandt,
1977) can achieve good performance, but an optimal preconditioning strategy is not generally available. Though
multigrid preconditioners can guarantee modest iteration
counts, computational overhead associated with solver creation and other per-iteration costs can dominate runtimes
in practice. This is especially true for problems posed on
evolving domains, where multigrid hierarchies must be rebuilt at each time step, and for nonlinear problems that require per-iteration rebuilds. Unfortunately, there is no clear
algorithmic solution.

We introduce a neural-preconditioned iterative
solver for Poisson equations with mixed boundary conditions. Typical Poisson discretizations
yield large, ill-conditioned linear systems. Iterative solvers can be effective for these problems,
but only when equipped with powerful preconditioners. Unfortunately, effective preconditioners like multigrid (Brandt, 1977) require costly
setup phases that must be re-executed every time
domain shapes or boundary conditions change,
forming a severe bottleneck for problems with
evolving boundaries. In contrast, we present a
neural preconditioner trained to efficiently approximate the inverse of the discrete Laplacian
in the presence of such changes. Our approach
generalizes to domain shapes, boundary conditions, and grid sizes outside the training set. The
key to our preconditioner’s success is a novel,
lightweight neural network architecture featuring
spatially varying convolution kernels and supporting fast inference. We demonstrate that our
solver outperforms state-of-the-art methods like
algebraic multigrid as well as recently proposed
neural preconditioners on challenging test cases
arising from incompressible fluid simulations.

Recently, machine learning techniques have shown
promise for these problems, eliminating setup costs at runtime by training a general-purpose solver once on a diverse set of systems offline. Tompson et al. (2017) showed
that a network (FluidNet) can be used to generate an approximate inverse across domain shapes, albeit only with
Neumann boundary conditions. Kaneda et al. (2023) developed the Deep Conjugate Direction Method (DCDM),
which improves on FluidNet by applying a similar network
structure as a preconditioner for an orthogonalized gradient
descent on the matrix norm of the error, enabling highly
accurate solutions to be obtained. While DCDM is similar to PCG, the nonlinearity of their approximate inverse
required a generalization of the PCG method. Also, their
approach only supports Neumann pressure boundary conditions. We build on the DCDM approach and generalize
it to domains with mixed Dirichlet and Neumann boundary conditions. Notably, these problems arise in simulating
free-surface liquid flows. DCDM fails on these cases, yet
we show that a novel, lighter-weight network structure can
be used effectively in its iterative formalism. In contrast to
DCDM, our approximate inverse is a linear operator and

1. Introduction
The Poisson equation is ubiquitous in scientific computing:
it governs a wide array of physical phenomena, arises as a
subproblem in many numerical algorithms, and serves as a
model problem for the broader class of elliptic PDEs. Solving its discretized form, a linear system of equations involving the discrete Laplacian matrix, is the bottleneck in many
engineering and scientific applications. These large, sym1

University of California, Davis, USA 2 University of California, Los Angeles, USA 3 Waseda University, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Kai Weixian Lan <kai.weixian.lan@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

