Graph Neural Stochastic Diffusion for Estimating Uncertainty in Node
Classification
Xixun Lin 1 Wenxiao Zhang 2 Fengzhao Shi 1 Chuan Zhou 3 4 Lixin Zou 5 Xiangyu Zhao 6 Dawei Yin 7
Shirui Pan 8 Yanan Cao 1 4

Abstract

et al., 2020b). There has been a fair amount of GNNs in
recent years, and the core operation is to design a powerful graph propagation mechanism where each node representation is iteratively updated by aggregating neighbour
information (Kipf & Welling, 2017; Hamilton et al., 2017;
Veličković et al., 2018; Balcilar et al., 2021).

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have advanced
the state of the art in various domains. Despite
their remarkable success, the uncertainty estimation of GNN predictions remains under-explored,
which limits their practical applications especially
in risk-sensitive areas. Current works suffer from
either intractable posteriors or inflexible prior
specifications, leading to sub-optimal empirical
results. In this paper, we present graph neural
stochastic diffusion (GNSD), a novel framework
for estimating predictive uncertainty on graphs
by establishing theoretical connections between
GNNs and stochastic partial differential equation.
GNSD represents a GNN-based parameterization
of the proposed graph stochastic diffusion equation which includes a Q-Wiener process to model
the stochastic evolution of node representations.
GNSD introduces a drift network to guarantee accurate prediction and a stochastic forcing network
to model the propagation of epistemic uncertainty
among nodes. Extensive experiments are conducted on multiple detection tasks, demonstrating
that GNSD yields the superior performance over
existing strong approaches.

Despite their superior predictive performance, GNNs
are poor at estimating uncertainty in their decision process (Stadler et al., 2021). Uncertainty estimation (Gal
& Ghahramani, 2016b; Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017; Malinin & Gales, 2018), which quantifies prediction confidence
for enabling neural networks to know what they do not
know, is an important requirement for deploying models on
safety-critical areas. According to different source types,
uncertainty is usually divided into aleatoric uncertainty and
epistemic uncertainty (Gal et al., 2016). Aleatoric uncertainty represents the natural randomness inherent in the data
distribution, such as label noise and class overlap; while
epistemic uncertainty refers to the uncertainty in model parameters caused by the lack of observation data, which can
be explained away given enough data (Kendall & Gal, 2017;
Kong et al., 2020; Charpentier et al., 2020).
Most works of uncertainty estimation concentrate on i.i.d.
data (Van Amersfoort et al., 2020; Abdar et al., 2021; Gawlikowski et al., 2023). The problem of estimating uncertainty for graphs is more complex, since interdependent
nodes may follow different input feature distributions, and
their predictive uncertainties are also significantly influenced by the graph structure. Previous approaches of uncertainty estimation over graphs follow the ensemble-based or
Bayesian-based learning manner (Lakshminarayanan et al.,
2017; Ng et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2019), which are high
computationally demanding. Current focus has shifted to
deterministic uncertainty estimation for improving model
efficiency. Nonetheless, they have to pre-specify prior distributions for performing posterior updates which degrade
model flexibility and empirical performance (Zhao et al.,
2020; Stadler et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
Nowadays graph neural networks (GNNs) have become a
standard model architecture of learning graph-structured
data, which benefit a series of real-world applications, e.g.,
molecular prediction (Stärk et al., 2022), recommender
system (Ying et al., 2018) and traffic forecasting (Wang
1
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 Beijing Jiaotong University 3 Academy of Mathematics and
Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences 4 School of Cyber
Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 5 Wuhan University 6 City University of Hong Kong 7 Baidu Inc. 8 Griffith University. Correspondence to: Yanan Cao <caoyanan@iie.ac.cn>.

In this paper, we introduce graph neural stochastic diffusion
(GNSD), a novel framework of estimating uncertainty on
graphs from the perspective of stochastic dynamical system.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

