Sign Gradient Descent-based Neuronal Dynamics:
ANN-to-SNN Conversion Beyond ReLU Network

Hyunseok Oh 1 Youngki Lee 1

Abstract
Spiking neural network (SNN) is studied in multidisciplinary domains to (i) enable order-ofmagnitudes energy-efficient AI inference and (ii)
computationally simulate neuroscientific mechanisms. The lack of discrete theory obstructs the
practical application of SNN by limiting its performance and nonlinearity support. We present a
new optimization-theoretic perspective of the discrete dynamics of spiking neurons. We prove that
a discrete dynamical system of simple integrateand-fire models approximates the subgradient
method over unconstrained optimization problems. We practically extend our theory to introduce a novel sign gradient descent (signGD)based neuronal dynamics that can (i) approximate diverse nonlinearities beyond ReLU and (ii)
advance ANN-to-SNN conversion performance
in low time steps. Experiments on large-scale
datasets show that our technique achieves (i) stateof-the-art performance in ANN-to-SNN conversion and (ii) is the first to convert new DNN
architectures, e.g., ConvNext, MLP-Mixer, and
ResMLP. We publicly share our source code at
www.github.com/snuhcs/snn signgd .

(a) Conceptual diagram of our technical contributions.

(b) Our signGD-based spiking neuron enables the conversion of
neural networks that use nonlinear operators other than ReLU.
Figure 1. In this paper, we (i) mathematically connect the neuronal
dynamics of integrate-and-fire models with the optimization dynamics of subgradient method, (ii) extend the theory to design a
new spiking neuron model that can approximate arbitrary elementwise tensor operators, and (iii) use our neuron model to expand
ANN-to-SNN conversion beyond ReLU networks (Fig. 1(b)).

Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. Correspondence to:
Youngki Lee <youngki.lee@gmail.com>.

neural network (ANN) in which its neuron models closely
mimic neuroscientific mechanisms (Schuman et al., 2022).
In detail, the spiking neuron, the central processing unit of
SNN, (i) processes non-linearity with an internal dynamical
system and (ii) communicates the information in the form of
a spike train, a time series of short binary electrical pulses.
These key characteristics of SNN are practically leveraged
to develop extremely efficient AI algorithms (Schuman et al.,
2022). For example, SNN inference is orders-of-magnitude
more energy-efficient than the same-architecture DNNs,
e.g., 35-560× less on VGG (Bu et al., 2022) and 280×
less on YOLO (Kim et al., 2020). Discretization of spiking
neuronal dynamics is thus pivotal to both (i) practically implement SNN for real-world applications and (ii) simulate
brain mechanisms with SNN. However, the theoretical understanding of SNN remains unclear (Zhang & Zhou, 2022),
especially regarding its discrete neuronal dynamics.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

The lack of discrete theory obstructs the practical application of SNN by constraining its inference accuracy and
nonlinearity support. Building a high-performance SNN is

1. Introduction
Understanding how a biological neuron processes information has been a milestone of both neuroscience and efficient
artificial intelligence (Christensen et al., 2021; Furber et al.,
2014b; Kasabov, 2014). Spiking neural network (SNN) is
widely studied to get new insights on the information dynamics of the brain (Ghosh-Dastidar & Adeli, 2009; Furber et al.,
2014b). SNN is a biologically plausible type of artificial
1

1

