LSEnet: Lorentz Structural Entropy Neural Network for
Deep Graph Clustering

Li Sun 1 Zhenhao Huang 1 Hao Peng 2 Yujie Wang 1 Chunyang Liu 3 Philip S. Yu 4

Abstract

2

2
1

6

Graph clustering is a fundamental problem in machine learning. Deep learning methods achieve
the state-of-the-art results in recent years, but they
still cannot work without predefined cluster numbers. Such limitation motivates us to pose a more
challenging problem of graph clustering with unknown cluster number. We propose to address
this problem from a fresh perspective of graph
information theory (i.e., structural information).
In the literature, structural information has not yet
been introduced to deep clustering, and its classic
definition falls short of discrete formulation and
modeling node features. In this work, we first
formulate a differentiable structural information
(DSI) in the continuous realm, accompanied by
several theoretical results. By minimizing DSI,
we construct the optimal partitioning tree where
densely connected nodes in the graph tend to have
the same assignment, revealing the cluster structure. DSI is also theoretically presented as a new
graph clustering objective, not requiring the predefined cluster number. Furthermore, we design
a neural LSEnet in the Lorentz model of hyperbolic space, where we integrate node features to
structural information via manifold-valued graph
convolution. Extensive empirical results on real
graphs show the superiority of our approach.

0

3

0
8

9

LSEnet
5

1

7
4
3
Graph

5

8

4

9

7
6
Hyperbolic partitioning tree

Figure 1. Overview. In hyperbolic space, the proposed LSEnet
learns a partitioning tree for node clustering without predefined K.

networks (Kipf & Welling, 2017; Velickovic et al., 2018),
deep graph clustering (Devvrit et al., 2022; Wang et al.,
2023) achieves remarkable success in recent years.
So far, deep graph clustering still cannot work without a predefined cluster number K, and thus one needs to correctly
predict the cluster number before clustering, which is often
impractical in real cases. Also, estimating cluster numbers
is nontrivial. Empirical methods such as Elbow or Bayesian
information criterion need to train the deep model repeatedly (Schubert, 2023), and computation cost is much too
expensive. For the clustering without graph structures, possible solutions free of K include Bayesian non-parametric
methods (Gershman & Blei, 2011), density-based models,
e.g., DBSCAN (Ester et al., 1996), and hierarchical clustering (Cohen-addad et al., 2019). However, they cannot
be directly applied to graphs owing to the inter-correlation
among the nodes. That is, the problem of graph clustering
with unknown cluster number largely remains open.

1. Introduction
Graph clustering aims to group the nodes into several clusters, and routinely finds itself in applications ranging from
biochemical analysis to community detection (Jia et al.,
2019; Liu et al., 2023c). With the advance of graph neural

In this work, we present a fresh perspective of information
theory. Stemming from Shannon entropy, structural information (Li & Pan, 2016) is formulated to measure the uncertainty on graphs. Minimizing the structural information,
an optimal partitioning tree is constructed to describe the
graph’s self-organization without the knowledge of cluster
number. It sheds light on the targeted problem but presents
several significant gaps to deep clustering in the meantime.
First and foremost, the clustering ability of structural entropy is still unclear. In the literature, structural information
has not yet been introduced to deep clustering, though it has
been receiving research attention recently (Liu et al., 2019;

1

North China Electric Power University, Beijing 102206, China
Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China 3 Didi Chuxing, Beijing, China 4 University of Illinois at Chicago, IL, USA. Correspondence to: Li Sun <ccesunli@ncepu.edu>, Hao Peng <penghao@buaa.edu.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

