A Theoretical Analysis of Backdoor Poisoning Attacks in Convolutional Neural
Networks
Boqi Li 1 Weiwei Liu 1

Abstract

et al., 2019) and dirty-label attacks (Gu et al., 2017; Chen
et al., 2017; Nguyen & Tran, 2021). The clean-label attacks
modify only the inputs, while the dirty-label attacks modify
both inputs and labels at the same time. The adversary adds
a small partition of poisoned data to the training set, and
the NN, well-trained on the poisoning training set, is consequently endowed with hidden backdoors. The backdoored
NN predicts all clean data as the same as a normal model
but misbehaves when a specific trigger pattern appears.

The rising threat of backdoor poisoning attacks
(BPAs) on Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) has
become a significant concern in recent years. In
such attacks, the adversaries strategically target
a specific class and generate a poisoned training
set. The neural network (NN), well-trained on
the poisoned training set, is able to predict any
input with the trigger pattern as the targeted label,
while maintaining accurate outputs for clean inputs. However, why the BPAs work remains less
explored. To fill this gap, we employ a dirty-label
attack and conduct a detailed analysis of BPAs
in a two-layer convolutional neural network. We
provide theoretical insights and results on the effectiveness of BPAs. Our experimental results on
two real-world datasets validate our theoretical
findings.

BPA, especially dirty-label attack, can successfully compromise a model by merely adding a small partition of poisoned data to the training set. The security of DNNs has
been widely studied from a theoretical perspective in recent
years (Xu & Liu, 2022; Ma et al., 2022; Zou & Liu, 2023).
However, the theoretical reasons behind the effectiveness
of BPA algorithms remain less explored. To fill this gap,
we investigate the dirty-label attacks in a two-layer convolutional neural network utilizing a multi-view data model
in this paper. To the best of our knowledge, this work is
the first to theoretically analyze the effectiveness of BPA
by studying the learning process in a convolutional neural
network.

1. Introduction
The security of DNNs has become a significant concern in
recent years (Zhang et al., 2019; Nguyen et al., 2023; Zhou
& Liu, 2023; Li & Liu, 2023). Most state-of-the-art models
require huge training data (Schmidt et al., 2018; Dosovitskiy et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2023b), but the training data
from unreliable data sources is vulnerable to data poisoning
attacks (Shafahi et al., 2018; Cinà et al., 2021; Koh et al.,
2022), for example, BPA. BPA (Gu et al., 2017; Jha et al.,
2023) is a training-time attack, which embeds backdoors
into the NN by providing poisoned data to users. In BPA, the
adversary firstly targets a class and generates the poisoned
data with a special pattern, called a trigger pattern. The
two primary categories of BPA algorithms include cleanlabel attacks (Shafahi et al., 2018; Turner et al., 2019; Barni

In this paper, we provide theoretical insights on backdoor
learning, which trains the model over poisoned data. Specifically, we analyze the outputs of a backdoored network, to
identify the sufficient conditions for successful BPA algorithms. We compare the update rules for standard and backdoor learning to understand the difference in the training
process over clean and poisoned data. Moreover, motivated
by the technique of Shen et al. (2022), we study the dynamic
of backdoor learning, and investigate the time cost associated with learning the main features and trigger patterns of
training data. We also show the effectiveness of dirty-label
attack. A formal theoretical result is presented regarding the
effectiveness of BPA. Our results indicate that the success of
BPA relies on three key components: the number of feature
vectors in the datasets, the norm ratio of trigger pattern and
feature vector, and the percentage of poisoned data in the
training set.

1

School of Computer Science, National Engineering Research
Center for Multimedia Software, Institute of Artificial Intelligence
and Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China. Correspondence to: Weiwei Liu <liuweiwei863@gmail.com>.

Empirically, we present experimental results on two realworld datasets to validate our theoretical insights and findings. Our analysis involves a comparison of the loss of

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

