DFlow: A Generative Model Combining Denoising AutoEncoder and
Normalizing Flow for High Fidelity Waveform Generation

Chenfeng Miao 1 Qingying Zhu 1 Minchuan Chen 1 Wei Hu 1 Zijian Li 2 Shaojun Wang 1 Jing Xiao 1

Abstract

models, NFs have many theoretical advantages, including
exact likelihood evaluation, efficient training and inference,
and controllable latent representation, making them especially attractive. Unfortunately, on many generation tasks,
the standard NFs generally do not have competitive generation performance against GAN-based models (Kong et al.,
2020; Lee et al., 2023; Brock et al., 2019) or other likelihood
models (Oord et al., 2016; Chen et al., 2021; Kong et al.,
2021; Ho et al., 2020). These other generative models, on
the other hand, also have pragmatic drawbacks over NFs.
For example, AR or diffusion models require multiple steps
to generate the output, while GAN models often suffer from
mode collapse when scaling up the model size (Lee et al.,
2023; Brock et al., 2019).

In this work, we present DFlow, a novel generative framework that combines Normalizing Flow
(NF) with a Denoising AutoEncoder (DAE), for
high-fidelity waveform generation. With a tactfully designed structure, DFlow seamlessly integrates the capabilities of both NF and DAE, resulting in a significantly improved performance compared to the standard NF models. Experimental results showcase DFlow’s superiority, achieving the
highest MOS score among the existing methods
on commonly used datasets and the fastest synthesis speed among all likelihood models. We further
demonstrate the generalization ability of DFlow
by generating high-quality out-of-distribution audio samples, such as singing and music audio.
Additionally, we extend the model capacity of
DFlow by scaling up both the model size and training set size. Our large-scale universal vocoder,
DFlow-XL, achieves highly competitive performance against the best universal vocoder, BigVGAN.

In this work, we aim to construct a powerful generative
framework that inherits the advantages of NFs while overcoming their limitations, thus further holding the potential
to surpass other generative models across various aspects.
For this purpose, we begin this work by investigating the
limitations of standard NF models. We find that NF-based
models are not robust to small input variations and often
encounter initial errors during inference. This inspires us to
enhance the NF model with a denoising autoencoder (DAE)
(Vincent et al., 2008). However, our preliminary results
indicate that simple integration of NF and DAE poses significant challenges to stable training. To address this issue,
we tactfully designed the model structure by having an autoregressive flow module acting as the denoising encoder,
constraining the primary flow to be volume-preserving, and
utilizing a feed-forward decoder. These design choices
empower our model, the DFlow, with stable training and
surprisingly improved performance. To summarize, DFlow
has the following advantages:

1. Introduction
Deep Generative Models (DGMs) have gained remarkable
success in the wave generation task in recent years. Starting with WaveNet (Oord et al., 2016), many DGMs have
flourished in the waveform generation field, including Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) (Kong et al., 2020;
Kumar et al., 2019; You et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2020) and
likelihood-based models, such as autoregressive (AR) models (Oord et al., 2016; Kalchbrenner et al., 2018; Valin &
Skoglund, 2019), normalizing flows (NF) (Kim et al., 2019;
Prenger et al., 2019), and diffusion models (Chen et al.,
2021; Kong et al., 2021). Compared with other generative

• Stable and efficient training. DFlow is trained from
scratch, using only one training stage. Moreover,
DFlow enjoys very efficient training thanks to its fully
convolutional and fully parallel structure.

1

Ping An Technology, Shanghai, China 2 Georgia Institute
of Technology, GA, US. Correspondence to: Chenfeng Miao
<miao chenfeng@126.com>.

• Fast synthesis. The synthesis speed of DFlow is significantly faster than the standard NF models. To the
best of our knowledge, DFlow sets a new benchmark
of synthesis speed among likelihood-based waveform
generation models and is approaching the speed of

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

