Robustness of Nonlinear Representation Learning

Simon Buchholz 1 2 Bernhard Schölkopf 1 2 3

Abstract

in identifiable settings, i.e., when, up to certain symmetries,
there is a unique model in the considered class generating
the observations. The simplest example of such a setting is
linear ICA where we observe linear mixtures of independent
variables. Identifiability of linear ICA was shown under
mild assumptions in Comon (1994). On the other hand, it
is well known that for general nonlinear functions ICA is
not identifiable (Hyvärinen & Pajunen, 1999). However,
recently, a flurry of results was proved that showed various
identifiability results under additional assumptions. Those
results rely among others on restrictions of the function
class (Taleb & Jutten, 1999; Horan et al., 2021; Gresele
et al., 2021; Buchholz et al., 2022; Kivva et al., 2022), multienvironment data (Khemakhem et al., 2020; Hyvarinen et al.,
2019), or interventional data (Ahuja et al., 2022; Squires
et al., 2023; von Kügelgen et al., 2023; Buchholz et al.,
2023), for a broader overview we refer to the recent survey
Hyvärinen et al. (2023).

We study the problem of unsupervised representation learning in slightly misspecified settings,
and thus formalize the study of robustness of nonlinear representation learning. We focus on the
case where the mixing is close to a local isometry
in a suitable distance and show based on existing
rigidity results that the mixing can be identified
up to linear transformations and small errors. In a
second step, we investigate Independent Component Analysis (ICA) with observations generated
according to x = f (s) = As + h(s) where A
is an invertible mixing matrix and h a small perturbation. We show that we can approximately
recover the matrix A and the independent components. Together, these two results show approximate identifiability of nonlinear ICA with almost
isometric mixing functions. Those results are a
step towards identifiability results for unsupervised representation learning for real-world data
that do not follow restrictive model classes.

While those results brought significant progress to the field
of Causal Representation Learning (CRL) they also generally require strong assumptions which will typically only
hold approximately for real data. Thus, it is of great importance to understand the various robustness properties of
such identifiability results. A first step in this direction is
the investigation of whether the latent variables can still be
approximately identified in settings where a small amount
of misspecification is allowed, i.e., when the model assumptions are mildly violated. Our analysis here focuses on
theoretical questions regarding identifiability in misspecified settings, but this has nevertheless profound implications
for the empirical side because it clarifies what assumptions
generate or do not generate useful learning signals that can
be exploited by suitable algorithms. This is particularly
important since there is still a lack of algorithms that uncover the true latent structure for complex data beyond toy
settings.

1. Introduction
One of the fundamental problems of data analysis is the
unsupervised learning of representations. Modern machine
learning algorithms excel at learning accurate representations of very complex data distributions. However, those
representations are, in general, not related to the true underlying latent factors of variations that generated the data.
Nevertheless, it is desirable to not only match the training
distribution, but also to identify the underlying causal structure because such representations are expected to improve
the downstream performance and improve explainability
and robustness (Schölkopf et al., 2021).
Generally, we can only hope to learn the ground truth model

In this work, we study the problem of approximate identifiability in a setting where the mixing function is close to
a local isometry and the latent variables are independent
(ICA). In particular, our results can be seen as a generalization of the identifiability result of Horan et al. (2021).
The main contributions of this work can be summarized as
follows:

1
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 2 Tübingen AI Center, Tübingen, Germany 3 ELLIS Institute, Tübingen, Germany. Correspondence to: Simon Buchholz
<sbuchholz@tue.mpg.de>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

