Federated Full-Parameter Tuning of Billion-Sized Language Models
with Communication Cost under 18 Kilobytes

Zhen Qin 1 * Daoyuan Chen 2 Bingchen Qian 2 Bolin Ding 2 Yaliang Li 2 Shuiguang Deng 1

Abstract

Table 1. Comparing federated tuning methods w.r.t. accuracy and
client-side costs, with computation cost referring to that incurred
by obtaining the latest model, d as the model parameter count, ν
as the ratio of trainable parameters in PEFT versus full-parameter
tuning, τ as the average number of local steps performed by each
client per round, r as the number of communication rounds, and
m as the number of active clients in each round. Minfer , Mpeft and
Mfull are peak memory usage for inference, PEFT with BP, and
full-parameter tuning with BP, respectively. For simplicity, we
denote ξ = Mpeft /Minfer and Ξ = Mfull /Minfer . Generally, ν ≪
1 < ξ < Ξ ≪ τ rm, and d is in billions for LLMs. FedKSeed
delivers top-tier performance across these aspects simultaneously.

Pre-trained large language models (LLMs) need
fine-tuning to improve their responsiveness to natural language instructions. Federated learning
offers a way to fine-tune LLMs using the abundant data on end devices without compromising
data privacy. Most existing federated fine-tuning
methods for LLMs rely on parameter-efficient
fine-tuning techniques, which may not reach the
performance height possible with full-parameter
tuning. However, federated full-parameter tuning
of LLMs is a non-trivial problem due to the immense communication cost. This work introduces
FedKSeed that employs zeroth-order optimization
with a finite set of random seeds. It significantly
reduces transmission requirements between the
server and clients to just a few random seeds and
scalar gradients, amounting to only a few thousand bytes, making federated full-parameter tuning of billion-sized LLMs possible on devices.
Building on it, we develop a strategy enabling
probability-differentiated seed sampling, prioritizing perturbations with greater impact on model
accuracy. Experiments across six scenarios with
various LLMs, datasets and data partitions demonstrate that our approach outperforms existing federated LLM fine-tuning methods in both communication efficiency and zero-shot generalization.

Approach

Acc.↑ Commu.↓ Mem.↓ Comput.↓

PEFT with BP
Full-param. with BP
Full-param. with ZOO
infinite seed-pool in uplink
infinite seed-pool in bi-link

⋆
⋆⋆
⋆⋆
⋆⋆
⋆⋆

O(νd) O(ξd)
O(d)
O(d) O(Ξd)
O(d)
O(d) O(d)
O(d)
O(d) O(d)
O(d)
O(1) O(d) O(τ rmd)

FedKSeed (|seed-pool|=K)

⋆⋆

O(1) O(d)

O(d)

2023a; Dong et al., 2023). While existing open datasets contribute to LLM tuning (Wang et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022),
the vast quantities of private data continuously generated
at end devices present an untapped opportunity for further
exploitation, especially as the reservoir of high-quality language data may become depleted in the future (Villalobos
et al., 2022). Federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al.,
2017; Kairouz et al., 2021) offers a privacy-protected way
to collaboratively tune LLMs with distributed data, which
has been explored by recent parameter-efficient fine-tuning
(PEFT) based works (Zhang et al., 2024; Babakniya et al.,
2023; Zhang et al., 2023; Che et al., 2023). Nonetheless,
PEFT is not a universal solution for LLM tuning, as it may
not consistently match the accuracy of full-parameter tuning
(Chen et al., 2022; Pu et al., 2023; Sun et al., 2023), particularly in FL scenarios where the statistically heterogeneous
client data diminish the effectiveness of PEFT (Babakniya
et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023). Considering full-parameter
tuning’s potential for higher accuracy, exploring its feasibility to LLMs with FL is promising.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) exhibit outstanding performance on various natural language tasks yet require finetuning to enhance their task responsiveness (Chen et al.,
*

Work done as an intern at Alibaba Group. 1 College
of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, China 2 Alibaba Group.
Correspondence to:
Yaliang Li <yaliang.li@alibaba-inc.com>, Shuiguang Deng
<dengsg@zju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

However, full-parameter tuning of billion-sized LLMs with
FL on devices is impractical with current technology, as
1

