Position: Benchmarking is Limited in Reinforcement Learning Research

Scott M. Jordan 1 Adam White 1 2 3 Bruno Castro da Silva 4 Martha White 1 2 3 Philip S. Thomas 4

Abstract

The widespread use of this experiment paradigm also propagated its issues. Many articles have pointed out problems
with reproducibility (Henderson et al., 2018; Islam et al.,
2017; Smith, 2018; Engstrom et al., 2020) or statistical
analyses (Colas et al., 2018; Agarwal et al., 2021). Other
works have examined methodological issues (Patterson et al.,
2023), showing that performance evaluation is sensitive to
subtle factors such as hyperparameter selection, score normalization, and the weight assigned to each task in an aggregate performance measure (Jordan et al., 2020; Whiteson
et al., 2011; Balduzzi et al., 2018; Eimer et al., 2023). These
works propose new methods to control for sources of variation in performance and make the process more rigorous,
including running more trials. However, these techniques
are not always straightforward and can complicate the process further. With increased complexity and cost, few have
adopted these more rigorous and expensive practices.

Novel reinforcement learning algorithms, or improvements on existing ones, are commonly justified by evaluating their performance on benchmark environments and are compared to an everchanging set of standard algorithms. However,
despite numerous calls for improvements, experimental practices continue to produce misleading
or unsupported claims. One reason for the ongoing substandard practices is that conducting
rigorous benchmarking experiments requires substantial computational time. This work investigates the sources of increased computation costs
in rigorous experiment designs. We show that conducting rigorous performance benchmarks will
likely have computational costs that are often prohibitive. As a result, we argue for using an additional experimentation paradigm to overcome the
limitations of benchmarking.

Instead of attempting to improve the standard benchmarking
process further, we question if it is computationally feasible
to have rigorous benchmarking procedures. We will show
that it is often prohibitively expensive to have benchmarking
procedure that can reliably detect statistically significant differences in algorithm performance. As a result it is unlikely
that benchmarking procedures by themselves will be able
to provide strong evidence for strong claims. An additional
empirical tool is needed to provide such support.

1. Introduction
Performance evaluation has long been standard practice in
reinforcement learning (RL) research. Performance, e.g.,
the expected cumulative reward on a particular problem, is
also often the primary highlight in highly publicized works
(Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2016; Vinyals et al., 2019;
Berner et al., 2019; Ecoffet et al., 2021; OpenAI et al., 2019).
In fact, according to our survey of NeurIPS 2022 RL papers
(see Appendix A), performance evaluation is the primary
form of experimentation, with 91% of empirical papers
using it. This emphasis on performance evaluation has
been systematised into a standard protocol for RL research:
propose a new algorithm, describe it, and demonstrate its
superiority to existing algorithms on benchmark problems.

Although cost is a significant limitation of benchmarking,
its primary limitation is that it can only identify that an
algorithm worked well, but not why. Developing the understanding of how or when an algorithm succeeds or fails is
crucial for making algorithmic improvements. Both these
limitations of benchmarking can be avoided by asking a
different type of question, specifically, one that is aimed
at understanding how an algorithm works. Borrowing the
terminology of Hooker (1995), we refer to scientific testing
as the process of using carefully controlled experiments to
understand an algorithm. In addition to producing different
insights, scientific testing is not limited to the same computational burdens as benchmarking. This is because the
set of interesting questions is not limited to running an algorithm many times on many environments. As such there
usually exist interesting questions for any computational
budget. These kind of experiments are not uncommon, they
are present in approximately 35% of papers in our survey,

1

University of Alberta 2 Canada Cifar AI Chair
Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute 4 University of Massachusetts. Correspondence to: Scott, Adam, or Martha
<[sjordan, amw8, whitem]@ualberta.ca>, Bruno or Phil
<[bsilva,pthomas]@cs.umass.edu>.
3

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

