Sparse Model Inversion:
Efficient Inversion of Vision Transformers for Data-Free Applications

Zixuan Hu 1 2 Yongxian Wei 1 Li Shen 3 4 Zhenyi Wang 5 Lei Li 1 Chun Yuan 1 Dacheng Tao 2

Abstract
Sparse Inversion Dense Inversion

mushroom

Model inversion, which aims to reconstruct the
original training data from pre-trained discriminative models, is especially useful when the original
training data is unavailable due to privacy, usage rights, or size constraints. However, existing
dense inversion methods attempt to reconstruct
the entire image area, making them extremely inefficient when inverting high-resolution images
from large-scale Vision Transformers (ViTs). We
further identify two underlying causes of this inefficiency: the redundant inversion of noisy backgrounds and the unintended inversion of spurious
correlations—a phenomenon we term “hallucination” in model inversion. To address these limitations, we propose a novel sparse model inversion
strategy, as a plug-and-play extension to speed up
existing dense inversion methods with no need for
modifying their original loss functions. Specifically, we selectively invert semantic foregrounds
while stopping the inversion of noisy backgrounds
and potential spurious correlations. Through both
theoretical and empirical studies, we validate the
efficacy of our approach in achieving significant
inversion acceleration (up to ×3.79) while maintaining comparable or even enhanced downstream
performance in data-free model quantization and
data-free knowledge transfer. Code is available at
https://github.com/Egg-Hu/SMI.

ladybird

(a) Redundant inversion
of noisy backgrounds

gardener mountain and lake
with sunflower
with bird

(b) Unintended inversion
of spurious correlations

Figure 1. The inefficiency of dense inversion (e.g., DeepInversion
(Yin et al., 2020)) arises from (a) redundant inversion of noisy
backgrounds, and (b) unintended inversion of spurious correlations
between foregrounds (green) and backgrounds (red), which are
improperly memorized in pre-trained models.

1. Introduction
Given a discriminative model f : x → y, model inversion
aims to reconstruct inputs x from a target output y. This
technique can be utilized to synthesize surrogate data when
the original dataset is unavailable due to constraints like privacy concerns, usage rights, or dataset size. An illustrative
application is data-free model quantization, which enables
the quantization of a full-precision model to a low-precision
one for lightweight deployment by using surrogate data inverted from the full-precision model (Li et al., 2023d; 2022b;
Xu et al., 2020; Qin et al., 2023). Another application is datafree knowledge transfer, which enables knowledge transfer
from a teacher model to a student model by using surrogate data inverted from the teacher model (Yin et al., 2020;
Fang et al., 2021; Chundawat et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 2021).
Overall, model inversion provides a practical solution in
data-constrained scenarios by synthesizing surrogate data
directly from the model itself.

1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, China 2 College of Computing
& Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 3 School of Cyber Science and Technology, Sun Yat-sen
University, Shenzhen, China 4 JD Explore Academy, China
5
University of Maryland, College Park, USA. Correspondence to: Li Shen <mathshenli@gmail.com>, Chun Yuan
<yuanc@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn>.

However, existing inversion methods (Zhu et al., 2021; Fang
et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022c; Yu et al., 2023; Braun
et al., 2023; Patel et al., 2023) share a “dense” characteristic,
meaning they attempt to reconstruct the entire image area.
This becomes extremely inefficient when inverting highresolution images from large-scale ViTs (see Tab. 1). As
shown in Fig. 1, we further reveal two underlying causes,

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

