BadPart: Unified Black-box Adversarial Patch Attacks
against Pixel-wise Regression Tasks

Zhiyuan Cheng 1 Zhaoyi Liu 2 Tengda Guo 2 Shiwei Feng 1 Dongfang Liu 3 Mingjie Tang 2 Xiangyu Zhang 1
Benign
Monocular Depth
Estimation
(MDE)

Abstract

Optical Flow
Estimation
(OFE)

Pixel-wise regression tasks (e.g., monocular depth
estimation (MDE) and optical flow estimation
(OFE)) have been widely involved in our daily
life in applications like autonomous driving, augmented reality and video composition. Although
certain applications are security-critical or bear
societal significance, the adversarial robustness
of such models are not sufficiently studied, especially in the black-box scenario. In this work,
we introduce the first unified black-box adversarial patch attack framework against pixel-wise
regression tasks, aiming to identify the vulnerabilities of these models under query-based black-box
attacks. We propose a novel square-based adversarial patch optimization framework and employ
probabilistic square sampling and score-based gradient estimation techniques to generate the patch
effectively and efficiently, overcoming the scalability problem of previous black-box patch attacks. Our attack prototype, named BAD PART, is
evaluated on both MDE and OFE tasks, utilizing
a total of 7 models. BAD PART surpasses 3 baseline methods in terms of both attack performance
and efficiency. We also apply BAD PART on the
Google online service for portrait depth estimation, causing 43.5% relative distance error with
50K queries. State-of-the-art (SOTA) countermeasures cannot defend our attack effectively.

Adversarial
Adversarial
Patch

Adversarial
Patch

Figure 1. Adversarial patch attack on pixel-wise regression tasks.

tinuous regression values for each pixel in the input image.
Examples of such tasks include monocular depth estimation
(MDE), optical flow estimation (OFE), surface normal estimation (SNE), among others. The evolution of deep learning
techniques has led to the development of numerous DNN
models that have demonstrated impressive performance on
these tasks, thereby enabling a variety of downstream applications such as autonomous driving, augmented reality,
video composition, and more. Given the extensive and
security-sensitive nature of some of these applications, it is
crucial to examine the adversarial robustness of these tasks.
Previous adversarial patch attacks on pixel-wise regression
models (Cheng et al., 2022; 2023) have primarily been conducted in a white-box setting, where the attacker has complete knowledge of the target model and can use gradientbased optimization to create the patch and compromise the
model. However, this white-box assumption is not always
feasible. For instance, models used in autonomous vehicles
are typically closed-source (Tesla). Moreover, some models
are provided as an online service, preventing users from accessing their internals model structures (Google3DPortrait).
In typical scenarios, black-box attacks are more realistic
and could pose a greater threat to the security of these tasks.
Existing black-box attack techniques are either based on
training a substitute model or iteratively querying the model.
In this study, we focus on the query-based approach as it
reduces the cost of model training and only assumes that the
attacker has access to the model output. This leads us to a
pivotal inquiry: “can we craft an adversarial patch to compromise the pixel-wise regression model through iterative
querying in a black-box manner?”

1. Introduction
Pixel-wise regression tasks represent a family of computer
vision tasks that employ images as input and generate con1

Department of Computer Science, Purdue University, West
Lafayette, USA 2 College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China 3 Department of Computer Engineering, Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, USA. Correspondence to: Zhiyuan Cheng <cheng443@purdue.edu>, Xiangyu Zhang <xyzhang@cs.purdue.edu>, Mingjie Tang <tangrock@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

