Relational DNN Verification With Cross Executional Bound Refinement
Debangshu Banerjee 1 Gagandeep Singh 1 2

Abstract

properties of DNNs. Despite advancements, current DNN
verification techniques can not handle relational properties
prevalent in practical scenarios. Most of the existing efforts
focus on verifying the absence of input-specific adversarial
examples within the local neighborhood of test inputs. However, recent studies (Li et al., 2019a) highlight the impracticality of attacks targeting individual inputs. In practical
attack scenarios (Liu et al., 2023; Li et al., 2019b;a), there
is a trend towards developing universal adversarial perturbations (UAPs) (Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2017) designed to
affect a significant portion of inputs from the training distribution. Since the same adversarial perturbation is applied to
multiple inputs, the executions on different perturbed inputs
are related, and exploiting the relationship between different executions is important for designing precise relational
verifiers. Existing DNN verifiers working on individual executions lack these capabilities and as a result, lose precision.
Beyond UAP verification, other relevant relational properties include measuring the worst-case hamming distance
for binary string classification and bounding the worst-case
absolute difference between the original number and the
number classified using a digit classifier where inputs perturbed with common perturbation.

We focus on verifying relational properties defined over deep neural networks (DNNs) such as
robustness against universal adversarial perturbations (UAP), certified worst-case hamming distance for binary string classifications, etc. Precise
verification of these properties requires reasoning about multiple executions of the same DNN.
However, most of the existing works in DNN verification only handle properties defined over single
executions and as a result, are imprecise for relational properties. Though few recent works for
relational DNN verification, capture linear dependencies between the inputs of multiple executions,
they do not leverage dependencies between the
outputs of hidden layers producing imprecise results. We develop a scalable relational verifier
RACoon that utilizes cross-execution dependencies at all layers of the DNN gaining substantial
precision over SOTA baselines on a wide range
of datasets, networks, and relational properties.

1. Introduction

Key challenges: For precise relational verification, we need
scalable algorithms to track the relationship between DNN’s
outputs across multiple executions. Although it is possible
to exactly encode DNN executions with piecewise linear
activation functions (e.g. ReLU) over input regions specified by linear inequalities as MILP (Mixed Integer Linear
Program), the corresponding MILP optimization problem
is computationally expensive. For example, MILP encoding of k executions of a DNN with nr ReLU activations
in the worst case introduces O(nr × k) integer variables.
Considering the cost of MILP optimization grows exponentially with the number of integer variables, even verifying
small DNNs w.r.t a relational property defined over k execution with MILP is practically infeasible. For scalability,
(Khedr & Shoukry, 2023) completely ignores the dependencies across executions and reduces relational verification
over k executions into k individual verification problems
solving them independently. SOTA relational verifier (Zeng
et al., 2023) first obtains provably correct linear approximations of the DNN with existing non-relational verifier (Xu
et al., 2020) without tracking any cross-execution dependencies then adds linear constraints at the input layer capturing

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have gained widespread
prominence across various domains, including safetycritical areas like autonomous driving (Bojarski et al., 2016)
or medical diagnosis (Amato et al., 2013), etc. Especially
in these domains, the decisions made by these DNNs hold
significant importance, where errors can lead to severe consequences. However, due to the black-box nature and highly
nonlinear behavior of DNNs, reasoning about them is challenging. Despite notable efforts in identifying and mitigating DNN vulnerabilities (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Madry
et al., 2018; Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2017; Potdevin et al.,
2019; Wu et al., 2023; Sotoudeh & Thakur, 2020), these
methods cannot guarantee safety. Consequently, significant
research has been dedicated to formally verifying the safety
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, USA 2 VMware Research, USA.
Correspondence to: Debangshu Banerjee <db21@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

