Advancing Dynamic Sparse Training by Exploring Optimization Opportunities

Jie Ji * 1 Gen Li * 1 Lu Yin 2 Minghai Qin 1 Geng Yuan 3 Linke Guo 1 Shiwei Liu 4 Xiaolong Ma 1

Abstract

Update weight

Dynamic Sparse Training (DST) has been effectively addressing the substantial training resource
requirements of increasingly large Deep Neural
Networks (DNNs). Characterized by its dynamic
“train-prune-grow” schedule during training, DST
implicitly develops a bi-level structure for training the weights while discovering a subnetwork
topology. However, such a structure is consistently overlooked by the current DST algorithms
for further optimization opportunities, and these
algorithms, on the other hand, solely optimize
the weights while determining masks heuristically. In this paper, we extensively study DST
algorithms and argue that the training scheme
of DST naturally forms a bi-level problem in
which the updating of weight and mask is interdependent. Based on this observation, we
introduce a novel efficient training framework
called BiDST, which for the first time, introduces
bi-level optimization methodology into dynamic
sparse training domain. Unlike traditional partialheuristic DST schemes, which suffer from suboptimal search efficiency for masks and miss
the opportunity to fully explore the topological
space of neural networks, BiDST excels at discovering excellent sparse patterns by optimizing
mask and weight simultaneously, resulting in maximum 2.62% higher accuracy, 2.1× faster execution speed, and 25× reduced overhead. Code
available at https://github.com/jjsrf/
BiDST-ICML2024.

w0

m0

Update mask

w1

Apply mask on weight

m1

w2

m2

w2

m2

(a) Original DST

w0

m0

w1

m1

(b) BiDST

Figure 1: Training and mask update comparison between
(a) original DST methods, and (b) the proposed BiDST.
ecosystem, fueling a wide range of challenging tasks (Ren
et al., 2015; Li et al., 2023a; Yin et al., 2023; Kirillov et al.,
2023). The arrival of the Artificial General Intelligence
(AGI) era coupled with extensive data has catalyzed the development of larger model sizes and an exponential increase
in computational requirements, resulting in a great challenge
for end-users when implementing edge intelligence locally.
A straightforward yet effective solution is to introduce sparsity into DNN training (Deng et al., 2020). As pointed out
in Bellec et al. (2018) and Mocanu et al. (2018), weight sparsity can be leveraged to potentially satisfy memory bound
along with training computation reduction, with notably
higher accuracy compared with directly training a shrinkedsize DNN model. In order to obtain such merits, a sparse
mask (i.e., a set of binary values that has the same shape
as weights and contains only 0 or 1) needs to be developed,
in which the 1s activate a portion of the original dense network by selecting weights (i.e., usually less than 30% of
the total weights) for training and inference. Under such
circumstances, finding the binary mask before or during
training surges as the key enabler to provide accurate and
efficient learning dynamics (Lee et al., 2019; Wang et al.,
2020b; Mocanu et al., 2018). Among a variety of methods,
the Dynamic Sparse Training (DST) (Mocanu et al., 2018;
Yin et al., 2024; Evci et al., 2020; Yuan et al., 2021; Li et al.,
2023b; Dai et al., 2023) has emerged with the ability to optimize weights and find the mask concurrently, and rapidly
becomes the prevailing approach owing to its high accuracy,
efficiency, and ease of implementation.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have transformed traditional
machine learning technology into an intelligent and scalable
*
Equal contribution 1 Clemson University, USA 2 University
of Aberdeen, Scotland 3 University of Georgia, USA
4
University of Oxford, England. Correspondence to: Jie Ji
<jji@g.clemson.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

In prior DST algorithms, a sparse mask keeps the entire
training phase following an “always sparse” regime, and is
1

