I/O Complexity of Attention, or How Optimal is FlashAttention?

Barna Saha * 1 Christopher Ye * 1

Abstract

1. Introduction

Attention is at the heart of the popular Transformer architecture, yet suffers from quadratic
time and memory complexity. In a recent significant development, FlashAttention shows that
the I/O complexity of attention is the true bottleneck in scaling Transformers. Given two levels
of memory hierarchy, a fast cache (e.g. GPU onchip SRAM) where computation happens and a
slow memory (e.g. GPU high-bandwidth memory) where the data resides, the I/O complexity
measures the number of accesses to the slow memory. FlashAttention is an I/O-aware algorithm
2 2
for self-attention that requires NMd I/O operations where N is the dimension of the attention
matrix, d is the head-dimension and M is the
size of cache. Naturally, to further reduce the
computational costs of Attention, the authors ask
the question: is FlashAttention’s I/O complexity
optimal for every value of M ? We resolve the
above question in its full generality by showing
an I/O complexity lower bound that matches the
upper bound provided by FlashAttention for any
values of M ≥ d2 within any constant factors.
Moreover, our lower bounds do not rely on using
combinatorial matrix multiplication for computing the attention matrix: even if one uses fast
matrix multiplication, the above I/O complexity
bounds cannot be improved. Further, we give a
better algorithm with lower I/O complexity for
M < d2 , and show that it is optimal for combinatorial algorithms. We do so by introducing
a new communication complexity protocol for
matrix compression, and connecting communication complexity to I/O complexity. We believe
this connection could be of independent interest
and will find more applications in proving I/O
complexity lower bounds in future.

Transformer models (Vaswani et al., 2017) have emerged
as the architecture of choice for a variety of applications
including natural language processing and computer vision. The self-attention module at the heart of the Transformer architecture requires quadratic time and memory
complexity. Thus despite their popularity, Transformers are
slow and memory-hungry. In a seminal paper, (Dao et al.,
2022) proposes FlashAttention, an IO-aware algorithm for
self-attention. Given two levels of memory hierarchy, a
fast cache (e.g. GPU on-chip SRAM) where computation
happens and a slow memory (e.g. GPU high-bandwidth
memory) where the data resides, the I/O complexity measures the number of accesses to the slow memory. (Dao
et al., 2022) argues that I/O complexity is indeed the true
bottleneck in achieving wall-clock speed up, and provide
2 2
an algorithm that achieves an I/O complexity of O( NMd )
where N is the dimension of the attention matrix, d is the
head-dimension and M is the cache size. In self-attention,
three input matrices Q, K, V ∈ RN ×d are used to compute
softmax(QK T )V where A = exp(QK T ) is the attention
matrix. For M = Θ(N d), the above I/O complexity bound
becomes N d which matches the trivial lower bound Ω(N d),
as the algorithm must at least read the input matrices of
size Θ(N d) into cache and write the output matrix of size
Θ(N d) to memory. This leaves a tantalizing open question
whether FlashAttention I/O complexity is optimal for any
values of M (specifically M = o(N d)).
We resolve this question in affirmative for any value of M
as long as M ≥ d2 . Moreover, for M < d2 , we give a better
algorithm than FlashAttention and also show the bound is
optimal among algorithms using combinatorial matrix multiplication. Formally, we give an algorithm (Algorithm
1)
 2 
N
d
√
computing Attention with I/O complexity O
. Note
M
2

2 2

√ d ≤ N d and both algorithms
that whenever M < d2 , N
M
M
have I/O complexity N 2 when M = d2 . Our algorithm
matches the optimal I/O complexity of the standard matrix
multiplication algorithm on N × d and d × N matrices
(Hong & Kung, 1981). This is no accident, and in fact we
prove that for M ≤ d2 , the I/O complexity of self-attention
is at least as high as the I/O complexity of computing matrix multiplication of two N × d and d × N matrices. For
M ≥ d2 which is also the more practical regime, our proof

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA.
Correspondence to: Christopher Ye <czye@ucsd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

