ESM All-Atom: Multi-scale Protein Language Model for Unified Molecular
Modeling

Kangjie Zheng * 1 Siyu Long * 2 Tianyu Lu 3 Junwei Yang 1
Xinyu Dai 2 Ming Zhang # 1 Zaiqing Nie 4 5 Wei-Ying Ma 4 Hao Zhou # 4

1. Introduction

Abstract

Protein language models (PLMs) have demonstrated significant potential in protein engineering, enabling the capture
of biochemical and co-evolutionary knowledge during the
pre-training of large-scale protein sequences. This has resulted in remarkable achievements across various domains,
including protein structure prediction (Wu et al., 2022; Fang
et al., 2022b), protein fitness prediction (Mardikoraem &
Woldring, 2023; Notin et al., 2022), protein design (Zheng
et al., 2023; Ferruz et al., 2022), etc. For instance, ESM
(Rives et al., 2021; Lin et al., 2022b), a widely used PLM,
has served as the foundation for several significant models,
including ESM-Fold (Lin et al., 2023) for precise protein
structure prediction and LM-Design (Verkuil et al., 2022;
Hie et al., 2022) for designing proteins with given target
functions.

Protein language models have demonstrated significant potential in the field of protein engineering. However, current protein language models
primarily operate at the residue scale, which limits their ability to provide information at the atom
level. This limitation prevents us from fully exploiting the capabilities of protein language models for applications involving both proteins and
small molecules. In this paper, we propose ESMAA (ESM All-Atom), a novel approach that enables atom-scale and residue-scale unified molecular modeling. ESM-AA achieves this by pretraining on multi-scale code-switch protein sequences and utilizing a multi-scale position encoding to capture relationships among residues
and atoms. Experimental results indicate that
ESM-AA surpasses previous methods in proteinmolecule tasks, demonstrating the full utilization
of protein language models. Further investigations reveal that through unified molecular modeling, ESM-AA not only gains molecular knowledge but also retains its understanding of proteins.

Current PLMs primarily operate at the protein residue
(amino acid) scale, which does not provide information at
the atom scale. In such circumstances, the potential of PLMs
cannot be fully exploited to benefit applications involving
both macromolecules (proteins) and small molecules, both
of which are vital for various downstream applications.2
Thus, external small molecule models must be included to
address these applications. However, proteins are also composed of atoms, and modeling proteins solely at the residue
scale may result in low resolution, meaning that it might not
capture information at the atom scale. Intuitively, extending
PLMs to operate at both residue and atom scales would
make them applicable to a larger range of applications.

1

*

Equal contribution 1 School of Computer Science, National
Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, Peking
University-Anker Embodied AI Lab, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China 2 School of Artificial Intelligence, National
Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University 3 Department of Computer Science, Tsinghua University
4
Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University.
This work was done during the internship of Kangjie, Siyu,
Tianyu, and Junwei at AIR 5 PharMolix Inc. Correspondence
to: Hao Zhou <zhouhao@air.tsinghua.edu.cn>, Ming Zhang
<mzhang cs@pku.edu.cn>.

Nevertheless, the development of multi-scale PLMs poses
significant challenges. First, achieving unified molecular
modeling that operates effectively at both the residue and
atom scales is a challenging task, due to the incompatible vocabularies used at these two different scales. One potential
2
These applications are widespread in the fields of chemistry
and biology and are consistently pivotal for specific scientific
breakthroughs. For instance, drug discovery aims to identify small
molecules capable of binding to protein pockets (Anderson, 2003;
Batool et al., 2019), while enzyme engineering seeks to find enzymes (a special type of protein) that can efficiently catalyze molecular reactions (Mazurenko et al., 2019; Kroll et al., 2023a).

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
The source codes of ESM-AA are publicly released at
https://github.com/zhengkangjie/ESM-AA.

1

