Pairwise Alignment Improves Graph Domain Adaptation

Shikun Liu 1 Deyu Zou 2 Han Zhao 3 Pan Li 1

Abstract

Nonetheless, these methods often encounter generalization
challenges, as the objects that lack labels and require inference may originate from domains that differ significantly
from those with abundant labeled data, thereby exhibiting
distinct interconnecting patterns. For instance, in fraud detection within financial networks, label acquisition may be
constrained to specific network regions due to varying international legal frameworks and diverse data collection periods (Wang et al., 2019; Dou et al., 2020). Another example
is particle filtering for Large Hadron Collider (LHC) experiments (Highfield, 2008), where reliance on simulationderived labeled data poses a challenge. These simulations
may not accurately capture the nuances of real-world experimental conditions, potentially leading to discrepancies in
label inference performance when applied to actual experiment scenarios (Li et al., 2022b; Komiske et al., 2017).

Graph-based methods, pivotal for label inference
over interconnected objects in many real-world
applications, often encounter generalization challenges, if the graph used for model training differs significantly from the graph used for testing.
This work delves into Graph Domain Adaptation
(GDA) to address the unique complexities of distribution shifts over graph data, where interconnected data points experience shifts in features,
labels, and in particular, connecting patterns. We
propose a novel, theoretically principled method,
Pairwise Alignment (Pair-Align) to counter graph
structure shift by mitigating conditional structure
shift (CSS) and label shift (LS). Pair-Align uses
edge weights to recalibrate the influence among
neighboring nodes to handle CSS and adjusts the
classification loss with label weights to handle LS.
Our method demonstrates superior performance
in real-world applications, including node classification with region shift in social networks, and
the pileup mitigation task in particle colliding experiments. For the first application, we also curate
the largest dataset by far for GDA studies. Our
method shows strong performance in synthetic
and other existing benchmark datasets. 1

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have recently demonstrated
remarkable effectiveness in utilizing object interconnections
for label inference tasks (Kipf & Welling, 2016; Hamilton
et al., 2017; Veličković et al., 2018). However, their effectiveness is often hampered by the vulnerability to variations
in data distribution (Ji et al., 2023; Ding et al., 2021; Koh
et al., 2021). This has sparked significant interest in developing GNNs capable of generalization from one domain
(source domain S) to another, potentially different domain
(target domain T ). This field of study, known as graph
domain adaptation (GDA), is gaining increasing attention.
GDA distinguishes itself from the traditional domain adaptation setting, primarily because the data points in GDA are
interlinked rather than independent. This non-IID nature of
graph data renders traditional domain adaptation techniques
suboptimal when applied to graphs. The distribution shifts
in features, labels, and connecting patterns between objects
may significantly impact the adaptation/generalization accuracy. Despite the recent progress made in GDA (Wu et al.,
2020; You et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2023),
current solutions still struggle to tackle the various shifts
prevalent in real-world graph data. We provide a detailed
discussion of the limitations of existing GDA methods in
Section 2.2.

1. Introduction
Graph-based methods are commonly used to enhance label
inference for interconnected objects by utilizing their connection patterns in many real-world applications (Jackson
et al., 2008; Szklarczyk et al., 2019; Shlomi et al., 2020).
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia
Institute of Technology, Georgia, USA 2 School of Data Science,
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois UrbanaChampaign, Champaign, USA. Correspondence to: Shikun Liu
<shikun.liu@gatech.edu>, Pan Li <panli@gatech.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
Our code and data are available at: https://github.
com/Graph-COM/Pair-Align

This work conducts a systematic study of the distinct challenges present in GDA and proposes a novel method, named
Pairwise Alignment (Pair-Align) to tackle graph structure
shift for node prediction tasks. Combined with feature align1

