Learning Iterative Reasoning through Energy Diffusion

Yilun Du 1 * Jiayuan Mao 1 * Joshua Tenenbaum 1

Abstract

Diverse Training Tasks

We introduce iterative reasoning through energy diffusion (IRED), a novel framework for
learning to reason for a variety of tasks by formulating reasoning and decision-making problems with energy-based optimization. IRED
learns energy functions to represent the constraints between input conditions and desired
outputs. After training, IRED adapts the number of optimization steps during inference based
on problem difficulty, enabling it to solve problems outside its training distribution — such
as more complex Sudoku puzzles, matrix completion with large value magnitudes, and path
finding in larger graphs. Key to our method’s
success is two novel techniques: learning a sequence of annealed energy landscapes for easier inference and a combination of score function and energy landscape supervision for faster
and more stable training. Our experiments
show that IRED outperforms existing methods
in continuous-space reasoning, discrete-space reasoning, and planning tasks, particularly in more
challenging scenarios. Code and visualizations
are at https://energy-based-model.
github.io/ired.

⋯ 1.0
?
0.3 ⋯ ?
⋮
⋱
⋮
0.82 ⋯ ?
Matrix Completion

Sudoku

Path Finding (Red-Green)

Learned Annealed Energy Functions 𝐸!" (𝑥, 𝑦)

1.5 ⋯ −1.3
?
3.1 ⋯
⋮
⋱
⋮
? ⋯
?
(Large Magnitude)

(Few Given Numbers)

(Larger Graphs)

Generalization to harder instances

Figure 1. Reasoning as Energy Diffusion – IRED formulates reasoning problem with inputs x and output y, as an energy minimization problem over a learned energy function. It can be trained
stably for a wide variety of reasoning tasks and achieves strong
generalization to harder problem instances, through adaptive computation in the optimization process.

require users or experts to encode rules in domain-specific
languages (such as axioms used in mathematical provers
or domain theories in planning). Furthermore, it is usually
hard for these systems to learn from experience to improve
their performance on familiar tasks. A large body of work
has been trying to address these limitations by incorporating
machine learning in order to handle sensory inputs and learn
to formulate and solve problems. Typical ideas include utilizing these domain-specific solvers as a submodule in a
deep neural network (e.g., SAT solvers; Wang et al., 2019)
or building structured neural networks that can realize algorithms (e.g., dynamic programming; Xu et al., 2019).

1. Introduction
Being able to solve complex reasoning tasks such as logic inference, mathematical proofs, and decision-making is one of
the hallmarks of artificial intelligence. Researchers in various fields have been working on domain-specific algorithms
for solving these tasks, typically utilizing various forms of
search or optimization in iterative manners (e.g., dynamic
programming and gradient descent). These domain-specific
algorithms are usually highly efficient and effective, but they
usually can not directly handle sensory data and typically

Illustrated in Figure 1, we take a different approach to address the aforementioned challenges by formulating various kinds of reasoning and decision-making problems as
an optimization problem. In particular, we consider the
learning-to-reason problem as learning an energy function
Eθ (x, y) over input conditions x and desired output y. For
example, logical deduction can be cast as finding possible
assignments to variables that satisfy all logical constraints;
theorem proving can be cast as finding a sequence of valid

*
Equal contribution 1 MIT. Correspondence to: Yilun Du
<yilundu@mit.edu>, Jiayuan Mao <jiayuanm@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

