Is Temperature Sample Efficient for Softmax Gaussian Mixture of Experts?

Huy Nguyen 1 Pedram Akbarian 2 Nhat Ho 1

Abstract

that aggregates the power of multiple expert networks using
softmax as a gating function (weight function) to create a
more sophisticated model than a single network. To scale
up the model capacity (the number of model parameters)
given a fixed computational cost, (Shazeer et al., 2017) have
introduced a sparse variant of the MoE model, which turns
on only one or a few experts for each input. Thanks to its
scalability, sparse MoE models have been widely used in
several applications, namely large language models (Lepikhin et al., 2021; Du et al., 2022; Fedus et al., 2022; Zhou
et al., 2023; Jiang et al., 2024), computer vision (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021; Liang et al., 2022; Riquelme et al., 2021),
multi-task learning (Hazimeh et al., 2021) and speech recognition (Gulati et al., 2020; You et al., 2021).

Dense-to-sparse gating mixture of experts (MoE)
has recently become an effective alternative to a
well-known sparse MoE. Rather than fixing the
number of activated experts as in the latter model,
which could limit the investigation of potential
experts, the former model utilizes the temperature
to control the softmax weight distribution and the
sparsity of the MoE during training in order to
stabilize the expert specialization. Nevertheless,
while there are previous attempts to theoretically
comprehend the sparse MoE, a comprehensive
analysis of the dense-to-sparse gating MoE has remained elusive. Therefore, we aim to explore the
impacts of the dense-to-sparse gate on the maximum likelihood estimation under the Gaussian
MoE in this paper. We demonstrate that due to
interactions between the temperature and other
model parameters via some partial differential
equations, the convergence rates of parameter estimations are slower than any polynomial rates,
and could be as slow as O(1/ log(n)), where n
denotes the sample size. To address this issue, we
propose using a novel activation dense-to-sparse
gate, which routes the output of a linear layer to an
activation function before delivering them to the
softmax function. By imposing linearly independence conditions on the activation function and
its derivatives, we show that the parameter estimation rates are significantly improved to polynomial rates. Finally, we conduct a simulation study
to empirically validate our theoretical results.

In sparse MoE models, gating functions are concurrently
trained with expert networks to route inputs effectively.
However, early in training, gating networks may exhibit
instability in expert selection due to their inexperience. Additionally, pre-determining the number of activated experts
per input can limit exploration of potential experts. To address this, (Nie et al., 2022) introduced a dense-to-sparse
gate, initially routing inputs to all experts and gradually
becoming sparser. This approach strategically controls the
temperature of a softmax-based gating function to adjust
weight distribution among experts and regulate sparsity in
MoE models, promoting stability in expert specialization.
From a theoretical perspective, there have been attempts to
comprehend the properties of MoE models. Firstly, (Chen
et al., 2022) studied how sparse MoE layers enhanced the
efficacy of neural network learning and explained why they
would not collapse into a single model. Another line of
work tried to understand the effects of gating functions on
the convergence rates of maximum likelihood estimation
under Gaussian MoE models. In particular, when the gating
function was independent of input, (Ho et al., 2022) showed
an interaction among expert parameters, which made those
rates inversely proportional to the number of over-specified
experts. Next, (Nguyen et al., 2023) considered a dense
softmax gating function, and demonstrated that parameter
estimation rates were determined by the solvability of an
intricate system of polynomial equations due to another
interaction between gating and expert parameters. Subsequently, (Nguyen et al., 2024b) explored a general Top-K
sparse softmax gating function. They revealed that acti-

1. Introduction
Mixture of experts (MoE) (Jacobs et al., 1991; Jordan &
Jacobs, 1994) is a statistical machine learning framework
1

Department of Statistics and Data Sciences 2 Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Texas at
Austin. Correspondence to: Huy Nguyen <huynm@utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

