SIN: Selective and Interpretable Normalization
for Long-Term Time Series Forecasting

Lu Han 1 2 Han-Jia Ye 1 2 De-Chuan Zhan 1 2

Abstract

Previous

Remove

Forecasting

Ours

In real-world applications, time series data frequently exhibit non-stationarity, with statistics
changing over time. This variability undermines
the forecasting accuracy of deep learning models
that are trained on historical data but deployed
for future prediction. A common approach to
mitigate this issue involves normalizing the data
to counteract statistical drift, followed by denormalization on the prediction. However, existing methods often employ heuristic normalization techniques that do not fully account for the
unique characteristics of the series. Our paper addresses the critical question in this context: which
statistics should be removed and restored? We
argue that the statistics selected for normalization
should exhibit both local invariance and global
variability to ensure their correctness and helpfulness. To this end, we propose the Selective and Interpretable Normalization methodology, dubbed
SIN. This approach maximizes the covariance
between a given look-back window and its subsequent future values, thereby identifying key statistics for normalization and simultaneously learning
the corresponding normalization transformations.
The interpretable framework can be used to explain the success and limitations of some popular
normalization methods. By integrating SIN, we
demonstrate improvements in the performance
of several prevalent forecasting models, thereby
validating the utility of our approach.

Remove
Statistics
Θ = 𝑔𝑔(𝑥𝑥)

Restore
Statistics
(Mean/Var…)

Statistics
(Mean/Var…)
Forecasting

Restore
Statistics
y = 𝑔𝑔−1 (Θ)

Figure 1. The normalization method removes the statistics from
the input and restores the statistics to the model’s prediction. This
process mitigates statistics drift that happens globally. Previous
methods usually use heuristic normalizations that ignore the unique
statistics of each time series. In contrast, our method overcomes
the limitations by using a learned normalization method.

1. Introduction
Time series forecasting plays a pivotal role in numerous
domains, including energy (Kardakos et al., 2013), transportation (Kadiyala & Kumar, 2014), and healthcare (Morid
et al., 2023). In recent years, deep learning has emerged
as a dominant force in this field and brought about a significant shift from traditional statistical methods (Box et al.,
2015) to various kinds of neural networks (Hochreiter &
Schmidhuber, 1997; Cho et al., 2014; Rangapuram et al.,
2018; Bai et al., 2018; Franceschi et al., 2019; Zhou et al.,
2021; Wu et al., 2021a; Zhou et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022b).
These methods demonstrated improved performance over
traditional statistical approaches, particularly in handling
high-dimensional series with long-term dependencies.
However, the efficacy of deep learning models in time
series forecasting is often hindered by the inherent nonstationarity in time series (Hyndman & Athanasopoulos,
2018; Petropoulos et al., 2022). Non-stationarity, characterized by time-varying statistical properties such as mean, and
variance, presents a formidable challenge. Models trained
on historical data may struggle with future series that exhibit
different distributions (Kim et al., 2021; Han et al., 2024).

1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, China. Correspondence to: Han-Jia Ye
<yehj@lamda.nju.edu.cn>.
2

In response to this challenge, the normalization method has
become a critical step, as depicted in Figure 1. By removing
the local statistics from the series, normalization mitigates
the effects of distribution drift between seen and unseen
data, enhancing the model’s ability to generalize from past
observations to future deployment (Passalis et al., 2020;

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

