Exploration-Driven Policy Optimization in RLHF: Theoretical Insights on
Efficient Data Utilization
Yihan Du 1 Anna Winnicki 1 Gal Dalal 2 Shie Mannor 3 2 R. Srikant 1

Abstract

Models (LLMs) (Ouyang et al., 2022; Achiam et al., 2023),
the goal of the agent is complex and related to human evaluation. Additionally, the reward function may be hard to
manually design.

Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback
(RLHF) has achieved impressive empirical successes while relying on a small amount of human
feedback. However, there is limited theoretical
justification for this phenomenon. Additionally,
most recent studies focus on value-based algorithms despite the recent empirical successes of
policy-based algorithms. In this work, we consider an RLHF algorithm based on policy optimization (PO-RLHF). The algorithm is based on
the popular Policy Cover-Policy Gradient (PCPG) algorithm, which assumes knowledge of the
reward function. In PO-RLHF, knowledge of the
reward function is not assumed, and the algorithm
uses trajectory-based comparison feedback to infer the reward function. We provide performance
bounds for PO-RLHF with low query complexity,
which provides insight into why a small amount
of human feedback may be sufficient to achieve
good performance with RLHF. A key novelty is a
trajectory-level elliptical potential analysis, which
bounds the reward estimation error when comparison feedback (rather than numerical reward
observation) is given. We provide and analyze
algorithms PG-RLHF and NN-PG-RLHF for two settings: linear and neural function approximation,
respectively.

To handle these challenges, a framework called Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) (Christiano
et al., 2017) has been proposed and has achieved huge empirical successes in ChatGPT (Achiam et al., 2023). In RLHF,
the agent does not directly observe rewards, but has access
to queries from humans on preferences based on trajectories. The agent learns the quality of trajectories (policies)
from the preference feedback over time in order to optimize
performance. Existing empirical works have demonstrated
the practical efficiency of RLHF: human feedback can solve
complex RL tasks by using fewer than 1% of the data from
the agent’s interactions with the environment (Christiano
et al., 2017).
Recently, there have also been a number of theoretical RL
papers which seek to provide analyze RLHF, e.g., (Pacchiano et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022; Zhu et al., 2023; Wang
et al., 2023). Most of these works consider value-based algorithms or a given dataset of human feedback, while in many
applications, e.g., ChatGPT, policy optimization algorithms
are often used. Our goal is to quantify the query and sample
complexities of policy-based algorithms when used in conjunction with RLHF, and show that the query complexity is
a small fraction of the overall sample complexity.
In order to address the aforementioned issues, we study Policy Optimization for RLHF (PO-RLHF) with active human
feedback, through which we provide insights on the query
efficiency of RLHF. The algorithm can be summarized as
follows. It is an iterative process where at each iteration
there is a policy, and several trajectories are drawn by following the policies obtained so far. The trajectories are
compared to trajectories generated by following a baseline
policy. Humans make comparisons between the trajectories
generated by the two policies. Assuming a Bradley-Terry
model (Bradley & Terry, 1952), the algorithm uses the results of the comparison queries to update the estimate of the
underlying reward function. Then, there is an inner loop
where the algorithm follows several steps of the PC-PG
policy optimization algorithm (Agarwal et al., 2020) using

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 2018; Agarwal et al., 2021) is a classic sequential decision-making
problem where an agent interacts with an unknown environment in order to maximize the expected cumulative reward.
In many applications, e.g., robotics and Large Language
1

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 2 NVIDIA Research 3 Technion.
Correspondence to: Yihan Du <yihandu@illinois.edu>, R. Srikant <rsrikant@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

