Bayesian Optimization of Function Networks with Partial Evaluations

Poompol Buathong * 1 Jiayue Wan * 2 Raul Astudillo 3
Samuel Daulton 4 Maximilian Balandat 4 Peter I. Frazier 2

Abstract

x1

Bayesian optimization is a powerful framework
for optimizing functions that are expensive or
time-consuming to evaluate. Recent work has
considered Bayesian optimization of function networks (BOFN), where the objective function is
given by a network of functions, each taking as
input the output of previous nodes in the network
as well as additional parameters. Leveraging this
network structure has been shown to yield significant performance improvements. Existing BOFN
algorithms for general-purpose networks evaluate the full network at each iteration. However,
many real-world applications allow for evaluating
nodes individually. To exploit this, we propose
a novel knowledge gradient acquisition function
that chooses which node and corresponding inputs
to evaluate in a cost-aware manner, thereby reducing query costs by evaluating only on a part of the
network at each step. We provide an efficient approach to optimizing our acquisition function and
show that it outperforms existing BOFN methods
and other benchmarks across several synthetic and
real-world problems. Our acquisition function is
the first to enable cost-aware optimization of a
broad class of function networks.

f1

y1
y2

x2

f3

y3

f2
x3

Figure 1: An example function network in the manufacturing problem.

et al., 2020), vaccine manufacturing (Rosa et al., 2022), and
pharmaceutical product development (Sano et al., 2020).
In many applications, such as manufacturing (Ghasemi et al.,
2018), epidemic model calibration (Garnett, 2002), machine
learning pipeline optimization (Xin et al., 2021), and robotic
control (Plappert et al., 2018), objective functions are computed by evaluating a network of functions where each function takes as input the outputs of its parent nodes. Consider the function network in Figure 1, which illustrates the
stages of a manufacturing process. The process begins with
a raw material described by x1 . This raw material is used
to produce an intermediate part described by y1 through
a process f1 . Similarly, a second raw material described
by x2 is used to produce another intermediate part described
by y2 through a process f2 . These parts (with properties y1
and y2 ) are combined with another raw material described
by x3 in a process f3 to make the final product, the quality
of which is denoted by y3 . Our goal is to choose x1 , x2 , x3
to maximize y3 .

1. Introduction
Bayesian optimization (BO) (Močkus, 1975; Frazier, 2018)
has emerged as a powerful framework for optimizing functions with expensive or time-consuming evaluations. BO
has proved its efficacy in a variety of applications, including
hyperparameter tuning of machine learning models (Snoek
et al., 2012), materials design (Frazier et al., 2008; Zhang

Astudillo & Frazier (2021a) showed that utilizing intermediate outputs in the network, i.e., y1 and y2 , to decide which
design parameters x = (x1 , x2 , x3 ) to evaluate significantly
improves the performance of BO. However, this and other
prior work have not exploited the ability to perform partial
evaluations of the function network, i.e., the ability to evaluate only a subset of nodes in the network at each iteration
and use the so-obtained information to decide on the inputs to subsequent nodes, and potentially even to pause the
evaluation process. As we demonstrate later, doing so can
significantly improve performance, especially when evaluation costs vary significantly across nodes. For example, if
evaluating f1 is much cheaper than evaluating f2 , it may be

*

Equal contribution 1 Center for Applied Mathematics, Cornell University 2 School of Operations Research and Information
Engineering, Cornell University 3 Department of Computing and
Mathematical Sciences, Caltech 4 Meta. Correspondence to: Poompol Buathong <pb482@cornell.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

