Correlation-Induced Label Prior for Semi-Supervised Multi-Label Learning

Biao Liu 1 2 Ning Xu 1 2 Xiangyu Fang 1 2 Xin Geng 1 2

Abstract

cations. Over the past decade, with the strong representation
learning ability of deep neural networks, MLL has been successfully applied to a variety of real-world applications such
as image annotation (Lanchantin et al., 2021), text classification (Liu et al., 2017), and facial expression recognition
(Chen et al., 2020).

Semi-supervised multi-label learning (SSMLL)
aims to address the challenge of limited labeled
data availability in multi-label learning (MLL) by
leveraging unlabeled data to improve the model’s
performance. Due to the difficulty of estimating
the reliable label correlation on minimal multilabeled data, previous SSMLL methods fail to
unlash the power of the correlation among multiple labels to improve the performance of the
predictive model in SSMLL. To deal with this
problem, we propose a novel SSMLL method
named P CLP where the correlation-induced label
prior is inferred to enhance the pseudo-labeling instead of directly estimating the correlation among
labels. Specifically, we construct the correlated
label prior probability distribution using structural
causal model (SCM), constraining the correlations
of generated pseudo-labels to conform to the prior,
which can be integrated into a variational label enhancement framework, optimized by both labeled
and unlabeled instances in a unified manner. Theoretically, we demonstrate the accuracy of the generated pseudo-labels and guarantee the learning
consistency of the proposed method. Comprehensive experiments on several benchmark datasets
have validated the superiority of the proposed
method. Source code is available at https:
//github.com/palm-biaoliu/pclp.

In the context of MLL, the complexity of the label space
makes the acquisition of labeled data both time-consuming
and costly, particularly for large-scale datasets that require
expert labeling. This challenge has given rise to the development of Semi-Supervised Multi-Label Learning (SSMLL),
which aims to utilize the information in unlabeled data
to improve model generalization performance when only
limited labeled instances are available for training. Existing SSMLL methods primarily seek inspiration from
approaches within single-label semi-supervised learning
(SSL), which has made great progress in recent years (Guo
& Li, 2022; Wang et al., 2023). For instance, Zhang et al.
employed a co-training strategy, where pairwise ranking
predictions on unlabeled data are communicated between
classifiers for model refinement (Zhan & Zhang, 2017). Similarly, Wang et al. introduced a dual-classifier framework
to align the feature distribution in a latent space while generating pseudo-labels for unlabeled instances (Wang et al.,
2020). More recently, a class-specific threshold strategy is
designed based on the estimated class prior probabilities,
which is then used to assign pseudo-labels (Xie et al., 2023).
The complex co-occurrence or mutual exclusion relationships, (Zhang & Zhou, 2013) in multiple labels, i.e., label correlation, is a critical property in MLL. However,
the previous methods only directly adopt single-label semisupervised framework for each class or just utilize an estimated unreliable label correlation matrix for propagating
relationships between labels at the output layer. As directly
estimating the reliable label correlation on the available
minimal labeled instances in SSMLL is difficult, previous
SSMLL methods fail to unlash the power of the correlation
among multiple labels to improve the performance of the
predictive model in SSMLL. In response to this challenge,
we consider implicitly constructing label correlation through
the correlated label prior probability distribution, which can
be inferred with both labeled and unlabeled data, thereby
achieving more reliable label correlation.

1. Introduction
Multi-label learning (MLL) has emerged as an effective
paradigm for handling instances associated with multiple
semantic labels, which is common in many real-world appli1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China 2 Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its Interdisciplinary
Applications (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China.
Correspondence to: Ning Xu <xning@seu.edu.cn>, Xin Geng
<xgeng@seu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

