Standardized Interpretable Fairness Measures for Continuous Risk Scores

Ann-Kristin Becker 1 Oana Dumitrasc 1 Klaus Broelemann 1

Abstract

Such discriminatory predictions manifest as disparities
among protected groups and may occur in different forms
and for various reasons. For example, individuals belonging to different protected groups may be assigned different
scores even if they have the same outcome, or predictions
may turn out to have different levels of consistency with
the ground-truth risk. Unfortunately, in most cases different
notions of algorithmic fairness are incompatible (Barocas
et al., 2019; Kleinberg et al., 2018; Saravanakumar, 2021;
Chouldechova, 2017; Pleiss et al., 2017). Various measures
for algorithmic fairness have been developed that aim to
quantify different kinds of group disparities (Zafar et al.,
2017; Kamishima et al., 2012; Makhlouf & Zhioua, 2021).
So far, most of the available literature discusses the problem
in the context of binary decision tasks (Mitchell et al., 2021;
Barocas et al., 2019; Kozodoi et al., 2022).

We propose a standardized version of fairness
measures for continuous scores with a reasonable interpretation based on the Wasserstein distance. Our measures are easily computable and
well suited for quantifying and interpreting the
strength of group disparities as well as for comparing biases across different models, datasets,
or time points. We derive a link between the different families of existing fairness measures for
scores and show that the proposed standardized
fairness measures outperform ROC-based fairness
measures because they are more explicit and can
quantify significant biases that ROC-based fairness measures miss.

However, in many applications, neither a final decision is
known, nor is the explicit cost of false predictions. This
is especially be the case when score and decision are performed by different entities. A prominent example is the
COMPAS Score (Larson et al., 2016) which was developed
by one entity to support decisions done by other entities. It
may also be that a score is never applied as a pure decision
but only as a quantitative prediction that affects, e.g. the cost
of a product (risk-based pricing). In these cases, fairness
can only be fully assessed if the disparities between groups
are summarized across the entire score model.

1. Introduction
In recent years, many decision-making processes in areas
such as finance, education, social media or medicine have
been automated, often at least in part with the goal of making those decisions more comparable, objective, and nondiscriminatory (Esteva et al., 2017; Holstein et al., 2018; Alvarado & Waern, 2018; Bucher, 2017; Rader & Gray, 2015).
For high-risk business transactions between individuals and
companies (e.g. in the lending industry), often predictions
of machine learning algorithms are incorporated into those
decisions. Such algorithms aim to differentiate individuals
as optimally as possible based on historical data and in terms
of future behavior. They assign risk scores or risk categories
to individuals. Even with good intentions, the approach
runs the risk of directly or indirectly discriminating against
individuals on the basis of protected characteristics, such as
gender, ethnicity, political background or sexual orientation
(Larson et al., 2016; Datta et al., 2014; Köchling & Wehner,
2020). That may be the case, if the data reflects biased social
circumstances or include prejudicial historical decisions.

This paper presents a novel approach to quantifying group
disparities for continuous risk score models. It’s major
contributions are
• a well interpretable and mathematically sound method
for quantifying group disparities in continuous risk
score models.
• a standardized framework, that allows for monitoring
bias over time or between models and populations,
even if there is a shift in the score distribution. Furthermore, standardized measures are unaffected by monotonic transformations of the scores, such as logistic /
logit transform. This prevents malicious actors from
finding a transformation that hides the bias (see section 3.2).

1
SCHUFA Holding AG, Wiesbaden, Germany. Correspondence to: Ann-Kristin Becker <ann-kristin.becker@schufa.de>,
Oana Dumitrasc <oana.dumitrasc@schufa.de>, Klaus Broelemann
<klaus.broelemann@schufa.de>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

• bridging the gap between common fairness-metrics
1

