Coresets for Multiple ℓ𝑝 Regression

David P. Woodruff 1 Taisuke Yasuda 1
problem, our input is an 𝑛 × 𝑑 matrix A ∈ R𝑛×𝑑 and a
response vector b ∈ R𝑛 , and our goal is to output an approximate minimizer x̂ ∈ R𝑑 such that

Abstract
A coreset of a dataset with 𝑛 examples and 𝑑
features is a weighted subset of examples that is
sufficient for solving downstream data analytic
tasks. Nearly optimal constructions of coresets
for least squares and ℓ𝑝 linear regression with a
single response are known in prior work. However, for multiple ℓ𝑝 regression where there can
be 𝑚 responses, there are no known constructions
with size sublinear in 𝑚. In this work, we con𝑂(𝜀−2 𝑑) for 𝑝 < 2 and
struct coresets of size ˜
−𝑝
𝑝/2
˜
𝑂(𝜀 𝑑 ) for 𝑝 > 2 independently of 𝑚 (i.e.,
dimension-free) that approximate the multiple ℓ𝑝
regression objective at every point in the domain
up to (1 ± 𝜀) relative error. If we only need to
preserve the minimizer subject to a subspace constraint, we improve these bounds by an 𝜀 factor
for all 𝑝 > 1. All of our bounds are nearly tight.

‖Ax̂ − b‖𝑝𝑝 ≤ (1 + 𝜀) min ‖Ax − b‖𝑝𝑝 .
x∈R𝑑

(1)

Among the vast literature on ℓ𝑝 regression, sampling algorithms and coresets, which are algorithms that select a
weighted subset of the rows of A and b that suffice to solve
ℓ𝑝 regression, have played major roles in the development
of efficient algorithms. That is, we seek a diagonal matrix
S ∈ R𝑛×𝑛 with few non-zero entries, i.e., nnz(S) ≪ 𝑛,
such that the weighted subset of rows SA and Sb are sufficient to compute a solution x̂ satisfying (1). We will often
refer to nnz(S) as the sample complexity. We focus on approaches that construct S by i.i.d. sampling of each of the 𝑛
rows:
Definition 1.1 (ℓ𝑝 sampling matrix). Let 𝑝 ≥ 1. A random
diagonal matrix S ∈ R𝑛×𝑛 is a random ℓ𝑝 sampling matrix
with sampling probabilities {𝑞𝑖 }𝑛𝑖=1 if for each 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛], the
𝑖th diagonal entry is independently set to be
{︃
1/𝑝
1/𝑞𝑖
with probability 𝑞𝑖
S𝑖,𝑖 =
0
otherwise

We give two application of our results. First, we
settle the number of uniform samples needed to
approximate ℓ𝑝 Euclidean power means up to
a (1 + 𝜀) factor, showing that Θ̃(𝜀−2 ) samples
for 𝑝 = 1, Θ̃(𝜀−1 ) samples for 1 < 𝑝 < 2,
and Θ̃(𝜀1−𝑝 ) samples for 𝑝 > 2 is tight, answering a question of Cohen-Addad, Saulpic,
and Schwiegelshohn. Second, we show that for
˜ −1 𝑘)
1 < 𝑝 < 2, every matrix has a subset of 𝑂(𝜀
rows which spans a (1+𝜀)-approximately optimal
𝑘-dimensional subspace for ℓ𝑝 subspace approximation, which is also nearly optimal.

Two well-studied guarantees for S are strong coresets and
weak coresets. Strong coresets refer to coresets that preserve the value of the objective function at every point in
the domain, while weak coresets only guarantee that the
unconstrained minimizer is preserved. If we only care about
solving the unconstrained ℓ𝑝 regression problem, then weak
coresets are sufficient to solve this problem, and it is known
that weak coresets can be substantially smaller than strong
coresets in certain settings (Musco et al., 2022). On the
other hand, strong coresets are necessary when the objective
function must be evaluated at points away from the optimum,
for example for constrained optimization problems.

1. Introduction
Least squares linear regression and ℓ𝑝 linear regression are
some of the most fundamental and practically valuable computational problems in statistics and optimization. In this

Definition 1.2 (Strong coreset). We say that S is a strong
coreset if ‖S(Ax − b)‖𝑝𝑝 = (1 ± 𝜀)‖Ax − b‖𝑝𝑝 simultaneously for every x ∈ R𝑑 .

*

Equal contribution 1 School of Computer Science, Carnegie
Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA. Correspondence to: David
P. Woodruff <dwoodruf@cs.cmu.edu>, Taisuke Yasuda
<taisukey@cs.cmu.edu>.

Definition 1.3 (Weak coreset). We say that S is a weak
coreset if

𝑠𝑡

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

‖Ax̂ − b‖𝑝𝑝 ≤ (1 + 𝜀) min ‖Ax − b‖𝑝𝑝
x∈R𝑑

1

