FedRC: Tackling Diverse Distribution Shifts Challenge in Federated Learning by
Robust Clustering

Yongxin Guo 1 2 Xiaoying Tang 1 2 3 Tao Lin 4 5

Abstract

have completed local training, the parameter updates are
sent back to the server for integration. Clients are not
required to provide local raw data during this procedure,
maintaining their privacy. However, the non-IID nature of
clients’ local distribution hinders the performance of FL
algorithms (McMahan et al., 2016; Li et al., 2020; Karimireddy et al., 2020b; Li et al., 2021), and the distribution
shifts among clients become a main challenge in FL.

Federated Learning (FL) is a machine learning
paradigm that safeguards privacy by retaining
client data on edge devices. However, optimizing FL in practice can be challenging due to the
diverse and heterogeneous nature of the learning
system. Though recent research has focused on
improving the optimization of FL when distribution shifts occur among clients, ensuring global
performance when multiple types of distribution
shifts occur simultaneously among clients—such
as feature distribution shift, label distribution shift,
and concept shift—remain under-explored. In this
paper, we identify the learning challenges posed
by the simultaneous occurrence of diverse distribution shifts and propose a clustering principle to
overcome these challenges. Through our research,
we find that existing methods fail to address the
clustering principle. Therefore, we propose a
novel clustering algorithm framework, dubbed
as FedRC, which adheres to our proposed clustering principle by incorporating a bi-level optimization problem and a novel objective function. Extensive experiments demonstrate that FedRC significantly outperforms other SOTA cluster-based
FL methods. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/LINs-lab/FedRC.

Distribution shifts in FL. As identified in the seminal
surveys (Kairouz et al., 2021; Moreno-Torres et al., 2012;
Lu et al., 2018), there are three types of distribution shifts
across clients that bottleneck the deployment of FL (see
Figure 5):
• Concept shift: For tasks of using feature x to predict label
y, the conditional distributions of labels P(y|x) may
differ across clients, even if the marginal distributions of
labels P(y) and features P(x) are shared 1 .
• Label distribution shift: The marginal distributions of labels P(y) may vary across clients, even if the conditional
distribution of features P(x|y) is the same.
• Feature distribution shift: The marginal distribution of
features P(x) may differ across clients, even if the conditional distribution of labels P(y|x) is shared.
New challenges posed by the simultaneous occurrence
of multiple types of distribution shifts. Despite the success of existing methods in addressing data heterogeneity
in FL, most existing methods concentrate on single shift
types. For example, Karimireddy et al. (2020b); Li et al.
(2020) for label shifts, Peng et al. (2019); Gan et al. (2021)
for feature shifts, and Jothimurugesan et al. (2022); Ke et al.
(2022) for concept shifts. However, various types of distribution shifts can occur concurrently. For instance, as
explained in Kairouz et al. (2021), label shifts may arise
from different geographical regions, while feature shifts
could be affected by user preferences. Moreover, concept
shifts might be prompted by cultural differences or fluctuations in weather conditions. In a scenario where clients
come from diverse geographical regions, each with unique

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) is an emerging privacy-preserving
distributed machine learning paradigm. The model is transmitted to the clients by the server, and when the clients
1

School of Science and Engineering, The Chinese University
of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, Guangdong, 518172, P.R. China 2 The
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society 3 The Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Future Networks of Intelligence 4 Research Center for Industries of the Future,
Westlake University 5 School of Engineering, Westlake University.
Correspondence to: Xiaoying Tang <tangxiaoying@cuhk.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1
More discussions about the definition of concept shifts can be
found in Appendix J.

1

