Provable Interactive Learning with Hindsight Instruction Feedback

Dipendra Misra∗ 1 Aldo Pacchiano∗ 2 Robert Schapire∗ 1

Abstract

offline. In contrast, consider the task of a robot following
instructions specified by a human user (Misra et al., 2016;
Blukis et al., 2019; Myers et al., 2023). It is expensive
to collect ground truth robot trajectories making standard
imitation learning (IL) approaches (Pomerleau, 1991) expensive to apply, whereas reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton
& Barto, 2018) approaches suffer from high sample complexity. This makes IL and RL– the two most common
ways of training agents, expensive in practice. Motivated by
the limitations of IL and RL, a line of work has proposed
using hindsight labeling, where the agent (robot in our example) generates a response (trajectory) given an instruction,
and a teacher instead of providing expensive ground truth
response, provides the instruction that is suitable for the
agent’s response (Fried et al., 2018; Nguyen et al., 2021).
This reverses the labeling problem to an easier labeling
problem, since instructions are typically in a format such as
natural language, which can be inexpensively elicited from
non-expert users in contrast to robot trajectories. While
this approach has been applied empirically, a theoretical
understanding remains absent. In this work, we initiate
the theoretical understanding of interactive learning from
hindsight instruction.

We study interactive learning in a setting where
the agent has to generate a response (e.g., an action or trajectory) given a context and an instruction. In contrast, to typical approaches that train
the system using reward or expert supervision on
response, we study learning with hindsight labeling where a teacher provides an instruction that is
most suitable for the agent’s generated response.
This hindsight labeling of instruction is often easier to provide than providing expert supervision
of the optimal response which may require expert
knowledge or can be impractical to elicit. We initiate the theoretical analysis of interactive learning
with hindsight labeling. We first provide a lower
bound showing that in general, the regret of any
algorithm must scale with the size of the agent’s
response space. Next we study a specialized setting where the underlying instruction-response
distribution can be decomposed as a low-rank matrix. We introduce an algorithm called LORIL
for this setting, and show that it is a no-regret
√
algorithm with the regret scaling with T and
depends on the intrinsic rank but does not depend
of the agent’s response space. We provide experiments showing the performance of LORIL in
practice for 2 domains.

We consider the learning setup illustrated in Figure 1. In
this setup, a teacher is teaching an agent to navigate in a
virtual home environment. In each round, the world gives
an instruction and a context to the agent. The instruction in
this case is expressed in natural language. The context is an
image that provides information about the environment such
as the position, color, and sizes of different objects. The
goal of the agent is to generate a trajectory that follows the
given instruction. In the beginning, the agent lacks any language understanding and, therefore, cannot generate correct
trajectories. We assume access to a teacher that can provide
an instruction that best describes the agent’s trajectory. This
type of feedback can be viewed as a hindsight instruction, as
it was the correct instruction in hindsight for the trajectory
generated by the agent. In each round, the agent generates
a trajectory and receives a hindsight instruction from the
teacher. This allows the agent to learn a mapping from the
instruction space to the trajectory space, which helps improve the agent’s policy. We call this learning approach as
Learning from Hindsight Instruction (LHI).

1. Introduction
Success of a machine learning approach is intimately tied
to the ease of getting training data. For example, language
models (Brown et al., 2020; Achiam et al., 2023), which are
one of the most successful applications of machine learning, are trained on an abundance of language data which is
both easy to elicit from non-expert users and is available
*

Equal contribution 1 Microsoft Research 2 Broad Institute
of MIT and Harvard, Boston University.. Correspondence
to: Aldo Pacchiano <pacchian@bu.edu>, Dipendra Misra
<dipendra.Misra@microsoft.com>, Robert Schapire
<schapire@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

There are several different approaches for training a
1

