Two-Stage Shadow Inclusion Estimation: An IV Approach for
Causal Inference under Latent Confounding and Collider Bias

Baohong Li 1 Anpeng Wu 1 Ruoxuan Xiong 2 Kun Kuang 1

Abstract
Latent confounding bias and collider bias are two
key challenges of causal inference in observational studies. Latent confounding bias occurs
when failing to control the unmeasured covariates that are common causes of treatments and
outcomes, which can be addressed by using the
Instrumental Variable (IV) approach. Collider
bias comes from non-random sample selection
caused by both treatments and outcomes, which
can be addressed by using a different type of instruments, i.e., shadow variables. However, in
most scenarios, these two biases simultaneously
exist in observational data, and the previous methods focusing on either one are inadequate. To the
best of our knowledge, no approach has been developed for causal inference when both biases exist. In this paper, we propose a novel IV approach,
Two-Stage Shadow Inclusion (2SSI), which can
simultaneously address latent confounding bias
and collider bias by utilizing the residual of the
treatment as a shadow variable. Extensive experimental results on benchmark synthetic datasets
and a real-world dataset show that 2SSI achieves
noticeable performance improvement when both
biases exist compared to existing methods.

X

U

T

Y

Z

X

U

T

Y

(a) Latent confounding. (b) Instrumental variable approach.
Figure 1. Causal graphs for illustrating the latent confounding problem and the instrumental variable approach. The dashed node
denotes that the variable is unmeasured.

T

S

X

Y

V

(a) Collider bias.

T

S

X

Y

(b) Shadow variable approach.

Figure 2. Causal graphs for illustrating the collider bias problem
and the shadow variable approach.

is to remove spurious correlations, of which the two most
common sources are confounding bias and collider bias
(Hernán & Robins, 2020).

1. Introduction
Causal inference empowers machine learning methods to
learn causality other than correlations from observational
data. It has achieved remarkable success in trustworthy
machine learning studies (Cui & Athey, 2022; Nilforoshan
et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023; 2024).
The primary task of causal inference in observational studies

Figure 1 shows the causal graph of (latent) confounding bias
and a method to address it, where T denotes the treatment
variable, X denotes the observed/measured covariates, U
denotes the unobserved/unmeasured covariates, Y denotes
the outcome variable, and Z denotes an Instrumental Variable (IV). As shown in Figure 1(a), confounding bias occurs
when common causes of T and Y , namely confounders, are
not measured and controlled. Confounding bias introduces
spurious correlations between T and Y , e.g., the non-causal
path T ← U → Y . In this paper, we focus on confounding
bias caused by unmeasured confounders. The IV approach is
commonly used to address latent confounding bias, that was
initially proposed assuming the existence of well-defined

1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China 2 Department of Quantitative Theory &
Methods, Emory University, Atlanta, USA. Correspondence to:
Kun Kuang <kunkuang@zju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

