Sliced Wasserstein with Random-Path Projecting Directions

Khai Nguyen 1 Shujian Zhang 1 Tam Le 2 3 Nhat Ho 1
of O(n−1/2 ) (Nadjahi et al., 2020b; Nietert et al., 2022).
As evidence for the effectiveness of the SW distance, many
applications have leveraged SW as the key to improving performance e.g., generative models (Deshpande et al., 2018),
domain adaptation (Lee et al., 2019), point-cloud upsampling (Savkin et al., 2022), clustering (Kolouri et al., 2018),
gradient flows (Bonet et al., 2022), and so on.

Abstract
Slicing distribution selection has been used as an
effective technique to improve the performance of
parameter estimators based on minimizing sliced
Wasserstein distance in applications. Previous
works either utilize expensive optimization to select the slicing distribution or use slicing distributions that require expensive sampling methods.
In this work, we propose an optimization-free
slicing distribution that provides a fast sampling
for the Monte Carlo estimation of expectation.
In particular, we introduce the random-path projecting direction (RPD) which is constructed by
leveraging the normalized difference between two
random vectors following the two input measures.
From the RPD, we derive the random-path slicing
distribution (RPSD) and two variants of sliced
Wasserstein, i.e., the Random-Path Projection
Sliced Wasserstein (RPSW) and the Importance
Weighted Random-Path Projection Sliced Wasserstein (IWRPSW). We then discuss the topological,
statistical, and computational properties of RPSW
and IWRPSW. Finally, we showcase the favorable
performance of RPSW and IWRPSW in gradient
flow and the training of denoising diffusion generative models on images.

A key component of the SW is the slicing distribution, i.e.,
the distribution of the projecting direction. The slicing distribution controls the contribution of each projecting direction
to the final value of the SW. A statistically desired slicing
distribution should satisfy two properties. The first property
is to assign a high probability to “informative” projecting
directions. In some applications that involve weak convergence of measures, such as generative modeling (Deshpande
et al., 2018) and gradient flow (Bonet et al., 2022), an informative direction can be interpreted as a discriminative
direction that highlights the difference between two measures after projection. The second property is to have the
maximal projecting direction in the support set, i.e., the
projecting direction that can lead to the maximum projected
distance. This property ensures the identity of indiscernible
of the expected value. To ensure the second property, a more
relaxed criterion can be considered, which involves having
a continuous density on the unit-hypersphere.
Beyond statistical properties, two computational properties
are desired for the slicing distribution. Firstly, the slicing
distribution should be stable to obtain, meaning that parameters of the slicing distribution can be computationally
identifiable. Secondly, it should be fast and efficient to sample projecting directions from the slicing distribution. This
property is essential, as Monte Carlo samples are used to
approximate the intractable expectation with respect to the
slicing distribution.

1. Introduction
Utilizing the closed-form solution of optimal transport in
one dimension (Peyré & Cuturi, 2020), the sliced Wasserstein (Bonneel et al., 2015) (SW) distance is computationally and statistically scalable. In particular, SW has the time
complexity of O(n log n) and the space complexity of O(n)
when dealing with two probability measures that have at
most n supports. Moreover, the SW does not suffer from
the curse of dimensionality since it has sample complexity

The conventional SW (Bonneel et al., 2015) utilizes the
uniform distribution over the unit-hypersphere as the slicing distribution, which is a fixed, continuous, and easy-tosample distribution. However, the uniform slicing distribution is not discriminative. Distributional sliced Wasserstein (Nguyen et al., 2021) (DSW) performs optimization
to find the best slicing distribution belonging to a chosen
family of distributions over the unit-hypersphere, aiming
to maximize the expected projected distance. When the

1
Department of Statistics and Data Sciences, University of
Texas at Austin, USA 2 Department of Advanced Data Science,
The Institute of Statistical Mathematics (ISM), Japan 3 RIKEN AIP,
Japan. Correspondence to: Khai Nguyen <khainb@utexas.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

