Time Series Diffusion in the Frequency Domain

Jonathan Crabbé * 1 Nicolas Huynh * 1 Jan Stanczuk 1 Mihaela van der Schaar 1

Abstract

applications, generative models allow for generation of new
synthetic samples consistent with the distribution of the
training data, yet distinct from the actual data encountered
during training. Recently this field has seen tremendous
progress in various modalities including image (Karras et al.,
2020; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021), audio (Kong et al., 2021;
Donahue et al., 2018), video (Rombach et al., 2022) and
text (Dieleman et al., 2022) generation, as well as addressing inverse problems such as in-painting (Lugmayr et al.,
2022) or super-resolution (Saharia et al., 2022). Moreover
deep generative models have started showing significant
potential in contributing to natural sciences, though protein
design (Watson et al., 2023), drug development (Xu et al.,
2022) and material synthesis (Zeni et al., 2023). However,
the application of these models to time series data has not
seen the same level of advancement (Gatta et al., 2022).
Some notable examples of time series generative models
include TimeGAN (Yoon et al., 2019), FourierFlow (Alaa
et al., 2021), and RCGAN (Esteban et al., 2017), yet this
area remains less explored compared to other applications.
While research on generative modeling for time series has
not progressed as quicky as in the static setting, it is an
equally important problem. For example, generative modelling for time series is a promising avenue to reconciliate
privacy with the development of machine learning models,
notably in high-stakes domains such as healthcare, where
access to time series data is subject to strong regulations
by medical institutions (Miller & Tucker, 2009). Another
example is generating time series for data augmentation, in
order to increase the dataset size for some downstream tasks
or to address imbalance problems (Nikolaidis et al., 2019).

Fourier analysis has been an instrumental tool
in the development of signal processing. This
leads us to wonder whether this framework could
similarly benefit generative modelling. In this paper, we explore this question through the scope of
time series diffusion models. More specifically,
we analyze whether representing time series in the
frequency domain is a useful inductive bias for
score-based diffusion models. By starting from
the canonical SDE formulation of diffusion in
the time domain, we show that a dual diffusion
process occurs in the frequency domain with an
important nuance: Brownian motions are replaced
by what we call mirrored Brownian motions, characterized by mirror symmetries among their components. Building on this insight, we show how
to adapt the denoising score matching approach
to implement diffusion models in the frequency
domain. This results in frequency diffusion models, which we compare to canonical time diffusion
models. Our empirical evaluation on real-world
datasets, covering various domains like healthcare
and finance, shows that frequency diffusion models better capture the training distribution than
time diffusion models. We explain this observation by showing that time series from these
datasets tend to be more localized in the frequency
domain than in the time domain, which makes
them easier to model in the former case. All our
observations point towards impactful synergies
between Fourier analysis and diffusion models.

Diffusion Models. In recent years, diffusion models
(Hyvärinen & Dayan, 2005; Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015;
Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020) have emerged as one
of the most promising research avenues in deep generative
modelling, achieving state-of-the art results across many
generative modelling tasks (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Saharia et al., 2022). Diffusion models have been applied
to time series modelling, achieving promising results (Lin
et al., 2023). However, there is substantial room for development and refinement in these early-stage applications.

1. Introduction
Deep generative modelling leverages the inductive bias of
neural networks to learn complex, high-dimensional probability distributions from real-world datasets. Among other
*

Equal contribution 1 DAMTP, University of Cambridge. Correspondence to: Jonathan Crabbé <jc2133@cam.ac.uk>, Nicolas
Huynh <nvth2@cam.ac.uk>.

Fourier Analysis. Fourier analysis is a remarkably powerful tool in signal processing, compression and machine
learning (Körner, 2022). It has been shown to significantly

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

