Short-Long Convolutions Help Hardware-Efficient Linear Attention
to Focus on Long Sequences

Zicheng Liu 1

Siyuan Li 1

Li Wang 1

Zedong Wang 1

Abstract

Yunfan Liu 1

Stan Z. Li† 1

vlin et al., 2019), visual signal processing (Dosovitskiy et al.,
2021; Liu et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023), and
speech understanding (Gulati et al., 2020). These models
use the attention mechanism, which calculates a dependency score for each pair of tokens in an input sequence.
Consequently, full attention has a quadratic time and space
complexity relative to the sequence length. This complexity,
however, becomes computationally prohibitive for tasks that
involve long sequences (Lin et al., 2022). It is worth mentioning that Transformer models equipped with full attention tend to overfit. This is because the attention mechanism
does not make any assumptions about the structure of the
inputs, which leads to the absence of structural biases. To
train a Transformer model, even the order information has
to be included. Therefore, the full attention is too flexible
to overfit to noise. This limitation restricts the practicality
of these models in long sequence modeling, where the dependency signal is often weak and the signal-to-noise ratio
is low. To solve this, recent studies have designed hybrid
models (Ma et al., 2022; Zuo et al., 2023) by combining
efficient state space models (SSMs) (Gu et al., 2021; 2020a;
2022; Hasani et al., 2022; Smith et al., 2023), with expressive attention variants for modeling long sequences from
perspectives in structured and flexible patterns, achieving
promising results. It is worth noting that their complexity is
essentially quadratic, and the corresponding linear versions
both suffer performance degradation (see Fig. 1 left).

To mitigate the computational complexity in
the self-attention mechanism on long sequences,
linear attention utilizes computation tricks to
achieve linear complexity, while state space models (SSMs) popularize a favourable practice of
using non-data-dependent memory pattern, i.e.,
emphasize the near and neglect the distant, to processing sequences. Recent studies have shown
the priorities by combining them as one. However, the efficiency of linear attention remains
only at the theoretical level in a causal setting,
and SSMs require various designed constraints
to operate effectively on specific data. Therefore,
in order to unveil the true power of the hybrid
design, the following two issues need to be addressed: (1) hardware-efficient implementation
for linear attention and (2) stabilization of SSMs.
To achieve this, we leverage the thought of tiling
and hierarchy to propose CHELA (short-long
Convolutions with Hardware-Efficient Linear
Attention), which replaces SSMs with short-long
convolutions and implements linear attention in
a divide-and-conquer manner. This approach enjoys global abstraction and data-dependent selection from stable SSM and linear attention while
maintaining real linear complexity. Our comprehensive experiments on the Long Range Arena
benchmark and language modeling tasks demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method.

While it is true that the simple use of a chunk linearization
strategy can rival the speed of SSMs, the drop in performance is significant. We, therefore, abandon this strategy
and the softmax function to accelerate the linear attention
operations of the kernel-based approach. In addition, long
convolution (Fu et al., 2023b) is more efficient and easier
to implement than the traditional SSMs. We believe combining these two modules could release the true power of
the hybrid model with faster speed and better performance.
However, the existence of such a dilemma is worth considering: (1) the linear attention in hybrid models is a
speed bottleneck for long convolution, the comparison is
shown in Fig. 1 right; (2) the instability of long convolution makes attention hard to optimize. Specifically, due
to the intense memory access (I/O) on the GPU and cumulative summation (cumsum) operation in a casual setting,

1. Introduction
Transformer models have demonstrated remarkable performance on a range of natural language processing
tasks (Vaswani et al., 2017), such as language modeling (De1

AI Lab, Research Center for Industries of the Future, Westlake
University, Hangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Stan Z. Li
<stan.zq.li@westlake.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

