Learning Cognitive Maps from Transformer Representations for Efficient
Planning in Partially Observed Environments

Antoine Dedieu 1 Wolfgang Lehrach 1 Guangyao Zhou 1 Dileep George 1 Miguel Lázaro-Gredilla 1
Observations

Abstract
Despite their stellar performance on a wide range
of tasks, including in-context tasks only revealed
during inference, vanilla transformers and variants trained for next-token predictions (a) do not
learn an explicit world model of their environment
which can be flexibly queried and (b) cannot be
used for planning or navigation. In this paper, we
consider partially observed environments (POEs),
where an agent receives perceptually aliased observations as it navigates, which makes path planning hard. We introduce a transformer with (multiple) discrete bottleneck(s), TDB, whose latent
codes learn a compressed representation of the
history of observations and actions. After training a TDB to predict the future observation(s)
given the history, we extract interpretable cognitive maps of the environment from its active
bottleneck(s) indices. These maps are then paired
with an external solver to solve (constrained) path
planning problems. First, we show that a TDB
trained on POEs (a) retains the near-perfect predictive performance of a vanilla transformer or
an LSTM while (b) solving shortest path problems exponentially faster. Second, a TDB extracts
interpretable representations from text datasets,
while reaching higher in-context accuracy than
vanilla sequence models. Finally, in new POEs, a
TDB (a) reaches near-perfect in-context accuracy,
(b) learns accurate in-context cognitive maps (c)
solves in-context path planning problems.

Actions

Figure 1. An agent is trained on random walks in an aliased room
with no reward and unknown layout. At test time, given a novel
random walk (in fuchsia), it has to find a shortest path (in red)
between room positions A and B. While a vanilla transformer
solves this path planning problem with forward rollouts, which can
be exponentially expensive due to aliasing, our transformer variant
pairs its learned cognitive map with an external solver.

processing (Radford et al., 2018; Chowdhery et al., 2022),
text-conditioned image generation (Ramesh et al., 2021), reinforcement learning (Chen et al., 2021a), and code writing
(Chen et al., 2021b). These large language models (LLMs)
also exhibit emergent abilities (Wei et al., 2022), among
which is their capacity to in-context learn (ICL), i.e., to
adapt to a new task at inference time given a few examples (Brown et al., 2020). However, these models suffer
from shortcomings that prevent them from being used for
planning (Valmeekam et al., 2022; Mialon et al., 2023).
Herein, we consider a suite of partially observed environments (POEs) (Chrisman, 1992) where the agent receives
perceptually aliased observations as it navigates; and cannot deterministically recover its spatial positions from its
observations. Path planning in these POEs is hard: the
planner has to disambiguate aliasing to locate itself, which
requires modeling its history of observations and actions.
Path planning in POEs is particularly hard for LLMs, as
these models do not learn an interpretable cognitive map
(Momennejad et al., 2023; Whittington et al., 2022)—i.e. an
action-conditioned latent graph modeling the POE dynamics
(George et al., 2021)—which can be flexibly queried.

1. Introduction
Large vanilla transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) trained
for next-token prediction have been successfully applied
to a wide range of applications such as natural language
1
Google DeepMind. Correspondence to: Antoine Dedieu
<adedieu@google.com>.

Example of a path planning problem in a POE that a
vanilla transformer cannot solve: We consider the partially observed 15 × 20 room in Fig.1, which only contains
four unique observations. The room also has global aliasing:

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

