Unsupervised Domain Adaptation for Anatomical Structure Detection in
Ultrasound Images

Bin Pu * 1 Xingguo Lv * 2 Jiewen Yang * 1 Guannan He 3 Xingbo Dong 2 Yiqun Lin 1 Shengli Li 4 Ying Tan 4
Fei Liu 2 Ming Chen 5 Zhe Jin 2 Kenli Li 6 Xiaomeng Li 1

Abstract
LV

Consistent
LV

Models trained on ultrasound images from one
institution typically experience a decline in effectiveness when transferred directly to other institutions. Moreover, unlike natural images, dense
and overlapped structures exist in fetus ultrasound
images, making the detection of structures more
challenging. Thus, to tackle this problem, we
propose a new Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) method integrated with the Topology Knowledge Transfer (TKT) and the Morphology Knowledge Transfer (MKT) module for fetus structure detection, named ToMo-UDA. TKT
leverages prior knowledge of the medical anatomy
of fetal as topological information, reconstructing and aligning anatomy features across source
and target domains. Then, MKT formulates a
more consistent and independent morphological
representation for each substructure of an organ.
To evaluate the proposed ToMo-UDA for ultrasound fetal anatomical structure detection, we
introduce FUSH2 , a new Fetal UltraSound benchmark, comprises Heart and Head images collected
from Two health centers, with 16 annotated regions. Our experiments show that utilizing topological and morphological anatomy information
in ToMo-UDA greatly improves organ structure
detection. This expands the potential for structure
detection tasks in medical image analysis.

Position, Size,
Relationship …

Left Ventricle
Left Ventricle

Consistent in Shape, Pattern,
Representation …

Target Domain

Source Domain

Left Ventricle

Figure 1: Ultrasound images contain prior knowledge across
domains. All substructures of the same view remain consistent in topology (position, size, relationship) and morphology (shape, patterns, representation), which provides
us with new insights into UDA, enhancing our capacity to
bridge the domain gaps effectively (Best view in color).

1. Introduction
In clinical practice, the observation of anatomical structures
allows for the direct diagnosis of many diseases (Xue et al.,
2021; Lin et al., 2019; Arnaout et al., 2021; Zheng et al.,
2023; Dai et al., 2022; Li et al., 2018). For example, the
absence of cavum septi pellucidi structure in fetal head view
is diagnosed as a severe disease called holoprosencephaly
(Monteagudo, 2020). Therefore, anatomical structure detection serves as an essential foundation for disease diagnosis.
Recently, deep learning (DL)-based methods as a powerful tool have already achieved significant progress in fetal
anatomical structure detection, such as standard view quality control (Pu et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2017; Zhao et al.,
2022; Wu et al., 2017), and disease diagnosis (Gong et al.,
2019; Xu et al., 2022).
Nonetheless, applying DL-based models directly to anatomical structure detection in ultrasound data often yields suboptimal results, especially for data from multiple health centers
(Guan & Liu, 2021). This is because real-world datasets
have domain gaps (Oza et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023a) due
to variations in data collection devices and obstetricians’
scanning techniques across different hospital centers. Finetuning the DL models on the target data may solve the
problem, but obtaining accurate annotations from obstetrician experts is either costly or unavailable. The diversity of
machines equipped with various transducers further challenges annotations, presenting a significant hurdle for DL

*

Equal contribution 1 The Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology 2 Anhui Provincial International Joint Research Center
for Advanced Technology in Medical Imaging, Anhui University
3
Sichuan Provincial Maternity and Child Health Care Hospital
4
Shenzhen Maternity and Child Healthcare Hospital 5 Harbin Red
Cross Central Hospital 6 Hunan University. Correspondence to:
Kenli Li <lkl@hnu.edu.cn>, Xiaomeng Li <eexmli@ust.hk>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

