Balanced Data, Imbalanced Spectra:
Unveiling Class Disparities with Spectral Imbalance

Chiraag Kaushik * 1 Ran Liu * 1 Chi-Heng Lin 1 2 Amrit Khera 1 Matthew Y Jin 3 Wenrui Ma 1
Vidya Muthukumar 1 Eva L Dyer 1

Abstract

models are often biased towards better performance on some
classes of the data and may do a poor job on others.

Classification models are expected to perform
equally well for different classes, yet in practice,
there are often large gaps in their performance.
This issue of class bias is widely studied in cases
of datasets with sample imbalance, but is relatively overlooked in balanced datasets. In this
work, we introduce the concept of spectral imbalance in features as a potential source for class
disparities and study the connections between
spectral imbalance and class bias in both theory
and practice. To build the connection between
spectral imbalance and class gap, we develop a
theoretical framework for studying class disparities and derive exact expressions for the per-class
error in a high-dimensional mixture model setting. We then study this phenomenon in 11 different state-of-the-art pretrained encoders, and
show how our proposed framework can be used to
compare the quality of encoders, as well as evaluate and combine data augmentation strategies to
mitigate the issue. Our work sheds light on the
class-dependent effects of learning, and provides
new insights into how state-of-the-art pretrained
features may have unknown biases that can be diagnosed through their spectra. Code can be found
at https://github.com/nerdslab/SpectraImbalance.

Most studies and approaches for dealing with class bias
have focused on sample imbalance, or the fact that different
classes often have different number of samples (Zhang et al.,
2023a). In this case, mechanisms to reweight the loss or
rebalance the dataset can be used to correct the sample
imbalance (Ren et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2022). Somewhat
surprisingly, even without sample imbalance there can still
be significant performance gaps across classes, including
on state-of-the-art encoders (Ma et al., 2022; 2023). These
effects can become more pronounced depending on the
types of regularization and/or data augmentation used during
training (Balestriero et al., 2022; Kirichenko et al., 2023).
Thus, we need a better understanding of the sources of
class disparities and new approaches for identifying and
mitigating underlying biases in models. This is particularly
relevant due to the popularity of foundation and pretrained
models, since underlying biases in the pretrained features
may impact performance and robustness on downstream
tasks.
In this work, we introduce a new framework for studying
class-dependent generalization that relies on a concept that
we call spectral imbalance. The central idea behind this
perspective is that differences, or shifts, in the distribution
of features across classes could be the source of class biases. We characterize these differences in feature geometry
using the distribution of eigenvalues, i.e. the spectrum, for
each class and show, both in theory and in practice, that
deviations in spectra across classes will indeed produce
interesting effects on the class gap. Our findings complement recent empirical work that connects certain geometric
properties of learned features to per-class performance (Ma
et al., 2022; 2023) while also providing a formal theoretical
connection between spectral imbalance and class gaps in
high-dimensional linear models.

1. Introduction
A core objective in machine learning is to build fair classification models that provide good performance irrespective
of the class to which the data belongs. In practice, however,
*
Equal contribution 1 Georgia Institute of Technology, Georgia,
the USA. 2 Samsung Research. 3 Stanford University, California,
the USA. Correspondence to: Ran Liu <rliu361@gatech.edu>,
Chiraag Kaushik <ckaushik7@gatech.edu>, Eva L Dyer
<evadyer@gatech.edu>, Vidya Muthukumar <vmuthukumar8@gatech.edu>.

First, we develop a theoretical framework for studying this
phenomenon and dig deeper into the distinct ways in which
spectral imbalance may impact class gap. In particular,
we derive exact asymptotic expressions for the class-wise
error in a Gaussian mixture model with class-specific covari-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

