Model-based Reinforcement Learning for Confounded POMDPs

Mao Hong 1 Zhengling Qi 2 Yanxun Xu 1

Abstract

processes (MDPs) unsuitable for modeling the underlying
data-generating processes. For example, in autonomous
driving, the environment is typically not fully observed. Instead, only partial information, such as noisy images or
videos captured by cameras, is available (Sun et al., 2020).
Considering partial observability inherent in many applications, partially observable Markov decision processes
(POMDPs) (Monahan, 1982) are considered as a more appropriate framework for sequential decision-making for a
wide range of applications (e.g., Sawaki & Ichikawa, 1978;
Albright, 1979; Monahan, 1982; Singh et al., 1994; Jaakkola
et al., 1994; Cassandra, 1998; Young et al., 2013; Zhang &
Bareinboim, 2016; Bravo et al., 2019). Moreover, in light of
the ethical and logistical challenges faced by online learning
such as the assignment of patients to potentially inferior or
harmful treatments in healthcare (Gottesman et al., 2019),
offline RL emerged and has recently received a lot of research interests (Levine et al., 2020). In the offline setting,
an agent aims to perform policy evaluation and learning
by only using a pre-collected dataset, which may be more
practical in solving decision-making problems in some high
stake domains.

We propose a model-based offline reinforcement
learning (RL) algorithm for confounded partially
observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs)
under general function approximations and show
it is provably efficient under some technical conditions such as the partial coverage imposed on
the offline data distribution. Specifically, we first
establish a novel model-based identification result
for learning the effect of any action on the reward
and future transitions in the confounded POMDP.
Using this identification result, we then design a
nonparametric two-stage estimation procedure to
construct an estimator for off-policy evaluation
(OPE), which permits general function approximations. Finally, we learn the optimal policy
by performing a conservative policy optimization
within the confidence regions based on the proposed estimation procedure for OPE. Under some
mild conditions, we establish a finite-sample upper bound on the suboptimality of the learned
policy in finding the optimal one, which depends
on the sample size and the length of horizons
polynomially.

Due to these practical challenges, there is a recent line of
research focusing on developing offline RL methods for
confounded POMDPs (e.g., Tennenholtz et al., 2020; Bennett & Kallus, 2021; Nair & Jiang, 2021; Shi et al., 2022;
Miao et al., 2022; Lu et al., 2022; Hong et al., 2023). The
confounding effect (Pearl, 2009) in this context arises from
the offline data-generating processes, wherein the behavior
policy depends on the unobserved states. In this setting,
unobserved state variables act as unmeasured confounders
at each decision point, which can simultaneously affect the
action, the reward, and the future transition. This complexity introduces a confounding bias when standard offline RL
methods designed for MDPs fail. To address this issue,
some aforementioned works employ proxy variables for policy evaluation and learning. A significant portion of these
investigations focuses on the task of off-policy evaluation
(e.g., Tennenholtz et al., 2020; Bennett & Kallus, 2021; Nair
& Jiang, 2021; Shi et al., 2022; Miao et al., 2022), with only
a few exploring the problem of offline policy learning (Lu
et al., 2022; Hong et al., 2023). In particular, Hong et al.
(2023) introduced a first policy gradient method for confounded POMDPs, but under some stringent full coverage

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 2018) has
been recognized as an effective approach for optimizing
sequential decision-making processes. It seeks to learn an
optimal policy by maximizing the expected cumulative rewards. However, most existing literature has focused on
environments that are fully observable with Markovian transition dynamics, which may not be known a priori. In
practice, the challenge of partial observability of state information frequently arises, making the Markov decision
1

Department of Applied Mathematics and Statistics, Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore, United States 2 Department of
Decision Sciences, George Washington University, Washington, DC, United States. Correspondence to: Zhengling Qi
<qizhengling@gwu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

