On the Asymptotic Distribution of the Minimum Empirical Risk

Jacob Westerhout 1 TrungTin Nguyen 1 Xin Guo 1 Hien Duy Nguyen 2 3

Abstract

by instead computing
n

1X
l(x, Zi ),
x∈X n
i=1

Empirical risk minimization (ERM) is a foundational framework for the estimation of solutions to
statistical and machine learning problems. Characterizing the distributional properties of the minimum empirical risk (MER) provides valuable
tools for conducting inference and assessing the
goodness of model fit. We provide a comprehensive account
√ of the asymptotic distribution for
the order- n blowup of the MER under generic
and abstract assumptions, and present practical
conditions under which our theorems hold. Our
results improve upon and relax the assumptions
made in previous works. Specifically, we provide asymptotic distributions for MERs for nonindependent and identically distributed data, and
when the loss functions may be discontinuous
or indexed by non-Euclidean spaces. We further
present results that enable the application of these
asymptotics for statistical inference. Specifically,
the construction of consistent confidence sets using the bootstrap and consistent hypothesis tests
using penalized model selection. We illustrate the
utility of our approach by applying our results to
neural network problems.

inf

where the data Zi has the same distribution as Z, and the
loss function l (·, Z) is indexed by parameter x ∈ X .
ERM appears as a fundamental topic in texts such as Vapnik (1998), Vidyasagar (2003), and Shalev-Shwartz & BenDavid (2014). A great variety of ML methods, from linear and logistic regression to maximum likelihood estimation, support vector machines, and even deep neural networks, can be characterized as ERM problems. The study of
ERM problems is also fundamental in statistics and econometric theory, taking on guises such as extremum estimation (Amemiya, 1985; Gourieroux & Monfort, 1995), Mestimation (Serfling, 1980; van der Vaart & Wellner, 2023),
and minimum contrasts estimation (Dacunha-Castelle &
Duflo, 1986; Bickel & Doksum, 2015), among other names.
The primary objects of interest when studying ERM problems are the empirical risk minimizer (ERM) and the minimum of the empirical risk (MER). Typical problems are the
convergence of the ERM and MER to their target values, often referred to as consistency (e.g., Vapnik 1998, Ch. 3 and
van der Vaart & Wellner 2023, Sec. 3.3); the finite-sample
concentration of mass and in expectation around their targets, often studied as oracle inequalities (e.g., Koltchinskii
2011, Ch. 4 and Cucker & Zhou 2007, Ch. 3); and the
asymptotic convergence of blowup sequences of ERMs and
their functions to limiting distributions (e.g., van der Vaart
& Wellner 2023, Sec. 3.3).

1. Introduction
Empirical risk minimization (ERM) is among the most foundational paradigms of machine learning (ML). ERM considers approximating

Of relatively less interest has been the study of the limiting
distribution of the MER, which dates back to the original
work of Wilks (1938), who provided conditions under which
the order-n blowup (or simply, n-blowup; defined in Section 3) of the maximum likelihood (ML) converges to a
χ2 random variable. This forms the basis for likelihood
ratio tests, for comparing the difference between the loglikelihoods of two competing models. Generalizations of
such results are frequently sought and studied to provide
hypothesis tests and uncertainty quantification in general
statistical settings. Examples of developments in this vein
include the works of Vuong (1989), who demonstrates the
distributional convergence of the n-blowup to a weighted

inf E(l(x, Z)),

x∈X

1
School of Mathematics and Physics, The University of Queensland, St Lucia, QLD 4072, Australia 2 School of Computing, Engineering, and Mathematical Sciences, La Trobe University, Bundoora, VIC 3086, Australia 3 Institute of Mathematics for Industry,
Kyushu University, Nishi Ward, Fukuoka 819-0395, Japan. Correspondence to: Hien Nguyen <hien@imi.kyushu-u.ac.jp>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

