Deconstructing the Goldilocks Zone of Neural Network Initialization

Artem Vysogorets 1 Anna Dawid 2 Julia Kempe 1 3

Abstract

tion of machine learning models. The training loss Hessian
and its properties have received a lot of attention, as they offer key insights into generalization (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997; Keskar et al., 2017), convergence speed (Becker
et al., 1988), and broader optimization dynamics (Jastrz˛ebski et al., 2020; Cohen et al., 2021).

The second-order properties of the training loss
have a massive impact on the optimization dynamics of deep learning models. Fort & Scherlis
(2019) discovered that a large excess of positive
curvature and local convexity of the loss Hessian
is associated with highly trainable initial points
located in a region coined the “Goldilocks zone”.
Only a handful of subsequent studies touched
upon this relationship, so it remains largely unexplained. In this paper, we present a rigorous and
comprehensive analysis of the Goldilocks zone
for homogeneous neural networks. In particular,
we derive the fundamental condition resulting in
excess of positive curvature of the loss, explaining
and refining its conventionally accepted connection to the initialization norm. Further, we relate
the excess of positive curvature to model confidence, low initial loss, and a previously unknown
type of vanishing cross-entropy loss gradient. To
understand the importance of excessive positive
curvature for trainability of deep networks, we
optimize fully-connected and convolutional architectures outside the Goldilocks zone and analyze the emergent behaviors. We find that strong
model performance is not perfectly aligned with
the Goldilocks zone, calling for further research
into this relationship.

Figure 1. The Goldilocks zone is an area of excess of positive
curvature of the loss. Left: Originally, the Goldilocks zone is observed for a narrow range of initialization scales. Middle: Setting
the appropriate softmax temperature T allows for excess positive
curvature at initialization of any norm. Right: Recreating the
Goldilocks zone at an unscaled initialization just by varying T .

While the Hessian is extensively studied throughout training
and at convergence, fewer works focus on the initialization stage. Recently, Fort & Scherlis (2019) discovered
the Goldilocks zone—a region of the optimization space
marked by excessive positive curvature Tr(H)/∥H∥F and
local convexity of the loss Hessian H (see Figure 1). The
anomalous readings of these metrics are recorded at a certain
distance from the origin of the configuration space where
some widely used initialization schemes such as Xavier
(Glorot & Bengio, 2010) and Kaiming (He et al., 2015) are
found. Thus, the Goldilocks zone is believed to be a hollow
centered spherical shell that contains a high density of suitable initial points. Indeed, an appropriate parameter norm
is crucial to avoid exploding and vanishing signals, and it
seems reasonable that initializations of extreme norm (outside the Goldilocks zone) might suffer from this notorious
issue. However, internal covariate shift is largely solved
in practice by BatchNorm (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015), and it
can be directly accounted for in some special cases. For
example, given an L-layer homogeneous network fαθ with
an α-scaled initialization (Dinh et al., 2017), the appropriate
logit variance and gradient norm can be restored by applying a carefully selected softmax temperature T = αL and

1. Introduction
Every neural network gives rise to a high-dimensional optimization space spanned by its trainable parameters. The
complex geometry of these spaces and embedded loss landscapes has been an area of prolific research since the incep1
Center for Data Science, New York University, 60 Fifth
Ave, New York, NY 10011 2 Center for Computational Quantum
Physics, Flatiron Institute, 162 Fifth Ave, New York, NY 10010,
USA 3 Courant Institute, New York University, 251 Mercer St,
New York, NY 10012. Correspondence to: Artem Vysogorets
<amv458@nyu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

