Safe Reinforcement Learning using Finite-Horizon Gradient-based Estimation

Juntao Dai 1 2 Yaodong Yang 3 Qian Zheng 1 2 Gang Pan 1 2

Abstract
A key aspect of Safe Reinforcement Learning
(Safe RL) involves estimating the constraint condition for the next policy, which is crucial for
guiding the optimization of safe policy updates.
However, the existing Advantage-based Estimation (ABE) method relies on the infinite-horizon
discounted advantage function. This dependence
leads to catastrophic errors in finite-horizon scenarios with non-discounted constraints, resulting in safety-violation updates. In response, we
propose the first estimation method for finitehorizon non-discounted constraints in deep Safe
RL, termed Gradient-based Estimation (GBE),
which relies on the analytic gradient derived along
trajectories. Our theoretical and empirical analyses demonstrate that GBE can effectively estimate
constraint changes over a finite horizon. Constructing a surrogate optimization problem with
GBE, we developed a novel Safe RL algorithm
called Constrained Gradient-based Policy Optimization (CGPO). CGPO identifies feasible optimal policies by iteratively resolving sub-problems
within trust regions. Our empirical results reveal
that CGPO, unlike baseline algorithms, successfully estimates the constraint functions of subsequent policies, thereby ensuring the efficiency and
feasibility of each update.

(a) Cost Function

(b) Relative Estimation Errors

Figure 1. Advantage-based Estimation fails even in simple environments under finite-horizon constraints. (a) The cost obtained
by the agent while traversing along the x-axis, namely, ct = c(xt ).
(b) Relative errors in the estimation
of changes in the finite-horizon
P
cumulative constraint (i.e., ⊤
c
t=1 t ≤ b). The ABE method generates relative errors even greater than 1.0, showing completely
incorrect estimations. Refer to Appendix C for more details.

et al., 2022), robotic control (Okamura et al., 2000; Singh
et al., 2022), Go (Silver et al., 2016; 2017), and the training
of large language models (Ouyang et al., 2022; Rafailov
et al., 2023). Recently, there has been a growing emphasis on prioritizing the safety of policy learning. This shift
is driven by the critical need for safety in real-world applications, such as autonomous driving (Muhammad et al.,
2020) and service robots (Bogue, 2017). In response, Safe
RL (Garcıa & Fernández, 2015) has emerged as a related
paradigm, aiming to provide reliable and robust policy
learning in the face of complex and dynamic environments.
The Constrained Markov Decision Process (CMDP) (Altman, 1999) stands as a foundational framework of Safe
RL, augmenting the traditional Markov Decision Process
(MDP) (Puterman, 1990) by incorporating constraints.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 2018) stands
as a powerful paradigm in artificial intelligence. Over the
past few years, RL has achieved notable success across various challenging tasks, such as video games (ElDahshan

In most Safe RL benchmarks (Ray et al., 2019; Gronauer,
2022; Ji et al., 2023b), the common practical constraints
are represented as non-discounted sums over finite trajectories, subject to scalar thresholds. However, existing deep
Safe RL algorithms uniformly apply an infinite-horizon approach, the Advantage-based Estimation (ABE) (Achiam
et al., 2017), across all types of constraints. This fundamental discrepancy hinders these algorithms’ ability to accurately predict the constraint values for subsequent policies,

1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China 2 The State Key Lab of Brain-Machine
Intelligence, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China 3 Center for AI
Safety and Governance, Peking University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Qian Zheng <qianzheng@zju.edu.cn>, Gang Pan
<gpan@zju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

