Mimicking Better by Matching the Approximate Action Distribution

João A. Cândido Ramos 1 2 Lionel Blondé 2 Naoya Takeishi 3 4 Alexandros Kalousis 2

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce MAAD, a novel,
sample-efficient on-policy algorithm for Imitation Learning from Observations. MAAD utilizes a surrogate reward signal, which can be
derived from various sources such as adversarial games, trajectory matching objectives, or optimal transport criteria. To compensate for the
non-availability of expert actions, we rely on an
inverse dynamics model that infers plausible actions distribution given the expert’s state-state
transitions; we regularize the imitator’s policy
by aligning it to the inferred action distribution.
MAAD leads to significantly improved sample
efficiency and stability. We demonstrate its effectiveness in a number of MuJoCo environments,
both int the OpenAI Gym and the DeepMind Control Suite. We show that it requires considerable
fewer interactions to achieve expert performance,
outperforming current state-of-the-art on-policy
methods. Remarkably, MAAD often stands out
as the sole method capable of attaining expert performance levels, underscoring its simplicity and
efficacy.

(a) DMC Suite

(b) OpenAI Gym

Figure 1: Median Normalized Return, over different environments, of various instantiations of our method (solid
lines) versus baselines (dashed curves). Methods marked
with † have access to expert actions representing the best
possible performance, all others do not. More details on the
construction of the figure in Section C.3.

to expert actions, precluding its use in scenarios where actions are not observable, such as in motion capture data or
video recordings.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) trains agents to perform tasks
by learning from rewards.Crafting a reward function that accurately reflects the intended task remains challenging (Silver et al., 2017; Ouyang et al., 2022). An alternative strategy
involves teaching agents through demonstration, known as
Imitation Learning (IL), where the goal is for the agent to
closely replicate expert demonstrations, usually given as
sequences of state-action pairs. While IL circumvents the
complexity of designing reward functions, it requires access

Imitation learning from observations (ILO), as opposed to
imitation learning from demonstrations (ILD), focuses on
learning from states alone, allowing agents to imitate expert
behavior without accessing their actions. This approach
is more versatile, addressing the limitations of IL in many
practical contexts, and has gained significant interest for its
broader applicability in fields like autonomous driving. To
facilitate imitation learning without direct action information, one strategy modifies algorithms to operate over statestate transitions rather than state-action pairs. This adaptation, as explored by (Torabi et al., 2019), leverages statestate transitions to distinguish between expert and agent. A
different strand of research focuses on inferring missing actions through inverse models of the environment, facilitating
the application of traditional IL methods (Hanna & Stone,
2017; Nair et al., 2017; Pavse et al., 2019; Al-Hafez et al.,
2023).

1

University of Geneva (UNIGE), Switzerland 2 University of
Applied Sciences and Arts Western (HES-SO), Switzerland 3 The
University of Tokyo, Japan 4 RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, Japan. Correspondence to: João A. Cândido Ramos
<joao.candido@etu.unige.ch>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

