Evaluating Model Bias Requires Characterizing its Mistakes

Isabela Albuquerque 1 Jessica Schrouff 1 David Warde-Farley 1 Taylan Cemgil 1 Sven Gowal 1 Olivia Wiles 1

Abstract

et al., 2023). To evaluate unintended biases in model outputs, existing metrics divide the population (or test set) into
subgroups (based on demographic characteristics, how wellrepresented in the dataset each group is, or another characteristic of significance) and aggregate the e.g. correct and
incorrect outputs across those subgroups as in (Sagawa et al.,
2019). However, existing metrics consider as equivalent all
responses deemed to be incorrect, obscuring important information regarding a model’s bias characteristics, especially
in the context of large or intractable output spaces.

The ability to properly benchmark model performance in the face of spurious correlations is important to both build better predictors and increase
confidence that models are operating as intended.
We demonstrate that characterizing (as opposed
to simply quantifying) model mistakes across subgroups is pivotal to properly reflect model biases,
which are ignored by standard metrics such as
worst-group accuracy or accuracy gap. Inspired
by the hypothesis testing framework, we introduce S KEW S IZE, a principled and flexible metric
that captures bias from mistakes in a model’s predictions. It can be used in multi-class settings
or generalised to the open vocabulary setting of
generative models. S KEW S IZE is an aggregation
of the effect size of the interaction between two
categorical variables: the spurious variable representing the bias attribute the model’s prediction.
We demonstrate the utility of S KEW S IZE in multiple settings including: standard vision models
trained on synthetic data, vision models trained on
I MAGE N ET, and large scale vision-and-language
models from the B LIP -2 family. In each case, the
proposed S KEW S IZE is able to highlight biases
not captured by other metrics, while also providing insights on the impact of recently proposed
techniques, such as instruction tuning.

Motivating example. Consider the synthetic setup in Figure 1 which compares two image classification models:
M ODEL 1 and M ODEL 2. These models predict occupation, with different distributions of outputs across two mutually exclusive1 subgroups (male and female). Following
prior work, we first compute model accuracy in each subgroup (e.g. Chowdhery et al., 2022), worst group accuracy
(i.e. minimum accuracy across groups, Sagawa et al., 2019)
and G AP (the difference between subgroup accuracy and
overall accuracy, Zhang & Ré, 2022) across the following
three ground-truth classes:
• W RITER: M ODEL 2’s accuracy is lower than that of
M ODEL 1; a bias in M ODEL 2’s predictions is evident
in women being misclassified as Editors and men being
misclassified as Composers and Philosophers. Accuracy and Worst group accuracy degrade as expected for
the more biased model, whereas G AP does not.
• D OCTOR: Accuracy is the same for M ODEL 1 and
M ODEL 2 but a bias is evident in M ODEL 2’s predictions, with women being misclassified as Nurses,
and men being misclassified as Surgeons. Traditional
accuracy-based metrics do not capture this bias.
• B IOLOGIST: Accuracy is higher for M ODEL 2 than
M ODEL 1, but a bias is evident in M ODEL 2’s predictions, with women being misclassified as Teachers and
men as Scientists or Bankers. Counterintuitively, the
standard metrics improve or stay the same.
• All: Aggregating across classes, we can see that the
standard metrics either improve in M ODEL 2 relative
to M ODEL 1 or do not change.

1. Introduction
Machine learning systems can capture unintended biases (Dixon et al., 2018) by relying on correlations in their
training data that may be spurious (i.e. a finite sample artifact), undesirable and/or that might vary across environments. Models of all scales are vulnerable to this failure
mode, including recent, large-scale models (Weidinger et al.,
2022; Birhane et al., 2023; Luccioni et al., 2023; Solaiman
1
Google DeepMind. Correspondence to: Isabela Albuquerque
<isabelaa@google.com>.

1
Assumed to be mutually exclusive for the limited purpose
of this illustrative example. We recognize that reality is richer
and more nuanced than this binary categorization. See Impact
Statement section.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

