Bayesian Program Learning by Decompiling Amortized Knowledge

Alessandro B. Palmarini 1 † Christopher G. Lucas 2 N. Siddharth 2 3

Abstract
D REAM C ODER is an inductive program synthesis
system that, whilst solving problems, learns to
simplify search in an iterative wake-sleep procedure. The cost of search is amortized by training
a neural search policy, reducing search breadth
and effectively “compiling” useful information to
compose program solutions across tasks. Additionally, a library of program components is learnt
to compress and express discovered solutions in
fewer components, reducing search depth. We
present a novel approach for library learning that
directly leverages the neural search policy, effectively “decompiling” its amortized knowledge to
extract relevant program components. This provides stronger amortized inference: the amortized
knowledge learnt to reduce search breadth is now
also used to reduce search depth. We integrate our
approach with D REAM C ODER and demonstrate
faster domain proficiency with improved generalization on a range of domains, particularly when
fewer example solutions are available.

Figure 1: (A) Program search space for a simple library
containing two primitives: a function f : N → N and a
variable n : N. Red path highlights the program f (f (n)).
(B) Restructured search space after f ◦ f is chunked into a
new primitive g, illustrating the breadth-depth trade off.

Any program must be built from some set of primitive components: base operations and elements. While a set of such
components (library) is finite, they can be combined in an infinite number of ways to form different programs. Moreover,
this number grows exponentially with the number of components used, rendering blind search intractable in all but the
simplest of cases. Improving upon blind search requires reducing the number of combinations searched. There are two
broad routes to achieving this: we can (i) reduce the breadth
searched as we move down the search tree to program solutions or we can (ii) reduce the depth searched by pushing
program solutions higher up the search tree. Accomplishing
either requires additional knowledge.

1. Introduction
The goal in inductive program synthesis is to generate a program whose functionality matches example behaviour (Gulwani et al., 2017). If behaviour is specified as input/output
examples, then the problem could be solved trivially by
defining a program that embeds (hard codes) the example
transformations directly. This solution, however, does not
provide an account relating, or explaining, how inputs map
to outputs, nor does it facilitate generalization to inputs beyond what it has observed. Discovering a program that can
do this cannot be derived from examples, just as our scientific theories cannot be derived from observations (Deutsch,
2011)—some form of hypothesising is required (i.e. search).

To reduce the breadth searched requires knowledge for
avoiding search paths that do not contain program solutions,
while focusing on those that do—i.e. a search policy. To
reduce the depth searched requires knowledge about which
functionality is used by program solutions: if any functionality, expressed as a combination of library components, was
itself made part of the library, then any program using this
functionality could be expressed with fewer components. In
effect, a copy of every program containing the functionality is pasted higher up the search tree, reducing the depth
required to reach the program’s corresponding computation, as illustrated in Fig. 1. We refer to turning composed
functionality into a library operation as “chunking”.

†
Majority of work done at University of Edinburgh 1 Santa Fe
Institute, Santa Fe, NM, USA 2 School of Informatics, University
of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK 3 The Alan Turing Institute, UK. Correspondence to: Alessandro B. Palmarini <abp@santafe.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Chunking to reduce the search depth comes at the cost of
increasing the search breadth—there are now more library
1

