Libra: Building Decoupled Vision System on Large Language Models

Yifan Xu 1 2 3 Xiaoshan Yang 1 2 3 Yaguang Song 2 Changsheng Xu 1 2 3

Abstract

2023; Peng et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2022a) jointly trains
multimodal models from scratch, naturally aligning vision
and language under the unified structure design and modeling paradigm. However, these approaches often compromise
on unified but not general models due to an information
imbalance: general intelligence in the era of foundation
models demands a large scale of language knowledge, but
unfortunately, visual data falls short in matching the scale
of language. For instance, Unified-IO (Lu et al., 2022a)
achieves cross-modal comprehension by making sacrifices
in certain language capabilities, especially the wide range
of world knowledge and chat ability.

In this work, we introduce Libra, a prototype
model with a decoupled vision system on a large
language model (LLM). The decoupled vision system decouples inner-modal modeling and crossmodal interaction, yielding unique visual information modeling and effective cross-modal comprehension. Libra is trained through discrete autoregressive modeling on both vision and language
inputs. Specifically, we incorporate a routed visual expert with a cross-modal bridge module
into a pretrained LLM to route the vision and
language flows during attention computing to enable different attention patterns in inner-modal
modeling and cross-modal interaction scenarios.
Experimental results demonstrate that the dedicated design of Libra achieves a strong MLLM
baseline that rivals existing works in the image-totext scenario with merely 50 million training data,
providing a new perspective for future multimodal
foundation models. Code is available at https:
//github.com/YifanXu74/Libra.

In light of this, another line of works (Alayrac et al., 2022;
Liu et al., 2023b; Bai et al., 2023; Sun et al., 2023b), LLMbased approaches, follows a staged training paradigm: first
training a large language model (LLM) to acquire a wide
range of general knowledge, then integrating visual perception into the pretrained LLM. This paradigm is reasonable because it can efficiently transfer the general knowledge learned by the language model to the MLLMs. To
this end, on the basis of well-built language systems like
LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023), building an effective vision
system for essential visual sensory and a reasonable crossmodal interaction strategy for cross-modal comprehension
upon LLMs becomes a natural idea.

1. Introduction

A straightforward approach in most recent LLM-based
works is to employ a pretrained vision encoder like
CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) as the vision system, integrating
its features into a pretrained LLM to facilitate cross-modal
interaction, e.g., through a trainable Q-Former (Li et al.,
2023d) or a simple projection layer (Liu et al., 2023b). This
integration is achieved through an image-captioning loss,
where the supervision is only performed on the language
part. However, this pipeline leads to a weak vision system
because its visual understanding ability is limited by the pretrained vision encoder. To address this, several works (Dong
et al., 2023), such as Emu (Sun et al., 2023b), attempt to
directly build more sophisticated vision systems on LLMs.
They perform contiguous auto-regressive image modeling,
where each input visual feature predicts the input feature
of the next position. Despite impressive image generation
results, these works provide limited benefits to downstream
tasks because 1) the unified architecture makes coupled vision and language systems, thereby losing unique visual

The integration of vision and language plays a vital role
in machine perception and understanding of the world.
Language serves as the basis for cognitive processing,
while vision provides essential sensory information. In
this context, the field of multimodal large language models
(MLLMs) (Yin et al., 2023) has made remarkable progress,
yielding impressive results across various domains, including multimodal conversation (Google, 2023b; OpenAI,
2023), interactive agents (Hong et al., 2023), and even autonomous driving (Cui et al., 2024).
A line of recent works (Lu et al., 2022a; 2023; Huang et al.,
1
MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Peng Cheng Laboratory 3 School of Artificial Intelligence, University of the Chinese Academy of Sciences. Correspondence to:
Changsheng Xu <csxu@nlpr.ia.ac.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

