Efficient Low-Rank Matrix Estimation, Experimental Design, and
Arm-Set-Dependent Low-Rank Bandits

Kyoungseok Jang 1 Chicheng Zhang 2 Kwang-Sung Jun 2

Abstract

et al., 2007), the user-movie rating matrix can be wellapproximated by a low-rank matrix; in demographic surveys (Udell et al., 2016), the respondents’ answers to the
survey questions are also oftentimes modeled as a low-rank
matrix. Motivated by these applications, estimation with
low-rank structure is one of the central themes in highdimensional statistics (Wainwright, 2019, Chapter 10).

We study low-rank matrix trace regression and
the related problem of low-rank matrix bandits.
Assuming access to the distribution of the covariates, we propose a novel low-rank matrix estimation method called LowPopArt and provide
its recovery guarantee that depends on a novel
quantity denoted by B(Q) that characterizes the
hardness of the problem, where Q is the covariance matrix of the measurement distribution. We
show that our method can provide tighter recovery
guarantees than classical nuclear norm penalized
least squares (Koltchinskii et al., 2011) in several
problems. To perform efficient estimation with
a limited number of measurements from an arbitrarily given measurement set A, we also propose
a novel experimental design criterion that minimizes B(Q) with computational efficiency. We
leverage our novel estimator and design of experiments to derive two low-rank linear bandit algorithms for general arm sets that enjoy improved
regret upper bounds. This improves over previous
works on low-rank bandits, which make somewhat restrictive assumptions that the arm set is the
unit ball or that an efficient exploration distribution is given. To our knowledge, our experimental
design criterion is the first one tailored to low-rank
matrix estimation beyond the naive reduction to
linear regression, which can be of independent
interest.

We study the low-rank trace regression problem (Koltchinskii et al., 2011; Rohde & Tsybakov, 2011; Hamidi & Bayati, 2020) and the related problem of low-rank linear bandits (Jun et al., 2019; Lu et al., 2021). In the low-rank linear bandit problem, a learner sequentially learns to choose
arms from a given arm set to maximize reward. For each
time step t ∈ {1, · · · , n}, the learner chooses an arm At
from an arm set A ⊂ Rd1 ×d2 , and receives a noisy reward
yt = ⟨Θ∗ , At ⟩ + ηt , where Θ∗ is a rank-r matrix and ηt
is σ-subgaussian noise. TheP
learner’s objective is to maxin
mize its cumulative reward, t=1 yt . This low-rank bandit
model is applicable to various practical scenarios (Natarajan
& Dhillon, 2014; Luo et al., 2017; Jun et al., 2019).
To name a few examples, in drug discovery (Luo et al.,
2017), each At represent the outer product ut vt⊤ of the feature representations of a pair of (drug ut , protein vt ), and
Θ∗ encodes the interaction between them; in online advertising (Jain & Dhillon, 2013), each At represent the outer
product of the feature representation of a pair of (user ut ,
product vt ), and Θ∗ models their interactions. The bandit
problem setup naturally induces an exploration-exploitation
tradeoff: as the learner does not know the reward predictor
matrix Θ∗ , she may need to choose arms that are informative in learning Θ∗ ; on the other hand, since the learner’s
objective is maximizing the expected reward, it may also be
a good idea to choose arms that the learner believes to yield
high reward, based on the past observations.

1. Introduction and related work
In many real-world applications, data exhibit low-rank
structure. For example, in the Netflix problem (Bennett

Early studies on low-rank bandits (Jun et al., 2019; Lu et al.,
2021; Jang et al., 2021) have designed bandit algorithms
with lower regret than naive approaches that view this problem as a d1 d2 -dimensional linear bandit problem (AbbasiYadkori et al., 2011; Abe & Long, 1999; Auer, 2002; Dani
et al., 2008). However, previous studies lack understandings
on the relationship between the geometry of the arm set
and regret bounds. Usually they assume that a “nice” explo-

1
Dipartimento di Informatica, Università degli Studi di Milano,
Milan, MI, Italy 2 Department of Computer Science, University of
Arizona, Tucson, AZ, United States. Correspondence to: Chicheng
Zhang <chichengz@cs.arizona.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

