Regression with Multi-Expert Deferral

Anqi Mao 1 Mehryar Mohri 2 1 Yutao Zhong 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
The accuracy of learning algorithms can be greatly enhanced
by redirecting uncertain predictions to experts or advanced
pre-trained models. Experts can be individuals with specialized domain knowledge or more sophisticated, albeit costly,
pre-trained models. The cost of an expert is important to
consider, as it may capture the computational resources it
requires or the quality of its performance. The cost can
further be instance-dependent and label-dependent.

Learning to defer with multiple experts is a framework where the learner can choose to defer the
prediction to several experts. While this problem has received significant attention in classification contexts, it presents unique challenges
in regression due to the infinite and continuous
nature of the label space. In this work, we introduce a novel framework of regression with deferral, which involves deferring the prediction
to multiple experts. We present a comprehensive analysis for both the single-stage scenario,
where there is simultaneous learning of predictor and deferral functions, and the two-stage scenario, which involves a pre-trained predictor with
a learned deferral function. We introduce new surrogate loss functions for both scenarios and prove
that they are supported by H-consistency bounds.
These bounds provide consistency guarantees that
are stronger than Bayes consistency, as they are
non-asymptotic and hypothesis set-specific. Our
framework is versatile, applying to multiple experts, accommodating any bounded regression
losses, addressing both instance-dependent and
label-dependent costs, and supporting both singlestage and two-stage methods. Our single-stage
formulation subsumes as a special case the recent
regression with abstention (Cheng et al., 2023)
framework, where only a single expert is considered, specifically for the squared loss and a labelindependent cost. Minimizing our proposed loss
functions directly leads to novel algorithms for
regression with deferral. We report the results of
extensive experiments showing the effectiveness
of our proposed algorithms.

How can we effectively assign each input instance to the
most suitable expert among a pool of several, considering
both accuracy and cost? This is the challenge of learning to defer in the presence of multiple experts, which is
prevalent in various domains, including natural language
generation tasks, notably large language models (LLMs)
(Wei et al., 2022; Bubeck et al., 2023), speech recognition,
image annotation and classification, medical diagnosis, financial forecasting, natural language processing, computer
vision, and many others.
This paper deals with the problem of learning to defer with
multiple experts in the regression setting. While this problem has received significant attention in classification contexts (Hemmer et al., 2022; Keswani et al., 2021; Kerrigan
et al., 2021; Straitouri et al., 2022; Benz & Rodriguez, 2022;
Verma et al., 2023; Mao et al., 2023a; 2024a), it presents
unique challenges in regression due to the infinite and continuous nature of the label space. In particular, the score-based
formulation commonly used in classification is inapplicable here, since regression problems cannot be represented
using multi-class scoring functions, with auxiliary labels
corresponding to each expert.
Our approach involves defining prediction and deferral functions, consistent with previous studies in classification (Mao
et al., 2023a; 2024a). We present a comprehensive analysis
for both the single-stage scenario (simultaneous learning of
predictor and deferral functions) (Section 3), and the twostage scenario (pre-trained predictor with learned deferral
function) (Section 4). We introduce new surrogate loss functions for both scenarios and prove that they are supported
by H-consistency bounds. These are consistency guarantees that are stronger than Bayes consistency, as they are
non-asymptotic and hypothesis set-specific. Our framework
is versatile, applying to multiple experts, accommodating

1
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York,
NY; 2 Google Research, New York, NY. Correspondence
to: Anqi Mao <aqmao@cims.nyu.edu>, Mehryar Mohri
<mohri@google.com>, Yutao Zhong <yutao@cims.nyu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

