PPF LOW: Target-Aware Peptide Design with Torsional Flow Matching

Haitao Lin 1 2 Odin Zhang 1 Huifeng Zhao 1 Dejun Jiang 1
Lirong Wu 2 1 Zicheng Liu 2 1 Yufei Huang 2 1 Stan Z. Li† 2

Abstract

ery and protein design (Makhatadze, 2021; Watson et al.,
2023; Dauparas et al., 2022), which proves to be effective
tools to assist the development of small and large molecule
drugs. Peptide drugs occupy a unique chemical and pharmacological space between small and large molecules, but the
AI-assisted peptide drug discovery methods remain limited
compared with those established for small molecules and
proteins. Unbound peptide chains are usually at high free
energy and entropy values, thus showing unstable conformations, while they trigger pharmacological effects when
binding to specific receptors, forming a complex with equilibrium structures that are composed of a pair of receptor
and ligand. (Marullo et al., 2013; Seebach et al., 2006).
Therefore, we focus on the designation of peptide drugs
that can bind to specific receptors (Todaro et al., 2023). Recently, structure-based drug design (SBDD) methods are
developed for target-aware small molecule generation (Peng
et al., 2022a; Guan et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2022), while these
methods cannot be simply transferred to peptide design
tasks for the following reasons: (i) Peptide drugs are usually
of larger molecular weights (500 − 5000 Da) compared with
small molecule drugs (< 1000 Da) (Francoeur et al., 2020);
(ii) Topologies of atom connectivity in peptides are close to
proteins rather than molecules; (iii) Internal geometries in
peptides are of different patterns from small molecules.

Therapeutic peptides have proven to have great
pharmaceutical value and potential in recent
decades. However, methods of AI-assisted peptide drug discovery are not fully explored. To fill
the gap, we propose a target-aware peptide design
method called PPF LOW, based on conditional
flow matching on torus manifolds, to model the internal geometries of torsion angles for the peptide
structure design. Besides, we establish a proteinpeptide binding dataset named PPBench2024
to fill the void of massive data for the task of
structure-based peptide drug design and to allow
the training of deep learning methods. Extensive
experiments show that PPF LOW reaches stateof-the-art performance in tasks of peptide drug
generation and optimization in comparison with
baseline models, and can be generalized to other
tasks including docking and side-chain packing.

1. Introduction
Therapeutic peptides are a unique class of pharmaceutical
agents composed of a series of well-ordered amino acids.
The development of peptide drug design and discovery is
accelerated by fast advances in structural biology, recombinant biologics, and synthetic and analytic technologies
(Wang et al., 2022). Peptide drugs play an important role
in pharmacology because they usually bind to cell surface
receptors and trigger intracellular effects with high affinity
and specificity, showing less immunogenicity and taking
lower production costs (Muttenthaler et al., 2021). Therefore, they have raised great research interests as new peptide
therapeutics are continuously developed with more than
150 peptides in clinical tests and another 400–600 peptides
undergoing preclinical studies.

Hence, we identify four challenges for the target-aware peptide drug design. First, how to extract sufficient information
from the conditional receptor contexts. This is indispensable
for the model to generalize to new receptors. Second, how
to generate valid peptides that satisfy physicochemical rules.
If the generated peptides are not chemically valid, other
drug properties are unnecessary for further consideration.
Third, searching for natural peptides and replacing them
with animal homologs, such as the discovery of insulin,
GLP-1 and somatostatin, were the important strategies used
for peptide drug discovery (Kelly et al., 2022). Therefore,
instead of de novo design, the model should apply to another
scenario: optimizing natural peptides to drugs with higher
binding affinities. Besides, there are few available benchmark datasets large enough to support the training of deep
learning models for structure-based peptide drug design
tasks, and it is urged to collect and organize a high-quality
dataset that satisfies the demand for massive data.

Deep learning has revolutionized fields like drug discov1

Zhejiang University; 2 AI Lab, Research Center for Industries
of the Future, Westlake University, Hangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Stan Z. Li <stan.zq.li@westlake.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

