A Diffusion Model Framework for Unsupervised Neural
Combinatorial Optimization

Sebastian Sanokowski 1 2 Sepp Hochreiter 1 2 3 Sebastian Lehner 1 2

Abstract

represents a formidable challenge. Problem areas like CO
or lattice models in physics are characterized by discrete
target distributions. In these applications, the approximation
of the target distribution is predominantly based on products of categorical distributions or autoregressive models.
While product distributions are computationally convenient
they lack expressivity due to their inability to represent
statistical inter-dependencies. Autoregressive models rely
on sequentially generating the components of the samples.
For the high-dimensional distributions that are frequently
encountered in the aforementioned application areas, this
procedure becomes prohibitively expensive. In addition,
there is typically no canonical ordering among the components of samples. Hence, an autoregressive approach
appears as an unnatural approach. Intuitively, an issue with
the sequential sample generation procedure of autoregressive models is that there is no possibility of correcting suboptimal decisions once they are made. More formally, it
can be shown that autoregressive models are less expressive
than energy-based models or latent variable models from a
computational complexity point of view (Lin et al., 2021).
Approximate likelihood models that utilize latent variables,
like Variational Autoencoders (VAE) (Kingma and Welling,
2014) and diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015;
Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021), are trained using data
samples and a loss that is based on the Evidence Lower
Bound (ELBO). These models have the advantage that they
are more expressive and applicable in the discrete setting.
However, with these models, it is in general not feasible to
evaluate exact sample likelihoods. This problem precludes
their application in problems of data-free approximation
of target distributions which typically rely on exact sample likelihoods. Recent works that proposed methods to
apply diffusion models in data-free approximation of target
distributions are limited to the continuous setting (Berner
et al., 2022; Richter et al., 2023; Vargas et al., 2023; 2024).
To the best of our knowledge, the discrete setting remains
unexplored.
In this work, we propose in Sec. 3 an approach that allows
for the application of latent variable models like diffusion
models in the problem of data-free approximation of discrete
distributions. We demonstrate our method on paradigmatic
problems in this area from the field of CO and obtain state-

Learning to sample from intractable distributions
over discrete sets without relying on corresponding training data is a central problem in a wide
range of fields, including Combinatorial Optimization. Currently, popular deep learning-based
approaches rely primarily on generative models
that yield exact sample likelihoods. This work
introduces a method that lifts this restriction and
opens the possibility to employ highly expressive latent variable models like diffusion models.
Our approach is conceptually based on a loss that
upper bounds the reverse Kullback-Leibler divergence and evades the requirement of exact sample
likelihoods. We experimentally validate our approach in data-free Combinatorial Optimization
and demonstrate that our method achieves a new
state-of-the-art on a wide range of benchmark
problems.*

1. Introduction
Sampling from a known but intractable, high-dimensional
target distribution like the Boltzmann distribution is of high
relevance in many scientific fields like the prediction of
molecule configurations (Noé and Wu, 2018), lattice models in physics (Wu et al., 2019) and Monte Carlo integration
(Müller et al., 2019). Recently, the works of Hibat-Allah
et al. (2021) and Sanokowski et al. (2023) showed that Combinatorial Optimization (CO) can be concisely formulated
as such a distribution learning problem where the resulting
samples correspond to solutions of a CO problem. In all of
these domains, the energy function associated to the distributions of interest is known but obtaining unbiased samples
1

Institute for Machine Learning, Johannes Kepler University,
Linz, Austria 2 ELLIS Unit Linz 3 NXAI GmbH. Correspondence
to: Sebastian Sanokowski <sebastian.sanokowski@jku.at>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
* Code is available at https://github.com/ml-jku/
DIffUCO.

1

