Towards Robust Model-Based Reinforcement Learning
Against Adversarial Corruption

Chenlu Ye * 1 Jiafan He * 2 Quanquan Gu 2 Tong Zhang 3

1. Introduction

Abstract

Reinforcement learning (RL) seeks to find the optimal policy within an unknown environment associated with rewards and transition dynamics. A representative model for
RL is the Markov decision process (MDP) (Sutton & Barto,
2018). While numerous studies assume static rewards and
transitions, the environments in real-world scenarios are
often non-stationary and vulnerable to adversarial corruption. For instance, autonomous vehicles frequently fall victim to misled navigation caused by hacked maps and adversarially contaminated traffic signs (Eykholt et al., 2018).
Similarly, in smart healthcare systems, an adversary with
partial knowledge can easily manipulate patient statuses
(Nanayakkara et al., 2022). Under this situation, standard
RL algorithms often fail to find policies robust to such adversarial corruption. Therefore, how to identify the optimal policies against adversarial corruption has witnessed a
flurry of recent investigations.

This study tackles the challenges of adversarial
corruption in model-based reinforcement learning (RL), where the transition dynamics can
be corrupted by an adversary. Existing studies on corruption-robust RL mostly focus on the
setting of model-free RL, where robust leastsquare regression is often employed for value
function estimation. However, the uncertainty
weighting techniques cannot be directly applied
to model-based RL. In this paper, we focus on
model-based RL and take the maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) approach to learn transition model. Our work encompasses both online and offline settings. In the online setting, we
introduce an algorithm called corruption-robust
optimistic MLE (CR-OMLE), which leverages
total-variation (TV)-based information ratios as
uncertainty weights for MLE. We
√ prove that CROMLE achieves a regret of Õ( T + C), where
C denotes the cumulative corruption level after T episodes. We also prove a lower bound
to show that the additive dependence on C is
optimal. We extend our weighting technique
to the offline setting, and propose an algorithm
named corruption-robust pessimistic MLE (CRPMLE). Under a uniform coverage condition,
CR-PMLE exhibits suboptimality worsened by
O(C/n), nearly matching the lower bound. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the first work
on corruption-robust model-based RL algorithms
with provable guarantees.

In this work, we focus on the scenario where the adversary can manipulate the transitions before the agent
observes the next state. Achieving a sub-linear regret
bound under transition corruption has been shown to be
computationally challenging with full information feedback (Abbasi Yadkori et al., 2013), and even informationtheoretically challenging with bandit feedback (Tian et al.,
2021). Therefore, a series of studies have introduced constraints on the level of corruption, such as limiting the fraction of corrupted samples (Zhang et al., 2022) or the cumulative sum of corruptions over T rounds (Lykouris et al.,
2018; Gupta et al., 2019; He et al., 2022; Ye et al., 2023a;b;
Yang et al., 2023). While these works exhibit a sub-linear
regret bound, to the best of our knowledge, existing works
all focus on the setting of model-free RL, where the agent
directly learns a policy or a value function from the experiences gained through interactions.

*

Equal contribution 1 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. 2 University of California, Los Angeles. 3 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign.. Correspondence to: Quanquan Gu <qgu@cs.ucla.edu>, Tong Zhang
<tongzhang@tongzhang-ml.org>.

In contrast to model-free RL, in model-based RL, the agent
learns an explicit model of the environment and utilizes
this model for decision-making. This paradigm not only exempts from Bellman completeness (Jin et al., 2021) (which
is a standard assumption for model-free RL) but also has
demonstrated impressive sample efficiency in both theories
(Kearns & Singh, 2002; Brafman & Tennenholtz, 2002;

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

