Improving Neural Logic Machines via Failure Reflection

Zhiming Li * 1 Yushi Cao * 1 Yan Zheng 2 Xu Liu 3 Bozhi Wu 1 Tianlin Li 1 Xiufeng Xu 1 Junzhe Jiang 4
Yon Shin Teo 5 Shang-wei Lin 1 Yang Liu 1

Abstract
Reasoning is a fundamental ability towards artificial general intelligence (AGI). Fueled by the
success of deep learning, the neural logic machines models (NLMs) have introduced novel
neural-symbolic structures and demonstrate great
performance and generalization on reasoning
and decision-making tasks. However, the original training approaches of the NLMs are still
far from perfect, the models would repeat similar mistakes during the training process which
leads to sub-optimal performance. To mitigate
this issue, we present a novel framework named
Failure Reflection Guided Regularizer (FRGR).
FRGR first dynamically identifies and summarizes the root cause if the model repeats similar mistakes during training. Then it penalizes
the model if it makes similar mistakes in future training iterations. In this way, the model
is expected to avoid repeating errors of similar root causes and converge faster to a betterperformed optimum. Experimental results on multiple relational reasoning and decision-making
tasks demonstrate the effectiveness of FRGR
in improving performance, generalization, training efficiency, and data efficiency. Our code is
available at https://sites.google.com/
view/frgr-icml24.

Figure 1. Training loss curve, performance (Per), and generalization (Gen) of the NLM, DLM models optimized with original
training approach on the IsUncle reasoning task.

which is critical for artificial general intelligence (Lake et al.,
2017; Kojima et al., 2022). To achieve this, researchers seek
to combine the strengths of both deep learning and symbolic
approaches (logic reasoning). Following this trend, neural
logic machine models (NLMs) (Zimmer et al., 2023; Dong
et al., 2018) have been proposed to learn logic programs
via gradient-based optimization. These NLMs introduce
inductive bias to build neural-symbolic structures that realize Horn clauses (Horn, 1951) in first-order logic. It is
surprising that even though these NLMs are small in size,
thanks to their logical design, they have shown great performance and generalization on the reasoning tasks (e.g., decision making, relational reasoning) even powerful Large
language models (LLMs) fail (Valmeekam et al., 2023; Li
et al., 2024). Besides, compared to SAT solver-based methods (Muggleton et al., 2015; Raghothaman et al., 2019), the
NLMs do not require well-crafted human expert bias for
search space construction (i.e., carefully designed metarules
or templates (Muggleton et al., 2015)), which makes them
easier to apply.

1. Introduction
Neural-symbolic AI (Garcez et al., 2022; Susskind et al.,
2021; Evans & Grefenstette, 2018) has become a novel and
active research direction towards better reasoning ability,

However, despite the accomplishment of the NLMs, we
observe that the original training approach of the current
state-of-the-art models (Dong et al., 2018; Zimmer et al.,
2023) are ineffective and often make the models converge
to an ill-performed local optimum with high oscillation.
Figure 1 shows the training loss curves of two state-ofthe-art neural logic machine models (neural logic machines
(NLM) (Dong et al., 2018) and differentiable logic machines
(DLM) (Zimmer et al., 2023)) on the IsUncle reasoning

*

Equal contribution 1 Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 2 Tianjin university, Tianjin, China 3 National University of
Singapore, Singapore 4 Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong
Kong 5 Continental Automotive Singapore Pte. Ltd., Singapore.
Correspondence to: Yan Zheng <yanzheng@tju.edu.cn>, Tianlin
Li <tianlin001@e.ntu.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

