UniCorn: A Unified Contrastive Learning Approach for Multi-view Molecular
Representation Learning

Shikun Feng * 1 Yuyan Ni * 2 3 Minghao Li 4 Yanwen Huang 5 Zhi-Ming Ma 2 Wei-Ying Ma 1 Yanyan Lan 1 6

Abstract

lar property prediction which is promising to enable highthroughput screening of molecules with desirable properties. Following the pre-training methods in natural language
processing (NLP) and computer vision (CV), a range of
molecular pre-training methods has emerged to address the
challenge of limited labeled molecular data. Specifically,
they perform self-supervised learning (SSL) on a large number of unlabeled data, and then fine-tune on specific kinds
of property prediction tasks with labeled data. Existing SSL
methods can be mainly classified into three categories. The
first category involves 2D graph masking (Hu et al., 2020;
Hou et al., 2022; Rong et al., 2020; Xia et al., 2022), where
random parts of the molecular graph are masked and the
model is pre-trained to reconstruct them. The second category comprises 2D-3D contrastive learning (Stärk et al.,
2022; Liu et al., 2021; 2023a; Li et al., 2022) that aligns
the representations of 3D conformations and that of their
corresponding 2D graph. The third category is 3D denoising (Zaidi et al., 2022; Feng et al., 2023a; Luo et al., 2023;
Liu et al., 2022; Ni et al., 2024) that adds noise to the conformation and trains the model to predict the noise.

Recently, a noticeable trend has emerged in developing pre-trained foundation models in the domains of CV and NLP. However, for molecular
pre-training, there lacks a universal model capable of effectively applying to various categories
of molecular tasks, since existing prevalent pretraining methods exhibit effectiveness for specific
types of downstream tasks. Furthermore, the lack
of profound understanding of existing pre-training
methods, including 2D graph masking, 2D-3D
contrastive learning, and 3D denoising, hampers
the advancement of molecular foundation models.
In this work, we provide a unified comprehension of existing pre-training methods through the
lens of contrastive learning. Thus their distinctions lie in clustering different views of molecules,
which is shown beneficial to specific downstream
tasks. To achieve a complete and general-purpose
molecular representation, we propose a novel pretraining framework, named UniCorn, that inherits
the merits of the three methods, depicting molecular views in three different levels. SOTA performance across quantum, physicochemical, and biological tasks, along with comprehensive ablation
study, validate the universality and effectiveness
of UniCorn.

Recently, foundation models, such as ChatGPT (OpenAI,
2022), GPT4 (OpenAI, 2023), SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023),
Unified-IO (Lu et al., 2022) , have caused a revolutionary
shift to the field of Artificial Intelligence, which are pretrained on large-scale data and are adopted to a broad range
of downstream tasks (Li et al., 2023a). However, there
still lacks a unified model in the molecular domain, that
can learn a universal representation and effectively be applied to various property prediction tasks. The challenge
firstly lies in that the relationship between the existing SSL
methods is still under study. Moreover, existing methods
are unbalanced for various downstream tasks. Generally,
3D denoising methods favor quantum chemical property
prediction, while 2D graph masking and 2D-3D contrastive
learning prefer biological and physicochemical property prediction. This phenomenon, also manifested in section 5.2, is
hardly discussed by previous studies and the causes are still
unclear. Furthermore, the relationship between the existing
SSL methods is still under study, posing a challenge in leveraging their strengths to create a universal model effective
for all three types of property prediction tasks.

1. Introduction
Molecular representation learning is pivotal across diverse
drug discovery tasks. One important application is molecu*
Equal contribution 1 Institute for AI Industry Research
(AIR), Tsinghua University 2 Academy of Mathematics and
Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 University
of Chinese Academy of Sciences 4 Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences 5 Department of Pharmaceutical Science, Peking University 6 Beijing Academy of
Artificial Intelligence.
Correspondence to: Yanyan Lan
<lanyanyan@air.tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

