Memorization Through the Lens of Curvature of Loss Function Around Samples

Isha Garg 1 Deepak Ravikumar 1 Kaushik Roy 1

Abstract

orizing both mislabeled and long-tailed outliers alike. This
can prove to be harmful in real-world settings, such as with
data poisoning attacks (Biggio et al., 2012; Chen et al., 2017)
and privacy leakage in the form of membership inference
attacks (Shokri et al., 2017). There has been considerable
research effort towards countering overfitting, with different
forms of regularization (Krogh & Hertz, 1991), dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014), early stopping (Yao et al., 2007) and
data augmentation (DeVries & Taylor, 2017; Zhang et al.,
2018). In this paper, we exploit overfitting to propose a new
metric for measuring memorization of a data point, that of
the curvature of the network loss around a data point. We
overfit intentionally and utilize this to study the samples the
network is memorizing.Recently, research has shown that
samples with low curvature of loss around them prove beneficial for subsampling in coresets (Garg & Roy, 2023) and
regularizing curvature can result in adversarial robustness
(Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2019). Inspired by these works,
we propose a modified version of curvature calculation, and
show that it serves as a reliable metric for measuring the
memorization of a sample by a network. In particular, we
average curvature scores over the training epochs, and show
that it is crucial to getting reliable memorization scores.

Deep neural networks are over-parameterized and
easily overfit to and memorize the datasets that
they train on. In the extreme case, it has been
shown that networks can memorize a randomly
labeled dataset. In this paper, we propose using
the curvature of the loss function around each
training sample, averaged over training epochs,
as a measure of memorization of a sample. We
show that this curvature metric effectively captures memorization statistics, both qualitatively
and quantitatively in popular image datasets. We
provide quantitative validation of the proposed
metric against memorization scores released by
Feldman & Zhang (2020). Further, experiments
on mislabeled data detection show that corrupted
samples are learned with high curvature and using
curvature for identifying mislabelled examples
outperforms existing approaches. Qualitatively,
we find that high curvature samples correspond to
long-tailed, mislabeled, or conflicting instances,
indicating a likelihood of memorization. Notably,
this analysis helps us find, to the best of our knowledge, a novel failure mode on the CIFAR100 and
ImageNet datasets: that of duplicated images with
differing labels.

In order to validate our measure of curvature quantitatively,
we show that our scores achieve a high cosine similarity
with memorization scores released by Feldman & Zhang
(2020) for CIFAR100 and ImageNet datasets, referred to
as FZ scores. Further, we show that prior curvature scoring
method from Garg & Roy (2023) fails to achieve significant
similarity to FZ scores. FZ scores serve as our baseline, but
their calculation requires training thousands of models. In
contrast, we calculate curvature while training only one network, while additionally identifying failure modes that the
baseline fails to capture. As a second, independent, quantitative validation of our metric, we synthetically mislabel
a small proportion (1 − 10%) of the dataset by introducing
uniform noise in the labels. We then overfit a network to this
noisy dataset, and use our method to calculate the AUROC
score for identifying the mislabeled examples. Our results
show that using the proposed curvature metric achieves stateof-the-art detection performance on MNIST, highlighting
that the mislabeled samples were learned with high curvature. Our method is compatible with other state-of-the-art
detection methods, such as Maini et al. (2022), and we

1. Introduction
Deep learning has been hugely successful in many fields.
With increasing availability of data and computing capacity,
networks are getting larger, growing to billions of parameters. This overparametrization often results in the problem
of overfitting. An extreme form of overfitting was demonstrated by Zhang et al. (2017), who showed that networks
can memorize a training set with fully randomized labels.
Further, networks make overconfident predictions, even
when the predictions are incorrect (Guo et al., 2017), mem1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue
University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47906. Correspondence to:
Isha Garg <garg.isha1991@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

