Confidence Aware Inverse Constrained Reinforcement Learning

Sriram Ganapathi Subramanian 1 Guiliang Liu 2 Mohammed Elmahgiubi 3 Kasra Rezaee 3 Pascal Poupart 4 1

Abstract

Atari (Mnih et al., 2015) and StarCraft (Vinyals et al., 2019),
and more recently in real-world environments like recommender systems (Afsar et al., 2022) and robotics (Zhao et al.,
2020). Traditionally in RL, agents are allowed to explore
the entire state and action space to learn the optimal policy.
However, in many real-world environments, considerations
of safety and feasibility prevent an exploring agent from
visiting all states and actions (Dulac-Arnold et al., 2021;
Ray et al., 2019). This observation led to the development
of constrained reinforcement learning (CRL) (Liu et al.,
2021) where the policy is constrained to remain within the
bounds of a set of constraint functions that limit the states
and/or actions that an agent can explore in the environment.
However, it is hard for human designers to fully specify all
constraints in complex real-world environments. Alternatively, it is possible to obtain expert demonstrations. For
example, in autonomous driving, it is far easier to obtain
demonstrations from expert human drivers that illustrate the
optimal behavior in different road and weather conditions.
Using these demonstrations, the agent will need to infer
the underlying constraints that the expert follows to ensure
smoothness, comfort and safety.

In coming up with solutions to real-world problems, humans implicitly adhere to constraints that
are too numerous and complex to be specified
completely. However, reinforcement learning
(RL) agents need these constraints to learn the
correct optimal policy in these settings. The field
of Inverse Constraint Reinforcement Learning
(ICRL) deals with this problem and provides algorithms that aim to estimate the constraints from
expert demonstrations collected offline. Practitioners prefer to know a measure of confidence in
the estimated constraints, before deciding to use
these constraints, which allows them to only use
the constraints that satisfy a desired level of confidence. However, prior works do not allow users
to provide the desired level of confidence for the
inferred constraints. This work provides a principled ICRL method that can take a confidence level
with a set of expert demonstrations and outputs
a constraint that is at least as constraining as the
true underlying constraint with the desired level
of confidence. Further, unlike previous methods,
this method allows a user to know if the number of expert trajectories is insufficient to learn
a constraint with a desired level of confidence,
and therefore collect more expert trajectories as
required to simultaneously learn constraints with
the desired level of confidence and a policy that
achieves the desired level of performance.

The field of Inverse Constrained Reinforcement Learning
(ICRL) (Malik et al., 2021) aims to solve the problem of
learning the underlying constraints from expert demonstrations. This is a new field of research where the algorithms
have a structure of alternating between updating a constraint
function and learning a policy that satisfies its current constraint estimate (see Figure 1a). While several recent works
introduce strong algorithms for ICRL (Malik et al., 2021;
Liu et al., 2023; Gaurav et al., 2023; Qiao et al., 2023; Liu &
Zhu, 2023; 2024; Xu & Liu, 2024), these methods estimate
only the constraint function, but do not provide an estimate of the confidence in the learned constraint. Intuitively,
agents will be more confident in the learned constraint if
there is a greater number of expert trajectories demonstrating behavior that follows such a constraint. In this paper, we
provide an algorithm, called confidence-aware ICRL (CAICRL) that uses a confidence estimate along with learning
the constraint itself. The algorithm will accept a desired
confidence and learn a constraint that is at-least as constraining as the ground truth constraint with the provided
confidence. Humans and/or agents can choose to learn appropriate constraints based on their risk profiles. Also, this

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 2018) has
seen large successes in a variety of computer games like
1
Vector Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Toronto, Canada
School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Shenzhen, Guangdong, 518172, P.R. China 3 Huawei Technologies Canada 4 Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of
Waterloo, Canada. Correspondence to: Sriram Ganapathi Subramanian <sriram.subramanian@vectorinstitute.ai>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

