AD3: Implicit Action is the Key for World Models to Distinguish the Diverse
Visual Distractors
Yucen Wang * 1 2 Shenghua Wan * 1 2 Le Gan 1 2 Shuai Feng 3 De-Chuan Zhan 1 2

Abstract

visual control, as demonstrated by approaches such as TIA
(Fu et al., 2021) and Denoised MDP (Wang et al., 2022).
However, prior research has primarily focused on eliminating heterogeneous distractors, such as noisy video backgrounds that exhibit entirely different visual semantics from
the agent behavior. When confronted with homogeneous distractors that closely resemble the task-relevant controllable
elements, previous methods often encounter substantial difficulties. For instance, when the visual observation contains
an additional shifted agent that shares a similar morphological structure with the controllable agent but cannot be
directly manipulated (Bharadhwaj et al., 2022), the policy
will get confused in determining which one to control.

Model-based methods have significantly contributed to distinguishing task-irrelevant distractors for visual control. However, prior research
has primarily focused on heterogeneous distractors like noisy background videos, leaving homogeneous distractors that closely resemble controllable agents largely unexplored, which poses
significant challenges to existing methods. To
tackle this problem, we propose Implicit Action
Generator (IAG) to learn the implicit actions of
visual distractors, and present a new algorithm
named implicit Action-informed Diverse visual
Distractors Distinguisher (AD3), that leverages
the action inferred by IAG to train separated world
models. Implicit actions effectively capture the
behavior of background distractors, aiding in distinguishing the task-irrelevant components, and
the agent can optimize the policy within the taskrelevant state space. Our method achieves superior performance on various visual control tasks
featuring both heterogeneous and homogeneous
distractors. The indispensable role of implicit actions learned by IAG is also empirically validated.

For model-based approaches primarily reliant on observation reconstruction such as Dreamer (Hafner et al., 2020),
the inclusion of task-irrelevant information, like the background agent, presents considerable challenges for extracting task signals. TIA (Fu et al., 2021) seeks to disentangle
the latent state into task signal and noise, through adversarial reward dissociation on the task-irrelevant state and
distractor-only reconstruction. However, such objectives
are sensitive, with optimization instability and inappropriate
loss weights easily leading to the inversion of the two components. Moreover, the underlying assumption behind these
heuristic loss objectives may not hold in environments featuring homogeneous distractors, where task-irrelevant information constitutes a relatively small proportion of the observation. Another category of distractor-eliminating methods
is based on state factorization, as seen in Denoised MDP
(Wang et al., 2022), but the assumed transition structures
of different factors are not enough to distinguish homogeneous distractors. Other model-free approaches (Laskin
et al., 2020; Yarats et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2021) and
visual-based methods also struggle to guarantee effective
distractor removal, especially on visually indistinguishable
distractors.

1. Introduction
In recent years, there has been a surge in research on reinforcement learning with visual inputs (Yarats et al., 2020;
2021; Laskin et al., 2020; Hafner et al., 2020; 2021; 2023).
This interest has arisen from the application of RL algorithms to real-world scenarios, where visual inputs are often
filled with distractive elements unrelated to the task. Modelbased methods have significantly contributed to distinguishing distractors and extracting task-relevant information for
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing
University, China 2 National Key Laboratory for Novel Software
Technology, Nanjing University, China 3 School of Cyberspace
Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: De-Chuan Zhan <zdc@nju.edu.cn>.

To a certain extent, such homogeneous visual distractors can
more accurately reflect the essence of RL problems compared to heterogeneous ones: distinguishment can only be
achieved by leveraging the inherent characteristics of the
control problem itself to identify the semantics and dynamic
changes of task-relevant and irrelevant components, rather
than relying on other visual elements, as distractors are not

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

