An Empirical Study of Realized GNN Expressiveness

Yanbo Wang 1 Muhan Zhang 1

Abstract

2011; Fan et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2018b; Berg et al., 2017;
Zhou et al., 2020). Despite impressive empirical achievements, related investigations have revealed that GNNs exhibit limited abilities to distinguish some similar but nonisomorphic graphs. In practical situations, the inability
to recognize specific structures, such as benzene rings (6member rings), may cause misleading learning results. Xu
et al. (2019); Morris et al. (2019) established a connection
between the expressiveness of message-passing neural networks (MPNNs) and the WL test for graph isomorphism
testing, demonstrating that MPNN’s upper bound is 1-WL.
Numerous subsequent studies have proposed GNN variants with enhanced expressiveness (Bevilacqua et al., 2022;
Cotta et al., 2021; You et al., 2021; Zhang & Li, 2021).

Research on the theoretical expressiveness of
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) has developed
rapidly, and many methods have been proposed
to enhance the expressiveness. However, most
methods do not have a uniform expressiveness
measure except for a few that strictly follow the kdimensional Weisfeiler-Lehman (k-WL) test hierarchy, leading to difficulties in quantitatively comparing their expressiveness. Previous research has
attempted to use datasets for measurement, but
facing problems with difficulty (any model surpassing 1-WL has nearly 100% accuracy), granularity (models tend to be either 100% correct
or near random guess), and scale (only several
essentially different graphs involved). To address
these limitations, we study the realized expressive
power that a practical model instance can achieve
using a novel expressiveness dataset, BREC,
which poses greater difficulty (with up to 4-WLindistinguishable graphs), finer granularity (enabling comparison of models between 1-WL and
3-WL), a larger scale (consisting of 800 1-WLindistinguishable graphs that are non-isomorphic
to each other). We synthetically test 23 models
with higher-than-1-WL expressiveness on BREC.
Our experiment gives the first thorough measurement of the realized expressiveness of those stateof-the-art beyond-1-WL GNN models and reveals
the gap between theoretical and realized expressiveness. Dataset and evaluation codes are released at: https://github.com/GraphPKU/BREC.

Given the multitude of models employing different approaches, such as feature injection, equivariance maintenance, and subgraph extraction, a unified framework that can
theoretically compare the expressive power among various
variants is highly desirable. In this regard, several attempts
have been made under the k-WL architecture. Maron et al.
(2019b) propose the concept of k-order invariant/equivariant
graph networks, which unify linear layers while preserving
permutation invariance/equivariance. Additionally, Frasca
et al. (2022) unify recent subgraph GNNs and establish
that their expressiveness upper bound is 3-WL. Zhang et al.
(2023a) further construct a comprehensive expressiveness
hierarchy for subgraph GNNs. Nonetheless, the magnitude
of the gaps remains unknown. Furthermore, there exist
methods that are difficult to categorize within the k-WL hierarchy. For instance, Papp & Wattenhofer (2022) propose
four extensions of GNNs, each of which cannot strictly compare with the other. Similarly, Feng et al. (2022) propose
a GNN that is partially stronger than 3-WL yet fails to distinguish many 3-WL-distinguishable graphs. In a different
approach, Huang et al. (2023) propose evaluating expressiveness by enumerating specific significant substructures,
such as 6-cycles. Zhang et al. (2023b) introduces biconnectivity as a measurement. Zhang et al. (2024) employs
homomorphism to provide a more intricate framework.

1. Introduction
GNNs have been extensively utilized in bioinformatics, recommender systems, social networks, and others, yielding
remarkable outcomes (Duvenaud et al., 2015; Barabási et al.,
1

Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Peking University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Muhan Zhang
<muhan@pku.edu.cn>.

Without a unified theoretical characterization of expressiveness, employing expressiveness datasets for empirical testing proves valuable. Notably, three expressiveness datasets,
EXP, CSL, and SR25, and some other combinations of difficult graphs have been introduced by Abboud et al. (2021);

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

