Implicit Representations for Constrained Image Segmentation

Jan Philipp Schneider 1 Mishal Fatima 2 Jovita Lukasik 1
Andreas Kolb 1 Margret Keuper 2 3 Michael Moeller 1

Abstract

The inclusion of modeling assumptions or constraints has
been extremely successful in common (classical) energy
minimization methods (Mumford & Shah, 1989; Vese &
Chan, 2002), and lately been combined with learning-based
approaches, e.g. by interpreting the (softmax-)output of a
neural network as the solution to a minimization problem
to which additional regularizers can be added (Liu et al.,
2022). Yet, some seemingly simple constraints, such as
the region to be segmented being convex or path-connected,
can lead to highly complex regularizers. As segmentations
of an image f ∈ Rnx ×ny ×3 are commonly represented as
masks m ∈ [0, 1]nx ×ny , graphs with nx · ny many nodes
or (discretized) level set functions ϕ ∈ Rnx ×ny to identify
the segmented region with {(i, j) | ϕi,j ≤ 0}, enforcing
geometric properties often leads to constraints that (naı̈vely)
grow quadratically in the number of pixels: For instance,
convexity means that for any two points in the segmentation
the line segment in between them is part of the segmentation; path-connectedness means that for any two points in
the segmentation there exists a path between them within
the segmentation. Thus, even relaxations of common segmentation problems face great difficulties in enforcing such
properties and binary optimization approaches are typically
NP-hard (see e.g. Royer et al. (2016)). We will provide a
more detailed overview of related work on enforcing geometric constraints in image segmentation in Sec. 5.

Implicit representations allow to use a parametric
function that maps (spatial) coordinates to the
value that is traditionally stored in each pixel,
e.g. RGB values, instead of a discrete grid. This
has recently proven quite advantageous as an internal representation for images or scenes for deep
learning models. Yet, its potential to ensure certain properties of the solution has not yet been
fully explored. In this work, we demonstrate that
implicit representations are a powerful tool for
enforcing a variety of different geometric constraints in image segmentation. While convexity, star-shape, path-connectedness, periodicity, or
symmetry of the (spatial or space-time) region to
be segmented are very challenging to enforce for
pixel-wise discretizations, a suitable parametrization of an implicit representation, mapping spatial
or spatio-temporal coordinates to the likeliness of
a pixel belonging to the fore- or background, allows to provably ensure such constraints. Several
numerical examples demonstrate that challenging
segmentation scenarios can benefit from the inclusion of application-specific constraints, e.g. when
occlusions prevent a faithful segmentation with
classical approaches.

In this work, we consider a significantly simpler option for
still provably satisfying constraints: Instead of a discrete
representation of the segmentation as, for example, a binary
image (mask), we parameterize a segmentation function
mapping from the image domain Ω ⊂ R2 to the real numbers implicitly via a neural network: With seminal works
such as Sitzmann et al. (2020) and Tancik et al. (2020b)
demonstrating that fully connected networks (possibly including the computation of Fourier Features in the first
layer) are well suited for representing natural images, we
exploit such implicit representations for image segmentation. By choosing a parametric function Gν : R2 → R to
map suitable coordinates to a segmentation likelihood such
that {x ∈ R2 | Gν (x) ≤ 0.5} represents the segmented
region, and restricting the architecture in suitable ways, we
can provably ensure a variety of constraints, see Fig. 1.

1. Introduction
The past decade has led to tremendous advances in the field
of image segmentation via data-driven techniques, including
seminal works such as the U-net architecture (Ronneberger
et al., 2015) and, more recently, large foundation image
segmentation models such as SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023).
Yet, when training data are scarce or objects of interest are
occluded, constraints to obey certain modeling assumptions
can become crucial.
1

University of Siegen 2 University of Mannheim 3 Max-PlanckInstitute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus. Correspondence to: Jan Philipp Schneider <Jan.Schneider@uni-siegen.de>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

We summarize our main contributions as follows:
1

