Auto-Encoding Morph-Tokens for Multimodal LLM

Kaihang Pan 1 Siliang Tang 1 Juncheng Li 1 2 Zhaoyu Fan 1 Wei Chow 1 Shuicheng Yan 3 Tat-Seng Chua 2
Yueting Zhuang 1 Hanwang Zhang 3 4

Abstract

Decoder

For multimodal LLMs, the synergy of visual comprehension (textual output) and generation (visual
output) presents an ongoing challenge. This is
due to a conflicting objective: for comprehension,
an MLLM needs to abstract the visuals; for generation, it needs to preserve the visuals as much
as possible. Thus, the objective is a dilemma
for visual-tokens. To resolve the conflict, we
propose encoding images into morph-tokens to
serve a dual purpose: for comprehension, they
act as visual prompts instructing MLLM to generate texts; for generation, they take on a different,
non-conflicting role as complete visual-tokens for
image reconstruction, where the missing visual
cues are recovered by the MLLM. Extensive experiments show that morph-tokens can achieve
a new SOTA for multimodal comprehension and
generation simultaneously. Our project is available at https://github.com/DCDmllm/
MorphTokens.

🟰

Existing MLLMs

MLLM
Our Morph-Tokens
Visual-Token

Encoder

Text-Token

Figure 1. Comparison between existing MLLMs and ours. The
key difference is the equality between pre- and post-MLLM visualtokens in training time.

Existing solutions are straightforward. As shown in Figure 1,
they have three steps: 1) images are encoded into visualtokens by a tokenizer (Fang et al., 2023; Esser et al., 2021);
2) these pre-MLLM visual-tokens are fed into an MLLM to
complete vision-language comprehension tasks, where the
MLLM is usually initialized from a pre-trained LLM, and 3)
the post-MLLM visual-tokens are used to reconstruct input
image in training or generate new images such as image
editing in testing (Koh et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2023b). More
details of such MLLMs are reviewed in Section 2.

1. Introduction
State-of-the-art Multimodal Large Language Models
(MLLMs) are still facing a great divide between visual
comprehension (textual output) and generation (visual output). For comprehension tasks—“Tell me why the image
[IMG] is funny”—we use GPT-4V (Achiam et al., 2023);
yet for generation—“Turn the image [IMG] into the style of
Ghibli”—instead, we need DALL·E (Ramesh et al., 2021).
Therefore, the community is interested in a unified, tokenbased, auto-regressive MLLM framework (Yu et al., 2023b).
Unlike traditional multimodal large models (Wang et al.,
2022a; Rahman et al., 2020), this framework employs LLM
as the core reasoning engine that drives both multimodal
comprehension and generation.

Yet, the synergy of comprehension and generation is not
achieved. The primary challenge lies in the conflicting
MLLM’s training objectives for comprehension and generation tasks. Comprehension may discard visual features due
to the need for visual abstraction, i.e., the MLLM training
encourages the image tokenizer to output pre-MLLM visualtokens invariant to task-irrelevant visual changes (Dai et al.,
2023; Li et al., 2023c)—a many-to-one map from images to
tokens; conversely, generation requires preserving the visual
details as much as possible, i.e., the post-MLLM visualtokens should be equivariant to all the visual changes (Wang
et al., 2023)—a one-to-one map from tokens to images.
The requirement for equality between pre- and post-MLLM
visual-tokens poses a dilemma in the auto-regressive training of multimodal token sequences.

1

Zhejiang University 2 National University of Singapore
Skywork AI 4 Nanyang Technological University. Correspondence to: Juncheng Li <junchengli@zju.edu.cn>.
3

As shown in Figure 2(a&b), the comprehension (or generation) performance consistently decreases as the number
of generation (or comprehension) training data increases,
and vice versa. Another piece of evidence is shown in

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

