Resisting Stochastic Risks in Diffusion Planners with
the Trajectory Aggregation Tree

Lang Feng 1 Pengjie Gu 2 Bo An 2 3 Gang Pan 1 4

Abstract

games (Silver et al., 2016; 2017). Conventionally, planning
relies on the complete model of the environment that provides the necessary information about action effects and outcome probabilities. In instances where such environment’s
dynamics are not available, model learning and function
approximation techniques are usually employed (Deisenroth & Rasmussen, 2011; Levine & Abbeel, 2014; Hafner
et al., 2019; Schrittwieser et al., 2020), like model-based
reinforcement learning (Sutton & Barto, 2018).

Diffusion planners have shown promise in handling long-horizon and sparse-reward tasks due to
the non-autoregressive plan generation. However,
their inherent stochastic risk of generating infeasible trajectories presents significant challenges
to their reliability and stability. We introduce a
novel approach, the Trajectory Aggregation Tree
(TAT), to address this issue in diffusion planners.
Compared to prior methods that rely solely on
raw trajectory predictions, TAT aggregates information from both historical and current trajectories, forming a dynamic tree-like structure. Each
trajectory is conceptualized as a branch and individual states as nodes. As the structure evolves
with the integration of new trajectories, unreliable
states are marginalized, and the most impactful
nodes are prioritized for decision-making. TAT
can be deployed without modifying the original
training and sampling pipelines of diffusion planners, making it a training-free, ready-to-deploy
solution. We provide both theoretical analysis and
empirical evidence to support TAT’s effectiveness.
Our results highlight its remarkable ability to resist the risk from unreliable trajectories, guarantee
the performance boosting of diffusion planners in
100% of tasks, and exhibit an appreciable tolerance margin for sample quality, thereby enabling
planning with a more than 3× acceleration.

Recent advances have focused on leveraging diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020), known for their ability to generate
high-quality samples (Luo & Hu, 2021; Li et al., 2022;
Nichol et al., 2022), to create diffusion-based planners (Janner et al., 2022; Ajay et al., 2023; Liang et al., 2023). These
planners approach sequential decision optimization as a
data-driven trajectory optimization problem and simultaneously predict all timesteps of a trajectory. This innovative
paradigm achieves non-autoregressive plan generation and
aligns model learning with planning, thereby avoiding the
compounding rollout errors (Asadi et al., 2018) and adversarial plans (Talvitie, 2014; Ke et al., 2018). Impressively,
diffusion planners have demonstrated remarkable abilities
to handle challenges like long-horizon, sparse-reward, as
well as offline control tasks (Fu et al., 2020).
Despite these advantages, diffusion planners are unable to
guarantee the generation of reliable and feasible plans due
to the inherent stochasticity of diffusion models. Unlike
deterministic models that yield the same output for a given
input, the outputs of diffusion models are probabilistic. This
characteristic means that while diffusion models may often produce high-quality samples, there is always a risk
of generating unreliable samples, which are referred to as
“artifacts” in vision task (Bau et al., 2019; Shen et al., 2020).

1. Introduction
Planning is a crucial aspect of decision-making and has
led to many successful outcomes, like simulated robot control (Tassa et al., 2012; Varlamov & Aladin, 2024) and board

Current diffusion planners directly base their decisions on
trajectories produced by diffusion models (Janner et al.,
2022; Ajay et al., 2023; Liang et al., 2023). However, these
planners often presuppose the high quality of the generated
trajectories, neglecting the stochastic risks inherent in the
process. This neglect can result in decision-making reliant
on unreliable trajectories, leading to potentially ineffective
or harmful actions for the intended task. Consequently, the
stability and reliability of these diffusion planners are com-

1
Zhejiang University, China 2 Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 3 Skywork AI, Singapore 4 State Key Laboratory of
Brain-Machine Intelligence, China. Correspondence to: Gang Pan
<gpan@zju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

