Probabilistic Inference in Language Models
via Twisted Sequential Monte Carlo

Stephen Zhao 1 2 * Rob Brekelmans 2 * Alireza Makhzani 1 2 ** Roger Grosse 1 2 **

Abstract

forcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) pipelines
(Ziegler et al., 2019; Stiennon et al., 2020; Ouyang et al.,
2022; Bai et al., 2022; Rafailov et al., 2023) prioritize responses that score highly according to a terminal reward
function reflecting human feedback (Korbak et al., 2022b).
Red-teaming techniques such as prompt-engineering and infilling may seek target outputs with low reward or (high probability of) undesirable responses (Zou et al., 2023; Perez
et al., 2022). In reasoning tasks, we may seek to target
outputs which are likely to be deemed valid by a ‘verifier’
(Cobbe et al., 2021; Anil et al., 2021; Dohan et al., 2022;
Hu et al., 2023). Specific properties of generated responses
might also be enforced (Khalifa et al., 2020; Yang & Klein,
2021; Lew et al., 2023).

Numerous capability and safety techniques of
Large Language Models (LLMs), including
RLHF, automated red-teaming, prompt engineering, and infilling, can be cast as sampling from
an unnormalized target distribution defined by a
given reward or potential function over the full sequence. In this work, we leverage the rich toolkit
of Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) for these probabilistic inference problems. In particular, we use
learned twist functions to estimate the expected future value of the potential at each timestep, which
enables us to focus inference-time computation
on promising partial sequences. We propose a
novel contrastive method for learning the twist
functions, and establish connections with the rich
literature of soft reinforcement learning. As a
complementary application of our twisted SMC
framework, we present methods for evaluating the
accuracy of language model inference techniques
using novel bidirectional SMC bounds on the log
partition function. These bounds can be used to
estimate the KL divergence between the inference and target distributions in both directions.
We apply our inference evaluation techniques to
show that twisted SMC is effective for sampling
undesirable outputs from a pretrained model (a
useful component of harmlessness training and
automated red-teaming), generating reviews with
varied sentiment, and performing infilling tasks.

We view the above tasks as instances of probabilistic inference: sampling from a target unnormalized density and
estimating its intractable (log) normalization constant. Consider a pretrained base model p0 (s1:T |s0 ) which generates
responses s1:T of maximum length T based on a variablelength prompt s0 . We consider defining the target distribution of interest using the base model modulated by a
potential function ϕ(s1:T ) which evaluates full sequences,
1
p0 (s1:T |s0 )ϕ(s1:T ),
(1)
σ(s1:T |s0 ) :=
Zσ (s0 )
P
P
where Zσ (s0 ):=
σ̃(s1:T |s0 ) =
p0 (s1:T |s0 )ϕ(s1:T ),
s1:T

s1:T

where σ̃(s1:T |s0 ) denotes the unnormalized density. We
refer to Zσ (s0 ) as the normalization constant or partition
function, which is intractable due to the summation over
s1:T . We drop dependence on s0 to avoid clutter, but note
that each prompt induces a different partition function. In
the context of the aforementioned applications, ϕ(s1:T ) may
be derived from a human preference model (for RLHF), an
indication of bad behavior (for automated red-teaming), or a
verifier’s prediction of correctness (for reasoning tasks). We
refer to Table 4 or Korbak et al. (2022b); Dohan et al. (2022);
Phan et al. (2023); Hu et al. (2023) for further examples and
discussion of probabilistic inference in language models.

1. Introduction
A wide range of language model learning and inference
tasks can be viewed as steering a model’s generations to
satisfy a specified property. In particular, traditional rein*
Joint first authorship, ** Joint senior authorship.
University of Toronto 2 Vector Institute.
Correspondence
to:
{stephenzhao, makhzani, rgrosse} @cs.toronto.edu,
rob.brekelmans@vectorinstitute.ai.

1

Twisted Sequential Monte Carlo in Language Models
In this work, we leverage tools from (twisted) Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) (Doucet et al., 2001; Del Moral
et al., 2006; Briers et al., 2010; Chopin et al., 2020)

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

