Amortized Variational Deep Kernel Learning

Alan L. S. Matias 1 César Lincoln C. Mattos 1 João P. P. Gomes 1 Diego P. P. Mesquita 2

Abstract
Deep kernel learning (DKL) marries the uncertainty quantification of Gaussian processes (GPs)
and the representational power of deep neural
networks. However, training DKL is challenging and often leads to overfitting. Most notably,
DKL often learns “non-local” kernels — incurring spurious correlations. To remedy this issue,
we propose using amortized inducing points and
a parameter-sharing scheme, which ties together
the amortization and DKL networks. This design imposes an explicit dependency between the
ELBO’s model fit and capacity terms. In turn,
this prevents the former from dominating the optimization procedure and incurring the aforementioned spurious correlations. Extensive experiments show that our resulting method, amortized
varitional DKL (AVDKL), i) consistently outperforms DKL and standard GPs for tabular data;
ii) achieves significantly higher accuracy than
DKL in node classification tasks; and iii) leads
to substantially better accuracy and negative loglikelihood than DKL on CIFAR100.

(a) SVGP.

(b) AVDKL.

(c) SVDKL.

(d) Prior entropy along the training epochs.
Figure 1. Example of the prior covariance matrix computed via
the kernel function for SVGP, AVDKL and SVDKL, considering
an 1D toy-dataset (see Figure 4(a)). Both AVDKL and SVDKL
perform nonlinear input projection before applying the kernel
function. One can notice that the SVDKL induces undesired correlations, since the original data comes from a smooth GP sample
with squared exponential kernel. The same effect can also be seen
in Figure 1(d), where the SVDKL, after a few training epochs,
decreases too much the prior entropy.

1. Introduction
In the late ’90s, preceding the advent of the deep learning
era, Gaussian Processes (GPs) gained popularity as alternatives to neural networks (NNs), owing to their inherent uncertainty quantification and frequently superior performance
(McKay, 1998). During this period, benchmarking datasets
primarily consisted of tabular data, fostering the perception
that it was reasonable to completely bypass representation
learning, concentrating solely on the relationship between
vectors in the input space. However, in the early 2010s, a
series of works harnessing the inductive biases of domainspecific NNs redirected the community’s focus toward more
intricate domains, encompassing images (Krizhevsky et al.,

2012), sequences (Mikolov et al., 2010), and speech (Hinton et al., 2012). This shift in attention, however, did not
favor GPs due mainly to the challenge of tailoring kernels
that embody useful inductive biases for these diverse domains. In response, works proposed methods for learning
GP kernels directly from data (e.g., Wilson & Adams, 2014;
Duvenaud et al., 2013). These approaches aimed to enhance
the adaptability of GPs to diverse datasets by capturing
relevant features automatically.

1
Federal University of Ceará 2 Getulio Vargas Foundation. Correspondence to: Alan Matias <matiasalsm@gmail.com>.

In this context, deep kernel learning (DKL) emerged as a
solution to the kernel versus NN dichotomy (Wilson et al.,
2016a) along with its scalable variant: stochastic variational
DKL (SVDKL) (Wilson et al., 2016b). DKL combines
the strengths of both approaches, using an NN to extract

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

