TVE: Learning Meta-attribution for Transferable Vision Explainer

Guanchu Wang 1 Yu-Neng Chuang 1 Fan Yang 2 Mengnan Du 3 Chia-Yuan Chang 4
Shaochen Zhong 1 Zirui Liu 1 Zhaozhuo Xu 5 Kaixiong Zhou 6 Xuanting Cai 7 Xia Hu 1

Abstract
Explainable machine learning significantly improves the transparency of deep neural networks.
However, existing work is constrained to explaining the behavior of individual model predictions,
and lacks the ability to transfer the explanation
across various models and tasks. This limitation
results in explaining various tasks being time- and
resource-consuming. To address this problem, we
introduce a Transferable Vision Explainer (TVE)
that can effectively explain various vision models
in downstream tasks. Specifically, the transferability of TVE is realized through a pre-training
process on large-scale datasets towards learning
the meta-attribution. This meta-attribution leverages the versatility of generic backbone encoders
to comprehensively encode the attribution knowledge for the input instance, which enables TVE
to seamlessly transfer to explain various downstream tasks, without the need for training on taskspecific data. Empirical studies involve explaining three different architectures of vision models
across three diverse downstream datasets. The
experimental results indicate TVE is effective in
explaining these tasks without the need for additional training on downstream data. The source
code is available at https://github.com/
guanchuwang/TVE.

Figure 1. Performance of TVE in explaining ViT-B, Swin-B, and
Deit-B on the Cats-vs-dogs, Imagenette, and CIFAR-10 datasets.
Fidelity+ score refers to the area under Fidelity+ -sparsity curve.

ios where model explanations are required, such as loan
approvals (Steel & Angwin, 2010), healthcare (Chang et al.,
2023), and targeted advertisement (Lin et al., 2021). In
these fields, explainable DNN decisions are particularly
important, given the practical needs of stakeholders and regulatory requirements, such as the General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR) (Goodman & Flaxman, 2017).
To overcome the black-box nature of DNNs, existing work
of explainable ML can be categorized into two groups. The
first group of work focuses on constructing local explanation based on perturbation of the target black-box model,
like LIME (Ribeiro et al., 2016), GradCAM (Selvaraju et al.,
2017), and Integrated Gradient (Sundararajan et al., 2017).
These pieces of work rely on resource-intensive procedures
like sampling or backpropagation of the target black-box
model (Liu et al., 2021a), leading to undesirable trade-off
between the efficiency and interpretation fidelity (Chuang
et al., 2023a). Another group leverages the knowledge of
explanation values to train DNN-based explainers, such as
FastSHAP (Jethani et al., 2021), CORTX (Chuang et al.,
2023b), and LARA (Rong et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2022).
Such arts capable of efficiently generating explanations for
an entire batch of instances through a single, streamlined

1. Introduction
Explainable machine learning (ML) contributes to enhancing the transparency of deep neural networks (DNNs) for
human comprehension (Du et al., 2019). It significantly
facilitates the deployment of DNNs to high-stake scenar1

Department of Computer Science, Rice University 2 Wake
Forest University 3 New Jersey Institute of Technology 4 Texas
A&M University 5 Stevens Institute of Technology 6 North Carolina
State University 7 Meta Platforms, Inc. Correspondence to: Xia Hu
<xia.hu@rice.edu>, Guanchu Wang <gw22@rice.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

