A General Theory for Softmax Gating Multinomial Logistic Mixture of Experts

Huy Nguyen 1 Pedram Akbarian 2 TrungTin Nguyen 3 4 Nhat Ho 1

Abstract

2017; Lepikhin et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2022; Du et al.,
2022; Fedus et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2023; Do et al., 2023),
computer vision (Deleforge et al., 2015; Riquelme et al.,
2021; Dosovitskiy et al., 2021; Bao et al., 2022; Liang et al.,
2022), speech recognition (Peng et al., 1996; Gulati et al.,
2020; You et al., 2022), reinforcement learning (Ren et al.,
2021; Chow et al., 2023) and multi-task learning (Hazimeh
et al., 2021; Gupta et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023). Despite its recent progress in the aforementioned applications,
the theoretical comprehension of the MoE model has been
found relatively restricted in the literature.

Mixture-of-experts (MoE) model incorporates the
power of multiple submodels via gating functions
to achieve greater performance in numerous regression and classification applications. From
a theoretical perspective, while there have been
previous attempts to comprehend the behavior of
that model under the regression settings through
the convergence analysis of maximum likelihood
estimation in the Gaussian MoE model, such analysis under the setting of a classification problem
has remained missing in the literature. We close
this gap by establishing the convergence rates
of density estimation and parameter estimation
in the softmax gating multinomial logistic MoE
model. Notably, when part of the expert parameters vanish, these rates are shown to be slower
than polynomial rates owing to an inherent interaction between the softmax gating and expert
functions via partial differential equations. To address this issue, we propose using a novel class
of modified softmax gating functions which transform the input before delivering them to the gating functions. As a result, the previous interaction
disappears and the parameter estimation rates are
significantly improved.

In general, that model can be formulated as either a regression problem, namely when the distribution of MoE
outputs is continuous, or a classification problem, i.e., when
the MoE outputs follow a discrete distribution. Under the
setting of a regression problem, there are some previous
works attempting to theoretically understand the MoE model
through the convergence analysis of maximum likelihood
estimation (MLE) by focusing on Gaussian MoE equipped
with different types of gating functions. First, (Ho et al.,
2022) established the convergence rates of parameter estimation in the covariate-free gating Gaussian MoE model using
the generalized Wasserstein loss function (Villani, 2003;
2008). In that paper, they discovered that those parameter
estimation rates were significantly slow owing to an interaction between expert parameters via some partial differential
equations (PDEs). Next, (Nguyen et al., 2024c) considered
the Gaussian density gating Gaussian MoE model. Since
that gating function depended on the covariates, there was
another interaction between the parameters of the gating
function and the expert function. To this end, the authors
proposed Voronoi loss functions to capture those interactions and demonstrate that the convergence rates of parameter estimation were determined by the solvability of a system
of polynomial equations. Subsequently, the Gaussian MoE
models with softmax gating function and top-K sparse softmax gating function were investigated in (Nguyen et al.,
2023) and (Nguyen et al., 2024b), respectively. Due to the
non-linearity and sophisticated structures of those gating
functions, the parameter estimation rates were shown to
vary with the solvability of a more complex system of polynomial equations than that in (Nguyen et al., 2024c), and
became substantially slow when the number of fitted experts
increased.

1. Introduction
Mixture of experts (MoE) (Jacobs et al., 1991; Jordan &
Jacobs, 1994) is a statistical machine learning model which
aggregates several submodels represented by expert networks associated with standard softmax gating functions.
Due to its modular and flexible structure, there has been
a surge of interests in leveraging the MoE model in various fields, including large language models (Shazeer et al.,
1

Department of Statistics and Data Sciences 2 Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Texas at
Austin 3 School of Mathematics and Physics, The University of
Queensland 4 Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP,
LJK. Correspondence to: Huy Nguyen <huynm@utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

