No Dimensional Sampling Coresets for Classification

Meysam Alishahi 1 Jeff M. Phillips 1 2

Abstract

and then ℓ : X × W −→ [0, ∞)Ris a loss (or cost) function
defined on a single x ∈ X . Let x∈X ℓ(x, w)dP (x) be the
full loss function evaluated at w ∈ W, which we will seek
to minimize. Now a (finite) set Y ⊆ X accompanied by a
measure (or weight function) ν, is termed an ε-coreset for
(X , P, W, ℓ) for ε ∈ (0, 1) when it approximates P in the
following way for each w ∈ W:
Z
Z
X
ν(y)ℓ(y, w) ≤ ε ℓ(x, w)dP (x)
ℓ(x, w)dP (x)−

We refine and generalize what is known about
coresets for classification problems via the sensitivity sampling framework. Such coresets seek
the smallest possible subsets of input data, so one
can optimize a loss function on the coreset and ensure approximation guarantees with respect to the
original data. Our analysis provides the first no
dimensional coresets, so the size does not depend
on the dimension. Moreover, our results are general, apply for distributional input and can use iid
samples, so provide sample complexity bounds,
and work for a variety of loss functions. A key
tool we develop is a Radamacher complexity version of the main sensitivity sampling approach,
which can be of independent interest.

X

y∈Y

X

Algorithms for coresets are often described with respect
to a finite sample X ⊂ X where we then assume P has
support limited to and uniform over X. We will return
later to the integral of P definition to state more general
bounds. Then a very common approach to create a coreset is
via sensitivity sampling (Feldman & Langberg, 2011). This
samples points from X proportional to their sensitivity score
s(x). Via an importance sampling argument, one can show
the size of the sample Y needed to induce anP
ε-coreset grows
proportionally to the total sensitivity S = x∈X s(x).

1. Introduction
In machine learning, coresets (Phillips, 2016) are small subsets of input data that act as proxy for the full set while
guaranteeing not to deviate much in accuracy. By reducing
data size, they improve scalability and efficiency. A common approach for constructing coresets involves sampling
data points with probabilities proportional to their so-called
sensitivity score, a bound on the worst-case impact that a
point can have on the property of interest. In classification
problems, the property optimized is a loss function ℓ which
is typically a smooth and convex approximation of the misclassification rate. However, the ultimately goal is not just
to optimize the loss function over the observed data, but to
understand how well the classifier will perform using new
data drawn iid from the same (unknown) distribution P .

For classification, consider a non-increasing function ϕ :
R −→ (0, ∞) and a set W ⊆ Rd . Define ℓϕ (x, w) =
ϕ(⟨x, w⟩); this aligns with scenarios like Logistic regression
when ϕ(t) = log(1 + e−t ). However, in (Munteanu et al.,
2018), it was proven that certain types of non-increasing
ϕ(x)
functions ϕ, specifically those where ϕ(−x)
approaches zero
as x goes to infinity, can lead to ε-coresets that encompass all points in X (see Theorem 3.1 in (Tolochinksy
et al., 2022) which refines (Munteanu et al., 2018)). To
construct a smaller coreset, some additional problem structure needs to be introduced. We mostly focus on the natural way of regularizing the problem (Shalev-Shwartz &
Ben-David, 2014), initiated in the context of coresets by
Tolochinksy et al. (2022). For a positive integer k, define ℓk,ϕ (x, w) = ϕ(⟨x, w⟩) + k1 ∥w∥22 . An ε-coreset for
(X, p, W, ℓk,ϕ ) was termed a coreset for a monotonic function ϕ (Tolochinksy et al., 2022; Curtin et al., 2020). Others approached this issue in varied ways. For example,
Munteanu et al. (2018) introduced a complexity measure
µ(X) that quantifies the hardness of compressing a dataset
for logistic regression, and showed sublinear-sized coresets
can be founding depending on this parameter. Their results
were polynomially improved by Mai et al. (2021) in terms

To formalize this, consider a probability distribution P over
a set X . Let W be the parameter space of potential models,
*
Equal contribution 1 Kahlert School of Computing, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA 2 visiting
ScaDS.AI, University of Leipzig and MPI for Math in
the Sciences, Leipzig, Germany.
Correspondence to:
Meysam Alishahi <meysam.alishahi@utah.edu>, Jeff M. Phillips
<jeffp@cs.utah.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

