Minimizing f -Divergences by Interpolating Velocity Fields

Song Liu 1 Jiahao Yu 1 Jack Simons 1 Mingxuan Yi 1 Mark Beaumont 1

Abstract
Many machine learning problems can be seen
as approximating a target distribution using a
particle distribution by minimizing their statistical discrepancy. Wasserstein Gradient Flow can
move particles along a path that minimizes the
f -divergence between the target and particle distributions. To move particles, we need to calculate
the corresponding velocity fields derived from a
density ratio function between these two distributions. Previous works estimated such density ratio functions and then differentiated the estimated
ratios. These approaches may suffer from overfitting, leading to a less accurate estimate of the
velocity fields. Inspired by non-parametric curve
fitting, we directly estimate these velocity fields
using interpolation techniques. We prove that
our estimators are consistent under mild conditions. We validate their effectiveness using novel
applications on domain adaptation and missing
data imputation. The code for reproducing our results can be found at https://github.com/
anewgithubname/gradest2.

Figure 1. Estimating a log density ratio log r using a flexible
model (RBF kernel) leads to a overfitted estimate (log r1 ). The
overfitting consequently causes huge fluctuations in the derivative
(log r1 )′ . Our proposed method provides a much more stable
estimate log r2 and a more accurate estimate of (log r2 )′ .

Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence using the steepest descent
algorithm and has achieved promising results in Bayesian
inference. However, to compute the SVGD updates, we
need unnormalized target density functions. If we only have
samples from the target distribution—as is often the case in
applications like domain adaptation and generative model
training— we cannot directly apply SVGD to minimize the
f -divergences.
Wasserstein Gradient Flow (WGF) describes the evolution
of a marginal measure qt along the steepest descent direction of a functional objective in Wasserstein geometry where
xt ∼ qt follows a probability flow ODE. It can be employed
to minimize an f -divergence between a particle distribution and the target distribution. Particularly, such WGFs
characterize the following ODE (Yi et al., 2023; Gao et al.,
2019)

1. Introduction
Many machine learning problems can be formulated as minimizing statistical divergences between distributions, e.g.,
Variational Inference (Blei et al., 2017), Generative Modeling (Nowozin et al., 2016; Yi et al., 2023), Domain Adaptation (Courty et al., 2017a; Yu et al., 2021), and Data Imputation (Muzellec et al., 2020). Among many divergence
minimization techniques, Particle-based gradient descent
reduces the divergence between a set of particles (which define a distribution) and the target distribution by iteratively
moving particles according to an update rule.

dxt = ∇(h ◦ rt )(xt )dt, t ∈ [0, ∞).

1
University of Bristol, Bristol, UK. Correspondence to: Song
Liu <song.liu@bristol.ac.uk>.

Here rt := qpt is the ratio between the target density p and
particle density qt at time t, and h is a known function which
depends on the f -divergence. The gradient operator ∇ computes the gradient of the composite function h ◦ rt . If we
know rt , simulating the above ODE would be straightforward using a discrete-time Euler method. However, the main
challenge is that we do not know the ratio rt in practice. In
the context we consider, we know neither the particle nor
target density, which constitutes rt .

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

To overcome this issue, recent works (Gao et al., 2019;
Ansari et al., 2021; Simons et al., 2021) first obtain an estimate r̂t using a density ratio estimator (Sugiyama et al.,

One such algorithm is Stein Variational Gradient Descent
(SVGD) (Liu and Wang, 2016; Liu, 2017). It minimizes the

1

