OODRobustBench: a Benchmark and Large-Scale Analysis of
Adversarial Robustness under Distribution Shift
Lin Li 1 Yifei Wang 2 Chawin Sitawarin 3 Michael Spratling 1 4

Abstract

is critical to the study of adversarial robustness since an unreliable evaluation can often give a false sense of robustness.
However, we believe that even state-of-the-art evaluation
benchmarks (like RobustBench Croce et al., 2021) suffer
from a severe limitation: they only consider ID generalization where test data comes from the same distribution as
the training data. Since distribution shifts are inevitable in
the real world, it is crucial to assess how adversarial robustness is affected when the test distribution differs from the
training one.

Existing works have made great progress in improving adversarial robustness, but typically test
their method only on data from the same distribution as the training data, i.e. in-distribution (ID)
testing. As a result, it is unclear how such robustness generalizes under input distribution shifts, i.e.
out-of-distribution (OOD) testing. To address this
issue we propose a benchmark named OODRobustBench to comprehensively assess OOD adversarial robustness using 23 dataset-wise shifts
(i.e. naturalistic shifts in input distribution) and
6 threat-wise shifts (i.e., unforeseen adversarial
threat models). OODRobustBench is used to assess 706 robust models using 60.7K adversarial evaluations. This large-scale analysis shows
that: 1) adversarial robustness suffers from a severe OOD generalization issue; 2) ID robustness
correlates strongly with OOD robustness in a
positive linear way. The latter enables the prediction of OOD robustness from ID robustness.
We then predict and verify that existing methods are unlikely to achieve high OOD robustness.
Novel methods are therefore required to achieve
OOD robustness beyond our prediction. To facilitate the development of these methods, we
investigate a wide range of techniques and identify several promising directions. Code and models are available at: https://github.com/
OODRobustBench/OODRobustBench.

Although OOD generalization has been extensively studied
for clean accuracy (Hendrycks & Dietterich, 2019; Taori
et al., 2020; Miller et al., 2021; Baek et al., 2022; Zhao et al.,
2022; Yang et al., 2022), there is little known about the OOD
generalization of adversarial robustness. To fill this void,
this paper presents for the first time, a comprehensive benchmark, OODRobustBench, for assessing out-of-distribution
adversarial robustness. Furthermore, it reports results of
a large-scale analysis of existing robust models performed
using the new benchmark to answer the following questions:
1. How resilient are current adversarially robust models
to distribution shift?
2. Can we predict OOD robustness from ID robustness?
3. How can we achieve OOD robustness?
OODRobustBench is analogous and complementary to RobustBench which is used for assessing in-distribution adversarial robustness. It includes two categories of distribution
shift: dataset shift and threat shift (see Figure 1). Dataset
shift denotes test data that has different characteristics from
the training data due to varying conditions under which
the samples are collected: for images, these include but
are not limited to corruptions, background, and viewpoint.
OODRobustBench contains 23 such dataset shifts and assesses adversarial robustness to such data using the attack
seen by the model during training. Threat shift denotes a
variation between training and test adversarial threat models.
In other words, threat shift assesses a model’s robustness to
unseen adversarial attacks applied to ID test data. OODRobustBench employs six different types of threat shifts. Adversarial robustness is evaluated for each type of shift to
comprehensively assess OOD robustness.

1. Introduction
Adversarial attack poses a serious threat to real-world machine learning models, and various approaches have been
developed to defend against such attacks. Previous work
(Athalye et al., 2018) has shown that adversarial evaluation
1

Department of Informatics, King’s College London, UK 2 MIT
CSAIL, USA 3 UC Berkeley, USA 4 University of Luxembourg,
Luxembourg. Correspondence to: Lin Li <lin.3.li@kcl.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

