GPTSwarm: Language Agents as Optimizable Graphs

Mingchen Zhuge * 1 Wenyi Wang * 1 Louis Kirsch 2 Francesco Faccio 1 2 Dmitrii Khizbullin 1
Jürgen Schmidhuber 1 2
https://gptswarm.org

Abstract

them with few-shot examples (Kojima et al., 2022; Brown
et al., 2020). Recent methods prompt LLMs in a structured way, such as chain of thought (COT) (Wei et al.,
2022), ReAct (Yao et al., 2022), tree of thought (TOT) (Yao
et al., 2023), Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023), and Graph
of Thought (GOT) (Besta et al., 2023), to improve textbased reasoning. Single agent applications such as AutoGPT (Torantulino et al., 2023), BabyAGI (Nakajima, 2023),
LangChain (Chase, 2022), and Llama-index (Liu, 2022)
utilize LLMs for various functionalities, including tool usage, function calling, and embodied actions. In multi-agent
frameworks (Zeng et al., 2022; Zhuge et al., 2023) several
LLMs take on different roles (Li et al., 2023; Park et al.,
2023; Qian et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023) to communicate in
natural language and collectively solve a given task. This
approach often outperforms single agents, exploiting the
specialization (Hong et al., 2023) of various LLM agents.
Unfortunately, it also leads to increasingly different and
disparate code bases that require a lot of human engineering
to define prompting schemes and the workflow of agents.

Various human-designed prompt engineering techniques have been proposed to improve problem solvers based on Large Language Models
(LLMs), yielding many disparate code bases. We
unify these approaches by describing LLM-based
agents as computational graphs. The nodes implement functions to process multimodal data or
query LLMs, and the edges describe the information flow between operations. Graphs can be recursively combined into larger composite graphs
representing hierarchies of inter-agent collaboration (where edges connect operations of different
agents). Our novel automatic graph optimizers
(1) refine node-level LLM prompts (node optimization) and (2) improve agent orchestration by
changing graph connectivity (edge optimization).
Experiments demonstrate that our framework can
be used to efficiently develop, integrate, and automatically improve various LLM agents. The code
can be found here.

In a “society of mind” (SOM) (Minsky, 1988; Zhuge et al.,
2023), higher-level intelligence emerges from the combination of simpler and modular cognitive components. Inspired
by SOMs, we describe language agent systems through
graph representations. Language agents querying LLMs
and utilizing external tools are modeled as computational
graphs where each node is dedicated to a specific function,
while the edges define a topology of how inputs are processed across nodes, mirroring the prompting schemes in
prior studies. A swarm is defined as a composite graph,
where each subgraph represents a collaborative agent. This
creates a deeper hierarchy of intelligence. Agent graphs
combine basic LLM operations (Kennedy, 2006; Nepusz &
Vicsek, 2013), and swarm graphs contain subgraphs representing agents. Approaches such as COT (Wei et al., 2022),
TOT (Yao et al., 2023), and Self-Consistency (Wang et al.,
2022) can be represented by our graphs.

1. Introduction
Interest in LLM-powered autonomous problem solvers
or agents and their varied applications is continually rising (Wang et al., 2023; Xi et al., 2023). However, much
work remains to be done to effectively incorporate these
agents into a cohesive society and improve their structure
automatically.
Early approaches zero-shot-prompted LLMs or prompted
*
Equal contribution 1 AI Initiative, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal,
Saudi Arabia 2 The Swiss AI Lab IDSIA, USI, SUPSI,
Lugano, Switzerland.
Correspondence to:
Mingchen
Zhuge <mingchen.zhuge@kaust.edu.sa>, Dmitrii Khizbullin
<dmitrii.khizbullin@kaust.edu.sa>.

Our graph representation lends itself to optimization via
prompting and evolutionary or reinforcement-learning techniques, so that agents can improve their communication (or

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

