Plug-in Performative Optimization

Licong Lin 1 Tijana Zrnic 2

Abstract

ditional supervised learning is the concept of a distribution
map D(·). This object, aimed to capture the feedback from
predictions to future observations, is a mapping from predictors fθ to their induced data distributions D(θ). The main
goal in performative prediction is thus to deploy a predictor fθ that will have good performance after deployment,
that is, on its induced distribution D(θ). Formally, the goal
is to choose predictor parameters θ ∈ Θ ⊆ Rdθ so as to
minimize the performative risk:

When predictions are performative, the choice of
which predictor to deploy influences the distribution of future observations. The overarching goal
in learning under performativity is to find a predictor that has low performative risk, that is, good
performance on its induced distribution. One family of solutions for optimizing the performative
risk, including bandits and other derivative-free
methods, is agnostic to any structure in the performative feedback, leading to exceedingly slow
convergence rates. A complementary family of
solutions makes use of explicit models for the
feedback, such as best-response models in strategic classification, enabling faster rates. However,
these rates critically rely on the feedback model
being correct. In this work we study a general
protocol for making use of possibly misspecified
models in performative prediction, called plug-in
performative optimization. We show this solution
can be far superior to model-agnostic strategies,
as long as the misspecification is not too extreme.
Our results support the hypothesis that models,
even if misspecified, can indeed help with learning in performative settings.

PR(θ) = Ez∼D(θ) [ℓ(z; θ)],
where ℓ(z; θ) is the loss incurred by predicting on instance z
with model θ. Typically, z is a feature–outcome pair (x, y).
We refer to
θPO = arg min PR(θ)
θ∈Θ

as the performative optimum.
The main challenge in optimizing the performative risk lies
in the fact that the map D(·) is not known. We only observe
samples from D(θ) for models θ that have been deployed;
we do not observe any feedback for the (typically infinitely
many) other models. A key discriminating factor between
existing solutions for optimizing under performativity is
how they cope with this uncertainty.
One group of methods accounts for the feedback without
assuming a problem-specific structure for it. This group includes bandit strategies (Kleinberg et al., 2008; Jagadeesan
et al., 2022) and derivative-free optimization (Flaxman et al.,
2004; Miller et al., 2021). These methods converge to optima at typically slow—without convexity, even exponentially slow—convergence rates. Moreover, their rates rely
on regularity conditions that are out of the learner’s control,
such as convexity of the performative risk (Miller et al.,
2021; Izzo et al., 2021; Dong et al., 2018) or bounded performative effects (Jagadeesan et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Predictions have the power to influence the patterns they aim
to predict. For example, stock price predictions inform trading decisions and hence prices; traffic predictions influence
routing decisions and thus traffic outcomes; recommendations shape users’ consumption and thus preferences.
This pervasive phenomenon has been formalized in a framework called performative prediction (Perdomo et al., 2020).
A central feature that distinguishes the framework from tra-

A complementary group of methods—an important starting
point for this work—takes feedback into account by positing
explicit models for it. Such models include best-response
models for strategic classification (Hardt et al., 2016; Jagadeesan et al., 2021; Levanon & Rosenfeld, 2021; Ghalme
et al., 2021), rational-agent models in economics (Spence,
1978; Wooldridge, 2003), and parametric distribution shifts
(Izzo et al., 2021; Miller et al., 2021; Izzo et al., 2022),

1

Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley,
USA 2 Stanford Data Science and Department of Statistics, Stanford University, USA. Correspondence to: Licong Lin <liconglin@berkeley.edu>, Tijana Zrnic <tijana.zrnic@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

