Prediction Accuracy of Learning in Games :
Follow-the-Regularized-Leader meets Heisenberg

Yi Feng 1 Georgios Piliouras 2 Xiao Wang 1 3

Abstract

larly intense object of study as zero-sum games related to
numerous recent applications and advances in AI such as,
achieving super-human performance in Go (Silver et al.,
2016), Poker (Brown & Sandholm, 2018) and Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014) to
name a few.

We investigate the accuracy of prediction in deterministic learning dynamics of zero-sum games
with random initializations, specifically focusing
on observer uncertainty and its relationship to the
evolution of covariances. Zero-sum games are
a prominent field of interest in machine learning due to their various applications. Concurrently, the accuracy of prediction in dynamical
systems from mechanics has long been a classic subject of investigation since the discovery
of the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle. This
principle employs covariance and standard deviation of particle states to measure prediction accuracy. In this study, we bring these two approaches
together to analyze the Follow-the-RegularizedLeader (FTRL) algorithm in two-player zero-sum
games. We provide growth rates of covariance
information for continuous-time FTRL, as well
as its two canonical discretization methods (Euler
and Symplectic). A Heisenberg-type inequality
is established for FTRL. Our analysis and experiments also show that employing Symplectic discretization enhances the accuracy of prediction in
learning dynamics.

Predicting players’ long term behaviors in a repeated game
is a fundamental and challenging problem (Nachbar, 1997;
Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2006). The conventional wisdom in
this regard is that players’ strategies will eventually converge
to some equilibrium. However, recent studies have shown
that such a belief usually fails, in particular, FTRL dynamics
do not converge in zero-sum games and exhibit complex
behaviors such as recurrence and divergence (Mertikopoulos
et al., 2018; Bailey & Piliouras, 2018). Therefore, one needs
to predict the future behaviors of players by tracing their
day-to-day (a.k.a. last-iterate) behaviors (Daskalakis et al.,
2018; Gidel et al., 2019a;b). By modeling the learning
dynamics as a deterministic dynamical system, an observer
with the computational ability to trace the learning dynamics
can accurately predict future player states by knowing their
exact current states.
However, in practice, the observer may have some uncertainty about the current states of players. This kind of uncertainty is common both from a game-theoretic perspective
(i.e., the unknown external action on agents’ preference) as
well as from a Machine Learning perspective (i.e., system
initialization by sampling from a distribution and noise introduced during training ). Thus, the observer may hope
that slightly inaccurate knowledge of current conditions can
lead to slightly inaccurate prediction. For example, by tracking the expectation of the evolving distribution along the
learning dynamics that model his uncertainty, satisfactory
predictions can be obtained.

1. Introduction
In recent years understanding the behavior of learning algorithms in repeated games has attracted increasing interests from the machine learning community (Lanctot et al.,
2017; Yang & Wang, 2020). Follow-the-Regularized-Leader
(FTRL) algorithm (Abernethy et al., 2009; Shalev-Shwartz
et al., 2012), arguably the most well known class of noregret dynamics, plays a prominent role in analysis of behavior of learning algorithms. The dynamics of such online
learning algorithm in zero-sum games has been a particu-

Unfortunately, this hope didn’t materialize as expected. One
remarkable aspect of several learning dynamics, like Multiplicative Weights Updates (FTRL with negative entropy
regularizer), is that even slight initial deviation can give
rise to significantly divergent strategy trajectories for players over extended periods (Sato et al., 2002; Vilone et al.,
2011; Galla & Farmer, 2013). Figure 1 illustrates that in a
repeated Rock-Paper-Scissor game, the evolution of many

1

Shanghai University of Finance and Economics, Shanghai,
China 2 Google DeepMind, London, United Kingdom 3 Key Laboratory of Interdisciplinary Research of Computation and Economics,
China. Correspondence to: Xiao Wang <wangxiao@sufe.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

