Controlled Decoding from Language Models

Sidharth Mudgal * 1 Jong Lee * 1 Harish Ganapathy 1 YaGuang Li 1 Tao Wang 2 Yanping Huang 1
Zhifeng Chen 1 Heng-Tze Cheng 1 Michael Collins 1 Trevor Strohman 1 Jilin Chen 1 Alex Beutel 2
Ahmad Beirami 1

Abstract

Controlling language model responses towards high reward
outcomes is an area of active research in the literature. We
divide the existing alignment methods into two categories
that differ significantly in real-world deployment: generator
improvement and inference-time add-on solutions.

KL-regularized reinforcement learning (RL) is a
popular alignment framework to control the language model responses towards high reward outcomes. We pose a tokenwise RL objective and
propose a modular solver for it, called controlled
decoding (CD). CD exerts control through a separate prefix scorer module, which is trained to
learn a value function for the reward. The prefix scorer is used at inference time to control the
generation from a frozen base model, provably
sampling from a solution to the RL objective. We
empirically demonstrate that CD is effective as a
control mechanism on popular benchmarks. We
also show that prefix scorers for multiple rewards
may be combined at inference time, effectively
solving a multi-objective RL problem with no additional training. We show that the benefits of
applying CD transfer to an unseen base model
with no further tuning as well. Finally, we show
that CD can be applied in a blockwise decoding
fashion at inference-time, essentially bridging the
gap between the popular best-of-K strategy and
tokenwise control through reinforcement learning. This makes CD a promising approach for
alignment of language models.

Generator improvement solutions, such as KL-regularized
PPO (Christiano et al., 2017; Ouyang et al., 2022), direct
preference optimization (DPO) (Rafailov et al., 2023), sequence likelihood calibration (SliC) (Zhao et al., 2022), and
identity preference optimization (IPO) (Azar et al., 2023)
update the weights of the language model to align it with
a reward model. They are efficient for inference but offer
little configurability on the reward.
A simple and effective inference-time add-on solution is
best-of-K (Nakano et al., 2021; Stiennon et al., 2020; Touvron et al., 2023), where K i.i.d. samples are drawn from a
base model, ranked based on a reward, and the highest ranking one is selected. Other methods, such as FUDGE (Yang
& Klein, 2021) or COLD (Qin et al., 2022), offer a prefix
scorer that is used at inference-time to control a frozen base
model response towards high-reward outcomes. Due to their
modularity of design which leaves the base model frozen,
these methods offer inference-time configurability. Our goal
is to propose a learning framework for such methods.
Our contributions are summarized below.
• We formalize a modular alignment method, controlled
decoding (CD), to solve a KL-regularized RL objective.
CD learns a prefix scorer for the reward that is used to
steer the generation from a partially decoded path.
• We show that two variants of CD, namely CDFUDGE (Yang & Klein, 2021) and CD-Q (ours), provably
lead to sampling from a solution to the RL objecive.
• We propose blockwise CD where the prefix scorer is used
to select the best-of-K paths for a decoded block of M
tokens. This bridges the gap between the sequence-level
best-of-K and tokenwise RL methods.
• We empirically show that CD offers significant improvement over existing controlled generation/decoding solutions on popular benchmarks.
• We show that CD prefix scorer transfers to an unseen base
model with no further training.

1. Introduction
Generative language models have reached a level where they
can effectively solve a variety of open-domain tasks with little task specific supervision. Hence, it is crucial to ask: how
can we align machine generated content to rewards when
we have no control over the pre-trained representations in a
generative language model?
*
Equal contribution 1 Google DeepMind 2 OpenAI (work done
at Google). Correspondence to:
Sidharth Mudgal <sidharthms@google.com>, Jong Lee <leejong@google.com>, Ahmad Beirami <beirami@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

