Large Language Models Can Automatically Engineer Features
for Few-Shot Tabular Learning

Sungwon Han 1 Jinsung Yoon 2 Sercan Ö. Arik 2 Tomas Pfister 2

Abstract

2023; Wilcox & Hripcsak, 2003), playing a crucial role in
the automation of diverse applications, including dialogue
analysis (Finch et al., 2023) and program repair (Fan et al.,
2023). Particularly, by incorporating a task description
and few examples into prompts, LLMs can understand the
context of a task and “attend” to important features and examples (Brown et al., 2020; Zhao et al., 2023). This demonstrates the capability of LLMs to analyze data, highlighting
their potential to perform as an expert feature engineer.

Large Language Models (LLMs), with their remarkable ability to tackle challenging and unseen
reasoning problems, hold immense potential for
tabular learning, that is vital for many real-world
applications. In this paper, we propose a novel
in-context learning framework, FeatLLM, which
employs LLMs as feature engineers to produce an
input data set that is optimally suited for tabular
predictions. The generated features are used to
infer class likelihood with a simple downstream
machine learning model, such as linear regression
and yields high performance few-shot learning.
The proposed FeatLLM framework only uses
this simple predictive model with the discovered
features at inference time. Compared to existing
LLM-based approaches, FeatLLM eliminates the
need to send queries to the LLM for each sample
at inference time. Moreover, it merely requires
API-level access to LLMs, and overcomes
prompt size limitations. As demonstrated across
numerous tabular datasets from a wide range of
domains, FeatLLM generates high-quality rules,
significantly (10% on average) outperforming
alternatives such as TabLLM and STUNT.

Utilization of LLMs’ prior knowledge and reasoning capabilities have been extended to the domain of tabular learning.
For instance, knowledge such as related to the increased risk
of certain diseases in older individuals can be beneficial at
disease prediction tasks. In this context, recent works define
task and feature descriptions in natural language, serialize
the data, and then feed it into an LLM (Dinh et al., 2022;
Wang et al., 2023). This is often followed by either using incontext learning (Nam et al., 2023a) or parameter-efficient
fine-tuning (Dinh et al., 2022; Hegselmann et al., 2023).
Prior knowledge provided by LLMs has proven effective,
outperforming conventional tabular learning baselines in
low-shot regimes (Hegselmann et al., 2023).
Current LLM-based tabular learning methods have some
limitations. For end-to-end predictions, at least one LLM
inference per sample is required, making it computationally
expensive. Most methods require fine-tuning the LLM for
high accuracy, making them infeasible to the application
to the LLMs that do not come with accessible training
codebases or tuning APIs, a prominent concern given that
recently-proposed top-performance LLMs only permit
limited access via inference APIs (Anil et al., 2023; OpenAI,
2023). In addition, most approaches are not suitable with
lengthy prompts (Liu et al., 2023) – when the number of
features in tabular data grows to the point where the serialized text length becomes long, the approach often turns
infeasible or experiences a decline in performance. These
constraints pose fundamental challenges to the real-world
application of LLM-based tabular learning models.

1. Introduction
In recent years, Large Language Models (LLMs) have
shown impressive abilities for generating suitable responses
for previously unseen tasks without requiring task-specific
fine-tuning (Creswell et al., 2022; Imani et al., 2023; Taylor
et al., 2022). Trained on extensive text corpora, the rich
prior knowledge of LLMs can substitute the need for expert
domain knowledge in many areas (Gen, 2021; Singhal et al.,
1
Work done at Google as a research intern. School of Computing, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon,
Republic of Korea 2 Google Cloud AI, Sunnyvale, California, USA.
Correspondence to: Jinsung Yoon <jinsungyoon@google.com>.

Our proposed approach goes beyond treating LLMs to yield
end-to-end predictions. Instead, we assign them the role of
feature engineering, with them proposing a more efficient
way to utilize their prior knowledge. Specifically, we

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

