Learning to Compile Programs to Neural Networks

Logan Weber 1 Jesse Michel 1 Alex Renda 1 Michael Carbin 1

Abstract

Neural Surrogate Training. The research community
has developed a variety of techniques to train neural surrogates. The traditional approach is to train a neural surrogate
for a single program by collecting and curating a dataset of
input-output pairs and then training a neural network to predict the program’s output given an input (Renda et al., 2021).

A neural surrogate is a neural network that mimics the behavior of a program. Neural surrogates
of programs have been used to automatically
tune program inputs, adapt programs to new
settings, and accelerate computations. Neural
surrogates have traditionally been developed by
training on input-output examples for a single
program. Language models present another
approach wherein a model is trained on a single,
large dataset then directly consumes program
text, to act as a neural surrogate of the program.
Having the language model as both the neural
surrogate generator and the neural surrogate,
however, poses a tradeoff of limited accuracy
or excessive resource consumption. We present
neural surrogate compilation, a technique
for producing neural surrogates directly from
program text without coupling neural surrogate
generation and execution. We implement neural
surrogate compilers using hypernetworks trained
on a dataset of C programs and find they produce
neural surrogates that are 1.91-9.50× as dataefficient and train in 4.31-7.28× fewer epochs
than neural surrogates trained from scratch.

Another point in the spectrum is to amortize the cost of
training neural surrogates by training a universal neural
surrogate: a neural network that directly consumes the text
of a program and predicts the program’s output for a given
input (Zaremba & Sutskever, 2015; Nye et al., 2021; Gu
et al., 2024). A key benefit of universal neural surrogates,
compared to standard neural surrogates is that creating
this dataset need only be done once, thereby enabling
the creation of a neural surrogate for a given program
without the need to curate a dataset of program-specific,
input-output pairs.
However, universal neural surrogates necessarily use the
same model to process the program text as is used to predict
the program output, and accurate prediction may require
multiple forward passes (e.g., chain-of-thought reasoning) (Nye et al., 2021; Wei et al., 2022). These limitations
pose challenges for successfully using such a model as a
neural surrogate because small models may not be able to
emulate complex programs (Zaremba & Sutskever, 2015)
and large models (OpenAI et al., 2023) may not be able to
execute in the resource-constrained environments where
neural surrogates have been used (Esmaeilzadeh et al.,
2012a; Mendis, 2020; Munk et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
A neural surrogate is a neural network that models a subset
of the observable behavior of a program (Renda et al., 2021).
Neural surrogates have been used to automatically configure
image signal processing units and CPU simulators (Tseng
et al., 2019; Renda et al., 2020), improve the accuracy
of manufacturing and physics simulations (Tercan et al.,
2018; Kustowski et al., 2020), accelerate the computer
architecture design process (Ïpek et al., 2006), and
accelerate computations in signal processing, robotics,
3D games, compression, machine learning, and image
processing (Esmaeilzadeh et al., 2012a).

Our Approach: Neural Surrogate Compilation. To
maintain the benefits of universal neural surrogates while
bypassing the above limitations, we propose a neural
surrogate compiler. A neural surrogate compiler is a
system that is specialized to a family of neural surrogate
architectures to accept a program’s text as input and produce
an initial neural surrogate of the program. This initial
neural surrogate can vary in behavioral quality, ranging
from closely matching the behavior of the input program
to only approximating the behavior of the program on a
few inputs. Similarly to a traditional compiler, a neural
surrogate compiler requires a significant upfront cost that
is amortized over the generation of initializations for many
neural surrogates. We demonstrate in this work that when

1
MIT CSAIL, Cambridge, MA. Correspondence to: Logan
Weber <loganweb@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

