Agnostic Interactive Imitation Learning: New Theory and Practical Algorithms

Yichen Li 1 Chicheng Zhang 1

Abstract

(state, action) pairs, each representing the expert’s action
taken under respective state. At first sight, imitation learning seems similar to supervised learning, where one would
like to train a policy that maps states to actions recommended by the expert. However, it is now well-known
that these two problems are different in nature (Pomerleau,
1988): compared to supervised learning, imitation learning
agents are faced with a new fundamental challenge of covariate shift: the state distribution the learner sees at the
test stage can be very different from that at the training
stage. To elaborate, upon deploying the trained policy, its
imperfection in mimicking the expert can result in compounding error: the learner may make an initial mistake
and enter a state not covered by the distribution of expert
demonstrations, and takes another incorrect action due to
lack of training data coverage in this state. This may lead
to sequences of consecutive states that were unseen in the
expert demonstrations, ultimately resulting in poor performance. Addressing such problem calls for better data collection methods beyond naively collecting expert trajectories; as summarized by (Bojarski et al., 2016) in the context of imitation learning for autonomous driving, “Training with data from only the human driver is not sufficient.
The network must learn how to recover from mistakes”.

We study interactive imitation learning, where a
learner interactively queries a demonstrating expert for action annotations, aiming to learn a policy that has performance competitive with the expert, using as few annotations as possible. We focus on the general agnostic setting where the expert demonstration policy may not be contained
in the policy class used by the learner. We propose a new oracle-efficient algorithm MFTPL-P
(abbreviation for Mixed Follow the Perturbed
Leader with Poisson perturbations) with provable finite-sample guarantees, under the assumption that the learner is given access to samples
from some “explorative” distribution over states.
Our guarantees hold for any policy class, which
is considerably broader than prior state of the
art. We further propose B OOTSTRAP -DAGGER,
a more practical variant that does not require additional sample access. Empirically, MFTPL-P
and B OOTSTRAP -DAGGER notably surpass online and offline imitation learning baselines in
continuous control tasks.

To cope with the covariate shift challenge, the interactive
imitation learning paradigm has been proposed and used
in practice (Ross and Bagnell, 2010; Ross et al., 2011;
Ross and Bagnell, 2014; Sun et al., 2017; Pan et al., 2020;
Celemin et al., 2022). Instead of having only access to offline expert trajectories, in interactive imitation learning,
the learner has the freedom to select states to ask for expert
annotations. This allows more targeted feedback and gives
the learning agent opportunities to learn to “recover from
mistakes”, and thus achieve better performance.

1. Introduction
Imitation learning (IL) is a learning paradigm for training
sequential decision making agents using expert demonstrations (Bagnell, 2015). It seeks to learn a policy whose
performance is on par with the expert, with as few expert
demonstrations as possible. Compared to reinforcement
learning which potentially requires intricate reward engineering, imitation learning sidesteps this challenge, making
it apt for complex decision making problems (Osa et al.,
2018).

Recent years have seen many exciting developments on designing provably efficient interactive imitation learning algorithms, using new algorithmic approaches such as distribution / moment matching (Ke et al., 2020; Swamy et al.,
2021) and online classification / regression (Rajaraman
et al., 2021; Sekhari et al., 2023). Most of these works
rely on some realizability assumption: they either assume
that the learner is given a policy class that contains the expert policy (Rajaraman et al., 2021; Sekhari et al., 2023;
Sun et al., 2017), or that the learner is given some function

The format of expert demonstrations often comprises of
1
Department of Computer Science,
University
of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA. Correspondence to:
Yichen Li <yichenl@arizona.edu>,
Chicheng Zhang
<chichengz@cs.arizona.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

