StrWAEs to Invariant Representations

Hyunjong Lee * 1 Yedarm Seong * 2 Sungdong Lee 3 Joong-Ho Won 1 2

Abstract

put. Thus an autoencoder can be considered a nonlinear
factor analysis model as the latent variable provided by the
encoder carries the meaning of “representation” and the
decoder can be used for generative modeling of the input
data distribution. Most autoencoders can be formulated as
minimizing some “distance” between the distribution PX
of input random variable X and the distribution g♯ PZ of
the reconstruction G = g(Z), where Z is the latent variable
or representation having distribution PZ , g is either deterministic or probabilistic decoder, and ♯ is the push-forward
operator (in the latter case g is read as the conditional distribution of G given Z), which is variationally described
in terms of an encoder QZ|X . For instance, the variational
autoencoder (VAE, Kingma & Welling, 2014) minimizes

Autoencoders have become an indispensable tool
for generative modeling and representation learning in high dimensions. Imposing structural constraints such as conditional independence in order to capture invariance of latent variables to
nuisance information has been attempted through
adding ad hoc penalties to the loss function mostly
in the variational autoencoder (VAE) context, often based on heuristics. This paper demonstrates
that Wasserstein autoencoders (WAEs) are highly
flexible in embracing such structural constraints.
Well-known extensions of VAEs for this purpose
are gracefully handled within the framework of
WAEs. In particular, given a conditional independence structure of the generative model (decoder),
corresponding encoder structure and penalties are
derived from the functional constraints that define the WAE. These structural uses of WAEs,
termed StrWAEs (“stairways”), open up a principled way of penalizing autoencoders to impose
structural constraints. Utilizing these advantages,
we present a handful of results on semi-supervised
classification, conditional generation, and invariant representation tasks.

DVAE (PX , g♯ PZ )
= inf

QZ|X ∈Q

EPX [DKL (QZ|X ∥PZ ) − EQZ|X log g(Z)] (1)

over the set of probabilistic decoders or conditional densities g of G given Z, where DKL is the Kullback-Leibler
(KL) divergence, and the Wasserstein autoencoder (WAE,
Tolstikhin et al., 2018) minimizes
DWAE (PX , g♯ PZ ) = inf

QZ|X ∈Q

EPX EQZ|X dp (X, g(Z)) (2)

over the set of deterministic decoders g, where d is the
metric in the space of input X and p ≥ 1. Set Q restricts
the search space for the encoder. In VAEs, a popular choice
is a class of normal distributions

1. Introduction
The ability to learn informative representations of data with
minimal supervision is a key challenge in machine learning (Tschannen et al., 2018). To address this challenge,
autoencoders have become an indispensable toolkit. An
autoencoder consists of the encoder, which maps the input
to a low-dimensional representation, and the decoder, that
maps a representation back to a reconstruction of the in-

Q = {QZ|{X=x} = N (µ(x), diag(Σ(x))) | µ, Σ ∈ N N }
where N N is a class of functions parametrized by neural
networks. In WAEs, the choice
Q = {QZ|X | QZ := EPX QZ|X = PZ }

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics, Seoul National
University, Seoul, Korea 2 Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial
Intelligence, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea 3 Department
of Medicine, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore. Correspondence to: Joong-Ho Won
<wonj@stats.snu.ac.kr>.

(3)

is considered; QZ is called an aggregate posterior of Z.
Of course, the notion of “informativeness” depends on the
downstream task. The variation in the observations that are
not relevant to the particular task is often called “nuisance”
and is desirable to be suppressed from the representation.
For example, in semi-supervised learning where the goal is
to use labeled as well as unlabeled data to perform learning
tasks such as digit generation (Van Engelen & Hoos, 2020),

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

