Understanding Diffusion Models by Feynman’s Path Integral

Yuji Hirono 1 Akinori Tanaka 2 3 4 Kenji Fukushima 5

Abstract

sampling driven by natural language (Rombach et al., 2022),
the mathematical framework underlying their training, i.e.,
the score-based scheme (Hyvärinen et al., 2009; Vincent,
2011; Song & Ermon, 2019) or the denoising scheme (SohlDickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020), is not inherently
dependent on prior conditions. The work (Kingma et al.,
2021) showed the equivalence of these two schemes from a
variational perspective. The work (Song et al., 2021b) developed a unified description based on stochastic differential
equations (SDEs)1 . In both cases, the sampling process is
given by a Markovian stochastic process.

Score-based diffusion models have proven effective in image generation and have gained
widespread usage; however, the underlying factors contributing to the performance disparity between stochastic and deterministic (i.e., the probability flow ODEs) sampling schemes remain unclear. We introduce a novel formulation of diffusion models using Feynman’s path integral, which
is a formulation originally developed for quantum physics. We find this formulation providing
comprehensive descriptions of score-based generative models, and demonstrate the derivation
of backward stochastic differential equations and
loss functions. The formulation accommodates
an interpolating parameter connecting stochastic
and deterministic sampling schemes, and we identify this parameter as a counterpart of Planck’s
constant in quantum physics. This analogy enables us to apply the Wentzel–Kramers–Brillouin
(WKB) expansion, a well-established technique
in quantum physics, for evaluating the negative
log-likelihood to assess the performance disparity between stochastic and deterministic sampling
schemes.

Another type of probabilistic models employs deterministic sampling schemes using ordinary differential equations (ODEs) such as the probability flow ODE (Song et al.,
2021b), which can be understood as a continuous normalizing flow (CNF) (Chen et al., 2018; Lipman et al., 2023).
A notable advantage of deterministic sampling schemes is
that there is a bijective map between the latent space and the
data space. This bijection not only facilitates intricate tasks
like manipulation of latent representations for image editing
(Su et al., 2023) but also enables the direct computation
of negative log-likelihoods (NLLs). Within stochastic sampling processes in contrast to deterministic ones, a direct
evaluation method of the NLL remains elusive, though a
theoretical bound exists for the NLL (Kong et al., 2023).
In general, stochastic sampling schemes require more
number of function evaluations (NFE) than deterministic
schemes, and is inferior in terms of sample generation speed.
However, the beneficial impact of stochastic generation on
certain metrics, such as the Fréchet Inception Distance (FID)
(Heusel et al., 2017) is a well-known property in practice.
For example, (Karras et al., 2022) reports improvements in
these metrics with the incorporation of stochastic processes
both in Variance-Exploding and Variance-Preserving pretrained models in (Song et al., 2021b). Intuitively, one can
conceptualize noise within stochastic generation as perturbation to propel particles out of local minima, potentially
enhancing the diversity and quality of the generated samples.
However, beyond this intuitive level, thoroughly quantitative analysis or rigorous theoretical framework to explain
this phenomenon is missing.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models have demonstrated impressive performance on image generation tasks (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021)
and they have earned widespread adoption across various
applications (Yang et al., 2023). While the predominant contemporary application of diffusion models lies in conditional
1

Department of Physics, Kyoto University, Kyoto 6068502, Japan 2 RIKEN AIP, RIKEN, Nihonbashi 103-0027, Japan
3
RIKEN iTHEMS, RIKEN, Wako 351-0198, Japan 4 Department
of Mathematics, Keio University, Hiyoshi 223-8522, Japan
5
Department of Physics, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.
Correspondence to:
Yuji Hirono <yuji.hirono@gmail.com>, Akinori Tanaka <akinori.tanaka@riken.jp>, Kenji Fukushima <fuku@nt.phys.s.utokyo.ac.jp>.

1

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

See (Oksendal, 2013) for basics of SDE and (Yang et al.,
2023) for diffusion models if readers are unfamiliar with them.

1

