Navigating Complexity: Toward Lossless Graph Condensation via Expanding
Window Matching

Yuchen Zhang * 1 Tianle Zhang * 1 Kai Wang† 1 Ziyao Guo 1 Yuxuan Liang 2 Xavier Bresson 1 Wei Jin 3
Yang You 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Graph condensation follows the success in vision dataset distillation (Wang et al., 2018; Zhao et al., 2020; Nguyen et al.,
2021; Cazenavette et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2022; 2023) and
aims to synthesize a smaller condensed graph dataset from
the original one. Recently, gradient and trajectory matching
methods (Jin et al., 2022; 2021; Zheng et al., 2024; Hashemi
et al., 2024) have achieved remarkable results on some
small-scale graph datasets. For instance, SFGC (Zheng
et al., 2024) condenses Citeseer (Kipf & Welling, 2016) to
1.8% sparsity without performance drop. However, these
methods fail to perform well on large-scale graph datasets,
i.e, there persists an unignorable performance gap between
GNNs trained on the condensed and original graph datasets.
This severely limits their effectiveness in real-world scenarios. Therefore, developing a high-performing and robust
graph condensation approach has become urgent for broader
graph-related applications.

Graph condensation aims to reduce the size of a
large-scale graph dataset by synthesizing a compact counterpart without sacrificing the performance of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) trained
on it, which has shed light on reducing the computational cost for training GNNs. Nevertheless,
existing methods often fall short of accurately
replicating the original graph for certain datasets,
thereby failing to achieve the objective of lossless
condensation. To understand this phenomenon,
we investigate the potential reasons and reveal that
the previous state-of-the-art trajectory matching
method provides biased and restricted supervision
signals from the original graph when optimizing
the condensed one. This significantly limits both
the scale and efficacy of the condensed graph.
In this paper, we make the first attempt toward
lossless graph condensation by bridging the previously neglected supervision signals. Specifically, we employ a curriculum learning strategy
to train expert trajectories with more diverse supervision signals from the original graph, and then
effectively transfer the information into the condensed graph with expanding window matching.
Moreover, we design a loss function to further
extract knowledge from the expert trajectories.
Theoretical analysis justifies the design of our
method and extensive experiments verify its superiority across different datasets. Code is released
at https://github.com/NUS-HPC-AI-Lab/GEOM.

*

1

In addressing the condensation challenges on large-scale
graphs, a critical question arises: what causes the notable
discrepancy in performance between condensing large-scale
and small-scale graphs? To this end, we analyze the differing outcomes of previous methods applied to graphs of
various sizes. A key observation highlights that a smaller
condensation ratio is utilized for large-scale graphs compared to small-scale ones. This suggests a greater disparity
in size between large-scale graphs and their condensed counterparts. One intuitive solution is to enlarge the condensation
ratio. We conduct experiments with the existing methods
and show results in Fig. 1(a). However, we find that the
performance of the condensed graph saturates as the ratio
increases. Besides, a significant gap still exists between the
saturated performance and that of the original graph.
GCond (Jin et al., 2021) explains this phenomenon as follows: optimizing a larger condensed graph might be more
complex. Nevertheless, GCond does not specify the exact
cause of this phenomenon. We infer that the lack of rich
supervision from the original graph might be a potential
reason. To verify it, we take trajectory matching method

2

Equal contribution , National University of Singapore Hong
Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou) 3 Emory
University. Correspondence to: Wei Jin <wei.jin@emory.edu>,
Yang You <youy@comp.nus.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

