Exploring Intrinsic Dimension for Vision-Language Model Pruning

Hanzhang Wang 1 * Jiawen Zhang 1 Qingyuan Ma 1

Abstract
The intrinsic dimension (ID) represents the
minimum dimension needed to describe data
on a lower-dimensional manifold within highdimensional spaces. Network pruning aims to
reduce the complexity of high-dimensional networks while minimizing performance trade-offs.
This symmetry motivates the exploration of ID
as a metric for effective pruning. For visionlanguage models, we investigate whether different
modalities exist on separate manifolds, indicating
varying complexity and prunability. We empirically study ID variations in large-scale visionlanguage pre-trained models and examine the contributions of different modalities to model prunability. We propose a layer importance metric
based on ID, which can conveniently integrate
with current metrics and enhance performance in
vision-language model pruning. The experimental results show a high correlation between ID and
modality prunability. Visual representations are
more sensitive and crucial to model performance,
while language representations are more robust
and offer greater prunability. Our findings suggest
an asymmetric pruning strategy for vision and language modalities, guided by the ID metric. The
code is available at https://github.com/
Nofear18/ID_VL_Pruning

Figure 1. Comparison of model weight reduction and performance
for language-only and visual-only pruning strategies. At approximately 40% pruning ratio, the language-only and vision-only
strategies result in a 1.9 and 75.4 drop in the CIDEr metric, respectively.

that are over-parameterized often fall prey to overfitting,
capturing incidental training noise instead of the essential
data distribution (Srivastava et al., 2014; Liebenwein et al.,
2021).
This study focuses on the interplay between intrinsic and extrinsic dimensionality, a key aspect in understanding the efficiency and effectiveness of large-scale pre-trained models.
The extrinsic dimension, typically the network’s architecture size (e.g., 512, 1024), often stands in stark contrast to its
intrinsic dimension, which varies based on different inputs
and tasks. The intrinsic dimension provides a more essential description of data, being significantly smaller than its
extrinsic counterpart. Studies (Li et al., 2018; Brown et al.,
2023) have demonstrated the variability of the intrinsic dimension (ID) across several datasets for image classification,
indicating a disparity between a network’s theoretical architectural capacity and the complexity of the data it represents.
In small-scale neural networks, it has been demonstrated
that less than 1% of the subspace dimensions can retain
90% of the original model’s performance (Li et al., 2018).
These findings suggest a potential for significant pruning of
parameters to achieve more effective representations.

1. Introduction
In the pursuit of advancing large-scale vision-language models, a question arises: How does the representation formed
by billions of parameters relate to the underlying complexity
of the data they represent? While the current large-scale
models are expansive, encompassing several billion parameters, their sheer size does not inherently translate to superior data abstraction or effective generalization. Networks
1

School of Computer Engineering and Science, Shanghai University.
Correspondence to:
Hanzhang Wang
<hanzhang.mon.wang@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

In assessing weight importance for pruning, leading strate1

