Quality Diversity through Human Feedback:
Towards Open-Ended Diversity-Driven Optimization

Li Ding 1 Jenny Zhang 2 3 Jeff Clune 2 3 4 Lee Spector 5 1 Joel Lehman 6 *

1. Introduction

Abstract

Foundation models such as large language models (LLMs)
and text-to-image generation models in effect compress
vast archives of human knowledge into powerful and flexible tools, serving as a foundation for down-stream applications (Brown et al., 2020; Bommasani et al., 2021). Their
promise includes helping individuals better meet their varied
goals, such as exploring their creativity in different modalities and coming up with novel solutions. One mechanism to
build upon such foundational knowledge is reinforcement
learning from human feedback (RLHF) (Christiano et al.,
2017), which can make models both easier to use (by aligning them to human instructions), and more competent (by
improving their capabilities based on human preferences).

Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback
(RLHF) has shown potential in qualitative tasks
where easily defined performance measures are
lacking. However, there are drawbacks when
RLHF is commonly used to optimize for average human preferences, especially in generative
tasks that demand diverse model responses. Meanwhile, Quality Diversity (QD) algorithms excel at
identifying diverse and high-quality solutions but
often rely on manually crafted diversity metrics.
This paper introduces Quality Diversity through
Human Feedback (QDHF), a novel approach that
progressively infers diversity metrics from human
judgments of similarity among solutions, thereby
enhancing the applicability and effectiveness of
QD algorithms in complex and open-ended domains. Empirical studies show that QDHF significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods
in automatic diversity discovery and matches the
efficacy of QD with manually crafted diversity
metrics on standard benchmarks in robotics and
reinforcement learning. Notably, in open-ended
generative tasks, QDHF substantially enhances
the diversity of text-to-image generation from a
diffusion model and is more favorably received in
user studies. We conclude by analyzing QDHF’s
scalability, robustness, and quality of derived diversity metrics, emphasizing its strength in openended optimization tasks. Code and tutorials are
available at https://liding.info/qdhf.

RLHF is a relatively new paradigm, and its deployments
often follow the relatively narrow recipe of maximizing a
learned reward model of averaged human preferences over
model responses. This work aims to broaden that recipe
to include optimizing for interesting diversity among responses, which is of practical importance for many creative
applications such as text-to-image generation (Rombach
et al., 2022). Such increased diversity can also improve
optimization for complex and open-ended tasks (through
improved exploration), personalization (serving individual
rather than average human preference), and fairness (to offset algorithmic biases in gender, ethnicity, and more).
Diversity encourages exploration, which is essential for finding novel and effective solutions to many complex problems.
Without diversity, optimization algorithms can converge prematurely, resulting in getting stuck in local optima or producing only a limited set of responses (i.e., mode collapse).
Diversity-seeking is a core aspect of Quality Diversity (QD)
algorithms (Pugh et al., 2016; Cully et al., 2015; Lehman
& Stanley, 2011b; Mouret & Clune, 2015), where diversity
metrics are explicitly defined and utilized to encourage the
variation of solutions during optimization.

1

Manning College of Information & Computer Sciences, University of Massachusetts Amherst 2 Department of Computer Science, University of British Columbia 3 Vector Institute 4 Canada
CIFAR AI Chair 5 Department of Computer Science, Amherst
College 6 Stochastic Labs *Part of the work was done while the
author was affiliated with Stability AI. Correspondence to: Li Ding
<liding@umass.edu>.

Our main idea is to derive distinct representations of what
humans find interestingly different and use such diversity
representations to support optimization. We introduce a
novel method, Quality Diversity through Human Feedback
(QDHF), which empowers QD algorithms with diversity

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

