Pragmatic Feature Preferences:
Learning Reward-Relevant Preferences from Human Input

Andi Peng 1 Yuying Sun 2 Tianmin Shu 3 David Abel 4

Abstract

Griffith et al., 2013). Motivated by the idea that pairwise
comparisons are a relatively simple and easy way for users
to provide offline input for training a reward model, RLHF
approaches have been used to train more efficient robotic
systems (Basu et al., 2018; Hüllermeier et al., 2008; Jain
et al., 2015), and safer language models (LMs) (Bai et al.,
2022a;b). Unfortunately, because such feedback is provided
over example pairs, valuable information regarding finegrained components of the reward, i.e. which features of the
examples matter and why, are lost (Basu et al., 2018).

Humans use social context to specify preferences
over behaviors, i.e. their reward functions. Yet,
algorithms for inferring reward models from preference data do not take this social learning view
into account. Inspired by pragmatic human communication, we study how to extract fine-grained
data regarding why an example is preferred that is
useful for learning more accurate reward models.
We propose to enrich binary preference queries to
ask both (1) which features of a given example are
preferable in addition to (2) comparisons between
examples themselves. We derive an approach
for learning from these feature-level preferences,
both for cases where users specify which features
are reward-relevant, and when users do not. We
evaluate our approach on linear bandit settings in
both vision- and language-based domains. Results
support the efficiency of our approach in quickly
converging to accurate rewards with fewer comparisons vs. example-only labels. Finally, we
validate the real-world applicability with a behavioral experiment on a mushroom foraging task.
Our findings suggest that incorporating pragmatic
feature preferences is a promising approach for
more efficient user-aligned reward learning.

As a simple example, consider taking up the task of mushroom foraging introduced by Sumers et al. (2022) (Fig. 1).
How might we learn which mushrooms are good for foraging? A pairwise comparison between two examples may
tell us that one mushroom is better (that is, more delicious)
than the other, but not the reason why (green mushrooms
tend to be zestier in flavor). Moreover, users may not hold
the same preferences over which features of mushrooms are
important—a chef may prefer mushrooms to taste delicious
but a collector may instead prefer them to look exotic. In
other words, there may be different reward-relevant features
that shape each user’s preference relation such that their
underlying reward functions are different.
If we assume the user in question is not simply acting as
an oracle providing labels divorced from the learning process, but rather as an engaged cooperative agent capable of
providing descriptive feedback, we can treat users as active
teachers capable of providing richer information regarding
their underlying reward function. Such pedagogical models
have been found to be useful for guiding RL agents from
actions (Ho et al., 2016; Goyal et al., 2019) and language
feedback (Bisk et al., 2016; Sumers et al., 2022; Lin et al.,
2022). How might we do the same for preference learning?

1. Introduction
Learning user-aligned reward functions from human data
is a cornerstone of efforts in value alignment and AI safety
(Fisac et al., 2020; Amodei et al., 2016; Christian, 2021;
Hadfield-Menell et al., 2017). Current efforts such as reinforcement learning (RL) from human feedback (RLHF)
propose to learn reward functions from pairwise comparisons provided by human users (Christiano et al., 2017;

In this work, we propose a pedagogical framework for modeling feature-level pairwise comparisons and design a joint
loss to learn rewards from both feature and example-level
comparisons. Our key insight is that humans communicate preferences pragmatically: when they describe which
features of each example are important to their preference,
they are also implicitly revealing which features are not
important. For example, as shown in Figure 1, the fact
that a user prefers a mushroom because of its color and

1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2 Boston University
Johns Hopkins University 4 Google DeepMind. Correspondence
to: Andi Peng <andipeng@mit.edu>.
3

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

