Fast Decision Boundary based Out-of-Distribution Detector

Litian Liu 1 Yao Qin 2

Abstract
Efficient and effective Out-of-Distribution (OOD)
detection is essential for the safe deployment
of AI systems. Existing feature space methods,
while effective, often incur significant computational overhead due to their reliance on auxiliary models built from training features. In
this paper, we propose a computationally-efficient
OOD detector without using auxiliary models
while still leveraging the rich information embedded in the feature space. Specifically, we
detect OOD samples based on their feature distances to decision boundaries. To minimize computational cost, we introduce an efficient closedform estimation, analytically proven to tightly
lower bound the distance. Based on our estimation, we discover that In-Distribution (ID) features tend to be further from decision boundaries
than OOD features. Additionally, ID and OOD
samples are better separated when compared at
equal deviation levels from the mean of training features. By regularizing the distances to
decision boundaries based on feature deviation
from the mean, we develop a hyperparameterfree, auxiliary model-free OOD detector. Our
method matches or surpasses the effectiveness of
state-of-the-art methods in extensive experiments
while incurring negligible overhead in inference
latency. Overall, our approach significantly improves the efficiency-effectiveness trade-off in
OOD detection. Code is available at: https:
//github.com/litianliu/fDBD-OOD.

Class 0 Feature
Class 1 Feature
Class 2 Feature

OOD Feature
Class 2 Decision Boundary

OOD(SVHN)

ID(CIFAR-10)

Feature distance to the
decision boundary of Class 2

Figure 1. Overview. Left: Conceptual Illustration. The feature
distance to decision boundaries on a multi-class classifier’s penultimate layer, quantifying the perturbation magnitude needed to
alter the model prediction to a class (see formal definition in Section 3.1). Right: Empirical Observation. Features of ID samples
(CIFAR-10) tend to reside further from decision boundaries than
OOD samples (SVHN). The distances are measured using our
method (see Section 3.1) and averages are per sample.

meaningful predictions on test samples from classes unseen
during training, the detection of Out-of-Distribution (OOD)
samples is crucial for taking necessary precautions. The
field of OOD detection, which has recently seen a surge in
research interest (Yang et al., 2021a), divides into two main
areas. One area investigates the training time regularization
to enhance OOD detection (Wei et al., 2022; Huang & Li,
2021; Ming et al., 2023), while our work, along with others,
delves into post-hoc methods, which are training-agnostic
and suitable for ready implementation on pre-trained models.
OOD detectors can be designed over model output space
(Liang et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2020; Hendrycks et al., 2019).
Additionally, Tack et al. (2020); Lee et al. (2018); Sun et al.
(2022) and Sastry & Oore (2020) use the clustering of InDistribution (ID) samples in the feature space for OOD
detection. For example, Lee et al. (2018) fit a multivariate
Gaussian over the training features and detect OOD based
on the Mahalanobis distance, and Sun et al. (2022) detect
OOD based on the k-th nearest neighbor (KNN) distance
to the training features. While existing feature-space methods are highly effective, their reliance on auxiliary models
built from training features incurs additional computational
costs. This poses a challenge for time-critical real-world
applications, such as autonomous driving, where the latency
of OOD detection becomes a top priority.

1. Introduction
As machine learning models are increasingly deployed in
the real world, it is inevitable to encounter samples out of
the training distribution. Since a classifier cannot make
1
MIT 2 UC Santa Barbara. Correspondence to: Litian Liu
<litianl@mit.edu>, Yao Qin <yaoqin@ucsb.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

In this work, we focus on designing post-hoc OOD detectors for pre-trained classifiers. We aim to leverage the rich
1

