Multi-layer Rehearsal Feature Augmentation for Class-Incremental Learning

Bowen Zheng 1 2 Da-Wei Zhou 1 2 Han-Jia Ye 1 2 De-Chuan Zhan 1 2

Abstract

However, in real-world situations, this assumption does not
hold since new concepts and knowledge increase over time.
It is necessary for learning systems to adapt to new knowledge while keeping the previously learned knowledge. This
motivates the research in Continual Learning (or Incremental Learning). Class-Incremental Learning (CIL) (Zhou
et al., 2023b) is one of the scenarios where new concepts incrementally emerge as new classes. The main challenge for
Continual Learning is catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey
& Cohen, 1989), where the learning system usually forgets
previously learned knowledge fast and catastrophically. The
forgetting is caused by the distribution shift on the input
samples and labels, especially at the task boundary where
the rapid shift occurs. When the distribution shift occurs, the
gradients, intermediate representations are biased towards
the new task, causing the test accuracy drop on old tasks.

Class-Incremental Learning (CIL) seeks to learn
new concepts without forgetting previously
learned knowledge. To achieve this, rehearsalbased methods keep a replay memory consisting
of a small number of trained samples from previous tasks. However, recent studies show that
rehearsal-based methods are prone to overfitting
on rehearsal samples, resulting in poor generalization on previous tasks. Since the generalization
error is bounded by the margin on the training
dataset, in this paper, we study the generalization by all-layer margin on deep neural networks
to alleviate catastrophic forgetting. Specifically,
we show that the average margin of the rehearsal
samples are smaller during incremental learning.
To acquire larger margin thus better generalization on rehearsal samples, we propose Multi-layer
Rehearsal Feature Augmentation (MRFA) in rehearsal training to optimize the all-layer margin
on rehearsal samples. The proposed method augments the features of rehearsal samples at each
layer by gradient ascent step of the current model
with respect to the feature. With such augmentations on layer features, the margin on rehearsal
samples are larger, rehearsal samples are able to
provide more information for refining the decision boundary during incremental learning, thus
alleviating catastrophic forgetting. Extensive experiments show the effectiveness of MRFA on
various CIL scenarios.

One of the widely adopted strategies to avoid catastrophic
forgetting is to keep a small number of samples from previously learned tasks for replay. Such methods are called
rehearsal-based approaches (Robins, 1995; Rebuffi et al.,
2017; Chaudhry et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2020). This strategy
is generally effective since it mitigates the distribution shift
during new task training. However, recent studies show
that rehearsal-based methods are prone to overfitting on rehearsal samples (Verwimp et al., 2021). When the model
is training with additional rehearsal samples, the gradients
are initially dominated by the new task because of the significant loss gap between rehearsal samples and training
samples from the new task. After some epochs, their losses
are balanced, the model will end up at a high-loss ridge,
harming the generalization on previous tasks.
There are various ways to bound the generalization error,
margin-based generalization bounds are important for classification models (Koltchinskii & Panchenko, 2002; Kakade
et al., 2008). All-layer margin (Wei & Ma, 2020) is one
of the margin-based generalization bounds for deep neural
networks. It is defined as the minimal perturbation required
to alter the prediction of the model for a sample. Generally,
large margin means good generalization. It is also true for
all-layer margin, the larger the minimal perturbation is, the
larger the margin is, thus better generalization the model will
achieve. All-layer margin offers a finegrained and tractable
way to estimate the generalization error for deep networks.
Therefore, we wonder if we can reveal the loss of generaliza-

1. Introduction
In traditional supervised learning, the training samples are
assumed to be drawn i.i.d. from a stationary distribution.
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University,
China 2 National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China.
Correspondence to:
Da-Wei Zhou <zhoudw@lamda.nju.edu.cn>, Han-Jia Ye
<yehj@lamda.nju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

