Matroid Semi-Bandits in Sublinear Time
Ruo-Chun Tzeng 1 § Naoto Ohsaka 2 Kaito Ariu 2

Abstract

(Bubeck et al., 2013; Streeter et al., 2009) and diversified
recommendation (Abbassi et al., 2013) can be modeled with
M as a partition matroid. Network routing (Kveton et al.,
2014a) can be modeled with M as a graphical matroid. Task
assignment (Chen et al., 2016) can be modeled with M as
a transversal matroid.

We study the matroid semi-bandits problem,
where at each round the learner plays a subset
of K arms from a feasible set, and the goal is to
maximize the expected cumulative linear rewards.
Existing algorithms have per-round time complexity at least Ω(K), which becomes expensive when
K is large. To address this computational issue,
we propose FasterCUCB whose sampling rule
takes time sublinear in K for common classes
of matroids: O(D polylog (K) polylog (T )) for
uniform matroids, partition√matroids, and graphical matroids, and O(D Kpolylog (T )) for
transversal matroids. Here, D is the maximum
number of elements in any feasible subset of
arms, and T is the horizon. Our technique is
based on dynamic maintenance of an approximate maximum-weight basis over inner-product
weights. Although the introduction of an approximate maximum-weight basis presents a challenge
in regret analysis, we can still guarantee an upper bound on regret as tight as CUCB in the sense
that it matches the gap-dependent lower bound by
Kveton et al. (2014a) asymptotically.

Popular algorithms include Combinatorial Upper Confidence Bound (CUCB) (Gai et al., 2012; Chen et al., 2013;
Kveton et al., 2014a; 2015), Combinatorial Thompson Sampling (CTS) (Wang and Chen, 2018; Kong et al., 2021;
Perrault, 2022), and the instance-specifically optimal algorithm KL-based Efficient Sampling for Matroids (KL-OSM)
(Talebi and Proutiere, 2016). All of these algorithms rely
on a greedy algorithm (see Algorithm 1) to determine the
action to be pulled. The greedy algorithm takes time at
least Ω(K) and at most O(K(log K + Tmember )), where
Tmember is the time taken to determine whether x + ek ∈ I
for some (x, k) ∈ I × [K], and ek is the k-th canonical
unit vector. However, when the number K of arms is large,
performing the greedy algorithm at each round can become
expensive. There is a need to develop a matroid semi-bandit
algorithm with per-round time complexity sublinear in K.
In this work, we present FasterCUCB (Algorithm 5), the
first sublinear-time algorithm for matroid semi-bandit. The
design of FasterCUCB is based on CUCB, but with a much
faster sampling rule which takes time sublinear in K for
many classes of matroids. For uniform matroids, partition
matroids, and graphical matroids, it has per-round time complexity of O(D polylog (K) polylog (T )), which is optimal
up to a polylogarithmic factor as compared to the trivial
lower bound of Ω(D). For transversal
matroids, the per√
round time complexity is O(D K polylog (T )), which is
1
still sublinear in K when D = O(K 2 −ϵ ) for any ϵ > 0.
FasterCUCB trades the accuracy for computational efficiency. In other words, the action computed by the sampling
rule of FasterCUCB is an approximation to the optimal
solution computed by the sampling rule of CUCB. This introduces difficulty in the regret analysis because prior analysis
of CUCB (Kveton et al., 2014a) requires the exact solution.
What is interesting is that we can still guarantee the same regret upper bound asymptotically as prior analysis of CUCB.

1. Introduction
Matroid semi-bandits model many real-world tasks. An
instance of matroid semi-bandit is described by ([K], X , µ),
where [K] ≜ {1, · · · , K} is the ground set, each k ∈ [K] is
associated with a probability distribution νk with mean µk ,
and X ⊆ {0, 1}K is the set of bases of a given matroid M =
([K], I) of rank D. At each round t ∈ [T ], the learner pulls
an action x(t) ∈ X and observes a semi-bandit feedback,
i.e., yk (t) ∼ νk iff xk (t) = 1. This formulation can be
used to model online advertisting and news selection (Kale
et al., 2010) with M as a uniform matroid. Ad placement
§Work done during an internship at CyberAgent. 1 EECS,
KTH Royal Institue of Technology, Sweden 2 AI Lab, CyberAgent, Japan.
Correspondence to: Ruo-Chun Tzeng
<rubys88684@gmail.com>.

To develop a sublinear-time sampling rule, we present a
dynamic algorithm for maintaining maximum-weight base

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

