Nesting Particle Filters for Experimental Design in Dynamical Systems

Sahel Iqbal 1 Adrien Corenflos 1 Simo Särkkä 1 Hany Abdulsamad 1

Abstract

a design ξ and observing an outcome x is defined as
G(x, ξ) := H[p(θ)] − H[p(θ | x, ξ)],

In this paper, we propose a novel approach
to Bayesian experimental design for nonexchangeable data that formulates it as risksensitive policy optimization. We develop the
Inside-Out SMC2 algorithm, a nested sequential
Monte Carlo technique to infer optimal designs,
and embed it into a particle Markov chain Monte
Carlo framework to perform gradient-based policy amortization. Our approach is distinct from
other amortized experimental design techniques,
as it does not rely on contrastive estimators. Numerical validation on a set of dynamical systems
showcases the efficacy of our method in comparison to other state-of-the-art strategies.

with H[p(·)] := −Ep(·) [log p(·)] denoting the entropy of
a random variable with probability density p. Since the
outcomes x are themselves random variables for a fixed
design ξ, the goal in BED is to choose a design ξ ∗ that
maximizes the expected information gain (EIG), defined as


I(ξ) := Ep(x|ξ) H[p(θ)] − H[p(θ | x, ξ)] ,
(1)
where p(x | ξ) = Ep(θ) [p(x | θ, ξ)]. The expected information gain thus quantifies the decrease in uncertainty in the
unknown variable θ upon implementing a design ξ.
While mathematically elegant, the BED framework involves
maximizing nested expectations over intractable quantities
such as the marginal likelihood of x and the posterior of
θ appearing in (1). This is a computationally intensive
task (Kueck et al., 2009; Rainforth et al., 2018), which
becomes even more challenging when optimizing designs
for a series of experiments conducted sequentially, where
the impact of each individual design needs to be accounted
for across the entire sequence of experiments. This makes
the deployment of sequential BED close to impossible on
real-time systems with high-frequency data.

1. Introduction
Traditionally, Bayesian inference on the parameters of a statistical model is performed after the fact by employing a posterior elicitation routine to previously gathered data. However, in many scenarios, experimenters can proactively design experiments to acquire maximal information about the
parameters of interest. Bayesian experimental design (BED,
Lindley, 1956; Chaloner & Verdinelli, 1995) offers a principled framework to achieve this goal by maximizing the
expected information gain over the design space. BED
has found applications in fields as varied as active learning (Bickford Smith et al., 2023), neuroscience (Shababo
et al., 2013), physics (McMichael et al., 2021), psychology (Myung et al., 2013), and robotics (Schultheis et al.,
2020). A recent overview of the field of BED can be found
in Rainforth et al. (2024).

Huan & Marzouk (2016) addressed this limitation by introducing a parametric policy to predict designs as a function
of the running parameter posterior, thereby eliminating the
cost of the maximization step in each experiment. Foster et al. (2021) extended this idea to amortize the overall
cost of sequential BED by conditioning the policy on the
entire outcome-design history and avoiding explicit posterior computation. In that approach, called Deep Adaptive
Design (DAD), there is an upfront cost to learning the policy, but experiments can be performed in real-time. While
DAD is only applicable for exchangeable models, implicit
DAD (iDAD, Ivanova et al., 2021) generalized the concept
to accommodate non-exchangeable models that cover dynamical systems. These methods leverage a lower bound
to the EIG known as the sequential Prior Contrastive Estimation (sPCE) bound. sPCE exhibits significant bias in
low-sample regimes, thus requiring a large number of samples for accurate estimates of the EIG (Foster et al., 2021).

In Bayesian experimental design, we are given a prior p(θ)
and a likelihood p(x | ξ, θ), where θ ∈ Θ is the set of unknown parameters of interest, x ∈ X is the experimental
outcome, and ξ ∈ Ξ is a controllable design. The information gain (IG, Lindley, 1956) in a parameter θ upon applying
1
Aalto University, Espoo, Finland. Correspondence to: Sahel
Iqbal <sahel.iqbal@aalto.fi>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

In this work, we introduce a novel amortization scheme that
circumvents the drawbacks of sPCE. Our approach is rooted
1

