Proteus: Exploring Protein Structure Generation for Enhanced Designability
and Efficiency

Chentong Wang 1 2 Yannan Qu 2 Zhangzhi Peng 3 Yukai Wang 2 Hongli Zhu 2 Dachuan Chen 2
Longxing Cao 2

Abstract

protein structure prediction methods, such as AlphaFold2
(Jumper et al., 2021) and RosettaFold (Baek et al., 2021),
have enabled the ’hallucination’ approach (Anishchenko
et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022) to directly generate protein
sequences using backpropagation on the structure prediction
networks. Further leveraging the generative capabilities of
the diffusion model (Ho et al., 2020), RFdiffusion (Watson
et al., 2023) has demonstrated superior performance across
a wide range of protein design challenges. These applications include designing protein binders, scaffolding motifs,
and creating symmetric oligomers. Despite RFdiffusion’s
impressive performance, its dependency on pretraining with
RosettaFold2 (Baek et al., 2023) poses a challenge for dissecting and refining the model’s architecture to improve
performance for structure generation tasks.

Diffusion-based generative models have been successfully employed to create proteins with novel
structures and functions. However, the construction of such models typically depends on large,
pre-trained structure prediction networks, like
RFdiffusion. In contrast, alternative models that
are trained from scratch, such as FrameDiff, still
fall short in performance. In this context, we
introduce Proteus, an innovative deep diffusion
network that incorporates graph-based triangle
methods and a multi-track interaction network,
eliminating the dependency on structure prediction pre-training with superior efficiency. We have
validated our model’s performance on de novo
protein backbone generation through comprehensive in silico evaluations and experimental characterizations, which demonstrate a remarkable success rate. These promising results underscore Proteus’s ability to generate highly designable protein
backbones efficiently. This capability, achieved
without reliance on pre-training techniques, has
the potential to significantly advance the field of
protein design. Codes are available at https://
github.com/Wangchentong/Proteus.

To tackle the challenge of generating designable protein
backbones without reliance on pretraining, researchers have
developed a range of diffusion strategies and model architectures. One such approach is FoldingDiff (Wu et al., 2022),
which employs diffusion in the protein backbone torsion
space with a bidirectional transformer. This network iteratively denoises a sequence of torsion angles to generate
protein-like backbones. However, the majority of generated structures are predicted to be non-designable. In contrast, two concurrent studies have shown more promise by
directly applying diffusion on residue coordinates (Lin &
AlQuraishi, 2023) or tangent space of coordinate and rotation (Yim et al., 2023). Additionally, previous research
(Anand & Achim, 2022; Lee et al., 2023; Trippe et al., 2022)
has explored multiple network architectures, including UNet (Ronneberger et al., 2015), Equivariant Graph Neural
Networks (EGNNs) (Satorras et al., 2022), Invariant Point
Attention(IPA) (Jumper et al., 2021), which have achieved
success in diverse fields such as Computer Vision or dynamic system modeling.

1. Introduction
The biological function of a protein is often directly determined by its tertiary structure, which underscores the importance of designing novel protein backbones. De novo protein
design methods are dedicated to creating proteins with the
desired structure and function. Recent advancements in
1
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China 2 School of
Life Sciences, Westlake University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
3
Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, USA. Correspondence
to: Longxing Cao <caolongxing@westlake.edu.cn>.

Although these initiatives have moderately improved the
designability of protein structure diffusion models without
dependency on pretraining, there is still a notable performance gap compared to RFdiffusion, which results in considerable limitations for these models, making them less
effective or difficult to apply in practical protein design

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

