ACPO: A Policy Optimization Algorithm for Average MDPs with Constraints

Akhil Agnihotri 1 Rahul Jain 1 Haipeng Luo 1

Abstract

2022), safe language, image or multi-modal output generation. Furthermore, the average criterion when long-term
rewards and safety are of consideration is more suitable.
Using discounted cost formulations (as a proxy for safety)
incentivizes policy optimization algorithms to search for
policies that are short-term safe but not long-term because
of future-discounting.

Reinforcement Learning (RL) for constrained
MDPs (CMDPs) is an increasingly important
problem for various applications. Often, the
average criterion is more suitable than the discounted criterion. Yet, RL for average-CMDPs
(ACMDPs) remains a challenging problem. Algorithms designed for discounted constrained RL
problems often do not perform well for the average CMDP setting. In this paper, we introduce
a new policy optimization with function approximation algorithm for constrained MDPs with the
average criterion. The Average-Constrained Policy Optimization (ACPO) algorithm is inspired
by trust region-based policy optimization algorithms. We develop basic sensitivity theory for
average CMDPs, and then use the corresponding
bounds in the design of the algorithm. We provide
theoretical guarantees on its performance, and
through extensive experimental work in various
challenging OpenAI Gym environments, show its
superior empirical performance when compared
to other state-of-the-art algorithms adapted for the
ACMDPs.

The planning problem for MDPs with constraints is often
formulated as a Constrained MDP (CMDP) model (Manne,
1960; Hordijk & Kallenberg, 1979; Altman, 1999). Unfortunately, CMDP models do not satisfy Bellman’s principle
of optimality, and hence dynamic programming (DP)-style
algorithms cannot be developed for the setting. Instead, an
alternative approach called the convex analytic approach
(Borkar, 1988; Altman, 1999) is used by way of introducing
occupation measures that leads to optimization formulations. This can be done for both discounted (DCMDPs) and
average-criterion (ACMDPs) constrained MDPs.
Theory and algorithms for RL deal with settings when the
MDP model is unknown. While DP-inspired RL algorithms
such as DQN, when combined with deep learning architectures for function approximation work remarkably effectively (Mnih et al., 2015), policy optimization algorithms
such as TRPO (Schulman et al., 2015), PPO (Schulman
et al., 2017) have proven even more effective in solving
high dimensional problems. Since the discounted criterion
is sometimes not suitable, policy optimization algorithms
such as ATRPO (Zhang et al., 2021; Wan et al., 2021; Liao
et al., 2022) have been developed for AMDPs. Furthermore,
as already mentioned, certain RL applications have multiple
objectives, one of which is to be optimized and the rest constrained. Thus, the Constrained Policy Optimization (CPO)
algorithm (Achiam et al., 2017) was introduced for infinitehorizon DCMDP problems. Unfortunately, as motivated
above, not all such applications fit the discounted-criterion
formulation: there are settings, for example where there may
be safety requirements when the average-CMDP model is a
better fit. No scalable RL algorithms are currently available
for such settings.

1. Introduction
Over the last decade, we have seen an enormous impact
of RL techniques on a variety of problems, from mastering complex games like Go (Silver et al., 2017) and StarCraft (Vinyals et al., 2019) to robotic control (Levine et al.,
2016; Akkaya et al., 2019; Aractingi et al., 2023). Many
of these have used RL-policy optimization algorithms such
as Schulman et al. (2017) for discounted MDPs (DMDPs).
These have come in handy even in generative AI, e.g., training large language models (LLMs) (Achiam et al., 2023).
However, applications often need satisfaction of some constraints, e.g., physical safety of mobile robots (Hu et al.,
1

University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
RJ is also affiliated with Google DeepMind. Correspondence to:
Akhil Agnihotri <agnihotri.akhil@gmail.com>.

We note that the RL problem is usually harder than the corresponding planning problem; average-MDPs are more challenging than discounted MDPs; and constrained MDPs are
more challenging than unconstrained ones. In this paper, we

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

