Agnostic Learning of Mixed Linear Regressions with
EM and AM Algorithms

Avishek Ghosh 1 Arya Mazumdar 2

Abstract

tions y = θjT x,θj ∈ Rd ,j = 1,...,k, that best fits the samples.

Mixed linear regression is a well-studied problem
in parametric statistics and machine learning.
Given a set of samples, tuples of covariates and
labels, the task of mixed linear regression is to
find a small list of linear relationships that best fit
the samples. Usually it is assumed that the label
is generated stochastically by randomly selecting
one of two or more linear functions, applying this
chosen function to the covariates, and potentially
introducing noise to the result. In that situation,
the objective is to estimate the ground-truth
linear functions up to some parameter error. The
popular expectation maximization (EM) and
alternating minimization (AM) algorithms have
been previously analyzed for this.

This problem is well-studies as the mixed linear regression,
when there are ground-truth θ̃j ,j = 1,...,k, that generate the
samples. For example, the setting where
xi ∼ N (0,Id ),θ ∼ Unif{θ˜1 ,...,θ˜k },yi |θ ∼ N (xT θ,σ 2 ), (1)
for i = 1,...,n has been analyzed thoroughly. Bounds on
sample complexity are provided in terms of d,σ 2 and error
in estimating parameters θ˜j ,j = 1,...,k ((Chaganty & Liang,
2013; Faria & Soromenho, 2010; Städler et al., 2010; Li &
Liang, 2018; Kwon & Caramanis, 2018; Viele & Tong, 2002;
Yi et al., 2014; 2016; Balakrishnan et al., 2017; Klusowski
et al., 2019)).
In this paper, we consider an agnostic and general learning
theoretic setup to study the mixed linear regression problem
first studied in (Pal et al., 2022). In particular, we do not
assume a generative model on the samples. Instead we focus
on finding the optimal set of lines that minimize a certain loss.

In this paper, we consider the more general
problem of agnostic learning of mixed linear
regression from samples, without such generative
models. In particular, we show that the AM
and EM algorithms, under standard conditions
of separability and good initialization, lead to
agnostic learning in mixed linear regression by
converging to the population loss minimizers, for
suitably defined loss functions. In some sense,
this shows the strength of AM and EM algorithms
that converges to “optimal solutions” even in the
absence of realizable generative models.

Suppose, we denote a loss function ℓ : Rd×k → R evaluated
on a sample as ℓ(θ1 ,θ2 ,...,θk ;x,y). The population loss is
L(θ1 ,θ2 ,...,θk ) ≡ E(x,y)∼D ℓ(θ1 ,θ2 ,...,θk ;x,y),
and the population loss minimizers
(θ1∗ ,...,θk∗ ) ≡ argmin L(θ1 ,θ2 ,...,θk ).
Learning in this setting makes sense if we are allowed to
predict a list (of size k) of labels for an input, as pointed out in
(Pal et al., 2022). We may set some goodness criteria, such as
an weighted average of prediction error over all elements in
the list. In (Pal et al., 2022), it was called a ‘good’ prediction if
at least one of the labels in the list is good, in particular, the following loss function was proposed, that we will call min-loss:

ℓmin (θ1 ,θ2 ,...,θk ;x,y) = min (y−⟨x,θj ⟩)2 .
(2)

1. Introduction
Suppose we obtain samples from a data distribution D on
Rd+1 , i.e., {xi ,yi } ∼ D, xi ∈ Rd ,yi ∈ R,i = 1,...,n. We consider the problem of learning a list of k Rd → R linear func1

Systems and Control Engg. and Centre for Machine Intelligence for Data Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology,
Bombay, India. 2 Halıcıoğlu Data Science Institute, University
of California, San Diego. Correspondence to: Avishek Ghosh
<avishek.ghosh38@gmail.com>.

j∈[k]

The intuition behind min-loss is simple. Each sample is
assigned to a best-fit line, which define a partition of the
samples. This is analogous to the popular k-means clustering
objective. In addition to the min-loss function, we will also

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

