Deletion-Anticipative Data Selection with a Limited Budget

Rachael Hwee Ling Sim 1 Jue Fan 1 Xiao Tian 1 Patrick Jaillet 2 Bryan Kian Hsiang Low 1

Abstract

example, online services such as Netflix and Amazon
require different users’ usage and purchase history to predict
good recommendations, while healthcare startups require
various patients’ health records (e.g., heart statistics, CT
scans) to predict diseases well. However, using a larger
dataset incurs longer training and prediction time and more
expensive labelling costs. Thus, conventionally, supervised
data subset selection and active learning have often been
used to select a smaller training set to reduce the time
and cost incurred without significantly sacrificing accuracy
(Wei et al., 2015); the former assumes accessibility of data
labels but the latter does not. Concretely, both classes of
data selection (DS) methods select a subset K (of size
at most k) from a large feasible set M as the training
dataset to maximize some chosen data utility function u, i.e.,
K := arg maxB⊆M :|B|≤k u(B), that positively correlates
with model accuracy but can be more efficiently computed
without model training.

Learners with a limited budget can use supervised
data subset selection and active learning
techniques to select a smaller training set and
reduce the cost of acquiring data and training
machine learning (ML) models. However, the
resulting high model performance, measured by a
data utility function, may not be preserved when
some data owners, enabled by the GDPR’s right to
erasure, request their data to be deleted from the
ML model. This raises an important question for
learners who are temporarily unable or unwilling
to acquire data again: During the initial data
acquisition of a training set of size k, can we
proactively maximize the data utility after future
unknown deletions? We propose that the learner
anticipates/estimates the probability that (i) each
data owner in the feasible set will independently
delete its data or (ii) a number of deletions
occur out of k, and justify our proposal with
concrete real-world use cases. Then, instead of
directly maximizing the data utility function, the
learner can maximize the expected or risk-averse
post-deletion utility based on the anticipated
probabilities. We further propose how to construct
these deletion-anticipative data selection (DADS)
maximization objectives to preserve monotone
submodularity and near-optimality of greedy
solutions, how to optimize the objectives and
empirically evaluate DADS’ performance on realworld datasets.

The recent interest in the rights of individuals to own and
protect their data as their properties, evidenced by the
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), has created
a stronger impetus for DS and a new important challenge
at the same time: Firstly, as data owners require monetary
compensations for their data (Ghorbani & Zou, 2019; Jia
et al., 2019) and would only grant ML model learners
temporary access to their data for DS, learners with a limited
monetary budget (e.g., a healthcare startup) have a stronger
impetus to acquire high utility data from fewer data owners.
Secondly, as some selected data owners may request timely
deletions of their data (e.g., sensitive health records) under
GDPR’s “right to erasure” in the future, the high data utility
and model accuracy achieved via DS is not preserved after
their data are deleted from the model (as empirically shown
in Sec. 5). The learner may neither have the budget1 nor
logistics to acquire replacement data from unselected data
owners for some time period. For example, a startup may
find it tedious to attract and request consent/data access
from data owners after every data deletion and prefer doing
data acquisition annually instead. Thus, a novel gap and
challenge arise: During data acquisition with a limited

1. Introduction
Training machine learning (ML) models with high
predictive performance often requires large datasets. For
1

Department of Computer Science, National University of
Singapore, Republic of Singapore 2 Department of Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, USA. Correspondence to: Bryan Kian Hsiang Low
<lowkh@comp.nus.edu.sg>.

1
A learner that reserves part of its budget to purchase
replacement data later undesirably sacrifices better current data
utility. We further describe scenarios when DADS is more useful
in App. A.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

