ContPhy: Continuum Physical Concept Learning and Reasoning from Videos

Zhicheng Zheng * 1 Xin Yan * 2 Zhenfang Chen * 3 Jingzhou Wang 1 Qin Zhi Eddie Lim 4
Joshua B. Tenenbaum 4 Chuang Gan 3 5

Abstract

and reason about the physical world plays a crucial role in
shaping our understanding of nature and the development
of scientific knowledge (Kill & Kim, 2020).

We introduce the Continuum Physical
Dataset (ContPhy), a novel benchmark for
assessing machine physical commonsense. ContPhy complements existing physical reasoning
benchmarks by encompassing the inference of
diverse physical properties, such as mass and
density, across various scenarios and predicting
corresponding dynamics.
We evaluated a
range of AI models and found that they still
struggle to achieve satisfactory performance
on ContPhy, which shows that current AI
models still lack physical commonsense for
the continuum, especially soft-bodies, and
illustrates the value of the proposed dataset. We
also introduce an oracle model (ContPRO) that
marries the particle-based physical dynamic
models with the recent large language models,
which enjoy the advantages of both models,
precise dynamic predictions, and interpretable
reasoning. ContPhy aims to spur progress in
perception and reasoning within diverse physical
settings, narrowing the divide between human
and machine intelligence in understanding
the physical world. Project page: https:
//physical-reasoning-project.
github.io.

As depicted in Figure 1, objects like solids and liquids in
nature often exhibit different properties, and these objects
of different properties couple together to build our complex
physical world. As humans, we are able to distinguish objects’ physical properties by observing their interactions.We
know that the clear liquid in Figure 1 (a) at the bottom has a
higher density than the yellow liquid on the top; we know
that the dynamic pulley in Figure 1 (c) could help us to
pull the cargo up more easily. These innate human skills
raise an intriguing question: can current AI models have the
physical common sense to infer physical properties of the
continuum1 and predict corresponding dynamics?
Recently, a series of benchmarks (Riochet et al., 2018; Rajani et al., 2020; Bear et al., 2021), have been developed to
study machine models’ effectiveness for physical reasoning. However, there have been limitations that make them
non-ideal for the assessment of whether machine models
have human-like physical reasoning abilities. Firstly, most
benchmarks mainly deal with simple visual primitives like
spheres, cubes, and collision events of rigid objects only. It
remains doubtful whether the conclusions based on these
simple scenes will still hold in more comprehensive visual
scenarios with the coupling of soft objects and their interaction with rigid objects. There have also been benchmarks
like Physion (Bear et al., 2021) that were developed to evaluate machine models’ physical reasoning abilities in different
scenarios. However, objects in Physion are of the same
physical parameters without any variance (e.g. solids with
the same mass and water with the same density). Moreover,
Physion only requires models to predict whether two objects
will come into contact after the observed video ends. It has
not incorporated natural language to answer other challenging questions like predicting dynamics in counterfactual
scenes and selecting actions to achieve a goal.

1. Introduction
Humans are capable of comprehending the physical properties of various substances, including rigid objects and
soft objects, understanding their dynamic interactions in
complex environments, and predicting their corresponding
dynamic changes. In fact, this innate ability to understand
*

Equal contribution 1 Tsinghua University 2 Wuhan University 3 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab 4 Massachusetts Institute of
Technology 5 UMass Amherst. Correspondence to: Zhenfang Chen <chenzhenfang2013@gmail.com>, Chuang Gan
<ganchuang1990@gmail.com>.

To this end, we aim to build a Continuum Physical
1
Continuum encompasses various bodies like liquids, soft materials (e.g., ropes), rigid bodies and articulated bodies (e.g., pulleys).
More details about the physical concept of the continuum can be
found in Section 9 in the Appendix.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

