Interpreting and Improving Diffusion Models from an Optimization Perspective

Frank Permenter * 1 Chenyang Yuan * 1

Abstract

2019; Song et al., 2020b). While these interpretations are
inherently probabilistic, samplers widely used in practice
(e.g. (Song et al., 2020a)) are often deterministic, suggesting diffusion can be understood using a purely deterministic
analysis. In this paper, we provide such analysis by interpreting denoising as approximate projection, and diffusion
as distance minimization with gradient descent, using the
denoiser output as an estimate of the gradient. This in turn
leads to novel convergence results, algorithmic extensions,
and paths towards new generalizations.

Denoising is intuitively related to projection. Indeed, under the manifold hypothesis, adding random noise is approximately equivalent to orthogonal perturbation. Hence, learning to denoise is
approximately learning to project. In this paper,
we use this observation to interpret denoising diffusion models as approximate gradient descent applied to the Euclidean distance function. We then
provide straight-forward convergence analysis of
the DDIM sampler under simple assumptions on
the projection error of the denoiser. Finally, we
propose a new gradient-estimation sampler, generalizing DDIM using insights from our theoretical
results. In as few as 5-10 function evaluations, our
sampler achieves state-of-the-art FID scores on
pretrained CIFAR-10 and CelebA models and can
generate high quality samples on latent diffusion
models.

Denoising approximates projection The core object in
diffusion is a learned denoiser ϵθ (x, σ), which, when given
a noisy point x ∈ Rn with noise level σ > 0, predicts the
noise direction in x, i.e., it estimates ϵ satisfying x = x0 +σϵ
for a clean datapoint x0 .
Prior work (Rick Chang et al., 2017) interprets denoising
as approximate projection onto the data manifold K ⊆ Rn .
Our first contribution makes this interpretation rigorous
by introducing a relative-error model, which states that
x − σϵθ (x,
√ σ) well-approximates the projection of x onto
K when nσ well-estimates the distance of x to K. Specifically, we will assume that

1. Introduction
Diffusion models achieve state-of-the-art quality on many
image generation tasks (Ramesh et al., 2022; Rombach et al.,
2022; Saharia et al., 2022). They are also successful in
text-to-3D generation (Poole et al., 2022) and novel view
synthesis (Liu et al., 2023). Outside the image domain, they
have been used for robot path-planning (Chi et al., 2023),
prompt-guided human animation (Tevet et al., 2022), and
text-to-audio generation (Kong et al., 2020).

∥x − σϵθ (x, σ) − projK (x)∥ ≤ ηdistK (x)
when (x, σ) satisfies ν1 distK (x) ≤
constants 1 > η ≥ 0 and ν ≥ 1.

√

(1)

nσ ≤ νdistK (x) for

This error model is motivated by the following
√ theoretical
observations that hold when σ ≈ distK (x)/ n:

Diffusion models are presented as the reversal of a stochastic process that corrupts clean data with increasing levels of
random noise (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020).
This reverse process can also be interpreted as likelihood
maximization of a noise-perturbed data distribution using
learned gradients (called score functions) (Song & Ermon,

1. When σ is small and the manifold hypothesis holds,
denoising approximates projection given that most of
the added noise is orthogonal to the data manifold; see
Figure 1a and Proposition 3.1.
2. When σ is large, then any denoiser predicting any
weighted mean of the data K has small relative error;
see Figure 1b and Proposition 3.2.

*
Equal contribution 1 Toyota Research Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. Correspondence to: Chenyang
Yuan
<chenyang.yuan@tri.global>,
Frank
Permenter
<frank.permenter@tri.global>.

3. Denoising with the ideal denoiser is a σ-smoothing
of projK (x) with relative error that can be controlled
under mild assumptions; see Section 3.3.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

We also empirically validate this error model on sequences
1

