LIDAO: Towards Limited Interventions for Debiasing (Large) Language Models

Tianci Liu 1 Haoyu Wang 1 Shiyang Wang 1 Yu Cheng 2 Jing Gao 1

Abstract

researchers further applied LMs to more diverse classification tasks by transforming them to generative frames (Raffel
et al., 2020). These successes underscore the versatility
of LMs, establishing them as the foundations for different natural language processing applications (Bommasani
et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2023). In addition, with model
sizes continually increasing, large language models (LLMs)
have demonstrated unprecedented abilities to follow natural language instructions (Dong et al., 2022; Ouyang et al.,
2022). These abilities empower the zero-shot adaptation of
LLMs to unseen tasks (Kojima et al., 2022), paving the way
towards artificial general intelligence (Bubeck et al., 2023).

Warning: this paper contains model outputs exhibiting offensiveness and biases.
Large language models (LLMs) have achieved
impressive performance on various natural language generation tasks. Nonetheless, they suffer from generating negative and harmful contents that are biased against certain demographic
groups (e.g., female), raising severe fairness concerns. As remedies, prior works intervened the
generation by removing attitude or demographic
information, inevitably degrading the generation
quality and resulting in notable fairness-fluency
trade-offs. However, it is still under-explored to
what extent the fluency has to be affected in order to achieve a desired level of fairness. In this
work, we conduct the first formal study from an
information-theoretic perspective. We show that
previous approaches are excessive for debiasing
and propose LIDAO, a general framework to debias a (L)LM at a better fluency provably. We
further robustify LIDAO in adversarial scenarios,
where a carefully-crafted prompt may stimulate
LLMs exhibiting instruction-following abilities
to generate texts with fairness issue appears only
when the prompt is also taken into account. Experiments on three LMs ranging from 0.7B to
7B parameters demonstrate the superiority of our
method.

Notwithstanding, despite their remarkable performance,
LMs suffer from the fairness issue, i.e., they may generate
negative texts that are biased against under-represented demographic groups (e.g., female) in our society (Sheng et al.,
2019). For instance, GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019) tends
to generate more negative texts towards females (Huang
et al., 2019). Such social biases, termed as global biases
(Sheng et al., 2020), stem from the real world corpora due
to historical reasons (Basta et al., 2019). Unsurprisingly,
LMs reproduce or amplify the biases from the data whereon
they are trained (Gehman et al., 2020; Schick et al., 2021).
As remedies, a vast amount of bias mitigation approaches
have been proposed. Early attempts of fine-tuning with
clean data proved effective on small LMs (Lu et al., 2020;
Saunders & Byrne, 2020; Bender et al., 2021). However,
they fall short on LLMs due to the prohibitive resource
requirement for clean data curation and documentation
(Schick et al., 2021). Recently, the lightweight decodingtime intervention paradigm, which directly modifies the
text generation process in a LM, showed promising results
and attracted great attention (Liu et al., 2021; Yang et al.,
2023). Conceptually, these interventions imposed certain
constraints to the generation process. For instance, in order to debias sentiment on different demographic groups,
Sheng et al. (2020) steered the LM to generate positive texts
in all cases. Similarly, Liang et al. (2021) sought to remove gender information during the text generation to avoid
gender bias. Constraints as such, which we dub constant
constraints, hinder the LMs from generating sentiment- or
gender-specific texts, inevitably resulting in degradation on
the generation quality (Liu et al., 2021; Fatemi et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
Language models (LMs) parameterized by deep neural networks (Vaswani et al., 2017; Lewis et al., 2019; Radford
et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020) have thrived in producing
fluent and meaningful texts on a variety of natural language
generation tasks (See et al., 2019; Ji et al., 2023). Recently,
1

Purdue University 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong.
Correspondence to: Yu Cheng <chengyu@cse.cuhk.edu.hku>,
Jing Gao <jinggao@purdue.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

