D O GE

: Domain Reweighting with Generalization Estimation

Simin Fan 1 Matteo Pagliardini 1 Martin Jaggi 1

Abstract

to specific downstream tasks by fine-tuning. The composition of the pretraining corpus often depend on the accessibility of each data sources. For example, 72.6% of RedPajama (Together Computer, 2023) are sampled from CommonCrawl, while only 1.7% from Stackexchange. While
recent research has demonstrated the significance of the
quantity and quality of the pretraining corpus (Kaplan et al.,
2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022; Longpre et al., 2023), there
are few explorations into how its composition from various source domains could contribute to the generalization
ability of the language model (Lee et al., 2023; Hashimoto,
2021; Xie et al., 2023a). The domain weights adopted by
current state-of-the-art LLMs are mostly determined by
heuristics (Gao et al., 2020) or tuned according to a series of downstream tasks (Du et al., 2022), which can be
sub-optimal and costly.

The coverage and composition of the pretraining data significantly impacts the generalization
ability of Large Language Models (LLMs). Despite its importance, recent LLMs still rely on
heuristics and trial and error to increase or reduce the influence of data-domains. We propose DOmain reweighting with Generalization
Estimation (D O GE), which optimizes the probability of sampling from each domain (domain
weights) in a principled way. Our approach is
a two-stage process consisting of (i) training
a proxy model to obtain domain weights using
a bi-level optimization algorithm; (ii) training
a larger base model by sampling training domains according to the learned domain weights.
In our experiments, we extensively show how
D O GE improves the generalization of the base
model to any target data mixture. On the SlimPajama dataset, our base model gets better perplexity and few-shot reasoning accuracies across
6 tasks compared to baseline methods. Moreover, aiming to generalize to out-of-domain target tasks, which is unseen in the pretraining
corpus (OOD domain), D O GE can effectively
identify inter-domain dependencies, and consistently achieves better test perplexity on the target
domain. We provide the codebase at https:
//github.com/Olivia-fsm/doge.

Recently, Xie et al. (2023a) proposed a learnability-based
domain reweighting framework D O R E M I, which settles domain weights using two small-scale auxiliary models: first,
a reference model is "well-trained" using uniform domain
weights; next, a second auxiliary model—referred to as
proxy model—is trained from scratch with the objective
to find domain weights that minimize the worst-case excess loss, i.e. the per-domain loss gap between the proxy
model and the well-trained reference model. The excess
loss is interpreted as an estimation for the remaining learnability of a given domain at each training step—a large gap
indicating the proxy model can further learn to model the associated domain. Despite the encouraging empirical results
of D O R E M I, minimizing the worst-case loss gap (i) creates
a strong dependency on the well-trained model whose capacity can strongly influence the overall accuracy and requires
appropriate tuning, and (ii) creates a dissonance between the
ideal goal of minimizing the average validation loss across
domains and the employed objective which seeks to simply
mimic the well-trained model. Moreover, this approach cannot be used when the target domains are different from the
training domains.

1. Introduction
Pretrained Large Language Models (LLMs) demonstrate impressive generalization abilities, making them the workhorse
of today’s NLP research and many practical use cases (Devlin et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2022;
Touvron et al., 2023a;b). They are trained on very large text
corpora collected from various source domains to obtain a
generalization ability, which enables an efficient adaptation
1

EPFL, Switzerland.
<simin.fan@epfl.ch>.

Correspondence to:

To mitigate these issues, we propose D Omain reweighting
with Generalization Estimation (D O GE), which finds optimal domain weight distributions by explicitly optimizing
for best generalization to a given set of domains. We follow
the two-stage process of D O R E M I which consists of first

Simin Fan

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

