Task Groupings Regularization:
Data-Free Meta-Learning with Heterogeneous Pre-trained Models

Yongxian Wei 1 Zixuan Hu 1 2 Li Shen 3 Zhenyi Wang 4 Yu Li 5 Chun Yuan 1 Dacheng Tao 2

1. Introduction

Abstract
Data-Free Meta-Learning (DFML) aims to derive
knowledge from a collection of pre-trained models without accessing their original data, enabling
the rapid adaptation to new unseen tasks. Current
methods often overlook the heterogeneity among
pre-trained models, which leads to performance
degradation due to task conflicts. In this paper, we
empirically and theoretically identify and analyze
the model heterogeneity in DFML. We find that
model heterogeneity introduces a heterogeneityhomogeneity trade-off, where homogeneous models reduce task conflicts but also increase the overfitting risk. Balancing this trade-off is crucial
for learning shared representations across tasks.
Based on our findings, we propose Task Groupings Regularization, a novel approach that benefits from model heterogeneity by grouping and
aligning conflicting tasks. Specifically, we embed
pre-trained models into a task space to compute
dissimilarity, and group heterogeneous models
together based on this measure. Then, we introduce implicit gradient regularization within each
group to mitigate potential conflicts. By encouraging a gradient direction suitable for all tasks, the
meta-model captures shared representations that
generalize across tasks. Comprehensive experiments showcase the superiority of our approach
in multiple benchmarks, effectively tackling the
model heterogeneity in challenging multi-domain
and multi-architecture scenarios.

Data-Free Meta-Learning (DFML) (Kwon et al., 2020;
Wang et al., 2022b; Hu et al., 2023a;b) aims to derive knowledge from a collection of pre-trained models without accessing their original data, enabling the rapid adaptation to
new unseen tasks. Traditional meta-learning methods (Finn
et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2020) assume access to a collection
of tasks with available training and testing data. However,
such data is often not accessible in real-world scenarios due
to privacy concerns, security risks, or usage rights restrictions (Chen et al., 2019; Truong et al., 2021; Zheng et al.,
2023). For instance, numerous pre-trained models from
diverse domains are released on platforms like GitHub or
Hugging Face without accompanying training data. This
situation underscores the value of DFML: collect some pretrained models with weaker generalization abilities, which
likely originate from diverse domains online, to train a metamodel with enhanced generalization capacity for new tasks.
Current DFML methods predominantly focus on data recovery from pre-trained models. For example, PURER (Hu
et al., 2023a) uses model inversion to optimize a learnable
dataset for each pre-trained model and samples pseudo tasks
for meta-learning. BiDf-MKD (Hu et al., 2023b) employs
generators with multiple black-box APIs, generating support and query sets for meta-learning. Nonetheless, these
methods often overlook the heterogeneity among pre-trained
models, raised from differences in training data, model architecture, and optimization algorithm. Simultaneously learning from heterogeneous pre-trained models1 can sometimes
lead to performance degradation due to task conflicts (Standley et al., 2020; Shi et al., 2021; Ye et al., 2021).

1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School,
Tsinghua University, China 2 College of Computing &
Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 3 School of Cyber Science and Technology, Sun Yatsen University, China 4 University of Maryland, College
Park, USA 5 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, China.
Correspondence to: Li Shen <mathshenli@gmail.com>,
Zhenyi Wang <zwang169@umd.edu>,
Chun Yuan
<yuanc@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn>.

In this paper, we first empirically demonstrate the existence
and potential causes of model heterogeneity in DFML (see
Fig. 1), and analyze the practical effects of model heterogeneity on generalization (see Sec. 3.2). Experiments suggest that model heterogeneity is a double-edged sword and
can be beneficial and desirable in certain cases (see Fig. 2).
A certain degree of heterogeneity plays a role similar to
1
In this paper, we consider pre-trained models as distinct tasks.
It means that the data recovered from pre-trained models form
individual tasks; and also that pre-trained models resemble diverse
tasks in meta-learning, on which the meta-model is trained.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

