Generalized Neural Collapse for a Large Number of Classes

Jiachen Jiang * 1 Jinxin Zhou * 1 Peng Wang 2 Qing Qu 2 Dustin G. Mixon 3 Chong You 4 Zhihui Zhu 1

Abstract

learning tasks and have significantly enhanced the stateof-the-art in many practical applications including computer
vision, natural language processing, and information retrieval systems. Despite their tremendous success, a comprehensive understanding of how DNNs work is still lacking.
Towards demystifying DNNs, the recent work Papyan et al.
(2020); Papyan (2020) examined the last-layer features and
classifier of DNNs and empirically uncovered an intriguing
phenomenon called Neural Collapse (N C), which can be
briefly summarized as the following characteristics:

Neural collapse provides an elegant mathematical characterization of learned last-layer representations, also known as features, and classifier
weights within deep classification models. The
result not only provides insights into deep models
but also catalyzes the development of new techniques for improving them. However, most of
the existing empirical and theoretical studies into
neural collapse center around scenarios where
the number of classes is small relative to the dimensionality of the feature space. This paper
introduces a generalization of neural collapse to
encompass scenarios where the number of classes
surpasses the dimension of feature space, which
broadly occurs for language models, information
retrieval systems, and face recognition applications. A key technical contribution is the introduction of the concept of softmax code, defined as a
collection of points that maximizes the minimum
one-vs-rest margin, to describe the arrangement of
class-mean features. We provide empirical study
to verify the prevalence of generalized neural collapse in practical deep neural networks. Moreover,
we provide theoretical study to show that the generalized neural collapse provably occurs under an
unconstrained feature model with spherical constraint, subject to specific technical conditions on
feature dimension and the number of classes.

• Variability Collapse (N C 1 ): Within-class variability of
features collapses to zero.
• Convergence to Simplex ETF (N C 2 ): Class-mean features converge to a simplex Equiangular Tight Frame
(ETF), achieving equal lengths, equal pair-wise angles,
and maximal distance in the feature space.
• Self-Duality (N C 3 ): Linear classifiers converge to classmean features, up to a global rescaling.
Neural collapse provides a mathematically elegant characterization of learned representations or features in deep
learning based classification models, independent of network architectures, dataset properties, and optimization algorithms. Building on the so-called unconstrained feature
model (Mixon et al., 2020) or the layer-peeled model (Fang
et al., 2021), subsequent research (Zhu et al., 2021; Lu &
Steinerberger, 2020; Ji et al., 2021; Yaras et al.; Wojtowytsch
et al., 2020; Ji et al.; Zhou et al.; Han et al.; Tirer & Bruna,
2022; Zhou et al., 2022a; Poggio & Liao, 2020; Thrampoulidis et al., 2022; Tirer et al., 2023; Nguyen et al., 2022;
Li et al., 2024) has provided theoretical evidence for the existence of the N C phenomenon when using a family of loss
functions including cross-entropy (CE) loss, mean-squareerror (MSE) loss and variants of CE loss. Theoretical results
regarding N C not only contribute to a new understanding
of the working of DNNs but also provide inspiration for
developing new techniques to enhance their practical performance in various settings, such as imbalanced learning (Xie
et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023b), transfer learning (Galanti
et al., 2022a; Li et al., 2022; Xie et al., 2022; Galanti et al.,
2022b), continual learning (Yu et al., 2022; Yang et al.,
2023), loss and architecture designs (Chan et al., 2022; Yu
et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2024), etc.

1. Introduction
Over the past decade, deep neural networks (DNNs) have
achieved remarkable success across numerous machine
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, The
Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA 2 Department of Electrical Engineering & Computer Science, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, MI, USA 3 Department of Mathematics, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH, USA 4 Google Research, New York
City, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Chong You and Zhihui Zhu
<cyou@google.com and zhu.3440@osu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

However, most of the existing empirical and theoretical stud1

