Align Your Steps: Optimizing Sampling Schedules in Diffusion Models
Amirmojtaba Sabour 1 2 3 Sanja Fidler 1 2 3 Karsten Kreis 1
Project Page: https://research.nvidia.com/labs/toronto-ai/AlignYourSteps/

Figure 1. We introduce Align Your Steps (AYS), a novel general framework for optimizing sampling schedules in diffusion models that
significantly boosts the quality of outputs, especially when performing synthesis in few steps. Notice the improved details with AYS.

Abstract

ing a variety of different samplers, and observe
that our optimized schedules outperform previous
hand-crafted schedules in almost all experiments.
Our method demonstrates the untapped potential
of sampling schedule optimization, especially in
the few-step synthesis regime.

Diffusion models (DMs) have established themselves as the state-of-the-art generative modeling approach in the visual domain and beyond.
A crucial drawback of DMs is their slow sampling speed, relying on many sequential function
evaluations through large neural networks. Sampling from DMs can be seen as solving a differential equation through a discretized set of noise
levels known as the sampling schedule. While
past works primarily focused on deriving efficient
solvers, little attention has been given to finding
optimal sampling schedules, and the entire literature relies on hand-crafted heuristics. In this work,
for the first time, we propose a general and principled approach to optimizing the sampling schedules of DMs for high-quality outputs, called Align
Your Steps. We leverage methods from stochastic
calculus and find optimal schedules specific to different solvers, trained DMs and datasets. We evaluate our novel approach on several image, video
as well as 2D toy data synthesis benchmarks, us-

1. Introduction
Diffusion models (DMs) have proven themselves to be extremely reliable probabilistic generative models that can
produce high-quality data. They have been successfully
applied to applications such as image synthesis (Dhariwal &
Nichol, 2021; Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020b; Rombach
et al., 2021; Saharia et al., 2022; Ramesh et al., 2022), image super-resolution (Saharia et al., 2021b), image-to-image
translation (Saharia et al., 2021a), image editing (Brooks
et al., 2023), inpainting (Lugmayr et al., 2022), video synthesis (Ho et al., 2022; Blattmann et al., 2023b), text-to-3d
generation (Poole et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2023), and even
planning (Janner et al., 2022). However, sampling DMs
requires multiple sequential forward passes through a large
neural network, limiting their real-time applicability.

1
NVIDIA, Toronto, Canada 2 Department of computer science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario 3 Vector Institute,
Toronto, Canada. Correspondence to: Amirmojtaba Sabour
<amsabour@cs.toronto.edu>.

As a result, extensive research effort has gone into designing fast and efficient samplers of these models, broadly
categorized into training-based and training-free methods.
Training-based approaches, such as distillation, can significantly accelerate the sampling process but often require significant compute power, comparable to training the model
itself, and face a trade-off between speed, diversity, and fi-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

