Latent Optimal Paths by Gumbel Propagation for Variational Bayesian Dynamic
Programming

Xinlei Niu 1 Christian Walder 2 Jing Zhang 1 Charles Patrick Martin 1

Abstract

effectiveness of the models. In the context of optimal path
problems, such as finding the shortest path in a graph, dynamic programming (DP) efficiently computes the solution
by breaking the problem down into several sub-problems
and finding optimal solutions within the sub-problems iteratively.

We propose the stochastic optimal path which
solves the classical optimal path problem by
a probability-softening solution. This unified
approach transforms a wide range of DP problems into directed acyclic graphs in which all
paths follow a Gibbs distribution. We show
the equivalence of the Gibbs distribution to a
message-passing algorithm by the properties
of the Gumbel distribution and give all the
ingredients required for variational Bayesian
inference of a latent path, namely Bayesian
dynamic programming (BDP). We demonstrate
the usage of BDP in the latent space of variational
autoencoders (VAEs) and propose the BDP-VAE
which captures structured sparse optimal paths
as latent variables. This enables end-to-end
training for generative tasks in which models
rely on unobserved structural information. At
last, we validate the behavior of our approach
and showcase its applicability in two real-world
applications: text-to-speech and singing voice
synthesis. Our implementation code is available
at https://github.com/XinleiNIU/
LatentOptimalPathsBayesianDP.

Since the DP algorithm finds shortest paths using the max
operator, it is non-differentiable which limits the usage
of optimal paths in neural networks where gradient backpropagation is applied. As a workaround, previous works
have approximated the max operator with smoothed functions to allow differentiation of DP algorithms (Verdu &
Poor, 1987). However, smoothed approximations lose the
sparsity of solutions which makes hard assignments become
soft assignments. Alternatively, some real-world generative
applications (Ren et al., 2019; 2020; Jeong et al., 2021; Li
et al., 2022; Halperin et al., 2019; Peng et al., 2020; Liu et al.,
2022; Popov et al., 2021), that require to integrate structured
optimal paths, split the training strategies in which neural
network models depend on sparse outputs from external DP
aligners (McAuliffe et al., 2017; Hasegawa-Johnson et al.,
2005) or pre-trained models (Li et al., 2018). However,
these external components involve more than one training
phase thus the model performance critically relies on them.
In this work, we explore a novel and unified method to obtain structured sparse optimal paths with DP and showcase
its application in the latent space of variational autoencoders
(VAEs). Instead of a smoothed approximation for the classical optimal path problem, we propose the stochastic optimal
path, which is a probabilistic softening solution by defining
a Gibbs distribution where the energy function is the path
score. We show this to be equivalent to a message-passing
algorithm on the directed acyclic graphs (DAG) using the
max and shift properties of the Gumbel distribution. To learn
the latent optimal paths, we give tractable closed-form ingredients for variational Bayesian inference (i.e., likelihood
and KL divergence) using DP, namely Bayesian dynamic
programming (BDP), as well as an efficient sampling algorithm, which enables VAEs to obtain latent optimal paths
within a DAG and achieve end-to-end training on generative
tasks that rely on sparse unobserved structural relationships.
We make the following contributions:

1. Introduction
Optimal paths are often required in many generative tasks
such as speech, music, and language modelling (Kim et al.,
2020; Li et al., 2022; Cai et al., 2019). These tasks involve
the simultaneous identification of structured relationships
between data and conditions. Finding optimal paths given
a graph constraint with learned weights can highlight unobserved structural relationships that are not immediately
apparent, thus potentially improving the interpretability and
1

Australian National University, Canberra, Australia
Google DeepMind. Correspondence to: Xinlei Niu <xinlei.niu@anu.edu.au>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

