From Self-Attention to Markov Models:
Unveiling the Dynamics of Generative Transformers

M. Emrullah Ildiz 1 Yixiao Huang 1 Yingcong Li 1 Ankit Singh Rawat 2 Samet Oymak 1

Abstract

ford et al., 2018; 2019; Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al.,
2022; Touvron et al., 2023). The self-attention layer allows
all tokens within an input sequence to interact with each
other. Through these interactions, the transformer assesses
the similarities of each token to a given query and composes
their value embedding in a non-local fashion.

Modern language models rely on the transformer
architecture and attention mechanism to perform language understanding and text generation. In this work, we study learning a 1-layer
self-attention model from a set of prompts and
the associated outputs sampled from the model.
We first establish a formal link between the selfattention mechanism and Markov models under suitable conditions: Inputting a prompt to
the self-attention model samples the output token according to a context-conditioned Markov
Chain (CCMC). CCMC is obtained by weighing the transition matrix of a standard Markov
chain according to the sufficient statistics of the
prompt/context. Building on this formalism, we
develop identifiability/coverage conditions for the
data distribution that guarantee consistent estimation of the latent model under a teacher-student
setting and establish sample complexity guarantees under IID data. Finally, we study the problem
of learning from a single output trajectory generated in response to an initial prompt. We characterize a winner-takes-all phenomenon where
the generative process of self-attention evolves
to sampling from a small set of winner tokens
that dominate the context window. This provides
a mathematical explanation to the tendency of
modern LLMs to generate repetitive text.

In this work, we study the mathematical properties of the
one-layer self-attention model where the model is trained to
predict the next token of an input sequence. The token generation process via the self-attention mechanism is non-trivial
because the generation depends on entire input sequence.
This aspect is crucial for the capabilities of modern large
language models (LLMs) where the response is conditioned
on the user prompt. It is also unlike well-understood topics
such as Markov Chains where the model generates the next
state based on the current one. Theoretical analysis is further complicated by the fact that the optimization landscape
is typically nonconvex. This motivates us to ask:
Q: Can self-attention be formally related to fundamental models such as Markov chains? Can this
allow us to study its optimization, approximation,
and generalization properties?
Our main contribution is addressing this question by formally mapping the generative process of one self-attention
layer to, what we call, Context-Conditioned Markov Chains
(CCMC) under suitable conditions. In essence, CCMC modifies the transition probabilities of a base Markov chain
according to the sequence of tokens/states observed so far.
Thus, learning a self-attention layer from the (prompt, output) pairs generated by it can be interpreted as learning a
Markov chain from its context-conditioned transitions.

1. Introduction
The attention mechanism (Vaswani et al., 2017) is a key
component of the canonical transformer architecture which
underlies the recent advances in language modeling (Rad-

Concretely, we make the following contributions:
• CCMC ⇔ Self-attention (Sec 2). We introduce CCMC
and show that it can precisely represent the transition dynamics of self-attention under suitable conditions. Importantly, the optimization of self-attention weights becomes
convex, hence tractable via gradient descent, under maximum likelihood estimation i.e., − log loss.
• Consistency of learning (Sec 3). We study the learnability of a self-attention layer where we observe its outputs

1

University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA 2 Google Research, NYC, USA. Correspondence to: M. Emrullah Ildiz
<eildiz@umich.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

