CogDPM: Diffusion Probabilistic Models via Cognitive Predictive Coding

Kaiyuan Chen * 1 Xingzhuo Guo * 1 Yu Zhang 1 Jianmin Wang 1 Mingsheng Long 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Predictive Coding (PC) is a theoretical construct in cognitive science, positing that the human brain cognizes the visual world through predictive mechanisms (Spratling, 2017;
Hohwy, 2020). The PC theory elucidates that the brain hierarchically amends its perception of the environment by
anticipating changes in the visual world. Researchers have
developed computational models based on the PC theory
to simulate the brain’s predictive mechanisms (Keller &
Mrsic-Flogel, 2018). Neuroscientists employ these models
to empirically validate the efficacy of the PC theory and to
find new characteristics. Precision weighting, a pivotal feature of the PC theory, suggests that the brain assigns more
attention to signals with lower precision by using precision
as a filter in weighting prediction errors.

Predictive Coding (PC) is a theoretical framework
in cognitive science suggesting that the human
brain processes cognition through spatiotemporal prediction of the visual world. Existing studies have developed spatiotemporal prediction neural networks based on the PC theory, emulating
its two core mechanisms: Correcting predictions
from residuals and hierarchical learning. However, these models do not show the enhancement
of prediction skills on real-world forecasting tasks
and ignore the Precision Weighting mechanism
of PC theory. The precision weighting mechanism posits that the brain allocates more attention
to signals with lower precision, contributing to
the cognitive ability of human brains. This work
introduces the Cognitive Diffusion Probabilistic
Models (CogDPM), which demonstrate the connection between diffusion probabilistic models
and PC theory. CogDPM features a precision
estimation method based on the hierarchical sampling capabilities of diffusion models and weight
the guidance with precision weights estimated by
the inherent property of diffusion models. We
experimentally show that the precision weights
effectively estimate the data predictability. We
apply CogDPM to real-world prediction tasks using the United Kindom precipitation and ERA
surface wind datasets. Our results demonstrate
that CogDPM outperforms both existing domainspecific operational models and general deep prediction models by providing more proficient forecasting.

With the advancement of deep learning, predictive learning
has emerged as one of the principal learning methods (Rane
et al., 2020; Bi et al., 2023). Neural networks are now
capable of making effective predictions in video data (Shi
et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2017; Ho et al., 2022c). Deep video
prediction models have rich applications, such as weather
forecasting (Ravuri et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2023) and
autonomous driving simulation (Wang et al., 2018; Wen
et al., 2023).
Researchers design cognitively inspired video prediction
models utilizing the PC theory. PredNet (Lotter et al., 2020),
which employs multi-layer ConvLSTM (Shi et al., 2015)
networks to predict the next frame in a video sequence, is responsible for predicting the residual between the outcomes
of a network layer and the ground truth values. However, the
predictive capability of PredNet does not show significant
improvement over non-hierarchical video prediction models
and has not been validated in real-world video prediction
tasks. We posit that the hierarchical modeling mechanism
in PredNet is not effectively implemented. PredNet directly
targets low signal-to-noise ratio residuals as learning objectives, which complicates the learning process, and fails to
extract fundamentally distinct features between layers. Additionally, PredNet lacks the capability to model precision,
leading to uniform weighting in learning residuals across
different regions. This results in redundant noise information becoming a supervisory signal and hinders the model’s
ability to learn from important information.

*
Equal contribution 1 School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua
University. Kaiyuan Chen <cky21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Correspondence
to:
Mingsheng
Long
<mingsheng@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

