Layerwise Change of Knowledge in Neural Networks

Xu Cheng * 1 2 Lei Cheng * 2 Zhaoran Peng 2 Yang Xu 3 Tian Han 4 Quanshi Zhang§ 2

Abstract

task-irrelevant information. Liang et al. (2020) extract common feature components shared by different features as the
shared knowledge.

This paper aims to explain how a deep neural
network (DNN) gradually extracts new knowledge and forgets noisy features through layers in
forward propagation. Up to now, although the
definition of knowledge encoded by the DNN has
not reached a consensus, Li & Zhang (2023); Ren
et al. (2023a; 2024) have derived a series of mathematical evidence to take interactions as symbolic
primitive inference patterns encoded by a DNN.
We extend the definition of interactions and, for
the first time, extract interactions encoded by intermediate layers. We quantify and track the newly
emerged interactions and the forgotten interactions in each layer during the forward propagation,
which shed new light on the learning behavior of
DNNs. The layer-wise change of interactions also
reveals the change of the generalization capacity and instability of feature representations of a
DNN.

In this paper, we aim to define and quantify the knowledge encoded in each layer. In this way, we can accurately
decompose and track explicit changes of knowledge (i.e.,
the learning of new knowledge and the forgetting of old
knowledge) through different layers.
However, there is no a widely-accepted definition of knowledge, because we cannot mathematically define/formulate
knowledge in human cognition. Instead of focusing on cognitive issues, Ren et al. (2023a); Li & Zhang (2023) have
discovered and Ren et al. (2024) have theoretically proven1
the sparsity property and universal-matching property
of interactions, i.e., given an input sample x, a well-trained
DNN usually only implicitly encodes a small number of interactions between the input variables, and the inference
score can be explained as numerical effects of these interactions. Thus, these two properties mathematically make
such interactions (also called interaction primitives or
interaction concepts) be considered as the knowledge encoded by a DNN. As Fig. 1 shows, given a dog image x,
each interaction implicitly encoded by the DNN represents a
co-appearance relationship between input variables (image
patches) in S = {eye, nose, mouth}. This is actually an
AND relationship between image patches in image x. Only
when all patches in S are present in the image, the interaction S is activated and makes a numerical effect I(S|x) on
the classification score. Masking4 any patch will deactivate
the interaction S and remove the effect.

1. Introduction
Recently, understanding the black-box representation of
deep neural networks (DNNs) has received increasing attention. This paper investigates how a DNN gradually extracts
knowledge from the input for inference during the layerwise forward propagation, although the definition of knowledge encoded by an AI model is still an open problem. To
this end, the information bottleneck theory (Shwartz-Ziv
& Tishby, 2017; Saxe et al., 2018) uses mutual information between the input and the intermediate-layer feature to
measure knowledge encoded in each layer. It finds that the
DNN fits (learns) task-relevant information, and compresses

Although the above studies make it plausible to define and
quantify interactions encoded by a DNN, our target of quantifying and tracking the interactions encoded by different
layers presents the following three new challenges.
(1) Alignment of interaction primitives. The fair comparison between any arbitrary pair of layers requires interaction
primitives extracted from different layers to be aligned, although the physical feature dimensions in different layers
do not have a clear correspondence/alignment.
(2) Decomposability and countability of knowledge. In-

*

Equal contribution 1 Nanjing University of Science and Technology. 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University. 3 Zhejiang University.
4
Stevens Institute of Technology.
Correspondence to: Quanshi Zhang. Quanshi Zhang is the corresponding author. He is with the Department of Computer Science
and Engineering, the John Hopcroft Center, at the Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, China. <zqs1022@sjtu.edu.cn>.

1
Ren et al. (2024) have proven that the sparsity of interactions
can be guaranteed by three common conditions for the DNN’s
smooth inferences on randomly masked samples.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

