SPP: Sparsity-Preserved Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning
for Large Language Models

Xudong Lu * 1 Aojun Zhou * 1 Yuhui Xu * 2 Renrui Zhang 1 3 Peng Gao 3 Hongsheng Li 1 4

Abstract

Wanda
Wanda+DS T
Wanda+LoRA*
Wanda+SPP

50

LM-eval Score

Large Language Models (LLMs) have become
pivotal in advancing the field of artificial intelligence, yet their immense sizes pose significant
challenges for both fine-tuning and deployment.
Current post-training pruning methods, while reducing the sizes of LLMs, often fail to maintain their original performance. To address these
challenges, this paper introduces SPP, a SparsityPreserved Parameter-efficient fine-tuning method.
Different from existing post-training pruning approaches that struggle with performance retention, SPP proposes to employ lightweight learnable column and row matrices to optimize sparse
LLM weights, keeping the structure and sparsity
of pruned pre-trained models intact. By elementwise multiplication and residual addition, SPP
ensures the consistency of model sparsity pattern
and ratio during both training and weight-merging
processes. We demonstrate the effectiveness of
SPP by applying it to the LLaMA and LLaMA2 model families with recent post-training pruning methods. Our results show that SPP significantly enhances the performance of models
with different sparsity patterns (i.e. unstructured
and N:M sparsity), especially for those with high
sparsity ratios (e.g. 75%), making it a promising solution for the efficient fine-tuning of sparse
LLMs. Code will be made available at https:
//github.com/Lucky-Lance/SPP.

45
40
35
30

Unstructured 75% (7B)

2:8 (7B)

Unstructured 75% (30B) 2:8 (30B)

Sparsity

Figure 1. We use LLaMA 7B/30B models at 75% sparsity and
test zero-shot accuracies on 7 benchmarks of LM-eval (Gao et al.,
2021) to compare different pruning methods. The results of Wanda,
Wanda+DS⊘T, Wanda+LoRA*, and Wanda+SPP are visualized.
The first two approaches are post-training pruning schemes, LoRA*
denotes applying the original Wanda pruning masks to sparse the
dense model after LoRA training. Our method achieves overall
best results. More experiment details are illustrated in Sec. 4.

sive success in various complex tasks (Wei et al., 2022;
Zhou et al., 2024). However, these models are usually
characterized by an extensive number of learnable parameters, ranging from several billions to around a hundred
billions (Touvron et al., 2023a;b), as exemplified by GPT-4.
This enormity makes LLMs cumbersome to be fine-tuned
for different scenarios and challenging to deploy on various
edge devices.
To reduce the parameters of pre-trained large language models without the demanding retraining phase, different posttraining pruning (Frantar & Alistarh, 2023) approaches have
been presented. SparseGPT, as outlined in (Frantar & Alistarh, 2023), focuses on minimizing the squared errors between pruned and original dense models in a layer-by-layer
manner. Wanda (Sun et al., 2023) incorporates both weight
magnitude and input activation as metrics for identifying
unimportant parameters. Despite their success in language
model pruning, these methods often fail to maintain the performance of pre-trained models at even moderate sparsity
levels (e.g., 50%) (Jaiswal et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) (Brown et al., 2020; OpenAI, 2023; Anil et al., 2023) have recently shown impres*
Equal contribution 1 Multimedia Laboratory (MMLab), The
Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Salesforce AI Research
3
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 4 CPII under InnoHK.
Correspondence to: Hongsheng Li <hsli@ee.cuhk.edu.hk>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

In contrast, pruning methods for smaller-scale deep models – those with fewer than 200 million parameters, such as
1

