The Relative Value of Prediction in Algorithmic Decision Making

Juan Carlos Perdomo 1

Abstract

use early warning systems that predict which students are
likely to drop out, as a means to target their limited counseling resources to those that need them the most (Balfanz &
Byrnes, 2019; U.S Department of Education, 2016). Similarly, in Israel, officials build risk predictors to determine the
likelihood that individuals will develop serious pulmonary
disease in order to prioritize people for vaccines (Barda
et al., 2020). Beyond these specific examples, this idea
that better predictions implies better decisions, and hence
higher welfare, is pervasive, and underlies the design of risk
prediction tools used in numerous domains (see Section 2).

Algorithmic predictions are increasingly used to
inform the allocations of goods and interventions
in the public sphere. In these domains, predictions serve as a means to an end. They provide
stakeholders with insights into likelihood of future events as a means to improve decision making
quality, and enhance social welfare. However, if
maximizing welfare is the ultimate goal, prediction is only a small piece of the puzzle. There are
various other policy levers a social planner might
pursue in order to improve bottom-line outcomes,
such as expanding access to available goods, or
increasing the effect sizes of interventions. Given
this broad range of design decisions, a basic question to ask is: What is the relative value of prediction in algorithmic decision making? How do the
improvements in welfare arising from better predictions compare to those of other policy levers?
The goal of our work is to initiate the formal study
of these questions. Our main results are theoretical in nature. We identify simple, sharp conditions
determining the relative value of prediction visà-vis expanding access, within several statistical
models that are popular amongst quantitative social scientists. Furthermore, we illustrate how
these theoretical insights can guide the design of
algorithmic decision making systems in practice.

From a design perspective, however, we see that prediction
is really a means to an end, rather than an end in of itself.
Predictions help inform decisions with the ultimate goal of
increasing some context-dependent notion of social welfare
(e.g. the number of on-time high school graduates). And, if
improving social welfare truly is the goal, there are of course
many different policy levers one could experiment with. To
name a few, apart from optimizing the quality of decision
making via better predictions, one could keep the current
predictor fixed and focus efforts on expanding access to the
available resources (e.g., invest in more counselors so as
to intervene on more students). Alternatively, one could
also focus on improving the quality of the interventions
themselves (e.g., boost the quality of tutoring).
Those tasked with solving these resource allocation problems do not always have the luxury to simultaneously pursue
all these various avenues of improvement. Given the broad
space of design decisions, we inevitably need to identify the
most cost efficient ways of improving overall welfare, and
understand: To what extent is prediction truly the highest
order bit in algorithmic decision making?

1. Introduction
Algorithmic predictions are increasingly used in the public
sphere to improve the allocation of scarce resources. At their
core, these prediction algorithms aim to provide decision
makers with valuable information regarding the impacts of
particular interventions, or the likelihood of future events,
in order to determine who will receive a social good.

In this work, we initiate the formal study of the relative
value of prediction. We aim to develop a principled understanding of how improvements in welfare arising from better
prediction compare to those induced through other policy
levers such expanding access or enhancing quality. As a
byproduct of our inquiry into the relative value of prediction,
we also aim to shed light on a related question: What does
it mean for a predictor to be “good enough” for decision
making? At what point do we decide that we no longer need
to collect more features or train a more accurate predictor?

For instance, in education, over half of US public schools
1

Harvard University, Center for Research on Computation and
Society, Cambridge, MA. Correspondence to: Juan Carlos Perdomo <jcperdomo@g.harvard.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Summarizing briefly, we argue that predictions are sufficient
1

