Sobolev Space Regularised Pre Density Models

Mark Kozdoba * 1 Binyamin Perets * 1 Shie Mannor 1 2

Abstract

(Marteau-Ferey et al., 2020), (Ferraccioli et al., 2021) (see
also the survey (Kirkby et al., 2023)), there still are very few
non-parametric methods applicable in higher dimensions.

We propose a new approach to non-parametric
density estimation that is based on regularizing
a Sobolev norm of the density. This method is
statistically consistent, and makes the inductive
bias of the model clear and interpretable. While
there is no closed analytic form for the associated
kernel, we show that one can approximate it using sampling. The optimization problem needed
to determine the density is non-convex, and standard gradient methods do not perform well. However, we show that with an appropriate initialization and using natural gradients, one can obtain
well performing solutions. Finally, while the approach provides pre-densities (i.e. not necessarily
integrating to 1), which prevents the use of loglikelihood for cross validation, we show that one
can instead adapt Fisher divergence based score
matching methods for this task. We evaluate the
resulting method on the comprehensive recent
anomaly detection benchmark suite, ADBench,
and find that it ranks second best, among more
than 15 algorithms.

Compared to parametric models, non parametric methods
are often conceptually simpler, and the model bias (e.g.,
prior knowledge, type of smoothness) is explicit. This may
allow better interpretability and better regularization control
in small and medium sized data regimes.
Ideally, a function g produced by a density estimator should
satisfy the following properties: (i) It is non-negative, (ii) it
is integrable, and integrates to 1, (iii) it models well multidimensional data, and (iv) it is computationally feasible.
As mentioned above, to the best of our knowledge currently
there are no non-parametric estimators that satisfy (iii) and
(iv). Moreover, note that even the requirements (i) and (ii)
are non-trivial in the sense that they are not natural in the
context of typical non-parametric constructions. Indeed,
some of the above mentioned estimators simply forego either or both of these conditions even in 1d situations (see
also a detailed discussion in (Marteau-Ferey et al., 2020) on
this topic).
In this paper we develop the first non-parametric estimator
that satisfies all the properties above, with the exception
of integrating to 1 (but still integrable). Since many tasks
derived from density estimation do not require the precise
normalisation constant knowledge, this yields a practically
useful and theoretically well founded method.

1. Introduction
Density estimation is one of the central problems in statistical learning. In recent years, there has been a tremendous
amount of work in the development of parametric neural
network based density estimation methods, such as Normalizing Flows (Papamakarios et al., 2021), Neural ODEs
(Chen et al., 2018), and Score Based methods, (Song et al.,
2021). However, the situation appears to be different for non
parametric density estimation methods, (Wasserman, 2006),
(Härdle et al., 2004). While there is recent work for low
dimensional (one or two dimensional) data, see for instance
(Takada, 2008), (Uppal et al., 2019), (Cui et al., 2020),

N

Let S = {xi }i=1 ⊂ Rd be a set of data points sampled
i.i.d from some unknown distribution. We study a density
estimator of the following form:
N

f ∗ := argmin −
f ∈Ha

1 X
2
log f 2 (xi ) + ∥f ∥Ha .
N i=1

(1)

Here Ha is a Sobolev type Reproducing Kernel Hilbert
Space (RKHS) of functions, having a norm of the form
Z
Z
2
2
∥f ∥Ha =
f 2 (x)dx + a
|(Df )| (x)dx, (2)

*
Equal contribution 1 Technion Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel 2 NVIDIA Research. Correspondence to:
Mark Kozdoba <mark.kozdoba@gmail.com>, Binyamin Perets
<sbp67250@campus.technion.ac.il>.

Rd

Rd

where D represents a combination of derivatives of a certain
order. The density estimate is given by the function (f ∗ )2 .
Note that (f ∗ )2 is clearly non-negative, and ∥f ∥Ha < ∞

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

