Memory Efficient Neural Processes via Constant Memory Attention Block

Leo Feng 1 2 Frederick Tung 2 Hossein Hajimirsadeghi 2 Yoshua Bengio 1 Mohamed Osama Ahmed 2

Abstract

ited energy supply (e.g., battery-powered devices such as
mobile robots).

Neural Processes (NPs) are popular meta-learning
methods for efficiently modelling predictive uncertainty. Recent state-of-the-art methods, however, leverage expensive attention mechanisms,
limiting their applications, particularly in lowresource settings. In this work, we propose
Constant Memory Attentive Neural Processes
(CMANPs), an NP variant that only requires constant memory. To do so, we first propose an efficient update operation for Cross Attention. Leveraging the update operation, we propose Constant
Memory Attention Block (CMAB), a novel attention block that (i) is permutation invariant, (ii)
computes its output in constant memory, and (iii)
performs constant computation updates. Finally,
building on CMAB, we detail Constant Memory
Attentive Neural Processes. Empirically, we show
CMANPs achieve state-of-the-art results on popular NP benchmarks while being significantly more
memory efficient than prior methods.

However, the state-of-the-art NP methods (Nguyen &
Grover, 2022; Feng et al., 2023) are attention-based methods that require substantial amounts of memory, limiting
their applicability. For example, Transformer Neural Processes (TNPs) (Nguyen & Grover, 2022) leverage Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017). As such, TNPs are computationally expensive, scaling quadratically with the size of the
context and query dataset. Latent Bottlenecked Attentive
Neural Processes (LBANPs) (Feng et al., 2023) leverage Perceiver’s iterative attention (Jaegle et al., 2021b) and require
O(k|DC |) memory where |DC | is the size of the context
dataset and k is a hyperparameter that scales with the difficulty of the task and the context dataset size.
Tackling this issue, we propose Constant Memory Attentive
Neural Processes (CMANPs), a novel attention-based NP
that is competitive with prior state-of-the-art while only
requiring a constant amount of memory. To do so, we first
(1) improve the computational efficiency of Cross Attention
and (2) propose a novel efficient attention block.
More specifically, we propose (1) an exact update operation
for Cross Attention that allows it to be efficiently updated
with new context data (Section 3.1.1). Using the efficient
updates operation, we show that Cross Attention can also be
computed memory-efficiently (Section 3.1.2). Leveraging
the aforementioned efficiency properties of Cross Attention,
we propose (2) Constant Memory Attention Block (CMAB)
(Section 3.2), a novel attention block, that (i) is permutation
invariant, (ii) computes its output in constant memory, and
(iii) performs updates in constant computation.

1. Introduction
Neural Processes (NPs) are a popular family of metalearning models for uncertainty estimation. They are particularly useful in low-resource settings due to not requiring
retraining from scratch given new data. Over recent years,
NPs have been applied to a wide variety of settings such
as graph link prediction (Liang & Gao, 2022), continual
learning (Requeima et al., 2019), and recommender systems (Lin et al., 2021). With the growing popularity of
low-memory/compute domains (e.g., IoT devices and mobile phones), deployed models in these low-resource settings
must be memory efficient. Furthermore, memory access is
energy intensive (Li et al., 2022a). As such, the design of
memory-efficient models is crucial for settings with a lim-

Finally, building on CMABs, we propose Constant Memory
Attentive Neural Processes (CMANPs) (Section 3.3). By
using CMABs, CMANPs (i) only require constant memory,
making it naturally scalable in the number of data points
and (ii) allow for updates to the context to be performed
efficiently unlike prior state-of-the-art NPs. Leveraging
the efficient updates property, we further introduce an Autoregressive Not-Diagonal extension (Section 3.3.1) which
only requires constant memory unlike the quadratic memory
required by all prior Not-Diagonal extensions of NPs. In
the experiments, CMANPs achieve state-of-the-art results
on popular NP benchmarks while being significantly more

*

Equal contribution 1 Mila – Université de Montréal, Canada
Borealis AI, Canada.
Correspondence to: Leo Feng
<leo.feng@mila.quebec>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

