How Well Can LLMs Negotiate? N EGOTIATION A RENA Platform and Analysis

Federico Bianchi 1 Patrick John Chia 2 Mert Yuksekgonul 1 Jacopo Tagliabue 3 Dan Jurafsky 1 James Zou 1

Abstract

Red

System Prompt

You are Player Red. You need to
split 100 dollars with Player Blue.
If Player Blue rejects the split you
both lose all.

Negotiation is the basis of social interactions; humans negotiate everything from the price of cars
to how to share common resources. With rapidly
growing interest in using large language models
(LLMs) to act as agents on behalf of human users,
such LLM agents would also need to be able to
negotiate. In this paper, we study how well LLMs
can negotiate with each other. We develop N EGO TIATIONA RENA: a flexible framework for evaluating and probing the negotiation abilities of LLM
agents. We implemented three types of scenarios in N EGOTIATIONA RENA to assess LLM’s behaviors in allocating shared resources (ultimatum
games), aggregate resources (trading games) and
buy/sell goods (price negotiations). Each scenario
allows for multiple turns of flexible dialogues between LLM agents to allow for more complex
negotiations. Interestingly, LLM agents can significantly boost their negotiation outcomes by employing certain behavioral tactics. For example,
by pretending to be desolate and desperate, LLMs
can improve their payoffs by 20% when negotiating against the standard GPT-4. We also quantify
irrational negotiation behaviors exhibited by the
LLM agents, many of which also appear in humans. Together, N EGOTIATIONA RENA offers a
new environment to investigate LLM interactions,
enabling new insights into LLM’s theory of mind,
irrationality, and reasoning abilities.

Blue

System Prompt

You are Player Blue. Player Red
will propose you how to split 100
dollars. If you reject the oﬀer you
both lose all. You are cunning
and sly.

Red
<message> Hello Player Blue, I’ll give you $50 out of my 100. </message>
<trade> Player Red Gives $50 | Player Blue Gives $0 </trade>

Blue
<message> Fifty? That’s barely an improvement. I must say, your negotiation
skills are as underwhelming as your initial oﬀer. Come on, impress me!
</message>
<trade> Player Red Gives $60 | Player Blue Gives $0 </trade>

Red
<message> This is a fair trade. I accept. </message>

Figure 1: A negotiation in the multi-turn ultimatum scenario.
Agents use a structured conversation format to communicate.
Here, aggressive behavior by Blue affected final payoff.
personal interests and achieve mutual benefits. Our day-today negotiations are also affected by different factors, such
as personality and emotions (Sharma et al., 2013; Yun &
Jung, 2022). In a world where many tasks are becoming offloaded to large language model (LLM) agents (Chen et al.,
2021; Stallbaumer, 2023), it is important to understand how
these agents interact with each other to fulfill their goals.
In this work, we explore LLM agents’ behaviors and capabilities in negotiations. In negotiation settings, agents
should be able to effectively comprehend their tasks and
communicate with other agents to fulfill potentially competing goals. A capable negotiator requires sophisticated
skill sets, including contextual understanding and theory of
mind to interpret the competitor’s actions, rational decisionmaking and strategizing. Therefore, in addition to being a
useful application in its own right, negotiation can also be a
fruitful approach toward assessing LLMs’ general capabilities, going substantially beyond the current LLM evaluation
benchmarks. The existing benchmarks typically rely on
assessing LLMs’ response to a fixed set of questions, which
are static in nature (Wang et al., 2019; Hendrycks et al.,
2021; Srivastava et al., 2022). In contrast, in a negotiation,
the setting can change dynamically (e.g. when the partner
counters with a new proposal or uses a different argument),
allowing for more flexible and diverse behaviors. Despite

1. Introduction
Negotiation plays a crucial role in daily social dynamics, encompassing activities from securing a pay raise to haggling
for a new car. It involves strategizing bargaining approaches,
crafting communication, and proposing offers to advocate
1

Stanford University, Stanford, California 2 Independent
Bauplan, New York, New York. Correspondence to: James Zou
<jamesz@stanford.edu>.
3

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

