An amortized approach to non-linear mixed-effects modeling
based on neural posterior estimation

Jonas Arruda 1 Yannik Schälte 1 2 Clemens Peiter 1 Olga Teplytska 3 Ulrich Jaehde 3 Jan Hasenauer 1 2

Abstract

a broad spectrum of abilities (Goldstein, 1987). This heterogeneity can be described and analyzed using non-linear
mixed-effects (NLME) models, a powerful class of statistical tools. NLME models can account for similarities and
differences between individuals using fixed effects, random
effects, and covariates. This allows for a high degree of flexibility and interpretability. These models are widely used
for statistical analysis (Yu et al., 2022; Llamosi et al., 2016),
hypothesis testing (Bortz & Nelson, 2006), and predictions
(Claret et al., 2009; Ribba et al., 2014).

Non-linear mixed-effects models are a powerful
tool for studying heterogeneous populations in
various fields, including biology, medicine, economics, and engineering. Here, the aim is to find
a distribution over the parameters that describe
the whole population using a model that can generate simulations for an individual of that population. However, fitting these distributions to data is
computationally challenging if the description of
individuals is complex and the population is large.
To address this issue, we propose a novel machine
learning-based approach: We exploit neural density estimation based on conditional normalizing
flows to approximate individual-specific posterior distributions in an amortized fashion, thereby
allowing for efficient inference of population parameters. Applying this approach to problems
from cell biology and pharmacology, we demonstrate its unseen flexibility and scalability to large
data sets compared to established methods.

NLME models depend on unknown parameters, such as
reaction rates and initial concentrations, which often need
to be estimated from data. Estimating these parameters – often also called parameter inference – provides key insights
about the data and the underlying processes. The main challenge in inferring these parameters lies in the likelihood formulation at the individual level. For this, there is generally
no closed-form solution (Pinheiro, 1994). Particularly for
large populations, this becomes a problem, as the required
marginalization must be performed for all individuals.
Here, we present a new approach based on invertible neural networks to estimate the parameters of NLME models.
We use simulation-based neural posterior estimation, which
has been developed to address general parameter estimation
problems (Cranmer et al., 2020). We train a mapping – a
conditional normalizing flow – from a latent distribution
to individual-specific posteriors conditioned on observed
individual-level data. During the training of this neural posterior estimator, only simulations of a generative model and
no real data are used. In the following inference phase, the
trained estimator can be applied highly efficiently to any
similar data set with different distributions of individuals
in the population without any further simulations, facilitating the estimation of NLME model parameters in an
amortized fashion. On problems from cell biology and pharmacology, we compare our method with state-of-the-art
and widely used techniques in the field of NLME models:
the stochastic approximation expectation maximization algorithm (SAEM) (Kuhn & Lavielle, 2005) implemented
in Monolix (Lixoft SAS, 2023) and the first-order conditional estimation with interaction (FOCEI) (Wang, 2008)
implemented in NONMEM (Beal & Sheiner, 1980).

1. Introduction
Heterogeneity within populations is a common phenomenon
in various fields, including epidemiology, pharmacology,
ecology, and economics. It is, for instance, well-established
that the human immune system exhibits substantial variability among individuals (Liston et al., 2021; Brodin &
Davis, 2017), that individual patients respond differently to
treatments (Claret et al., 2009; Ribba et al., 2014; Groenland et al., 2019), that genetically identical cells develop
pronounced cell-to-cell variability (Spencer et al., 2009;
Swain et al., 2002), but also that individual students show
1

Life and Medical Sciences Institute, University of Bonn, 53115
Bonn, Germany 2 Computational Health Center, Helmholtz Zentrum München, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany 3 Pharmaceutical
Institute, University of Bonn, 53121 Bonn, Germany. Correspondence to: Jan Hasenauer <jan.hasenauer@uni-bonn.de>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

