Prompt-tuning Latent Diffusion Models for Inverse Problems

Hyungjin Chung 1 Jong Chul Ye 1 Peyman Milanfar 2 Mauricio Delbracio 2

Abstract

(DM) (Song et al., 2022; Chung & Ye, 2022).

We propose a new method for solving imaging
inverse problems using text-to-image latent diffusion models as general priors. Existing methods
using latent diffusion models for inverse problems typically rely on simple null text prompts,
which can lead to suboptimal performance. To
improve upon this, we introduce a method for
prompt tuning, which jointly optimizes the text
embedding on-the-fly while running the reverse
diffusion. This allows us to generate images that
are more faithful to the diffusion prior. Specifically, our approach involves a unified optimization framework that simultaneously considers the
prompt, latent, and pixel values through alternating minimization. This significantly diminishes
image artifacts - a major problem when using latent diffusion models instead of pixel-based diffusion ones. Our method, called P2L, outperforms
both pixel- and latent-diffusion model-based inverse problem solvers on a variety of tasks, such
as super-resolution, deblurring, and inpainting.
Furthermore, P2L demonstrates remarkable scalability to higher resolutions without artifacts.

In particular, DMs have gained significant attention as implicit generative priors for solving inverse problems in imaging (Kadkhodaie & Simoncelli, 2021; Whang et al., 2022;
Daras et al., 2022; Kawar et al., 2022; Feng et al., 2023;
Laroche et al., 2023; Chung et al., 2023b). Leaving the
pre-trained diffusion prior intact, one can guide the inference process to perform posterior sampling conditioned on
the measurement at inference time by resorting to Bayesian
inference. In the end, the ultimate goal of Diffusion modelbased Inverse problem Solvers (DIS) would be to act as a
fully general inverse problem solver, which can be used not
only regardless of the imaging model, but also regardless of
the data distribution.
Solving inverse problems in a fully general domain is hard.
This directly stems from the difficulty of generative modeling a wide distribution, where it is known that one has to
trade-off diversity with fidelity by some means of sharpening the distribution (Brock et al., 2018; Dhariwal & Nichol,
2021). The standard approach in modern DMs is to condition on text prompts (Rombach et al., 2022; Saharia et al.,
2022b), among them the most popular being Stable Diffusion (SD), a latent diffusion model (LDM), which is itself
an under-explored topic in the context of inverse problem
solving. While text conditioning is now considered standard practice in content creation including images (Ramesh
et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022b), 3D (Poole et al., 2023;
Wang et al., 2023c), video (Ho et al., 2022), personalization (Gal et al., 2022), and editing (Hertz et al., 2022), it has
been completely disregarded in the inverse problem solving
context. This is natural, as it is highly ambiguous which
text would be beneficial to use when all we have is a degraded measurement. The wrong prompt could easily lead
to degraded performance.

1. Introduction
Imaging inverse problems are often solved by optimizing or sampling a functional that combines a datafidelity/likelihood term with a regularization term or signal
prior (Romano et al., 2017; Venkatakrishnan et al., 2013;
Ongie et al., 2020; Kamilov et al., 2023; Kawar et al., 2022;
Kadkhodaie & Simoncelli, 2021; Chung et al., 2023b). A
common regularization strategy is to use pre-trained image
priors from generative models, such as GANs (Bora et al.,
2017), VAEs (Bora et al., 2017; González et al., 2022), Normalizing flows (Whang et al., 2021) or Diffusion models

In this work, we aim to bridge this gap by proposing a way to
automatically find the right prompt to condition DMs when
solving inverse problems. This can be achieved through
optimizing the continuous text embedding on-the-fly while
running DIS. We formulate this into a united framework of
updating the text embedding and the latent in an alternating
fashion, such that they become gradually aligned during
the sampling process. Orthogonal and complementary to
embedding optimization, we devise a simple Latent DIS

1
KAIST, Daejeon, Korea 2 Google Research, Mountain View, US. Correspondence to:
Hyungjin Chung
<hj.chung@kaist.ac.kr>,
Mauricio Delbracio <mdelbra@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

