On the Universality of Volume-Preserving and
Coupling-Based Normalizing Flows

Felix Draxler 1 Stefan Wahl 1 Christoph Schnörr 1 Ullrich Köthe 1

Abstract

works is nontrivial and a significant body of work has developed a plethora of architectures, see (Kobyzev et al., 2021)
for an overview. The evidence for which architecture to
choose in practice is mostly limited to empirical results,
however. In this work, we prove rigorous results regarding
the universality of the families of volume-preserving and
coupling-based normalizing flows.

We present a novel theoretical framework for understanding the expressive power of normalizing
flows. Despite their prevalence in scientific applications, a comprehensive understanding of flows
remains elusive due to their restricted architectures. Existing theorems fall short as they require
the use of arbitrarily ill-conditioned neural networks, limiting practical applicability. We propose a distributional universality theorem for wellconditioned coupling-based normalizing flows
such as RealNVP (Dinh et al., 2017). In addition, we show that volume-preserving normalizing flows are not universal, what distribution
they learn instead, and how to fix their expressivity. Our results support the general wisdom that
affine and related couplings are expressive and
in general outperform volume-preserving flows,
bridging a gap between empirical results and theoretical understanding.

First, we consider volume-preserving flows such as (Dinh
et al., 2015; Sorrenson et al., 2019; Toth et al., 2020).
Volume-preservation can be useful in certain applications,
such as disentanglement (Sorrenson et al., 2019) or learning distributions with controllable temperature p(x|T ) ∝
(p̂(x))T (Dibak et al., 2022). However, we show that they
are not universal and learn a biased distribution in practice.
We also provide a simple solution to restore universality,
by adding a single one-dimensional non-volume-preserving
layer.
Second, we improve on the universality theory of couplingbased normalizing flows (not preserving volume). These
flows are a particularly efficient variant of parameterizing
invertible neural networks, with fast training and inference.
Despite their seemingly strong architectural constraints, in
practice even the simple affine coupling-based normalizing
flow (Dinh et al., 2017) can learn high-dimensional distributions such as images (Kingma & Dhariwal, 2018).

1. Introduction
Density estimation and generative modeling of complex distributions is a fundamental problem in statistics and machine
learning, with applications ranging from computer vision
(Kingma & Dhariwal, 2018) to thermodynamic systems
(Noé et al., 2019; Albergo et al., 2019; Nicoli et al., 2021)
and uncertainty quantification (Ardizzone et al., 2018b).

Theoretical explanations for this architecture’s ability to fit
complex distributions are limited. Existing proofs make assumptions that are not valid in practice, as the involved constructions rely on ill-conditioned neural networks (Teshima
et al., 2020a; Koehler et al., 2021) or construct a volumepreserving flow (Koehler et al., 2021). We introduce a new
proof for the distributional universality of coupling-based
normalizing flows that does not require ill-conditioned neural networks to converge. This proof is constructive, showing that training affine coupling blocks sequentially converges to the correct target (compare Figure 1).

Normalizing flows are a class of generative models that
learn a probability density pθ (x) from samples x ∼ p(x)
or from a potentially unnormalized ground truth density
p̂(x) ∝ p(x). They are implemented by transporting a simple multivariate base density such as the standard normal via
a learned invertible function to the distribution of interest.
Constructing flexible and tractable invertible neural net-

In summary, we contribute:

1

Heidelberg University, Germany. Correspondence to: Felix
Draxler <felix.draxler@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de>.

• We show for the first time that volume-preserving flows
are not universal, derive what distribution they converge to instead and provide simple fixes for their shortcomings in Section 4.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

