Fine-grained Classes and How to Find Them

Matej Grcić * 1 2 Artyom Gadetsky * 1 Maria Brbić 1

Abstract

fine-grained labels, machine learning methods that can differentiate between subtle differences in fine-grained labels
are needed.

In many practical applications, coarse-grained
labels are readily available compared to finegrained labels that reflect subtle differences between classes. However, existing methods cannot
leverage coarse labels to infer fine-grained labels
in an unsupervised manner. To bridge this gap,
we propose FALCON, a method that discovers
fine-grained classes from coarsely labeled data
without any supervision at the fine-grained level.
FALCON simultaneously infers unknown finegrained classes and underlying relationships between coarse and fine-grained classes. Moreover,
FALCON is a modular method that can effectively
learn from multiple datasets labeled with different strategies. We evaluate FALCON on eight
image classification tasks and a single-cell classification task. FALCON outperforms baselines by
a large margin, achieving 22% improvement over
the best baseline on the tieredImageNet dataset
with over 600 fine-grained classes.

Prior work has shown that coarse labels can be used to
more effectively learn fine-grained classes (Wu et al., 2018).
Weakly-supervised classification methods use coarse labels
as a form of weak supervision to improve fine-grained classification performance (Ristin et al., 2015; Taherkhani et al.,
2019). Recently, few-shot learning methods have been proposed that are trained on a set of coarse classes and then
adapted for fine-grained classification with only a few labeled samples per class (Liu et al., 2019; Bukchin et al.,
2021; Ni et al., 2022). However, all these methods assume
that a set of fine-grained classes along with a small number
of samples assigned to them are known beforehand.
In this work, we propose FALCON (Fine grAined Labels
from COarse supervisioN), a method that discovers finegrained classes within a coarsely labeled dataset without
any supervision. The key insight in FALCON is that finegrained predictions can be combined with the relations between coarse and fine classes to recover coarse predictions.
With this insight, FALCON develops a specialized optimization procedure that alternates between inferring unknown
relations between the coarse and fine-grained classes and
training a fine-grained classifier. Relationships between the
coarse and fine-grained classes are inferred by solving a discrete optimization problem, while the fine-grained classifier
is trained using coarse supervision and fine-grained pseudolabels. Moreover, FALCON can be seamlessly adapted to
leverage multiple datasets with incompatible coarse classes,
relabeling all of them at the same fine-grained level.

1. Introduction
Machine learning excels in domains with large quantities
of precisely labeled data (Esteva et al., 2017; Kirillov et al.,
2023). While coarse labels are typically abundant and easy
to obtain, precise annotation with fine-grained labels is challenging due to the subtle differences between classes and
the small number of discriminative features. Thus, in many
domains obtaining such fine-grained labels requires domain
expertise and tedious manual effort (Tkatchenko, 2020; Erfanian et al., 2023). For example, B-cells and T-cells can
be easily differentiated, but differentiating between very
fine-grained cell subtypes such as CD4+ T cells and CD8+
T cells requires identifying a very small number of specific markers. To automate the tedious effort of obtaining

We compare FALCON to alternative baselines on eight image classification datasets and a single-cell dataset from
biology domain. Experimental results show that FALCON
effectively discovers fine-grained classes without supervision and consistently outperforms baselines on both image
and single-cell data. For instance, on the tieredImageNet
dataset with 608 fine-grained classes, FALCON outperforms
baselines by 22%. Moreover, when trained with multiple
datasets with different coarse classes, FALCON effectively
reuses different annotation policies to improve its performance.

*

Equal contribution 1 EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland 2 Faculty
of Electrical Engineering and Computing, University of Zagreb,
Croatia. Correspondence to: Maria Brbić <mbrbic@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

