Language Models as Science Tutors

Alexis Chevalier 1 Jiayi Geng 1 Alexander Wettig 1 Howard Chen 1 Sebastian Mizera 2
Toni Annala 3 Max Jameson Aragon 4 Arturo Rodríguez Fanlo 5 Simon Frieder 6 Simon Machado 7
Akshara Prabhakar 1 Ellie Thieu 8 9 Jiachen T. Wang 1 Zirui Wang 1 Xindi Wu 1 Mengzhou Xia 1
Wenhan Xia 1 Jiatong Yu 1 Jun-Jie Zhu 10 11 Zhiyong Jason Ren 10 11
Sanjeev Arora 1 Danqi Chen 1

Abstract
NLP has recently made exciting progress toward
training language models (LMs) with strong scientific problem-solving skills. However, model
development has not focused on real-life usecases of LMs for science, including applications
in education that require processing long scientific documents. To address this, we introduce
T UTOR E VAL and T UTOR C HAT. T UTOR E VAL is
a diverse question-answering benchmark consisting of questions about long chapters from STEM
textbooks, written by experts. T UTOR E VAL helps
measure real-life usability of LMs as scientific
assistants, and it is the first benchmark combining
long contexts, free-form generation, and multidisciplinary scientific knowledge. Moreover, we
show that fine-tuning base models with existing dialogue datasets leads to poor performance
on T UTOR E VAL. Therefore, we create T UTOR C HAT, a dataset of 80,000 long synthetic dialogues about textbooks. We use T UTOR C HAT
to fine-tune Llemma models with 7B and 34B parameters. These LM tutors specialized in math
have a 32K-token context window, and they excel at T UTOR E VAL while performing strongly on
GSM8K and MATH. Our datasets build on opensource materials, and we release our models, data,
and evaluations publicly.
Figure 1: Example from T UTOR E VAL. Given the chapter,
the student asks a question to the LM Tutor. Both the chapter
and the question are fed to the LM Tutor to generate the
answer. GPT-4 assesses the generation by referencing the
human annotated key points (blue: the tutoring task; yellow:
evaluation). See detailed examples in §A.

1

Princeton Language and Intelligence, Princeton University
School of Natural Sciences, Institute for Advanced Study 3 School
of Mathematics, Institute for Advanced Study 4 Neuroscience Institute, Princeton University 5 Hebrew University of Jerusalem
6
Department of Computer Science, Oxford University 7 FIM - Institute for Mathematical Research, ETH Zürich 8 Department of
Computer Science, University of Wisconsin-Madison 9 Meta FAIR
10
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Princeton University 11 Andlinger Center for Energy and the Environment, Princeton University. Correspondence to: Alexis Chevalier
<achevalier@princeton.edu>.
2

1. Introduction
NLP has recently made exciting progress towards improving
LM performance on problem-solving benchmarks such as
GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021) or MATH (Hendrycks et al.,

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

