DAG-Based Column Generation for Adversarial Team Games
Youzhi Zhang 1 Bo An 2 3 Daniel Dajun Zeng 4

Abstract

state-of-the-art baselines.

Many works recently have focused on computing optimal solutions for the ex ante coordination
of a team for solving sequential adversarial team
games, where a team of players coordinate against
an opponent (or a team of players) in a zero-sum
extensive-form game. However, it is challenging to directly compute such an optimal solution
because the team’s coordinated strategy space is
exponential in the size of the game tree due to the
asymmetric information of team members. Column Generation (CG) algorithms have been proposed to overcome this challenge by iteratively
expanding the team’s coordinated strategy space
via a Best Response Oracle (BRO). More recently,
more compact representations (particularly, the
Team Belief Directed Acyclic Graph (TB-DAG))
of the team’s coordinated strategy space have been
proposed, but the TB-DAG-based algorithms only
outperform the CG-based algorithms in games
with a small TB-DAG. Unfortunately, it is inefficient to directly apply CG to the TB-DAG because the size of the TB-DAG is still exponential
in the size of the game tree and then makes the
BRO unscalable. To this end, we develop our
novel TB-DAG CG (DCG) algorithm framework
by computing a coordinated best response in the
original game first and then transforming this strategy into the TB-DAG form. To further improve
the scalability, we propose a more suitable BRO
for DCG to reduce the cost of the transformation
at each iteration. We theoretically show that our
algorithm converges exponentially faster than the
state-of-the-art CG algorithms in the worst case,
and experimental results show that our algorithm
is at least two orders of magnitude faster than the

1. Introduction
Many research efforts on computational game theory have
focused on computing a Nash equilibrium (Nash, 1951) in
two-player zero-sum extensive-form games (Zinkevich et al.,
2008; Moravčı́k et al., 2017; Brown & Sandholm, 2018;
Zhang & Sandholm, 2020), where two players receive opposite payoffs. In this setting, a Nash equilibrium can be computed in polynomial time in the size of the extensive-form
game (Shoham & Leyton-Brown, 2008). Recent landmark
results such as superhuman performance in the heads-up
no-limit Texas hold’em poker game (Moravčı́k et al., 2017;
Brown & Sandholm, 2018) show that researchers have understood the problem of computing a Nash equilibrium in
two-player zero-sum extensive-form games well in both theory and practice. However, such a problem in multiplayer
games is not well understood, where computing a Nash
equilibrium is generally hard (Chen & Deng, 2005; Zhang
et al., 2023c;b).
In this paper, we focus on sequential adversarial team games
(von Stengel & Koller, 1997; Celli & Gatti, 2018; Zhang
& An, 2020a; Zhang et al., 2021; 2022d;a; 2023a; Li et al.,
2021; 2023b), where a team of players coordinate against an
opponent (or a team of players) in an extensive-form game.
For example, a team of police officers coordinately interdict
an evader (Zhang et al., 2017; 2019; Xue et al., 2021; Li
et al., 2023a). Specifically, we focus on the solution concept
called Team-Maxmin Equilibrium with Coordination device
(TMECor) (Celli & Gatti, 2018), which models the ex ante
coordination of team members who share the same payoff
function. That is, the team members agree on a common
strategy before the game starts, but they cannot communicate during playing the game in face of private information
for each team member. Examples of this setting include collusion in poker games and a team of drones playing against
an intruder (Carminati et al., 2022). Even though a TMECor
is equivalent to a Nash equilibrium in a two-player (a team
and an opponent) zero-sum game, computing a TMECor
is hard (i.e., APX-hard) (Celli & Gatti, 2018). The main
barrier is the team members’ asymmetric information in
this setting, which makes a team of players equivalent to a
single player with imperfect recall and then the behavioral

1
Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Hong Kong
Institute of Science & Innovation, Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 3 Skywork
AI, Singapore 4 Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Youzhi Zhang
<youzhi.zhang@cair-cas.org.hk>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

