One-Shot Strategic Classification Under Unknown Costs

Elan Rosenfeld 1 Nir Rosenfeld 2

Abstract

be a good measure” (Goodhart, 1975). This natural tension
between learning systems and their users applies broadly:
loan approvals, admissions, hiring, insurance, and welfare
benefits are all examples in which the system seeks predictions that are accurate, whereas users—irrespective of their
true label—wish to be classified as positive.

The goal of strategic classification is to learn
decision rules which are robust to strategic input
manipulation. Earlier works assume that these
responses are known; while some recent works
handle unknown responses, they exclusively
study online settings with repeated model deployments. But there are many domains—particularly
in public policy, a common motivating use
case—where multiple deployments are infeasible,
or where even one bad round is unacceptable. To
address this gap, we initiate the formal study of
one-shot strategic classification under unknown
responses, which requires committing to a single
classifier once. Focusing on uncertainty in
the users’ cost function, we begin by proving
that for a broad class of costs, even a small
mis-estimation of the true cost can entail trivial
accuracy in the worst case. In light of this, we
frame the task as a minimax problem, aiming to
minimize worst-case risk over an uncertainty set
of costs. We design efficient algorithms for both
the full-batch and stochastic settings, which we
prove converge (offline) to the minimax solution
at the rate of Õ(T −1/2 ). Our analysis reveals
important structure stemming from strategic
responses, particularly the value of dual norm
regularization with respect to the cost function.

The field of strategic classification (Brückner et al., 2012;
Hardt et al., 2016) studies learning in such settings, with
the principal aim of learning classifiers that are robust to
strategic user behavior. However, most works in this field
rely on the key assumption that the learner knows precisely
how users would respond to any given classifier. This is typically modeled as knowledge of the underlying cost function
c(x, x′ ) which defines the cost users incur for modifying
features x to become x′ . This assumption enables tractable
learning, but it is unrealistic and it effectively takes the
“sting” out of Goodhart’s law: in a statistical sense, the
power to anticipate user responses completely nullifies the
effect of users’ gaming behavior on predictive performance
(for radial basis cost functions; see Appendix G).
Indeed, if we survey some well-known examples of Goodhart’s law (e.g. Chrystal et al., 2003; Elton, 2004; Fire and
Guestrin, 2019; Teney et al., 2020), it becomes apparent
that much of the policy challenge arises precisely from not
knowing how users would respond. This motivates us to instead focus on learning strategically robust classifiers under
an unknown cost function. To cope with this uncertainty,
we take a conservative approach and model the system as
aiming to learn a classifier that is robust to all cost functions
c in some uncertainty set C, which we think of as including
all cost functions which are believed to be plausible (alternatively, it is a set which we can be confident will contain
the true, unknown c). Our approach is therefore doubly
robust, providing guarantees under both the manipulation
of inputs by strategic behavior and an adversarial choice of
cost function. We argue this is necessary: we prove that
if one optimizes for strategic classification under a single,
fixed cost, then any discrepancy between that cost and the
true cost can result in dramatically reduced accuracy.

1. Introduction
Across a multitude of domains, machine learning is increasingly being used to inform decisions about human users. But
when users stand to gain from certain predictive outcomes,
they may act to obtain favorable predictions by modifying
their features. Since this can harm predictive performance,
learning becomes susceptible to Goodhart’s law, which
states that “when a measure becomes a target, it ceases to
1

Carnegie Mellon University 2 Technion – Israel Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Elan Rosenfeld
<elan@cmu.edu>.

While some works have studied strategic learning under
unknown responses (Dong et al., 2018; Ahmadi et al., 2021;
Shao et al., 2023; Lechner et al., 2023; Harris et al., 2023),
their focus is entirely on sequential learning settings. This

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

