How Uniform Random Weights Induce Non-uniform Bias:
Typical Interpolating Neural Networks Generalize with Narrow Teachers

Gon Buzaglo * 1 Itamar Harel * 1 Mor Shpigel Nacson * 1 Alon Brutzkus 1 Nathan Srebro 2 Daniel Soudry 1

Abstract

generalizing solutions (e.g., Gunasekar et al. (2017); Soudry
et al. (2018); Arora et al. (2019); Lyu & Li (2020); Chizat &
Bach (2020); Vardi (2023)). This bias stems from underlying interactions between the model and the training method
— including the type of optimization step, the initialization,
the parameterization, and the loss function.

Background. A main theoretical puzzle is why
over-parameterized Neural Networks (NNs) generalize well when trained to zero loss (i.e., so they
interpolate the data). Usually, the NN is trained
with Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) or one
of its variants. However, recent empirical work
examined the generalization of a random NN that
interpolates the data: the NN was sampled from
a seemingly uniform prior over the parameters,
conditioned on that the NN perfectly classifies
the training set. Interestingly, such a NN sample
typically generalized as well as SGD-trained NNs.
Contributions. We prove that such a random
NN interpolator typically generalizes well if there
exists an underlying narrow “teacher NN” that
agrees with the labels. Specifically, we show that
such a ‘flat’ prior over the NN parameterization
induces a rich prior over the NN functions, due
to the redundancy in the NN structure. In particular, this creates a bias towards simpler functions,
which require less relevant parameters to represent — enabling learning with a sample complexity approximately proportional to the complexity of the teacher (roughly, the number of nonredundant parameters), rather than the student’s.

Previous works (Valle-Perez et al., 2019; Mingard et al.,
2021; Chiang et al., 2023) suggested, based on empirical
evidence, that a significant part of this implicit bias in NNs
is the mapping from the model parameters to the model
function. Specifically, suppose we randomly sample the
NN parameters from a ‘uniform’ prior1 , and accept only
parameter samples in which the NN perfectly classifies all
the training data — i.e., samples from the posterior composed of the same prior and the likelihood of a 0-1 loss
function. Then, Chiang et al. (2023) found that the sampled
NNs generalize as well as SGD in small-scale experiments.
These results may suggest that such a uniform sampling
of the NN parameters induces simple and generalizing NN
functions. In this paper, we prove this is indeed the case, and
aim to uncover the mechanism behind this phenomenon. In
short, we prove typical NN interpolators sampled this way
(“students”) generalize well, given there exists a “narrow”
NN teacher that generates the labels. Next, we explain these
results in more detail.
Contributions. In Section 3 we prove that a typical NN
sampled from the posterior over interpolators generalizes
well (i.e., has a small test error with high probability) with

1. Introduction

#samples = O (− log p̃) ,

A central theoretical question in deep learning is why
Neural Networks (NNs) generalize, despite being overparameterized, and even when perfectly fitted to the data
(Zhang et al., 2017). One of the leading explanations for
this phenomenon is that NNs have an “implicit bias” toward

(1)

where p̃ is the probability that a random NN (sampled from
the ‘uniform’ prior) is equivalent to the teacher function.2
Thus, to obtain generalization guarantees for NNs, we proceed to upper bound (− log p̃).
1

*

1
Equal contribution
Technion Institute of Technol2
ogy, Haifa, Israel Toyota Technological Institute at
Chicago, Chicago IL, USA. Correspondence to:
Gon
Buzaglo <gon.buzaglo@gmail.com>, Itamar Harel <itamarharel01@gmail.com>.

A truly uniform prior does not exist for infinite sets, so the
prior is chosen similarly to standard ‘uniform-like’ initializations:
in each layer, the prior is Gaussian (uniform on the ℓ2 sphere) or
uniform in the ℓ∞ ball.
2
The proof idea is simple: the number of hypotheses sampled until a successful interpolation is |H| ⪅ 1/p̃. Plugging this
into the standard sample complexity of a finite hypotheses class
O (log |H|), we obtain the result. The actual proof is slightly more
complicated since |H| here weakly depends on the training set.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

