Interpretability Illusions in the Generalization of Simplified Models

Dan Friedman 1 * Andrew Lampinen 2 Lucas Dixon 3 Danqi Chen 1 2 Asma Ghandeharioun 3

Abstract

and discretization. We then interpret the results of these
simplifications—for example finding dimensions in the principal components that encode a task-relevant feature (e.g.
Liu et al., 2022; Power et al., 2022; Zhong et al., 2023;
Chughtai et al., 2023; Lieberum et al., 2023). In other
words, we are essentially replacing the original model with
a simplified proxy that uses a more limited—and thus easier
to interpret—set of features. By analyzing these simplified
proxies, we hope to understand at an abstract level how the
system solves a task. Ideally, this understanding helps us
predict model behavior in unfamiliar situations, and thereby
anticipate failure cases or potentially unsafe behavior.

A common method to study deep learning systems
is to use simplified model representations—for
example, using singular value decomposition to
visualize the model’s hidden states in a lower dimensional space. This approach assumes that the
results of these simplifications are faithful to the
original model. Here, we illustrate an important
caveat to this assumption: even if the simplified
representations can accurately approximate the
full model on the training set, they may fail to accurately capture the model’s behavior out of distribution. We illustrate this by training Transformer
models on controlled datasets with systematic generalization splits, including the Dyck balancedparenthesis languages and a code completion task.
We simplify these models using tools like dimensionality reduction and clustering, and then explicitly test how these simplified proxies match the
behavior of the original model. We find consistent
generalization gaps: cases in which the simplified
proxies are more faithful to the original model on
the in-distribution evaluations and less faithful on
various tests of systematic generalization. This
includes cases where the original model generalizes systematically but the simplified proxies fail,
and cases where the simplified proxies generalize
better. Together, our results raise questions about
the extent to which mechanistic interpretations
derived using tools like SVD can reliably predict
what a model will do in novel situations.

However, in order to arrive at understanding by simplifying
a model, we have to assume that the result of the simplification is a relatively faithful proxy for the original model.
For example, we need to assume that the principal components of the model representations, by capturing most of
the variance, are thereby capturing the important details of
the model’s representations for its computations. In this
work, we question whether this assumption is valid. First,
some model simplifications, like PCA, are not computed
solely from the model itself; they are calculated with respect
to the model’s representations for a particular collection
of inputs, and therefore depend on the input data distribution. Second, even if a simplification does not explicitly
depend on the training distribution, it might appear faithful
on in-distribution evaluations, but fail to capture the model’s
behavior over other distributions. Thus, it is important to
understand the extent to which simplified proxy models
characterize the behavior of the underlying model beyond
this restricted data distribution.
We therefore study how models, and their simplified proxies, generalize out-of-distribution. We focus on small-scale
Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) language models trained
on controlled datasets with systematic generalization splits.1
We first consider models trained on the Dyck balancedparenthesis languages. These languages have been studied
in prior work on characterizing the computational expressivity of Transformers (e.g., Hewitt et al., 2020; Ebrahimi
et al., 2020; Yao et al., 2021; Weiss et al., 2021; Murty
et al., 2023; Wen et al., 2023), and admit a variety of sys-

1. Introduction
How can we understand deep learning models? Often,
we begin by simplifying the model, or its representations, using tools like dimensionality reduction, clustering,
* Work done while the author was a Student Researcher at
Google Research. 1 Department of Computer Science, Princeton
University 2 Google DeepMind 3 Google Research. Correspondence
to: Dan Friedman <dfriedman@cs.princeton.edu>.

1

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

That is, we focus on out-of-distribution settings where models
can be expected to generalize to some extent.

1

