An Online Optimization Perspective on First-Order and Zero-Order
Decentralized Nonsmooth Nonconvex Stochastic Optimization

Emre Sahinoglu 1 Shahin Shahrampour 1

Abstract

vergence results (Rockafellar & Wets, 2009; Clarke et al.,
2008). More recently, finite-time analysis of this class of
problems has attracted significant attention (Jordan et al.,
2023; Majewski et al., 2018; Davis & Drusvyatskiy, 2019;
Daniilidis & Drusvyatskiy, 2020; Tian et al., 2022).

We investigate the finite-time analysis of finding
(δ, ϵ)-stationary points for nonsmooth nonconvex
objectives in decentralized stochastic optimization. A set of agents aim at minimizing a global
function using only their local information by interacting over a network. We present a novel
algorithm, called Multi Epoch Decentralized Online Learning (ME-DOL), for which we establish
the sample complexity in various settings. First,
using a recently proposed online-to-nonconvex
technique, we show that our algorithm recovers
the optimal convergence rate of smooth nonconvex objectives. We then extend our analysis to the
nonsmooth setting, building on properties of randomized smoothing and Goldstein-subdifferential
sets. We establish the sample complexity of
O(δ −1 ϵ−3 ), which to the best of our knowledge
is the first finite-time guarantee for decentralized
nonsmooth nonconvex stochastic optimization in
the first-order setting (without weak-convexity),
matching its optimal centralized counterpart. We
further prove the same rate for the zero-order oracle setting without using variance reduction.

On the other hand, decentralization is a crucial mechanism to scale up optimization problems. For nonsmooth objectives, though the class of convex problems
is well-understood in decentralized optimization (Nedic &
Ozdaglar, 2009; Scaman et al., 2018), the characterization
of optimal finite-time rates for nonconvex problems has remained elusive (except for weakly-convex problems (Chen
et al., 2021)). In the present work, we address the finite-time
analysis of decentralized nonsmooth nonconvex stochastic
optimization.
We consider a decentralized optimization problem where
a group of n agents aim at minimizing a global function.
However, each agent has limited information about this
global objective and interacts with its neighbors to solve the
global problem, formulated in the following form
n
n
1X i o
min f (x) =
f (x) .
(1)
n i=1
x∈Rd
Local functions f i are in the form of f i (x) =
Eξi ∼Di [F i (x, ξi )], where F i (x, ξi ) are stochastic with random index ξi , and ξi corresponds to a data sample from
local dataset of agent i. We assume that the local functions
are nonconvex and Lipschitz continuous but do not necessarily have Lipschitz continuous gradients, i.e., they are
nonsmooth.

1. Introduction
At the heart of many practical machine learning problems,
we must deal with nonconvex optimization of nonsmooth
objective functions. Examples include training neural networks with ReLU activation functions, blind deconvolution,
sparse dictionary learning, and robust phase retrieval. Despite the significant practical success of such schemes, the
vast majority of prior work in theoretical analysis of nonsmooth nonconvex optimization focused on asymptotic con-

In an optimization problem, a tractable optimality criterion
is required for finite-time convergence guarantees. For nonsmooth nonconvex objectives, ϵ-stationarity cannot be guaranteed in finite time (Kornowski & Shamir, 2021; Zhang
et al., 2020b). Instead, the notion of (δ, ϵ)-stationarity is
a tractable criterion (Zhang et al., 2020b), where we seek
vectors with norm less than ϵ among the convex hull of the
subdifferential set of a ball with radius δ (see Definition 2
for exact mathematical definition). The goal of this paper is
to identify a (δ, ϵ)-stationary point of the global function f
when agents have access to either the first-order oracle (i.e.,
∇F i (·, ξi )) or the zero-order oracle (i.e., F i (·, ξi )).

1
Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115. Correspondence to: Emre
Sahinoglu <sahinoglu.m@northeastern.edu>, Shahin Shahrampour <s.shahrampour@northeastern.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

