Non-confusing Generation of Customized Concepts in Diffusion Models

Wang Lin 1 * Jingyuan Chen 1 2 Jiaxin Shi 3 * Yichen Zhu 1 Chen Liang 4 Junzhong Miao 5 Tao Jin 1
Zhou Zhao 1 Fei Wu 1 Shuicheng Yan 6 Hanwang Zhang 6 7

Abstract
We tackle the common challenge of inter-concept
visual confusion in compositional concept generation using text-guided diffusion models (TGDMs).
It becomes even more pronounced in the generation of customized concepts, due to the scarcity
of user-provided concept visual examples. By
revisiting the two major stages leading to the success of TGDMs—1) contrastive image-language
pre-training (CLIP) for text encoder that encodes
visual semantics, and 2) training TGDM that decodes the textual embeddings into pixels—we
point that existing customized generation methods
only focus on fine-tuning the second stage while
overlooking the first one. To this end, we propose a simple yet effective solution called CLIF:
contrastive image-language fine-tuning. Specifically, given a few samples of customized concepts,
we obtain non-confusing textual embeddings of
a concept by fine-tuning CLIP via contrasting a
concept and the over-segmented visual regions of
other concepts. Experimental results demonstrate
the effectiveness of CLIF in preventing the confusion of multi-customized concept generation.
Project page: https://clif-official.github.io/clif.

Figure 1. The black line and box denote the prevailing pipeline of
customized generation methods. Our contribution is to contrast the
textual embeddings of customized concepts in the Text Encoder
stage, which is shown in the red line and dashed box.

based on fine-tuning a pre-trained TGDM, where the tunable parameters include the textual embeddings of the new
concept names (Gal et al., 2022; Voynov et al., 2023) and/or
LoRAs (Hu et al., 2021) on the generation backbone (Ruiz
et al., 2023; Kumari et al., 2023). In this way, the fine-tuned
TGDM is expected to memorize the visual concepts and
generalize them to unseen compositions. However, an everelusive challenge of the generalization is the inter-concept
confusion shown in Figure 3. This visual defect is even
more severe when the interaction is spatially cluttered, such
as “snuggling” and “riding motorcycle”.
Recent findings of visualizing the role of the image-text
cross-attention in pre-trained TGDM (Tewel et al., 2023;
Patashnik et al., 2023) show that the textual embeddings
(V-values) control “what to draw” and the cross-attention
map (Q-K softmax) tells “where to draw”. Inspired by this,
we believe that the cause of the confusion is mainly due to
the confusing textual embeddings of concepts. To see this,
we revisit the two stages in training TGDM (Figure 1 and
Section 3):

1. Introduction
We are interested in customizing a text-guided diffusion
model (TGDM), e.g., Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al.,
2022), to generate compositions of user-provided concepts.
For example, as shown in Figure 3, given a few images of
Hector Rivera and Tang Seng, we can generate imaginary
compositions by the prompt “Hector Rivera snuggled up in
Tang Seng”. Existing customized generation methods are

• Text Encoder: we obtain the text encoder from contrastive image-language pre-training (CLIP) on largescale image-text pairs (Radford et al., 2021; Schuhmann
et al., 2021). In this way, the token embedding of a concept token carries its visual features.
• Text-to-Image Decoder: the textual embedding is decoded into pixels by the cross-attention between textual
and visual embeddings in the U-net decoder. In Section 2,
we discuss that almost all the customized generation methods focus on this stage.

*

Equal contribution 1 Zhejiang University 2 Corresponding Author 3 Huawei Cloud Computing 4 Tsinghua University 5 Harbin
Institute of Technology 6 Skywork AISingapore 7 Nanyang Technological University. Correspondence to: Jingyuan Chen
<jingyuanchen@zju.edu.cn>.

We can show the confusion of common concepts in the
existing vocabulary of Stable Diffusion by measuring the
confusion degree of each concept. We use a sentence of
two concepts as the prompt for generation (e.g., “a cat and a

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

