Discovering Symmetry Breaking in Physical Systems with
Relaxed Group Convolution

Rui Wang 1 Elyssa Hofgard 1 Han Gao 2 Robin Walters 3 Tess E. Smidt 1

Abstract

integrate symmetries into the design of the architectures,
have demonstrated notable success in modeling complex
data. By constructing a model inherently equivariant to the
symmetry group governing transformations of a physical
system, we ensure automatic generalization across these
transformations. This enhances not only the model’s robustness to distributional shifts but also its sample efficiency
(Geiger & Smidt, 2022; Walters et al., 2021; Wang et al.,
2020; Helwig et al., 2023; Liao et al., 2023).

Modeling symmetry breaking is essential for
understanding the fundamental changes in the
behaviors and properties of physical systems,
from microscopic particle interactions to macroscopic phenomena like fluid dynamics and
cosmic structures. Thus, identifying sources of
asymmetry is an important tool for understanding
physical systems. In this paper, we focus on
learning asymmetries of data using relaxed group
convolutions. We provide both theoretical and
empirical evidence that this flexible convolution
technique allows the model to maintain the highest level of equivariance that is consistent with
data and discover the subtle symmetry-breaking
factors in various physical systems. We employ
various relaxed group convolution architectures
to uncover various symmetry-breaking factors
that are interpretable and physically meaningful
in different physical systems, including the phase
transition of crystal structure, the isotropy and
homogeneity breaking in turbulent flow, and the
time-reversal symmetry breaking in pendulum
systems. We open-source our code at https:
//github.com/atomicarchitects/
Symmetry-Breaking-Discovery.

The symmetry of the outputs of any equivariant model will
have equal or higher symmetry than the inputs to the model
(Smidt et al., 2021). This suggests that equivariant models
might be too restrictive to be useful in describing symmetry
breaking. However, understanding the effects that give rise
to symmetry breaking is key for predicting the behavior
of complex systems, from the intricacies of particle interactions to the dynamics of fluid flows (Fahle et al., 2001;
Weinberg, 1976; Beekman et al., 2019). Symmetry breaking
occurs in two forms: explicit, when the governing equations of a physical system lack symmetry, and spontaneous,
when a symmetric system transitions to a lower-energy state
with lower symmetry (Strocchi, 2005). Depending how this
phenomenon manifests in the data, it can be categorized as
either functional or distributional. Hence, our objective is to
construct models capable of identifying asymmetries across
these scenarios.
While traditional equivariant models may be unable to
describe some forms of symmetry breaking, Smidt et al.
(2021) shows that additional trainable equivariant symmetrybreaking inputs can be used to learn asymmetries throughout
training with an equivariant model. Relaxed group convolution (Wang et al., 2022) furthers this idea by incorporating
trainable relaxed weights to ease the strict weight-sharing
scheme in equivariant convolutions. In Wang et al. (2022),
the authors empirically show the ability of relaxed group
convolutions to model approximate symmetries, but they do
not provide any theoretical guarantees or insights. Our work
advances the understanding of relaxed group convolutions
by both theoretically and empirically showing that they can
consistently capture the correct symmetry inductive biases
from the data in all scenarios of symmetry breaking. We also
demonstrate that after training, the relaxed weights can be

1. Introduction
Symmetry play pivotal roles in the advancement of deep
learning (Zhang, 1988; Kondor & Trivedi, 2018; Bronstein
et al., 2021; Cohen & Welling, 2016a; Weiler & Cesa, 2019;
Zaheer et al., 2017; Cohen & Welling, 2016b). Specifically,
equivariant convolution (Cohen & Welling, 2016b; Esteves
et al., 2018) and graph neural networks (Satorras et al.,
2021a; Thomas et al., 2018; Cohen et al., 2019), which
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2 Harvard University Northeastern University. Correspondence to: Rui Wang
<rayruw@mit.edu>.
3

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

