Embarrassingly Parallel GFlowNets
Tiago da Silva 1 Luiz Max Carvalho 1 Amauri Souza 2 3 Samuel Kaski 2 4 Diego Mesquita 1

Abstract

2023; Atanackovic et al., 2023b), GFlowNets find varied
applications in combinatorial optimization (Zhang et al.,
2023a), multi-objective active learning (Jain et al., 2023),
and design of biological sequences (Jain et al., 2022). Inheriting jargon from reinforcement learning, GFlowNets learn
to sample from R : X → R+ by incrementally refining a
policy function pF that incrementally builds objects x ∈ X
by augmenting an initial state s0 . In Bayesian context, R is
proportional to some posterior p(·|D), and X is its support.

GFlowNets are a promising alternative to MCMC
sampling for discrete compositional random variables. Training GFlowNets requires repeated evaluations of the unnormalized target distribution, or
reward function. However, for large-scale posterior sampling, this may be prohibitive since it
incurs traversing the data several times. Moreover, if the data are distributed across clients, employing standard GFlowNets leads to intensive
client-server communication. To alleviate both
these issues, we propose embarrassingly parallel
GFlowNet (EP-GFlowNet). EP-GFlowNet is a
provably correct divide-and-conquer method to
sample from product distributions of the form
R(·) ∝ R1 (·)...RN (·) — e.g., in parallel or federated Bayes, where each Rn is a local posterior defined on a data partition. First, in parallel, we train
a local GFlowNet targeting each Rn and send the
resulting models to the server. Then, the server
learns a global GFlowNet by enforcing our newly
proposed aggregating balance condition, requiring a single communication step. Importantly, EPGFlowNets can also be applied to multi-objective
optimization and model reuse. Our experiments
illustrate the EP-GFlowNets’s effectiveness on
many tasks, including parallel Bayesian phylogenetics, multi-objective multiset, sequence generation, and federated Bayesian structure learning.

Nonetheless, similarly to running MCMC chains, training
GFlowNets requires repeatedly evaluating R. For posterior
sampling, this implies repeated sweeps through the data.
Furthermore, if the data is scattered across many clients
— e.g., in Bayesian federated learning (El Mekkaoui et al.,
2021; Vono et al., 2022) —, the multiple communication
rounds between clients and the server may be a bottleneck.

In the realm of MCMC, embarrassingly parallel methods (Neiswanger et al., 2014) address both aforementioned
issues simultaneously through a divide-and-conquer scheme.
In a nutshell, given an N -partition D1 , . . . , DN of the data
D, the strategy consists of sampling in parallel from N
subposteriors defined on different data shards:
Rn (x) ∝ p(Dn |x)p(x)1/N

∀n = 1 . . . N,

and subsequently combining the results in a server to get
approximate samples from the full posterior p(x|D), or
equivalently from R ∝ R1 R2 . . . RN . In federated settings,
the data partition reflects how data arises in client devices,
and this class of algorithms incurs a single communication round between the clients and the server. However,
these methods are tailored towards continuous random variables, and their combination step relies on approximating
(or sampling from) the product of sample-based continuous
surrogates of the subposteriors, e.g., kernel density estimators (Neiswanger et al., 2014), Gaussian processes (Nemeth
& Sherlock, 2018; de Souza et al., 2022), or normalizing
flows (Mesquita et al., 2019). Consequently, they are not
well-suited to sample from discrete state spaces.

1. Introduction
Generative Flow Networks (GFlowNets) (Bengio et al.,
2021) are powerful sampling tools and, despite being in
their infancy, have become popular alternatives to Markov
Chain Monte Carlo methods in finite discrete state spaces.
While the most straight-forward use of MCMC-like methods
is to sample from Bayesian posteriors (Deleu et al., 2022;
1

Getulio Vargas Foundation 2 Aalto University 3 Federal Institute
of Ceará 4 University of Manchester. Correspondence to: Diego
Mesquita <diego.mesquita@fgv.br>.

We propose EP-GFlownet, the first embarrassingly parallel
sampling method for discrete distributions. EP-GFlowNets
start off by learning N local GFlowNets in parallel to sample proportional to their corresponding reward functions
R1 , . . . , RN and send the resulting models to the server.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

