Improving Antibody Humanness Prediction using Patent Data

Talip Uçar 1 Aubin Ramon 2 Dino Oglic 1 Rebecca Croasdale-Wood 3 Tom Diethe 1 Pietro Sormanni 2

Abstract

them by having a large number of antibodies in circulation
throughout the body, capable of binding specifically to different antigens. Monoclonal antibodies are manufactured in
laboratories as clones or copies of a single antibody. They
are a significant class of biopharmaceuticals, often used
for therapeutic purposes, and have contributed significantly
to the overall sales of biopharmaceutical products (Ecker
et al., 2015). Therapeutics based on monoclonal antibodies
are typically produced from non-human sources and can
lead to an undesired immune response, referred as immunogenicity, which is one of the major causes of attrition in
the development of monoclonal antibody therapeutics (Vandivort et al., 2020). Thus, many therapeutic monoclonal
antibodies often go through a humanization process, which
involves modifying the antibody to make it more similar to
human antibodies, reducing the likelihood of triggering an
immune response. This process must be able to identify the
humanness of an antibody with little to no errors as there are
significant costs associated with attrition in the later stages
of the drug development process (Marks et al., 2021).

We investigate the potential of patent data for improving the antibody humanness prediction using
a multi-stage, multi-loss training process. Humanness serves as a proxy for the immunogenic response to antibody therapeutics, one of the major
causes of attrition in drug discovery and a challenging obstacle for their use in clinical settings.
We pose the initial learning stage as a weaklysupervised contrastive-learning problem, where
each antibody sequence is associated with possibly multiple identifiers of function and the objective is to learn an encoder that groups them
according to their patented properties. We then
freeze a part of the contrastive encoder and continue training it on the patent data using the crossentropy loss to predict the humanness score of a
given antibody sequence. We illustrate the utility
of the patent data and our approach by performing inference on three different immunogenicity
datasets, unseen during training. Our empirical
results demonstrate that the learned model consistently outperforms the alternative baselines and
establishes new state-of-the-art on five out of six
inference tasks, irrespective of the used metric.

Motivated by the importance of antibody humanness prediction, we propose a weakly-supervised contrastive learning approach designed to extract informative and contextually rich representations of amino acids and antibodies
from patented antibody database (PAD). As the contrastive
learning is a well-known instance of self-supervised learning, we refer to our approach as SelfPAD. The patented
antibody database is a rich and diverse source of information with functional characterization of antibodies, consisting of approximately 300, 000 unpaired sequences across
seven different species (Krawczyk et al., 2021). Our approach to leverage the PAD for representation learning and
immunogencity prediction departs from conventional approaches, pre-dominantly focused on leveraging information from Observed Antibody Space (OAS). The latter is
the database with more than billion different antibody sequences sourced from more than 80 different studies (Olsen
et al., 2022a). What lacks in the OAS is functional characterization of antibodies which limits representation learning
to self-supervised approaches focused on sequence completion tasks (Ruffolo et al., 2021; Olsen et al., 2022b; Shuai
et al., 2023). In contrast, the PAD offers noisy association
of sequences with function via more than 16, 000 different
patent filings that can be translated into more than 1, 000

1. Introduction
Proteins are naturally occurring large molecules, composed
of one or more chains of amino acids. They are present in
all living organisms and include many essential biological
compounds such as enzymes and antibodies. An antibody
is a type of protein that binds specifically to proteins called
antigens, typically found on the surface of pathogens such
as bacteria, viruses, and other foreign substances, including cancer cells. Immune system protects the body from
1

Centre for AI, BioPharmaceuticals R&D, AstraZeneca 2 Centre
for Misfolding Diseases, Yusuf Hamied Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge 3 Biologics Engineering, Oncology R&D, AstraZeneca. Correspondence to: Talip Uçar
<talip.ucar@astrazeneca.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

