Progressive Inference: Explaining Decoder-Only Sequence Classification Models
Using Intermediate Predictions

Sanjay Kariyappa 1 Freddy Lécué 1 Saumitra Mishra 1 Christopher Pond 1 Daniele Magazzeni 1
Manuela Veloso 1

Abstract

2

Intermediate Predictions

𝑝⃗! 𝑝⃗" 𝑝⃗# 𝑝⃗% . . . . . . . 𝑝⃗$

This paper proposes Progressive Inference–a
framework to compute input attributions to explain the predictions of decoder-only sequence
classification models. Our work is based on the insight that the classification head of a decoder-only
Transformer model can be used to make intermediate predictions by evaluating them at different
points in the input sequence. Due to the causal
attention mechanism, these intermediate predictions only depend on the tokens seen before the
inference point, allowing us to obtain the model’s
prediction on a masked input sub-sequence, with
negligible computational overheads. We develop
two methods to provide sub-sequence level attributions using this insight. First, we propose
Single Pass-Progressive Inference (SP-PI), which
computes attributions by taking the difference between consecutive intermediate predictions. Second, we exploit a connection with Kernel SHAP
to develop Multi Pass-Progressive Inference (MPPI). MP-PI uses intermediate predictions from
multiple masked versions of the input to compute
higher quality attributions. Our studies on a diverse set of models trained on text classification
tasks show that SP-PI and MP-PI provide significantly better attributions compared to prior work.

Final
Prediction

Decoder-Only
Transformer

(with Masked Attention)

1

SP-PI: 𝑥⃗ =

𝑡! 𝑡" 𝑡# 𝑡% . . . . . . . 𝑡$

MP-PI: 𝑥⃗′ = 𝑚 𝑡" 𝑚 𝑡%
4

3

.......

𝑡$

Attributions {𝜙! }

SP-PI/MP-PI

Figure 1. 1 Input tokens are fed to the decoder-only models to
produce 2 intermediate predictions. 3 Progressive inference
(PI) uses these predictions to produce 4 attributions over input
tokens/words/sentences. While Single-Pass PI uses the intermediate predictions produced by the original input tokens, multi-pass
PI collects multiple sets of intermediate predictions with different
masked versions of the input to compute the attribution.

ing to their impressive generalization capability, these models can be used directly for zero/few-shot classification
tasks (Brown et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2023b) or indirectly to
generate pseudo labels to train custom models (Gekhman
et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023). They also serve as base
models that can be fine-tuned on specific classification
tasks (Wang et al., 2023; Kheiri & Karimi, 2023; Li et al.,
2023), achieving performance that matches/surpasses other
architectures. Companies like OpenAI even provide APIs
to fine-tune LLMs on custom data (OpenAI, 2023).

1. Introduction
Large language Models (LLMs) based on the decoderonly Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017) (e.g.
GPT (Radford et al., 2018)) have gained widespread adoption over the past few years with a burgeoning open-source
community creating increasingly performant models. Ow-

With the growing adoption of these models in critical applications such as healthcare and finance (Wu et al., 2023a),
there is a strong need to provide accurate explanations to
improve trust in the model’s predictions. Input attribution is
a form of explanation that addresses this need by highlighting input features that support/oppose the prediction of the
model. This can be used to easily evaluate the correctness
of the model’s prediction, debug model performance (Anders et al., 2022), perform feature selection (Zacharias et al.,

1
JPMorganChase AI Research. Correspondence to: Sanjay
Kariyappa <sanjay.kariyappa@jpmchase.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

