LoRA Training in the NTK Regime has No Spurious Local Minima

Uijeong Jang 1 Jason D. Lee 2 Ernest K. Ryu 3
where r ≪ min(m, n), A ∈ Rr×n is initialized to be a
random Gaussian, and B ∈ Rm×r is initialized to be zero.

Abstract
Low-rank adaptation (LoRA) has become the standard approach for parameter-efficient fine-tuning
of large language models (LLM), but our theoretical understanding of LoRA has been limited. In this work, we theoretically analyze LoRA
fine-tuning in the neural tangent kernel (NTK)
regime with N data points, showing: (i) full finetuning (without LoRA)
admits a low-rank solu√
tion √
of rank r ≲ N ; (ii) using LoRA with rank
r ≳ N eliminates spurious local minima, allowing (stochastic) gradient descent to find the lowrank solutions; (iii) the low-rank solution found
using LoRA generalizes well.

However, despite the widespread adoption of LoRA, our
theoretical understanding of its mechanisms remains limited.
One notable prior work is (Zeng & Lee, 2024), which analyzes the expressive power of LoRA, showing that for any
given function, there exist weight configurations for LoRA
that approximate it. However, their work does not address
whether LoRA can efficiently learn such configurations.
Additionally, Malladi et al. (2023) experimentally demonstrated that under certain conditions, LoRA fine-tuning is
nearly equivalent to a kernel regression, where the A matrix
provides random features and is essentially not trained. This
regime neglects the possibility of the A matrix learning new
features and, consequently, leads to a LoRA rank requirement of r ≥ Θ(1/ε2 ), where ε is an approximation tolerance, originating from the use of the Johnson–Lindenstrauss
lemma (Johnson & Lindenstrauss, 1984). Crucially, LoRA’s
fundamental nature as a quadratic parameterization has not
been considered in the prior analysis of trainability and
generalizability.

1. Introduction
The modern methodology of using large language models
involves (at least) two phases: self-supervised pre-training
on a large corpus followed by supervised fine-tuning to the
downstream task. As large language models have grown
in scale, pre-training has become out of reach for research
groups without access to enormous computational resources.
However, supervised fine-tuning remains feasible for such
groups. One key strategy facilitating this efficient finetuning is Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT), which
freezes most of the pre-trained model’s weights while selectively fine-tuning a smaller number of parameters within an
adapter module. Among various PEFT methodologies, lowrank adaptation (LoRA) (Hu et al., 2021) has emerged as the
standard approach. Given a pre-trained matrix W0 ∈ Rm×n ,
LoRA trains a low-rank update such that the forward pass
evaluates

Contribution. In this work, we theoretically analyze
LoRA fine-tuning and present results on trainability and
generalizability. We consider fine-tuning a deep (transformer) neural network with K-dimensional outputs using
N training (fine-tuning) data points. Assuming that training remains under the NTK regime, which we soon define
and justify in Section 2, we show the following. First, full
fine-tuning (without LoRA) admits a rank-r solution such
that r(r+1)
≤ KN . Second, using LoRA with rank r such
2
that r(r+1)
> KN eliminates spurious local minima, al2
lowing (stochastic) gradient descent to find the low-rank
solutions. Finally, the low-rank solution found using LoRA
generalizes well.

W0 x + ∆W x = W0 x + BAx
1

Department of Mathematical Sciences, Seoul National University 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Princeton University 3 Department of Mathematics, University
of California, Los Angeles. Correspondence to: Ernest Ryu
<eryu@math.ucla.edu>.

1.1. Prior works
Theory of neural networks. The question of expressive
power addresses whether certain neural networks of interest
can approximate a given target function. Starting with the
classical universal approximation theorems (Cybenko, 1989;
Hornik et al., 1990; Barron, 1993), much research has been
conducted in this direction. (Delalleau & Bengio, 2011;

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

