S CI B ENCH: Evaluating College-Level Scientific Problem-Solving Abilities of
Large Language Models

Xiaoxuan Wang * 1 Ziniu Hu * 2 Pan Lu * 1 Yanqiao Zhu * 1 Jieyu Zhang 3 Satyen Subramaniam 1
Arjun R. Loomba 1 Shichang Zhang 1 Yizhou Sun 1 Wei Wang 1
Project Homepage: https://scibench-ucla.github.io

Abstract

telligence (Brown et al., 2020; Gao et al., 2023; Liu et al.,
2023b; OpenAI., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023a; Zhang et al.,
2023a;b). They have demonstrated outstanding performance
in many mathematical reasoning tasks that are typically
considered challenging even for well-educated individuals (Chen et al., 2021; 2023a; Gao et al., 2022; Kojima et al.,
2022; Wei et al., 2022). Notably, GPT-4 achieves a remarkable score of 163 out of 170 on the GRE Quantitative Exam,
placing it at the 80th percentile ranking (OpenAI., 2023).

Most existing Large Language Model (LLM)
benchmarks on scientific problem reasoning focus on problems grounded in high-school subjects
and are confined to elementary algebraic operations. To systematically examine the reasoning capabilities required for solving complex scientific
problems, we introduce an expansive benchmark
suite S CI B ENCH for LLMs. S CI B ENCH contains
a carefully curated dataset featuring a range of
collegiate-level scientific problems from mathematics, chemistry, and physics domains. Based on
the dataset, we conduct an in-depth benchmarking
study of representative open-source and proprietary LLMs with various prompting strategies.
The results reveal that current LLMs fall short
of delivering satisfactory performance, with the
best overall score of merely 43.22%. Furthermore,
through a detailed user study, we categorize the errors made by LLMs into ten problem-solving abilities. Our analysis indicates that no single prompting strategy significantly outperforms the others
and some strategies that demonstrate improvements in certain problem-solving skills could result in declines in other skills. We envision that
S CI B ENCH will catalyze further developments
in the reasoning abilities of LLMs, thereby ultimately contributing to scientific research and
discovery.

While the remarkable improvements in these benchmark
performances might suggest that LLMs are capable of
performing scientific reasoning tasks, we argue that this
assertion might be overly optimistic due to the inherent limitations of current benchmarks. Firstly, many existing benchmarks such as ScienceQA (Lu et al., 2022)
and GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021) only contain problems
grounded in grade-level subjects. Although other benchmarks like MATH (Hendrycks et al., 2021) introduce highschool level questions, they primarily focus on math problems. Secondly, recent works like MMLU (Hendrycks et al.,
2020), AGIEval (Zhong et al., 2023), and JEEBench (Arora
et al., 2023), despite introducing challenging problems
that span a wide range of disciplines, only require basic
computations—addition, subtraction, multiplication, and
exponentiation—which do not adequately assess the depth
of reasoning abilities of LLMs for solving scientific problems. Lastly, most of these benchmarks only include textual
problems, which omit problems that incorporate visual elements such as figures or diagrams.
In parallel to benchmark developments, many studies propose various prompting strategies aimed at enhancing the
reasoning abilities of LLMs in scientific problem solving. A
notable example is the Chain-of-Thought (CoT) approach,
which instructs LLMs to generate detailed, step-by-step solutions that prompt deeper problem thinking (Huang et al.,
2022; Wang et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2022).
Additionally, other strategies propose to enable LLMs to
utilize external tools (Lu et al., 2023b; Schick et al., 2023)
that improve the numerical computation capability. However, even these strategic approaches, each with its specific
strengths, struggle to fully address complex scientific prob-

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in Large Language Models (LLMs)
have dramatically expanded the boundaries of artificial in*
Equal contribution 1 University of California, Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, CA, USA 2 California Institute of Technology, Pasadena,
CA, USA 3 University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. Correspondence to: Xiaoxuan Wang <xw27@cs.ucla.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

