The Surprising Effectiveness of Skip-Tuning in Diffusion Sampling

Jiajun Ma 1 2 * Shuchen Xue 3 4 * Tianyang Hu 5 Wenjia Wang 1 2 Zhaoqiang Liu 6 Zhenguo Li 5
Zhi-Ming Ma 3 4 Kenji Kawaguchi 7

Abstract

1. Introduction
Over the past few years, Diffusion Probabilistic Models
(DPMs) (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020; Song
et al., 2020b) have garnered significant attention for their
success in generative modeling, especially high-resolution
images. A special trait of DPMs is that the training and
sampling are usually decoupled. The training target is the
multi-level score function of the noisy data, captured by the
UNet in denoising score matching. Various sampling methods are developed based on differential equation solvers to
generate new samples, enabling us to trade-off efficiency
against quality (discretization error) by choosing the number
of sampling steps. This leaves room for post-training modifications to the score net that may significantly improve
the diffusion sampling process. Many works have been
dedicated to efficient diffusion sampling with pre-trained
DPMs with as few steps as possible, e.g., through improved
differential equation solvers (Lu et al., 2022; Zhao et al.,
2023; Xue et al., 2023), better time step selections (Xue
et al., 2024), extra distillation training (Salimans & Ho,
2022; Song et al., 2023; Luo et al., 2023), etc. In this paper, we unveil an important yet missing angle to improving
diffusion sampling by looking into the network architecture.

With the incorporation of the UNet architecture,
diffusion probabilistic models have become a
dominant force in image generation tasks. One
key design in UNet is the skip connections between the encoder and decoder blocks. Although
skip connections have been shown to improve
training stability and model performance, we
point out that such shortcuts can be a limiting
factor for the complexity of the transformation.
As the sampling steps decrease, the generation
process and the role of the UNet get closer to the
push-forward transformations from Gaussian distribution to the target, posing a challenge for the
network’s complexity. To address this challenge,
we propose Skip-Tuning, a simple yet surprisingly effective training-free tuning method on the
skip connections. For instance, our method can
achieve 100% FID improvement for pretrained
EDM on ImageNet 64 with only 19 NFEs (1.75),
breaking the limit of ODE samplers regardless
of sampling steps. Surprisingly, the improvement
persists when we increase the number of sampling
steps and can even surpass the best result from
EDM-2 (1.58) with only 39 NFEs (1.57). Comprehensive exploratory experiments are conducted to
shed light on the surprising effectiveness of our
Skip-Tuning. We observe that while Skip-Tuning
increases the score-matching losses in the pixel
space, the losses in the feature space are reduced,
particularly at intermediate noise levels, which
coincide with the most effective range accounting
for image quality improvement.

The concept of DPM (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015) long
predates their empirical success. Despite the elegant mathematical formulation, the empirical performance has been
lacking until the adoption of the UNet architecture for denoising score matching (Song & Ermon, 2019; Ho et al.,
2020). One distinctive feature of the UNet design is the
skip connection between the encoder and decoder blocks,
which was originally designed for image segmentation (Ronneberger et al., 2015). Nevertheless, numerous works have
since demonstrated its effectiveness in DPMs, and after
various architectural modifications, such skip designs are
still mainstream. When experimenting with the transformer
architecture, Bao et al. (2023) conducted comprehensive
investigations that the long skip connections can be helpful for diffusion training. However, such skip connections
may not be an ideal design choice for few-shot diffusion
sampling. As the sampling steps decrease, the generation
process or role of the UNet gets closer to the push-forward
transformations from Gaussian distribution to the target,
which essentially contradicts the goal of score matching.

*

Equal contribution 1 The Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology 2 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou) 3 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science 5 Huawei Noah’s
Ark Lab 6 University of Electronic Science and Technology of
China 7 National University of Singapore. Correspondence to:
Tianyang Hu <hutianyang.up@outlook.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

