Superpoint Gaussian Splatting for Real-Time High-Fidelity Dynamic Scene
Reconstruction
Diwen Wan 1 Ruijie Lu 1 Gang Zeng 1

Abstract

or training and rendering speed (Müller et al., 2022; Chen
et al., 2022a; Hu et al., 2022; Fridovich-Keil et al., 2022) for
static scenes, another line of work (Pumarola et al., 2021;
Fridovich-Keil et al., 2023; Fang et al., 2022) proposes to
extend the setting to a dynamic scene. Though various attempts have been made to improve efficiency and dynamic
rendering quality, the introduction of an additional timevariant MLP to model complex motions in dynamic scenes
will inevitably cause a surge in computational cost during
both the training and inference process.

Rendering novel view images in dynamic scenes
is a crucial yet challenging task. Current methods mainly utilize NeRF-based methods to represent the static scene and an additional timevariant MLP to model scene deformations, resulting in relatively low rendering quality as well
as slow inference speed. To tackle these challenges, we propose a novel framework named Superpoint Gaussian Splatting (SP-GS). Specifically,
our framework first employs explicit 3D Gaussians to reconstruct the scene and then clusters
Gaussians with similar properties (e.g., rotation,
translation, and location) into superpoints. Empowered by these superpoints, our method manages to extend 3D Gaussian splatting to dynamic
scenes with only a slight increase in computational expense. Apart from achieving state-of-theart visual quality and real-time rendering under
high resolutions, the superpoint representation
provides a stronger manipulation capability. Extensive experiments demonstrate the practicality
and effectiveness of our approach on both synthetic and real-world datasets. Please see our
project page at https://dnvtmf.github.
io/SP_GS.github.io.

More recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting(3D-GS) (Kerbl et al.,
2023) manages to achieve real-time rendering with high
visual quality by introducing a novel point-like representation, referred to as 3D Gaussians. However, it mainly deals
with static scenes. Though methods such as leveraging a
deformation network on each 3D Gaussian can extend 3DGS to dynamic scenes, the rendering speed will be greatly
affected, especially when a large number of 3D Gaussians
is necessary to represent the scene.
Drawing inspiration from the well-established As-RigidAs-Possible regularization in 3D reconstruction and the superpoint/superpixel concept in point clouds/images oversegmentation, we propose a novel approach named Superpoint Gaussian Splatting (SP-GS) in this work for reconstructing and rendering dynamic scenes. The key insight
lies in that each 3D Gaussian should not be a completely
independent entity. Some neighboring 3D Gaussians probably possess similar translation and rotation transformations
at all timesteps due to the properties of a rigid motion. We
can cluster these similar 3D Gaussians together to form a
superpoint so that it is no longer necessary to compute a deformation for every single 3D Gaussian, leading to a much
faster rendering speed.

1. Introduction
Synthesizing high-fidelity novel view images of a 3D scene
is imperative for various industrial applications, ranging
from gaming and filming to AR/VR. In recent years, Neural Radiance Fields(NeRF) (Mildenhall et al., 2020) has
demonstrated its remarkable ability on this task with photorealistic renderings. While lots of subsequent works focus
on improving rendering quality (Barron et al., 2021; 2022)

To be specific, after acquiring the initial 3D Gaussians of
the canonical space through a warm-up training process, a
learnable association matrix will be applied to the initial 3D
Gaussians and group them into several superpoints. Subsequently, our framework will leverage a tiny MLP network
for predicting the deformations of superpoints, which will
later be utilized to compute the deformation of every single 3D Gaussian in the superpoint to enable novel view
rendering for dynamic scenes. Apart from the rendering

1

National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence,
School of IST, Peking University, China. Correspondence to: Gang
Zeng <zeng@pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

