Fast, Scalable, Warm-Start Semidefinite Programming
with Spectral Bundling and Sketching

Rico Angell 1 Andrew McCallum 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Semidefinite programming (SDP) is a convex optimization
paradigm capable of modeling or approximating many practical problems in combinatorial optimization (Alizadeh,
1995), neural network verification (Raghunathan et al.,
2018; Dathathri et al., 2020), robotics (Rosen et al., 2019),
optimal experiment design (Vandenberghe et al., 1998b),
VLSI (Vandenberghe et al., 1998a), and systems and control
theory (Bertsimas, 1995). Despite their widespread applicability, practitioners often dismiss the use of SDPs under the
presumption that optimization is intractable at real-world
scale. This assumption is grounded in the prohibitively
high computational complexity of standard SDP solvers (Alizadeh et al., 1998; Vandenberghe & Boyd, 1999).

While semidefinite programming (SDP) has traditionally been limited to moderate-sized problems,
recent algorithms augmented with matrix sketching techniques have enabled solving larger SDPs.
However, these methods achieve scalability at the
cost of an increase in the number of necessary
iterations, resulting in slower convergence as the
problem size grows. Furthermore, they require
iteration-dependent parameter schedules that prohibit effective utilization of warm-start initializations important in practical applications with
incrementally-arriving data or mixed-integer programming. We present Unified Spectral Bundling
with Sketching (USBS), a provably correct, fast
and scalable algorithm for solving massive SDPs
that can leverage a warm-start initialization to further accelerate convergence. Our proposed algorithm is a spectral bundle method for solving general SDPs containing both equality and inequality constraints. Moreover, when augmented with
an optional matrix sketching technique, our algorithm achieves the dramatically improved scalability of previous work while sustaining convergence
speed. We empirically demonstrate the effectiveness of our method across multiple applications,
with and without warm-starting. For example,
USBS provides a 500x speed-up over the state-ofthe-art scalable SDP solver on an instance with
over 2 billion decision variables. We make our
implementation in pure JAX publicly available1 .

The main challenge when solving SDPs with standard constrained optimization approaches is the high cost of projection onto the feasible region. Projecting a symmetric
matrix onto the semidefinite cone requires a full eigendecomposition, an operation that scales cubicly with the problem dimension. The high computational cost of this single
operation severely limits the applicability of projected gradient and ADMM-based approaches (Boyd et al., 2011;
O’Donoghue et al., 2021). Interior point methods, the de
facto approach for solving small-to-moderate sized SDPs,
require even more computational resources.
Projection-free and conditional gradient-based methods
have been proposed to avoid the computational burden of
projecting iterates onto the semidefinite cone (Yurtsever
et al., 2019; 2015; Arora et al., 2005). These methods avoid
projection onto the feasible region with various techniques
including subgradient descent in the dual space and a conditional gradient method on an unconstrained augmented
objective function. The bulk of the computational burden for
these methods is typically an extreme eigenvector calculation. The scalablity of these methods is still limited, despite
the improved per-iteration complexity, since they require
storing the entire primal matrix which scales quadratically
with the problem dimension.

*

Equal contribution 1 Manning College of Information and
Computer Sciences, University of Massachusetts Amherst,
Amherst, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Rico Angell
<rangell@cs.umass.edu>.

The most well-known method for scaling semidefinte programming without storing the entire primal matrix in memory is the Burer–Monteiro (BM) factorization heuristic (Bu-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
https://github.com/rangell/usbs

1

