Which Frequencies do CNNs Need?
Emergent Bottleneck Structure in Feature Learning

Yuxiao Wen 1 Arthur Jacot 1

Abstract

These intuitions have motivated special network architectures that encode additional properties such as rotation symmetries (Cohen et al., 2019), or the design of feature maps
such as the scattering transform (Mallat, 2012) that encode
similar symmetries, upon which more traditional statistical
models can then be used.

We describe the emergence of a Convolution Bottleneck (CBN) structure in CNNs, where the network uses its first few layers to transform the
input representation into a representation that is
supported only along a few frequencies and channels, before using the last few layers to map back
to the outputs. We define the CBN rank, which
describes the number and type of frequencies that
are kept inside the bottleneck, and partially prove
that the parameter norm required to represent a
function f scales as depth times the CBN rank f .
We also show that the parameter norm depends at
next order on the regularity of f . We show that
any network with almost optimal parameter norm
will exhibit a CBN structure in both the weights
and - under the assumption that the network is
stable under large learning rate - the activations,
which motivates the common practice of downsampling; and we verify that the CBN results still
hold with down-sampling. Finally we use the
CBN structure to interpret the functions learned
by CNNs on a number of tasks.

A CNN at initialization gives rise to features and kernels,
either the Neural Network Gaussian Process (NNGP) kernel
(Neal, 1996; Cho & Saul, 2009) or the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) (Jacot et al., 2018). The symmetries and invariances enforced by the locality, weight-sharing and pooling
of CNNs are reflected in the kernels (Bietti & Mairal, 2019;
Arora et al., 2019; Mei et al., 2021; Misiakiewicz & Mei,
2022), thus reducing the intrinsic dimension of the task and
improving generalization (Mei et al., 2021; Misiakiewicz &
Mei, 2022).
While the aforementioned results rely on a connection between fully-connected neural networks (FC-NNs) and kernel methods, other results have shown that the inductive
bias coming from the CNN architecture is much more general, and applies to any training method that satisfies some
reasonable property such as rotation equivariance (Li et al.,
2020b; Xiao & Pennington, 2022; Wang & Wu, 2023).
But even those expertly designed kernel and features fail in
general to match the performances of CNNs (Arora et al.,
2019; Li et al., 2019). A possible explanation is that feature
learning allows CNNs to identify low-dimensional structures in the task during training, thus further reducing the
dimensionality of the task, beyond the dimension reduction
that is enforced by the CNN architecture. This is supported
by the empirical observation that CNNs can learn additional
symmetries during training (Petrini et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have played a key
role in the success of deep learning (Lecun et al., 1998;
Krizhevsky et al., 2012). It seems that the structure of CNNs
is particularly well adapted to tasks on natural images. But
we still lack a description of this structure, though many
theories have been proposed.

While there is a large literature of empirical analysis of
features learned by CNNs (Karantzas et al., 2022) there
remains very little theoretical work outside of linear CNNs
(Dai et al., 2021).

The most common explanation, is that some fundamental
properties of natural images are encoded in the structure of
CNNs, such as translation invariance and locality.
1

Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University, New York, NY 10012, USA. Correspondence to: Yuxiao Wen
<yuxiaowen@nyu.edu>, Arthur Jacot <arthur.jacot@nyu.edu>.

The appearance of low-dimensional features and symmetry learning has already been observed in FC-NNs (Jacot,
2023a;b). This paper extends these results to CNNs, showing a very similar bottleneck structure, though with some
important differences resulted from the CNN architecture,

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

