Contrastive Representation for Data Filtering in Cross-Domain
Offline Reinforcement Learning

Xiaoyu Wen 1 Chenjia Bai 2 3 Kang Xu 4 Xudong Yu 5 Yang Zhang 6 Xuelong Li 7 Zhen Wang 1

Abstract

offline data without requiring any additional online interactions. In real-world scenarios like robotic manipulation
(Feng et al., 2023; Shi et al., 2024), autonomous driving
(Zhang et al., 2023b), and healthcare (Fatemi et al., 2022),
gathering a substantial offline dataset with good coverage
of transitions for a specific environment is time-consuming
and expensive (Alberti et al., 2020; Kuo et al., 2021; Walke
et al., 2023). Nevertheless, the offline RL algorithms rely
heavily on the data coverage of the offline dataset (Zhan
et al., 2022; Deng et al., 2023), and the performance degenerates significantly if the amount of offline data decreases.
To tackle this challenge for a specific target domain with
scarce data, cross-domain offline RL leverages additional
source domain data with dynamics shift to compensate for
the (target) offline dataset (Liu et al., 2022; 2024). However, as we illustrated in Figure 1(a), simply combining the
dataset from source and target domains induces a significant
dynamics shift due to the dynamics mismatch, leading to
policy divergence and poor performance (Yu et al., 2021;
2022). Therefore, how to appropriately incorporate source
domain data to improve the data efficiency for learning in
the target domain remains a challenge.

Cross-domain offline reinforcement learning
leverages source domain data with diverse transition dynamics to alleviate the data requirement for
the target domain. However, simply merging the
data of two domains leads to performance degradation due to the dynamics mismatch. Existing
methods address this problem by measuring the
dynamics gap via domain classifiers while relying on the assumptions of the transferability of
paired domains. In this paper, we propose a novel
representation-based approach to measure the domain gap, where the representation is learned
through a contrastive objective by sampling transitions from different domains. We show that such
an objective recovers the mutual-information gap
of transition functions in two domains without suffering from the unbounded issue of the dynamics
gap in handling significantly different domains.
Based on the representations, we introduce a data
filtering algorithm that selectively shares transitions from the source domain according to the contrastive score functions. Empirical results on various tasks demonstrate that our method achieves
superior performance, using only 10% of the target data to achieve 89.2% of the performance on
100% target dataset with state-of-the-art methods.

There are two key problems for cross-domain offline RL:
how to measure the domain gap and how to utilize the crossdomain data. For the first problem, prior methods directly
estimate the dynamics models with offline datasets or training domain discriminators to approximate the dynamics
gap. Nevertheless, the dynamics model suffers from large
extrapolation errors given limited target domain data, and
domain discriminators fail to provide smooth measurement
for the dynamics discrepancy. For example, the dynamics gap (i.e., log Psource /Ptarget [s′ |s, a]) can be unbounded
when the two domains mismatch significantly (Xu et al.,
2023). For the second problem, previous approaches modify the rewards according to the estimation of dynamics
discrepancy (Liu et al., 2022) or employ pessimistic supported constraints for the source domain data (Liu et al.,
2024). Despite these progresses, these methods typically
experience rapid performance degradation when confronted
with a larger dynamics gap, as shown in Figure 1(b).

1. Introduction
Offline Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Lange et al., 2012;
Fujimoto et al., 2019; Levine et al., 2020; Bai et al., 2022;
Yang et al., 2022b; Bai et al., 2024) exhibits a distinctive
advantage over online RL, leveraging previously collected
1

Northwestern Polytechnical University 2 Shanghai Artificial
Intelligence Laboratory 3 Shenzhen Research Institute of Northwestern Polytechnical University 4 Fudan University 5 Harbin Institute of Technology 6 Tsinghua University 7 The Institute of Artificial Intelligence (TeleAI), China Telecom. Correspondence
to: Chenjia Bai <baichenjia@pjlab.org.cn>, Zhen Wang <wzhen@nwpu.edu.cn>.

In this paper, we propose a novel perspective to measure the
domain gap via the mutual information (MI) of transitions.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

