tinyBenchmarks: evaluating LLMs with fewer examples

Felipe Maia Polo 1 Lucas Weber 2 Leshem Choshen 3 4 Yuekai Sun 1 Gongjun Xu 1 Mikhail Yurochkin 3 5

Abstract

(Liang et al., 2022), and AlpacaEval (Li et al., 2023).
These benchmarks are comprised of hundreds or thousands
of examples, making the evaluation of modern LLMs with
billions of parameters computationally, environmentally,
and financially very costly. For example, Liang et al. (2022)
report that evaluating the performance of a single LLM
on HELM costs over 4K GPU hours (or over $10K for
APIs). Benchmarks like AlpacaEval (Li et al., 2023) also
require a commercial LLM as a judge to perform evaluation,
further increasing the costs. Furthermore, evaluation of
a single model is often performed many times to monitor
checkpoints during pre-training (Biderman et al., 2023a; Liu
et al., 2023) and to explore different prompting strategies
or a wider range of hyperparameters (Weber et al., 2023b;
Mizrahi et al., 2023; Sclar et al., 2023; Voronov et al., 2024).

The versatility of large language models (LLMs)
led to the creation of diverse benchmarks that thoroughly test a variety of language models’ abilities.
These benchmarks consist of tens of thousands
of examples making evaluation of LLMs very expensive. In this paper, we investigate strategies
to reduce the number of evaluations needed to
assess the performance of an LLM on several
key benchmarks. For example, we show that to
accurately estimate the performance of an LLM
on MMLU, a popular multiple-choice QA benchmark consisting of 14K examples, it is sufficient
to evaluate this LLM on 100 curated examples.
We release evaluation tools and tiny versions of
popular benchmarks: Open LLM Leaderboard,
MMLU, HELM, and AlpacaEval 2.0. Our empirical analysis demonstrates that these tools and
tiny benchmarks are sufficient to reliably and efficiently reproduce the original evaluation results1 .

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable abilities to solve a diverse range of tasks (Brown et al.,
2020). Quantifying these abilities and comparing different
LLMs became a challenge that led to the development of several key benchmarks, e.g., MMLU (Hendrycks et al., 2020),
Open LLM Leaderboard (Beeching et al., 2023), HELM

Figure 1. Estimating accuracy on MMLU (true accuracy) using
100 curated examples (predicted accuracy). IRT++, our bestperforming evaluation strategy, predicts the accuracy of recent
LLMs released between December 30th and January 18th within
1.9% of their true accuracy on all of MMLU (14K examples).

1

Department of Statistics, University of Michigan, USA
Department of Translation and Language Sciences, University
of Pompeu Fabra, Spain 3 IBM Research 4 MIT 5 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab. Correspondence to: Felipe Maia Polo <felipemaiapolo@gmail.com>.
2

Our work reassesses the need to evaluate LLMs on such
large benchmark datasets. In Figure 1 we demonstrate the
efficacy of our best evaluation strategy on MMLU, where
we compare accuracy estimates obtained from evaluating
LLMs on a curated subset of 100 examples (less than 1%
of the examples) to accuracy on all of MMLU, achieving
average estimation error under 2%.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
To use our methods for efficient LLM evaluation,
please check https://github.com/felipemaiapolo/
tinyBenchmarks. This repository includes a Python package
for model evaluation and tutorials. Additionally, we have uploaded
tiny datasets on huggingface.co/tinyBenchmarks and
developed a Google Colab demo in which you can easily use our
tools to estimate LLM performances on MMLU. To reproduce the
results in this paper, please check this GitHub repository.

We consider a range of evaluation strategies (§3):
1. Stratified random sampling as proposed by Perlitz et al.
1

