Task-aware Orthogonal Sparse Network for Exploring Shared Knowledge in
Continual Learning

Yusong Hu * 1 De Cheng† * 1 Dingwen Zhang 2 Nannan Wang† 1 Tongliang Liu 3 Xinbo Gao 4

1. Introduction

Abstract

Continual learning (CL) aims to learn knowledge from sequential input data/tasks, to mimic human cognition to incrementally learn new concepts over his/her lifespan. Therefore, CL is also known as lifelong learning or incremental
learning. However, this is a very challenging problem due
to the catastrophic forgetting (CF) phenomenon, where the
performance of the network on the old tasks will substantially decrease after training on the new task when facing
a series of continuous data stream. To achieve long-term
CL, the network should not only preserve old knowledge
learned from old tasks to deal with CF, but also needs to
obtain knowledge transfer from the old tasks to the new one,
which is known as the stability-plasticity trade-off dilemma.

Continual learning (CL) aims to learn from sequentially arriving tasks without catastrophic forgetting (CF). By partitioning the network into two
parts based on the Lottery Ticket Hypothesis—
one for holding the knowledge of the old tasks
while the other for learning the knowledge of
the new task—the recent progress has achieved
forget-free CL. Although addressing the CF issue well, such methods would encounter serious
under-fitting in long-term CL, in which the learning process will continue for a long time and the
number of new tasks involved will be much higher.
To solve this problem, this paper partitions the
network into three parts—with a new part for exploring the knowledge sharing between the old
and new tasks. With the shared knowledge, this
part of network can be learnt to simultaneously
consolidate the old tasks and fit to the new task.
To achieve this goal, we propose a task-aware
Orthogonal Sparse Network (OSN), which contains shared knowledge induced network partition
and sharpness-aware orthogonal sparse network
learning. The former partitions the network to select shared parameters, while the latter guides the
exploration of shared knowledge through shared
parameters. Qualitative and quantitative analyses,
show that the proposed OSN induces minimum
to no interference with past tasks, i.e., approximately no forgetting, while greatly improves the
model plasticity and capacity, and finally achieves
the state-of-the-art performances.

Recently, various CL methods have been proposed to deal
with CF, which can be roughly divided into the following categories: Regularization-based methods (Kirkpatrick et al.,
2017; Zenke et al., 2017; Aljundi et al., 2018), Rehearsalbased methods (Aljundi et al., 2018; Ostapenko et al., 2019;
Shin et al., 2017; Cheng et al., 2024a) and Architecturebased methods (Hung et al., 2019; Li et al., 2019; Yoon
et al., 2018; Mallya & Lazebnik, 2018; Wang et al., 2022;
Kang et al., 2022). For these Architecture-based methods,
they are mainly based on parameter expansion or pruning.
Parameter expansion methods (Hung et al., 2019; Li et al.,
2019; Yoon et al., 2018) usually selectively reuse the parameters in the dense network to deal with forgetting and
increase the size of the network to learn on new tasks, as
shown in Fig. 1(b). Parameter pruning methods (Mallya &
Lazebnik, 2018; Wang et al., 2022; Kang et al., 2022) assign
a sub-network, which is pruned from the pre-allocated dense
network, to each specific old task and only the unpruned
parameters can be used for further training, as shown in
Fig. 1(c). Although these methods have many merits, which
are memory efficient without requiring to store extra oldtask data and could achieve forget free in some situations,
they still have the following limitations: 1) The parameter
expansion methods have to keep increasing the network size
to learn on new task, which may cause serious burden on
training efficiency; 2) The pruned sub-network in the parameter pruning methods is monopolized by the old tasks
leading to low model capacity for new tasks.

*
Equal contribution 1 Xidian University, Xi’an, Shaanxi
Province, China. 2 Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an,
Shaanxi Province, China. 3 University of Sydney. 4 Chongqing
University of Post and Telecommunications, Chongqing, China..
Correspondence to: De Cheng <dcheng@xidian.edu.cn>, Nannan
Wang <nnwang@xidian.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

