Privacy Preserving Adaptive Experiment Design

Jiachun Li * 1 Kaining Shi * 2 David Simchi-Levi * 1

Abstract

rithms like UCB or Thompson sampling to minimize the
cumulative loss of rewards (like revenue or social welfare),
it has been shown in (Lai & Robbins, 1985) that adaptive
allocation strategies can surpass the efficiency of certain
conventional random experimental approaches, such as Randomized Control Trials (RCTs)and has drawn much attention in recent experiment design works (Zhao 2023, Dai
et al. 2023).

Adaptive experiment is widely adopted to estimate conditional average treatment effect (CATE)
in clinical trials and many other scenarios. While
the primary goal in experiment is to maximize estimation accuracy, due to the imperative of social
welfare, it’s also crucial to provide treatment with
superior outcomes to patients, which is measured
by regret in contextual bandit framework. Furthermore, privacy concerns arise in clinical scenarios containing sensitive data like patients health
records. Therefore, it’s essential for the treatment
allocation mechanism to incorporate robust privacy protection measures. In this paper, we investigate the tradeoff between loss of social welfare
and statistical power of CATE estimation in contextual bandit experiment. We propose a matched
upper and lower bound for the multi-objective optimization problem, and then adopt the concept of
Pareto optimality to mathematically characterize
the optimality condition. Furthermore, we propose differentially private algorithms which still
matches the lower bound, showing that privacy is
”almost free”. Additionally, we derive the asymptotic normality of the estimator, which is essential
in statistical inference and hypothesis testing.

Considering the following motivating example of clinical
trials. These trials necessitate evaluating the efficacy of new
pharmaceutical interventions across diverse patient circumstances. Regret here is measured as the cumulative detriment
to patient welfare, thus necessitating its minimization. This
imperative becomes particularly acute in the case of rare or
fatal diseases, where the goal is to allocate the most effective
treatment possible to patients. The heterogeneity of patient
profiles, characterized by diverse attributes such as age, gender, and genotype, significantly influences the efficacy of
treatment. Therefore, it’s crucial to evaluate the efficacy of
drugs across varied patient profiles to identify treatments
with superior therapeutic benefits while mitigating potential
adverse effects for specific patient groups. This illustrates
the necessity to estimate the conditional average treatment
effect (CATE) (see Abrevaya et al. 2015, Fan et al. 2022,
Wager & Athey 2018) in adaptive allocation assignment
problems while keeping the loss of welfare, or regret at minimum. This dual focus on minimizing regret and accurately
estimating CATE is central to both experimental design and
contextual bandits in academic literature.

1. Introduction

While online regret minimization and statistical inference
have been extensively studied separately, the simultaneous
pursuit of these objectives introduces novel complexities.
This duality of purpose can result in conflicting optimal allocation strategies, as illustrated in some recent works (SimchiLevi & Wang 2023). In specific, better accuracy of statistical
inference typically necessitates broader exploration of various treatment options while a focus on minimizing regret
restricts the algorithm’s engagement with suboptimal arms.
Moreover, the presence of patient-specific features and heterogeneous treatment effects introduce further complexity.
The estimation and inference for one subgroup of patients
cannot be transferred to another, and the arrival of various
types of patients may be highly non-stationary, which complicates the inference process for certain subgroups due to

1.1. Background
The contextual bandit framework, a prominent and effective
approach for sequential decision-making, is distinguished
by its adaptability in progressively refining decisions based
on accumulating information. This stands in contrast to reliance on static, offline datasets and batch learning methodologies. While most literature focus on developing algo*
Equal contribution 1 Laboratory for Information and Decision
Systems, MIT, Cambridge, U.S. 2 Department of Statistics, The
University of Chicago, Chicago, U.S.. Correspondence to: Jiachun
Li <jiach334@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

