Neural Operators Meet Conjugate Gradients: The FCG-NO Method for
Efficient PDE Solving

Alexander Rudikov 1 2 Vladimir Fanaskov 2 Ekaterina Muravleva 2 3 Yuri M. Laevsky 4 Ivan Oseledets 1 2

Abstract

(DeepONet (Lu et al., 2019) and its variants).
According to the large-scale benchmarks, typical accuracy
of such methods is about 0.1% − 1% relative L2 norm
(Takamoto et al., 2022), (Lu et al., 2022), (de Hoop et al.,
2022). On the other hand, classical numerical methods for
PDEs are usually consistent, so they can reach arbitrary
accuracy on a sufficiently fine grid.

Deep learning solvers for partial differential equations typically have limited accuracy. We propose to overcome this problem by using them
as preconditioners. More specifically, we apply discretization-invariant neural operators to
learn preconditioners for the flexible conjugate
gradient method (FCG). Architecture paired with
novel loss function and training scheme allows
for learning efficient preconditioners that can be
used across different resolutions. On the theoretical side, FCG theory allows us to safely use
nonlinear preconditioners that can be applied in
O(N ) operations without constraining the form
of the preconditioners matrix. To justify learning
scheme components (the loss function and the
way training data is collected) we perform several
ablation studies. Numerical results indicate that
our approach favorably compares with classical
preconditioners and allows to reuse of preconditioners learned for lower resolution to the higher
resolution data.

Is it possible to combine the consistency with the efficiency
of deep learning methods? One way around this is to build
a hybrid system, that is, to replace some parts of the classical method with deep learning components (e.g., (BarSinai et al., 2019), (Kochkov et al., 2021), (Greenfeld et al.,
2019)). In the present contribution we focus on elliptic
boundary value problems and show how to utilize neural operator (Li et al., 2020) (NO) with flexible conjugate gradient
method (Notay, 2000) (FCG). As one can see on Figure 1,
our approach indeed allows one to retain consistency which
leads to much better error on grids with higher resolutions.
We are not the first ones, who propose to learn preconditioners. The previous contributions include at least (Hsieh et al.,
2019), (Zhang et al., 2022), (Cui et al., 2022), (Häusner
et al., 2023), (Li et al., 2023). However, our approach is the
first one with three unique properties: (i) – we learn nonlinear operator with asymptotic complexity O(N ), which
allows us not to prescribe a structure of the preconditioners
matrix to have an efficient matrix-vector product, (ii) – our
nonlinear operator is discretization-invariant so it can be
applied at different resolutions, (iii) – we have convergence
guarantees based on FCG theory built in (Notay, 2000). We
provide more details on comparison with other approaches
in Section 4.

1. Introduction
The recent surge of interest in learning solution operators
and surrogates for partial differential equations (PDEs)
leads to several new approaches and architectures (Azzizadenesheli et al., 2023), (Karniadakis et al., 2021), (Kovachki et al., 2021). Most notable, combination of functional methods with deep learning (spectral convolutions
(Rippel et al., 2015), FNO (Li et al., 2020)); operator-valued
kernels (Kadri et al., 2016), (Batlle et al., 2024); random
feature model in Banach space; (Nelsen & Stuart, 2021) architectures based on universal approximation for operators

To summarize, our contributions are:
1. We propose to train a neural operator as a nonlinear preconditioner for the flexible conjugate gradient method.
We demonstrate that neural operators can be trained
on lower resolutions and serve as an efficient preconditioner for higher resolutions.

1
Artificial Intelligence Research Institute 2 Skolkovo Institute
of Science and Technology 3 Sberbank PJSC 4 Institute of Computational Mathematics and Mathematical Geophysics SB RAS. Correspondence to: Alexander Rudikov <A.Rudikov@skoltech.ru>.

2. We provide a novel learning scheme that involves drawing random vectors from the Krylov subspace. Ablation study shows that abandoning Krylov subspace

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

