Beyond Individual Input for Deep Anomaly Detection on Tabular Data

Hugo Thimonier 1 Fabrice Popineau 1 Arpad Rimmel 1 Bich-Liên Doan 1

Abstract

applications involving imbalanced datasets, where standard
supervised methods may fail to achieve satisfactory performance (Yanmin et al., 2011). Those applications include
fraud detection (Hilal et al., 2022), intrusion detection in
cybersecurity (Malaiya et al., 2018) or astronomy (Reyes &
Estévez, 2020).

Anomaly detection is vital in many domains, such
as finance, healthcare, and cybersecurity. In this
paper, we propose a novel deep anomaly detection method for tabular data that leverages NonParametric Transformers (NPTs), a model initially
proposed for supervised tasks, to capture both
feature-feature and sample-sample dependencies.
In a reconstruction-based framework, we train an
NPT to reconstruct masked features of normal
samples. In a non-parametric fashion, we leverage the whole training set during inference and
use the model’s ability to reconstruct the masked
features to generate an anomaly score. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first work to
successfully combine feature-feature and samplesample dependencies for anomaly detection on
tabular datasets. Through extensive experiments
on 31 benchmark tabular datasets, we demonstrate
that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance, outperforming existing methods by 2.4%
and 1.2% in terms of F1-score and AUROC, respectively. Our ablation study further proves that
modeling both types of dependencies is crucial
for anomaly detection on tabular data.

Anomaly detection encompasses both unsupervised and supervised methods. In most real-world scenarios, labeled
datasets that differentiate normal samples from anomalies
are unavailable or costly to obtain. To address this, efficient anomaly detection methods must be robust to dataset
contamination, where the training set is predominantly composed of normal samples but also includes anomalies. However, when labeled data is available, one can consider a supervised approach to create a training set consisting solely
of normal samples, thereby indirectly incorporating label
information into the anomaly detection model.
Many general AD methods tend to work well on tasks that
involve unstructured data (e.g., natural language processing or computer vision) such as (Schölkopf et al., 1999;
Tax & Duin, 2004; Liu et al., 2008; Ruff et al., 2018; Kim
et al., 2020; Liznerski et al., 2021). However, recent work
(Bergman & Hoshen, 2020; Qiu et al., 2021; Shenkar &
Wolf, 2022) has revealed that the best-performing methods for tabular data involve models tailored to consider
the particular structure of this data type. AD methods for
structured data typically identify anomalies by using either feature-feature or sample-sample dependencies. For
instance, in (Shenkar & Wolf, 2022), the authors assume a
class-dependent relationship between a subset of variables
in a sample’s feature vector and the rest of its variables. The
authors thus propose a contrastive learning framework to
detect anomalies based on this assumption. Another recent
method (Thimonier et al., 2022) identifies anomalies in tabular datasets by focusing on sample-sample dependencies
by measuring the influence of training normal samples on
the validation samples. Both approaches have demonstrated
competitive results for anomaly detection in tabular datasets.

1. Introduction
Anomaly detection is a critical task that aims to identify
samples that deviate from a pre-defined notion of normality within a dataset. Traditional approaches to anomaly
detection characterize the normal1 distribution almost exclusively using samples considered as normal, and flag data
points as anomalies based on their deviation from this distribution. Anomaly detection (AD) is especially useful for
1
Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, CentraleSupélec, Laboratoire Interdisciplinaire des Sciences du Numérique, 91190, Gifsur-Yvette, France.. Correspondence to: Hugo Thimonier
<name.surname@lisn.fr>.

Recent work on supervised deep learning methods for tabular data (Shavitt & Segal, 2018; Arik & Pfister, 2021; Gorishniy et al., 2023; Somepalli et al., 2021; Kossen et al.,
2021) has also highlighted the importance of considering
the particular structure of tabular data. In particular, in

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
The term normal here relates to the concept of normality in
opposition to abnormal.

1

