Conformal Prediction for Deep Classifier via Label Ranking

Jianguo Huang * 1 2 † Huajun Xi * 1 Linjun Zhang 3 Huaxiu Yao 4 Yue Qiu 5 Hongxin Wei 1

Abstract

of the model performance. This gives rise to the importance
of Conformal Prediction (CP) (Vovk et al., 2005; Shafer
& Vovk, 2008; Balasubramanian et al., 2014; Angelopoulos & Bates, 2021), which yields prediction sets containing
ground-truth labels with a desired coverage guarantee.

Conformal prediction is a statistical framework
that generates prediction sets containing groundtruth labels with a desired coverage guarantee.
The predicted probabilities produced by machine
learning models are generally miscalibrated, leading to large prediction sets in conformal prediction. To address this issue, we propose a novel
algorithm named Sorted Adaptive Prediction Sets
(SAPS), which discards all the probability values
except for the maximum softmax probability. The
key idea behind SAPS is to minimize the dependence of the non-conformity score on the probability values while retaining the uncertainty information. In this manner, SAPS can produce compact
prediction sets and communicate instance-wise
uncertainty. Extensive experiments validate that
SAPS not only lessens the prediction sets but also
broadly enhances the conditional coverage rate of
prediction sets.

To determine the size of the prediction set, CP algorithms
generally design non-conformity scores to quantify the deviation degree between a new instance and the training data. A
higher non-conformity score is associated with a larger prediction set or region, indicating a lower confidence level in
the prediction. For example, Adaptive Prediction Sets (APS)
(Romano et al., 2020) calculates the score by accumulating
the sorted softmax values in descending order. However, the
softmax probabilities typically exhibit a long-tailed distribution, allowing for easy inclusion of those tail classes in the
prediction sets. To alleviate this issue, Regularized Adaptive Prediction Sets (RAPS) (Angelopoulos et al., 2021)
excludes unlikely classes by appending a penalty to classes
beyond a specified threshold. Yet, the non-conformity score
of RAPS involves unreliable softmax probabilities, leading
to suboptimal performance in conformal prediction. This
motivates our question: does the probability value play a
critical role in conformal prediction?

1. Introduction
Machine learning is being deployed in many high-stakes
tasks, such as autonomous driving (Bojarski et al., 2016),
medical diagnostics (Caruana et al., 2015), and financial
decision-making. The trust and safety in these applications
are critical, as any erroneous prediction can be costly and
dangerous. To assess the reliability of predictions, a popular
solution is to quantify the model uncertainty, such as confidence calibration (Guo et al., 2017), MC-Dropout (Gal &
Ghahramani, 2016), and Bayesian neural network (Smith,
2013). However, these methods lack theoretical guarantees

In this work, we show that the value of softmax probability
might be redundant information for conformal prediction.
We provide an empirical analysis by removing the exact
value of softmax probability while preserving the relative
rankings of labels. The results indicate that APS without
probability value yields much more compact prediction sets
than APS using the softmax outputs, at the same coverage rate. Theoretically, we show that, by removing the
probability value, the size of prediction sets generated by
APS is consistent with the model prediction accuracy. In
other words, a model with higher accuracy can produce
smaller prediction sets, using APS without access to the
probability value. The details of the analysis are presented
in Section 3.1.

*

Equal contribution ,† Work done while working at SUSTech
as a visiting scholar. 1 Department of Statistics and Data Science,
Southern University of Science and Technology. 2 The School
of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University 3 Department of Statistics, Rutgers University 4 Department of
Computer Science, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
5
College of Mathematics and Statistics, Chongqing University.
Correspondence to: Hongxin Wei <weihx@sustech.edu.cn>, Yue
Qiu <qiuyue@cqu.edu.cn>.

Inspired by the analysis, our key idea is to minimize the
dependence of the non-conformity score on the probability values, while retaining the uncertainty information.
Specifically, we propose the Sorted Adaptive prediction sets
(dubbed SAPS), which discards all the probability values
except for the maximum softmax probability in the construc-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

