Inferring Dynamic Networks from Marginals with Iterative Proportional Fitting

Serina Chang * 1 Frederic Koehler * 2 Zhaonan Qu * 3 4 Jure Leskovec 1 Johan Ugander 4

Abstract

served. Instead, it is often easier to observe the time-varying
marginals of the network, i.e., the row sums and column
sums of its adjacency matrix. In transportation networks,
it is easier to observe passengers embarking or disembarking, e.g., at bus stops (Navick & Furth, 1994), but harder
to uncover routes between stops. In migration networks, it
is easier to observe the number of individuals leaving from
and arriving at a region but harder to estimate the network of
their movements (Plane, 1982; Pham & Komiyama, 2022).
In these settings, we observe the time-varying marginals regularly, but only have occasional access to a time-aggregated
network (e.g., from surveys). Thus, a natural dynamic network inference problem arises from such data: given a network with adjacency matrices X (t) per time step t, can we
reasonably infer X (t) fromPits time-varying marginals and a
time-aggregated version, t X (t) , of the network?

A common network inference problem, arising
from real-world data constraints, is how to infer
a dynamic network from its time-aggregated adjacency matrix and time-varying marginals (i.e.,
row and column sums). Prior approaches to this
problem have repurposed the classic iterative proportional fitting (IPF) procedure, also known as
Sinkhorn’s algorithm, with promising empirical
results. However, the statistical foundation for using IPF has not been well understood: under what
settings does IPF provide principled estimation of
a dynamic network from its marginals, and how
well does it estimate the network? In this work,
we establish such a setting, by identifying a generative network model whose maximum likelihood
estimates are recovered by IPF. Our model both
reveals implicit assumptions on the use of IPF
in such settings and enables new analyses, such
as structure-dependent error bounds on IPF’s parameter estimates. When IPF fails to converge
on sparse network data, we introduce a principled
algorithm that guarantees IPF converges under
minimal changes to the network structure. Finally,
we conduct experiments with synthetic and realworld data, which demonstrate the practical value
of our theoretical and algorithmic contributions.

One approach to solving this problem is to repurpose the
classic iterative proportional fitting (IPF) procedure (Deming & Stephan, 1940), also widely known as Sinkhorn’s
algorithm (Sinkhorn, 1974). Given a matrix X, target row
marginals p, and target column marginals q, IPF tries to find
a biproportional scaling of X to match the target marginals.
IPF poses an attractive solution for the network inference
problem: it matches the marginal constraints of the problem,
is computationally lightweight and space efficient, and is
supported by decades of literature devoted to its analysis
(Bregman, 1967; Fienberg, 1970; Csiszár, 1975; Pukelsheim
& Simeone, 2009; Marino & Gerolin, 2020; Léger, 2021;
Carlier, 2022; Qu et al., 2023). Furthermore, prior works
have shown empirical success with using IPF to infer networks (Liang et al., 2006; McCord et al., 2010; Chang
et al., 2021a), enabling important applications such as modeling epidemic spread on mobility networks (Li et al., 2023;
Chaudhuri et al., 2022; Alimohammadi et al., 2023) and
supporting policymakers (Chang et al., 2021b).

1. Introduction
Dynamic networks of human movements are integral to
important societal problems, such as epidemic response
and transportation planning, but they are rarely fully ob*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science,
Stanford University 2 Department of Statistics and Data Science Institute, University of Chicago 3 Department of Economics, Stanford University 4 Department of Management
Science & Engineering, Stanford University.
Correspondence to: Serina Chang <serinac@stanford.edu>, Frederic Koehler <fkoehler@uchicago.edu>, Zhaonan Qu <zhaonanq@stanford.edu>.

However, despite the appeal and empirical success of using
IPF for network inference, what is missing is a firm statistical grounding for when and why IPF is justified in this
setting. While it is well-known that IPF solves a KullbackLeibler (KL) divergence minimization problem (Ireland &
Kullback, 1968), a formal connection to statistical theory is
limited, especially in network settings. Moreover, IPF occasionally fails to converge on sparse network data. While
tests exist for whether IPF will converge, there is no clear

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

