Linear Explanations for Individual Neurons

Tuomas Oikarinen 1 Tsui-Wei Weng 2

Abstract

description (Bau et al., 2017; Hernandez et al., 2022; Oikarinen & Weng, 2023). However, most of these methods only
focus on understanding and explaining the very highest activations of a neuron. In Section 2 we show that this is
not enough, and a neuron’s impact on network outputs is
distributed quite evenly across all inputs. Therefore, to fully
understand a neuron, we need to understand everything it is
doing, not just its highest activations.

In recent years many methods have been developed to understand the internal workings of neural
networks, often by describing the function of individual neurons in the model. However, these
methods typically only focus on explaining the
very highest activations of a neuron. In this paper we show this is not sufficient, and that the
highest activation range is only responsible for
a very small percentage of the neuron’s causal
effect. In addition, inputs causing lower activations are often very different and can’t be reliably predicted by only looking at high activations.
We propose that neurons should instead be understood as a linear combination of concepts, and
develop an efficient method for producing these
linear explanations. In addition, we show how to
automatically evaluate description quality using
simulation, i.e. predicting neuron activations on
unseen inputs in vision setting.

In Section 3 we propose a solution to these issues, which
we call Linear Explanations (LE). In our method, each
neuron is described as linear combination of concepts,
such as ”w1 × dog + w2 × pet”. This explanation allows us to directly simulate neuron activations as s(xi ) =
w1 P(dog|xi ) + w2 P(pet|xi ), where P(concept|xi ) can be
estimated by either a human or a model. Our automated
method allows for learning accurate linear explanations efficiently, as demonstrated in Section 5, where we evaluate
and compare our method and existing automated explanation methods. We believe linear explanations are a natural
way to represent neurons, and they can elegantly model the
scalar nature of a neuron’s activation. In addition, linear
explanations can be found efficiently and do not binarize
neuron activations (which loses information), unlike alternative methods to capture complex neuron behavior such as
Compositional Explanations (Mu & Andreas, 2020).

1. Introduction
Current machine learning models are extremely capable at
many tasks, yet they are notoriously hard to understand,
and most often seen as black boxes. Recently, the field
of mechanistic interpretability (Olah et al., 2020; Elhage
et al., 2021) has emerged to address this issue by providing
mechanistic understanding of the inner workings of neural
networks, with the ultimate goal of reverse engineering the
algorithms that neural networks use to solve problems.

In Section 4 we propose a new, more rigorous way to automatically evaluate the quality of neuron descriptions via
simulation, i.e. predicting the neuron’s activation on a new
input given the explanation. The simulation evaluation was
recently proposed for explaining neurons of large language
models by (Bills et al., 2023), and has since been a popular
evaluation method in language settings (Cunningham et al.,
2023; Bricken et al., 2023). We are the first to present an
effective and natural way to run simulation on vision models
by utilizing SigLIP (Zhai et al., 2023) models as the simulator. We find that existing neuron explanations (Bau et al.,
2017; Hernandez et al., 2022; Oikarinen & Weng, 2023)
perform poorly under simulation, while our method provides more than 3× higher ablation scores when simulated.
Finally, in Figure 3 we show how our method can uncover
multiple roles played by the same neuron that would be
missed when only looking at highest activations. Our code
and results are available at https://github.com/TrustworthyML-Lab/Linear-Explanations.

Individual neurons (or channels of a CNN) are the most
simple unit of a neural network, and understanding them is
a fundamental building block of mechanistic interpretability.
Many methods have been developed to understand individual neurons, based on both manual inspection (Erhan et al.,
2009; Zhou et al., 2015; Olah et al., 2020) and automated
1

CSE, UC San Diego, CA, USA 2 HDSI, UC San Diego,
CA, USA. Correspondence to: Tuomas Oikarinen <toikarinen@ucsd.edu>, Tsui-Wei Weng <lweng@ucsd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

