Towards Resource-friendly, Extensible and Stable
Incomplete Multi-view Clustering

Shengju Yu 1 Zhibing Dong 1 Siwei Wang 2 Xinhang Wan 1
Yue Liu 1 Weixuan Liang 1 Pei Zhang 1 Wenxuan Tu 1 Xinwang Liu 1

Abstract

2022; Yang et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2023a; 2024a; Xia et al.,
2022b; Fu et al., 2024). However, due to transmission errors
or privacy protection, incomplete instances are unavoidable, which leads to existing MVC methods not working
properly. Accordingly, incomplete multi-view clustering
(IMVC) grasps widespread attention recently (Peng et al.,
2019; Liu et al., 2021; Wan et al., 2024b; Liang et al., 2023).

Incomplete multi-view clustering (IMVC) methods typically encounter three drawbacks: (1) intense time and/or space overheads; (2) intractable
hyper-parameters; (3) non-zero variance results.
With these concerns in mind, we give a simple
yet effective IMVC scheme, termed as ToRES.
Concretely, instead of self-expression affinity, we
manage to construct prototype-sample affinity
for incomplete data so as to decrease the memory requirements. To eliminate hyper-parameters,
besides mining complementary features among
views by view-wise prototypes, we also attempt
to devise cross-view prototypes to capture consensus features for jointly forming worth-having
clustering representation. To avoid the variance,
we successfully unify representation learning and
clustering operation, and directly optimize the
discrete cluster indicators from incomplete data.
Then, for the resulting objective function, we provide two equivalent solutions from perspectives of
feasible region partitioning and objective transformation. Many results suggest that ToRES exhibits
advantages against 20 SOTA algorithms, even in
scenarios with a higher ratio of incomplete data.

Given incomplete data {Dm ∈ Rdm ×n }M
m=1 and index vectors {wm ∈ Rnm }M
m=1 where nm and dm represent the
number and dimension of samples observed on view m,
one can construct indicator matrices {Wm ∈ Rn×nm }M
m=1
in which [Wm ]i,j = 1 if [wm ]j = i else [Wm ]i,j =
0, ∀j = 1, 2, · · · , nm . Then, Dm Wm ∈ Rdm ×nm represents available instances on view m. On this basis, current
methods first build self-expression affinity on each view by
min
Hm

M
X

2

∥Dm Wm − Dm Wm Hm ∥F + λϕ(Hm )

m=1

(1)

s.t. Hm ∈ Rnm ×nm ≥ 0, H⊤
m 1 = 1.
⊤
Afterwards, the full affinity is restored via Wm Hm Wm
∈
n×n
R
. Due to missing instances, there will be blank rows
and columns in the full affinity. By locating these affinities
with blanks into corresponding positions, current methods
optimize a set of sketched affinities to generate the fused
full affinity H:

⊤
min ψ H, W1 H1 W1⊤ , · · · , WM HM WM
;β
H
(2)
s.t. H ∈ Rn×n ≥ 0, H⊤ 1 = 1.

1. Introduction
Multi-view data (MVD), generally collected from diverse
domains or modalities, is becoming increasingly common
in daily life. As a technique for handling MVD, multiview clustering (MVC) can partition it into distinct groups
without requiring any prior label information (Xu et al.,

Subsequently, running spectral clustering on H generates
discrete data labels. Here, ϕ and ψ denote regularization and
fusion strategies respectively. λ and β are hyper-parameters.
Although making promising results, the paradigm adopted
by current methods typically requires at least O(n3 ) comput⊤
ing cost and O(n2 ) memory cost due to both Wm Hm Wm
n×n
and H being R
. Moreover, the presence of hyperparameters harms the extensibility of models. Even worse,
the generated results usually contain variance, which not
only decreases the reliability of clustering but also leads
to relatively poor interpretability. To alleviate these three

1

School of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, Hunan, China 2 Intelligent Game and Decision Lab,
Beijing, China. yu-shengju@foxmail.com. Correspondence to:
Siwei Wang <wangsiwei13@nudt.edu.cn>, Xinwang Liu <xinwangliu@nudt.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

