Graph Generation with Diffusion Mixture

Jaehyeong Jo 1 * Dongki Kim 1 * Sung Ju Hwang 1 2

Abstract

proposed, including models based on generative adversarial
networks (GANs) (De Cao & Kipf, 2018; Martinkus et al.,
2022), recurrent neural networks (RNNs) (You et al., 2018),
and variational autoencoders (VAEs) (Jin et al., 2018).

Generation of graphs is a major challenge for
real-world tasks that require understanding the
complex nature of their non-Euclidean structures.
Although diffusion models have achieved notable
success in graph generation recently, they are illsuited for modeling the topological properties of
graphs since learning to denoise the noisy samples does not explicitly learn the graph structures
to be generated. To tackle this limitation, we
propose a generative framework that models the
topology of graphs by explicitly learning the final
graph structures of the diffusion process. Specifically, we design the generative process as a mixture of endpoint-conditioned diffusion processes
which is driven toward the predicted graph that
results in rapid convergence. We further introduce
a simple parameterization of the mixture process
and develop an objective for learning the final
graph structure, which enables maximum likelihood training. Through extensive experimental
validation on general graph and 2D/3D molecule
generation tasks, we show that our method outperforms previous generative models, generating
graphs with correct topology with both continuous (e.g. 3D coordinates) and discrete (e.g.
atom types) features. Our code is available at
https://github.com/harryjo97/GruM.

Recently, diffusion models have achieved state-of-the-art
performance on the generation of graph-structured data (Niu
et al., 2020; Jo et al., 2022; Hoogeboom et al., 2022). These
models learn the generation process as the time reversal of
the forward process, which corrupts the graphs by gradually
adding noise that destroys its topological properties. Since
the generative process is derived from the unknown score
function (Song et al., 2021) or noise (Ho et al., 2020), existing graph diffusion models aim to estimate them in order to
denoise the data from noise, which are commonly referred
to as the denoising diffusion models (Figure 1 (a)).
Despite their success, learning the score or noise is fundamentally ill-suited for the generation of graphs. In contrast
to other types of data such as images, the key to generating valid graphs is accurately modeling the discrete structures that determine the topological properties such as connectivity or clusteredness. However, learning the score or
noise does not explicitly model these features, as it aims
to gradually denoise the corrupted structures. Thereby it is
challenging for the diffusion models to recover the topological properties, which leads to failure cases even for small
graphs. A way to more accurately generate graphs with
correct topology would be directly learning the final graph
and its structure, instead of learning how to denoise a noisy
version of the original graphs.

1. Introduction

However, predicting the final graph structure of the diffusion
process is difficult since the prediction would be highly
inaccurate in the early steps of the diffusion process, and
such an inaccurate prediction may lead the process in the
wrong direction resulting in invalid results. Few existing
works (Hoogeboom et al., 2021; Austin et al., 2021; Vignac
et al., 2023) based on denoising diffusion models aim to
predict the probability of the final states by parameterizing
the denoising process, but it is only applicable to categorical
data with a finite number of states and thus cannot generate
graphs with continuous features, which is not suitable for
tasks such as 3D molecule generation.

Generation of graph-structured data has emerged as a crucial task for real-world problems such as drug discovery (Simonovsky & Komodakis, 2018), protein design (Ingraham
et al., 2019), and program synthesis (Brockschmidt et al.,
2019). To tackle the challenge of learning the underlying
distribution of graphs, deep generative models have been
*

Equal contribution 1 Korea Advanced Institute of Science
and Technology (KAIST) 2 DeepAuto.ai. Correspondence to:
Jaehyeong Jo <harryjo97@kaist.ac.kr>, Dongki Kim <cleverki@kaist.ac.kr>, Sung Ju Hwang <sjhwang82@kaist.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

To address these limitations of existing graph diffusion models, we propose a novel framework that explicitly models the
1

