Any-Precision LLM: Low-Cost Deployment of Multiple, Different-Sized LLMs

Yeonhong Park 1 Jake Hyun 1 SangLyul Cho 1 Bonggeun Sim 1 Jae W. Lee 1

Abstract

et al., 2023; Kim et al., 2023b), as the parameter size is the
primary obstacle for their efficient deployment.

Recently, considerable efforts have been directed
towards compressing Large Language Models
(LLMs), which showcase groundbreaking capabilities across diverse applications but entail significant deployment costs due to their large sizes.
Meanwhile, much less attention has been given
to mitigating the costs associated with deploying multiple LLMs of varying sizes despite its
practical significance. Thus, this paper introduces any-precision LLM, extending the concept
of any-precision DNN to LLMs. Addressing
challenges in any-precision LLM, we propose a
lightweight method for any-precision quantization
of LLMs, leveraging a post-training quantization
framework, and develop a specialized software engine for its efficient serving. As a result, our solution significantly reduces the high costs of deploying multiple, different-sized LLMs by overlaying
LLMs quantized to varying bit-widths, such as
3, 4, ..., n bits, into a memory footprint comparable to a single n-bit LLM. All the supported
LLMs with varying bit-widths demonstrate stateof-the-art model quality and inference throughput,
proving itself to be a compelling option for deployment of multiple, different-sized LLMs. The
code is available at https://github.com/
SNU-ARC/any-precision-llm.

Meanwhile, there has been limited discussion on mitigating the costs associated with deploying multiple LLMs of
varying sizes, despite its practical significance. Real-world
scenarios often demand the dynamic adaptation of multiple
LLMs, each with distinct model quality/inference latency
trade-offs. This approach enables the effective handling of
queries with varied latency constraints, enhancing the user
experience. Moreover, it supports a popular generation acceleration technique: speculative decoding (Leviathan et al.,
2023; Chen et al., 2023; Kim et al., 2023d). Despite these
benefits, deploying multiple LLMs of varying sizes presents
challenges. First, it exacerbates the already high memory
costs of LLM deployment, and second, it necessitates training of multiple model versions when models of desired sizes
are not readily available as open-source.
Any-precision LLM, an extension of the concept of anyprecision DNN (Yu et al., 2021) to LLM, is a promising solution for the low-cost deployment of multiple, different-sized
LLMs. Any-precision DNN refers to an n-bit quantized
model capable of generating lower bit quantized models ((n1)-bit, (n-2)-bit, ...) simply by taking its most significant
bits (MSBs). Applying this concept to LLM enables the
utilization of multiple LLMs with varying sizes by storing
only a single large LLM (n-bit model) in memory, while
avoiding the additional overhead of training multiple LLMs.
Meanwhile, two challenges need to be resolved for effective
implementation of any-precision LLM. First, a practical
method for any-precision quantization of LLM is needed.
The existing any-precision quantization method on DNN
requires training the model from scratch, limiting its applicability to LLMs. Second, a new GPU kernel for quantized
matrix-vector multiplication is required, which will translate the use of reduced bit-widths in any-precision LLMs
into shorter inference times. Existing kernels for quantized
matrix-vector multiplication are unable to load just a portion
of each quantized weight value’s bit-vector. Consequently,
with existing kernels, opting for a model with a lower bitwidth does not reduce memory bandwidth usage.

1. Introduction
With the revolutionary success of Large Language Models (LLMs) across various applications, there have been
many recent efforts to reduce the costs of their deployment.
Specifically, there has been a considerable focus on compressing LLMs using techniques like pruning (Frantar &
Alistarh, 2023; Zhang et al., 2023; Santacroce et al., 2023;
Ma et al., 2023) or quantization (Lin et al., 2023; Frantar
1
Seoul National University. Correspondence to: Jae W. Lee
<jaewlee@snu.ac.kr>.

Thus, we in this paper make a strong case for any-precision
LLM by addressing the two aforementioned issues. First,
we build a lightweight method for any-precision quantiza-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

