Nonlinear Filtering with Brenier Optimal Transport Maps

Mohammad Al-Jarrah 1 Niyizhen Jin 2 Bamdad Hosseini 2 Amirhossein Taghvaei 1
served random process, denoted by {Yt }∞
t=1 , that represents
sensory data. We assume the state and observation processes
follow the probabilistic relationship

Abstract
This paper is concerned with the problem of nonlinear filtering, i.e., computing the conditional
distribution of the state of a stochastic dynamical
system given a history of noisy partial observations. Conventional sequential importance resampling (SIR) particle filters suffer from fundamental limitations, in scenarios involving degenerate
likelihoods or high-dimensional states, due to the
weight degeneracy issue. In this paper, we explore
an alternative method, which is based on estimating the Brenier optimal transport (OT) map from
the current prior distribution of the state to the
posterior distribution at the next time step. Unlike SIR particle filters, the OT formulation does
not require the analytical form of the likelihood.
Moreover, it allows us to harness the approximation power of neural networks to model complex
and multi-modal distributions and employ stochastic optimization algorithms to enhance scalability.
Extensive numerical experiments are presented
that compare the OT method to the SIR particle
filter and the ensemble Kalman filter, evaluating
the performance in terms of sample efficiency,
high-dimensional scalability, and the ability to
capture complex and multi-modal distributions.

Xt ∼ a(· | Xt−1 ),

X0 ∼ π0 ,

Yt ∼ h(· | Xt ),

(1a)
(1b)

where a(· | ·) and h(· | ·) denote the conditional probability kernels of Xt+1 and Yt , given Xt , respectively, and π0
denotes the probability distribution of the initial state X0 .
The filtering problem is to compute the conditional probability distribution of the hidden state Xt , given the history
of observations Yt = {Y1 , Y2 , . . . , Yt }, denoted by
πt (·) := P(Xt ∈ · | Yt ),

for

t = 1, 2, . . .

(1c)

The conditional distribution πt is also referred to as the
posterior or the belief.
In a general nonlinear and non-Gaussian setup, the posterior
does not admit an explicit analytical solution. Therefore, it
is necessary to design numerical methods to approximate it.
Standard sequential importance re-sampling (SIR) particle
filters (PF) approximate the posterior
PN πt with a weighted empirical distribution of particles i=1 wti δXti (Gordon et al.,
1993; Doucet & Johansen, 2009) with the particle locations
and weights updated according to
i.i.d

(propagation) Xti ∼

N
X

j
j
wt−1
a(· | Xt−1
),

(2a)

j=1

1. Introduction

h(Yt | Xti )
(conditioning) wti = PN
.
j
j=1 h(Yt | Xt )

This paper is concerned with numerical methods for the solution of nonlinear filtering problems in discrete-time with
a particular focus towards the settings where the distribution of interest is highly non-Gaussian and multi-modal. To
formulate the filtering problem consider two stochastic processes: (i) a hidden Markov process, denoted by {Xt }∞
t=0 ,
that represents the state of a dynamical system; (ii) an ob-

(2b)

The propagation step involves simulation according to the
dynamic model (1a), followed by a resampling procedure1 .
The conditioning step implements the Bayes’s rule according to the observation model (1b).
SIR PF provides an exact solution to the filtering problem in
the limit N → ∞ (Del Moral & Guionnet, 2001). However,
it suffers from the curse of dimensionality (COD). Specifically, as the dimension of the state and observation grows,
the likelihood becomes degenerate and concentrated on a
small support, causing the majority of weights to become

1

Department of Aeronautics & Astronautics, University
of Washington, Seattle. 2 Department of Applied Mathematics, University of Washington, Seattle.. Correspondence to:
Mohammad Al-Jarrah <mohd9485@uw.edu>, Niyizhen Jin
<njin2@uw.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1
In practice, resampling is usually done only when the variance
of weights becomes large.

i

