Neuroexplicit Diffusion Models for Inpainting of Optical Flow Fields

Tom Fischer 1 Pascal Peter 2 Joachim Weickert 2 Eddy Ilg 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Diffusion is a fundamental process in physics that leads to
an equilibrium of local concentrations. It explains many phenomena and finds applications in image processing (Weickert, 1998) and computer vision tasks (Weickert & Schnörr,
2001). In particular, it motivates the smoothness term
in dense optical flow estimation in variational techniques.
However, recent advancements in optical flow estimation
have been dominated by deep-learning approaches (Dosovitskiy et al., 2015; Ilg et al., 2017; Teed & Deng, 2020;
Xu et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2022). While all these architectures include a task-specific model-driven operation
that represents the data term, the regularization through the
smoothness term is handled in a fully data-driven manner
by the learned parameters of the convolutions (Dosovitskiy
et al., 2015; Ilg et al., 2017; Teed & Deng, 2020) and more
recently by attention (Xu et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2022).
Notably, none of these approaches utilize a specialized regularization operation as it has been studied in traditional
computer vision. For this reason, we investigate whether it
is possible to integrate diffusion with its rich mathematical
foundations based on partial differential equations (PDEs)
into neural architectures. In the following, we refer to these
model-driven operations that integrate specialized domain
knowledge for a certain task as explicit, the general datadriven operations as neural, and the combination of both as
neuroexplicit.

Deep learning has revolutionized the field of computer vision by introducing large scale neural networks with millions of parameters. Training these
networks requires massive datasets and leads to intransparent models that can fail to generalize. At
the other extreme, models designed from partial
differential equations (PDEs) embed specialized
domain knowledge into mathematical equations
and usually rely on few manually chosen hyperparameters. This makes them transparent by construction and if designed and calibrated carefully,
they can generalize well to unseen scenarios. In
this paper, we show how to bring model- and
data-driven approaches together by combining
the explicit PDE-based approaches with convolutional neural networks to obtain the best of both
worlds. We illustrate a joint architecture for the
task of inpainting optical flow fields and show
that the combination of model- and data-driven
modeling leads to an effective architecture. Our
model outperforms both fully explicit and fully
data-driven baselines in terms of reconstruction
quality, robustness and amount of required training data. Averaging the endpoint error across different mask densities, our method outperforms the
explicit baselines by 11 − 27%, the GAN baseline
by 47% and the Probabilisitic Diffusion baseline
by 42%. With that, our method sets a new state of
the art for inpainting of optical flow fields from
random masks.

The role of the regularization in traditional computer vision
is to propagate information from confident correspondences
to regions with less or little information. Variational methods do so using smoothness terms that lead to diffusion
terms in the Euler-Lagrange equations. To isolate this behavior, we focus on inpainting of sparsely masked optical
flow fields and compare our novel architecture with popular
state-of-the-art methods. By imposing the diffusion behavior explicitly, our goal is to achieve interpretable models
with fewer parameters, improved generalization capabilities,
and less dependence on large-scale datasets.

1
Computer Vision and Machine Perception Lab, Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany 2 Mathematical Image Analysis Group, Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany. Correspondence to: Tom Fischer, Eddy Ilg <{fischer,
ilg}@cs.uni-saarland.de>, Pascal Peter, Joachim Weickert
<{peter, weickert}@mia.uni-saarland.de>.

1.1. Contributions
For the first time, we implement an end-to-end trainable network to predict the diffusion tensor used in an image driven
diffusion inpainting of an optical flow field. Additionally, it

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

