Think Before You Act: Decision Transformers with Working Memory

Jikun Kang 1 2 Romain Laroche * Xingdi Yuan * 3 Adam Trischler * Xue Liu * 1 2 Jie Fu 2

Abstract

Games

Decision Transformer-based decision-making
agents have shown the ability to generalize across
multiple tasks. However, their performance relies on massive data and computation. We argue
that this inefficiency stems from the forgetting
phenomenon, in which a model memorizes its behaviors in parameters throughout training. As a
result, training on a new task may deteriorate the
model’s performance on previous tasks. In contrast to LLMs’ implicit memory mechanism, the
human brain utilizes distributed memory storage,
which helps manage and organize multiple skills
efficiently, mitigating the forgetting phenomenon.
Inspired by this, we propose a working memory
module to store, blend, and retrieve information
for different downstream tasks. Evaluation results
show that the proposed method improves training
efficiency and generalization in Atari games and
Meta-World object manipulation tasks. Moreover,
we demonstrate that memory fine-tuning further
enhances the adaptability of the proposed architecture. 1

Memory
Update

Memory
Retrieve

Working Memory
Asteroids
Knowledge

Asteroids
Asteroids Delux
Knowledge

Asteroids Delux

Space Invaders

Space Invaders II

Space Invaders
Knowledge

Space Invaders II
Knowledge

Shared
Knowledge

Figure 1: Illustrating how a robot can use its memory to
guide its playing strategy.

ber of parameters. This is partly because neural network
parameters act as implicit memory (Neyshabur et al., 2019),
enabling models to “memorize” a huge amount of training
data by fitting these parameters. However, relying purely
on scale has practical and ethical limits: there are economic
and ecological costs, and it reduces accessibility To address
some limits of the implicit, parameter-based memory of
large models, we take inspiration from the concept of “working memory” (Baddeley, 2003; Cowan, 2008) to explicitly
store and recall past experiences for use in future decisionmaking. The concept, “working memory”, originates from
cognitive psychology and neuroscience (Baddeley, 2003;
Goldman-Rakic, 1995), where it refers to the system responsible for the temporary storage and manipulation of
information during cognitive tasks.

1. Introduction
Recently, with the tremendous success of decoder-only
Transformer models (Brown et al., 2020; OpenAI, 2023;
Dosovitskiy et al., 2021; Touvron et al., 2023), an increasing number of researchers have focused on decoder-only
Transformer-based decision-making agents. As shown with
GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) and follow-up work (Kaplan
et al., 2020; Clark et al., 2022), the generalization of these
LLMs depends significantly on the model size, i.e. the num-

Our motivation comes from how humans think before they
act: they can reason on past experiences to generate appropriate behavior in new situations. We want to equip our
robots with similar abilities. Imagine training a robot to play
four different Atari games: Asteroids, Asteroids Deluxe,
Space Invaders, and Space Invaders II (Figure 1). Asteroids
Deluxe is a sequel to Asteroids that introduces new boss
fights and enemies, similarly, Space Invaders II is a sequel
to Space Invaders. For a robot to play these four games,
it must actively store what it has learned in memory and
choose the appropriate strategy for each game. Throughout
training, the robot’s memory module continuously processes

*Equal advising 1 Department of Computer Science, McGill University, Montréal, Canada 2 Mila - Québec AI Institute, Montréal,
Canada 3 Microsoft Research, Montréal, Canada. Correspondence to: Jikun Kang <jikun.kang@mail.mcgill.ca>, Jie Fu
<jie.fu@polymtl.ca>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
We open source the code at https://github.com/
luciferkonn/DT_Mem.

1

