EvoluNet: Advancing Dynamic Non-IID Transfer Learning on Graphs

Haohui Wang 1 Yuzhen Mao 1 Yujun Yan 2 Yaoqing Yang 2 Jianhui Sun 1 Kevin Choi 3 Balaji Veeramani 3
Alison Hu 3 Edward Bowen 3 Tyler Cody 4 Dawei Zhou 1

Abstract
Non-IID transfer learning on graphs is crucial in
many high-stakes domains. The majority of existing works assume stationary distribution for
both source and target domains. However, realworld graphs are intrinsically dynamic, presenting challenges in terms of domain evolution and
dynamic discrepancy between source and target
domains. To bridge the gap, we shift the problem to the dynamic setting and pose the question:
given the label-rich source graphs and the labelscarce target graphs both observed in previous T
timestamps, how can we effectively characterize
the evolving domain discrepancy and optimize the
generalization performance of the target domain
at the incoming T + 1 timestamp? To answer it,
we propose a generalization bound for dynamic
non-IID transfer learning on graphs, which implies the generalization performance is dominated
by domain evolution and domain discrepancy between source and target graphs. Inspired by the
theoretical results, we introduce a novel generic
framework named E VOLU N ET. It leverages a
transformer-based temporal encoding module to
model temporal information of the evolving domains and then uses a dynamic domain unification module to efficiently learn domain-invariant
representations across the source and target domains. Finally, E VOLU N ET outperforms the stateof-the-art models by up to 12.1%, demonstrating
its effectiveness in transferring knowledge from
dynamic source graphs to dynamic target graphs.

(Wu & He, 2022)
(Liu et al., 2020)

(Wang et al., 2022)
(Ben-David et al., 2010)

(Wu et al., 2023)
(Zhu et al., 2021)

Figure 1. A paradigm shift to the dynamic non-IID transfer learning. D denotes IID domain; G denotes non-IID graph domain.
Subscript src and tgt denote source and target, and superscript (i)
represents the ith timestamp.

1. Introduction
The recent decade has witnessed notable achievements
in machine learning. Despite the exciting achievements,
whether the learned model could deliver its promise in
real-world scenarios heavily depends on abundant and highquality training data. Nevertheless, the data annotation
process, which requires domain-specific knowledge from
human annotators, is often a costly and time-intensive endeavor (Fang et al., 2022; Cui et al., 2022; Zhou et al.,
2022). Transfer learning has emerged as a promising tool,
which aims to improve the generalization performance of
the target domain with little or no labeled data by leveraging
knowledge from the source domain with adequate labeled
data (Tripuraneni et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2019; Ganin et al.,
2016; Ben-David et al., 2006). However, a majority of the
existing work (Ben-David et al., 2010; Zhao et al., 2019a;
Wang et al., 2022) hold the assumption that data is static and
independent and identically distributed (IID), as shown in
the bottom-left of Figure 1. When extending transfer learning to graph-structured data, particular challenges are posed
due to the non-IID nature of graphs, i.e., samples on graphs
(e.g., nodes, edges, subgraphs) are naturally connected with
their neighbors in certain ways (Xie et al., 2021a).

1

Department of Computer Science, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg,
VA, USA. 2 Department of Computer Science, Dartmouth College,
Hanover, NH, USA. 3 Deloitte & Touche LLP, USA. 4 Virginia Tech
National Security Institute, Arlington, VA, USA. Correspondence
to: Dawei Zhou <zhoud@vt.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

While recent research efforts have delved into non-IID transfer learning on graphs (Wu et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 2021; Hu
1

