MolCRAFT: Structure-Based Drug Design in Continuous Parameter Space

Yanru Qu * 1 2 Keyue Qiu * 1 3 Yuxuan Song * 1 3 Jingjing Gong 1
Jiawei Han 2 Mingyue Zheng 4 Hao Zhou 1 Wei-Ying Ma 1

Abstract

ert et al., 2023). Recently, generative models for molecules
have emerged as a promising direction, which could streamline SBDD by directly proposing desired molecules, eliminating the need for exhaustive blind search in the vast space
(Walters, 2019; Luo et al., 2021). Recent progress in SBDD
can be divided into two categories, i.e. auto-regressive models (Luo et al., 2021; Peng et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023)
as next-token prediction for text generation, and diffusion
models (Guan et al., 2022; 2023) as for image generation.

Generative models for structure-based drug design (SBDD) have shown promising results in
recent years. Existing works mainly focus on
how to generate molecules with higher binding
affinity, ignoring the feasibility prerequisites for
generated 3D poses and resulting in false positives. We conduct thorough studies on key factors
of ill-conformational problems when applying
autoregressive methods and diffusion to SBDD,
including mode collapse and hybrid continuousdiscrete space. In this paper, we introduce MolCRAFT, the first SBDD model that operates in
the continuous parameter space, together with
a novel noise reduced sampling strategy. Empirical results show that our model consistently
achieves superior performance in binding affinity
with more stable 3D structure, demonstrating our
ability to accurately model interatomic interactions. To our best knowledge, MolCRAFT is the
first to achieve reference-level Vina Scores (-6.59
kcal/mol) with comparable molecular size, outperforming other strong baselines by a wide margin
(-0.84 kcal/mol). Code is available at https:
//github.com/AlgoMole/MolCRAFT.

The essential criteria for drug-like candidate molecules are
outlined as follows: (i) high affinity towards specific binding
sites (a.k.a, protein pockets), where a higher affinity indicates better performance, (ii) satisfactory drug-like properties, such as synthesizability and drug-likeness scores,
which often serve as thresholds for filtering out unfavorable compounds (Ursu et al., 2011; Tian et al., 2015), and
(iii) well-conformational 3D structure, which needs special
attention as there is a danger of generating unrealistic 3D
conformations yet with deceptively high affinities.
However, current generative models focus primarily on (i)
and (ii), whereas we observe that the generated molecules
often fail to meet all criteria simultaneously, especially for
(iii) conformational stability. This challenge manifests as the
False Positives phenomenon (FP) in generative modeling of
SBDD, where models yield molecules that reside outside the
true molecular manifold yet appear to exhibit good binding
affinity after redocking. Specifically, these molecules suffer
from distorted structure, displaying problematically unusual
topology, and inferior binding mode, whereby the generated
poses fail to capture true interactions and may even violate
biophysical constraints, and thus go through post-fixes and
significant rearrangements from docking software. Such
problems threaten to jeopardize reliable model assessment,
ultimately hindering their application in SBDD (Sec. 2.1).

1. Introduction
Structure-based drug design (SBDD) advances drug discovery by leveraging 3D structures of biological targets, thereby
facilitating efficient and rational design of molecules within
a certain chemical space of interests (Wang et al., 2022; Is*
Equal contribution Work was done during Yanru Qu’s internship at Tsinghua AIR. 1 Institute for AI Industry Research
(AIR), Tsinghua University 2 University of Illinois UrbanaChampaign, USA 3 Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University 4 Shanghai Institute of Materia
Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences.
Correspondence
to: Hao Zhou <zhouhao@air.tsinghua.edu.cn>, Jingjing Gong
<gongjingjing@air.tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Both autoregressive and diffusion-based models exhibit challenges with generating accurate molecular conformations,
yet these issues stem from distinct causes. In Sec. 2.2, we
delve into the mode collapse issue faced by autoregressive
methods. Empirically, they tend to repeatedly generate a
limited number of specific (sub-)structures due to an unnatural atom ordering imposed during generation. On the other
hand, the problem with diffusion-based models is attributed

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

