Mastering Robot Manipulation with Multimodal Prompts through Pretraining
and Multi-task Fine-tuning

Jiachen Li 1 * Qiaozi Gao 2 Michael Johnston 2 Xiaofeng Gao 2 Xuehai He 3 * Hangjie Shi 2 Suhaila Shakiah 2
Reza Ghanadan 2 William Yang Wang 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

The unprecedented advancement of large language models
(LLM) (Brown et al., 2020; OpenAI, 2023; Gemini et al.,
2023; Chowdhery et al., 2022; Anil et al., 2023; Chung
et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023) has stimulated rapid development of building instruction-following agents (Lynch
& Sermanet, 2020; Ahn et al., 2022; Driess et al., 2023;
Guhur et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2022a). By leveraging
LLM’s remarkable zero-shot generalizability, various research initiatives (Ahn et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2022a;b)
have developed powerful action planners to parse language
instructions into a sequence of sub-goals. A prominent example is the SayCan (Ahn et al., 2022), which employs
PALM (Chowdhery et al., 2022) to transform abstract task
descriptions into actionable step-by-step plans.

Prompt-based learning has been demonstrated as
a compelling paradigm contributing to large language models’ tremendous success (LLMs). Inspired by their success in language tasks, existing
research has leveraged LLMs in embodied instruction following and task planning. In this work,
we tackle the problem of training a robot to understand multimodal prompts, interleaving vision
signals with text descriptions. This type of task
poses a major challenge to robots’ capability to
understand the interconnection and complementarity between vision and language signals. In
this work, we introduce an effective framework
that learns a policy to perform robot manipulation
with multimodal prompts from multi-task expert
trajectories. Our methods consist of a two-stage
training pipeline that performs inverse dynamics
pretraining and multi-task finetuning. To facilitate multimodal understanding, we design our
multimodal prompt encoder by augmenting a pretrained LM with a residual connection to the visual input and model the dependencies among action dimensions. Empirically, we evaluate the efficacy of our method on the VIMA-BENCH (Jiang
et al., 2023) and establish a new state-of-the-art
(10% improvement in success rate). Moreover,
we demonstrate that our model exhibits remarkable in-context learning ability. Project page:
https://midas-icml.github.io/.

However, relying solely on language instructions can be
inefficient for describing intricate task details. For instance,
directing a household robot to tidy out a living room is more
straightforward with a combination of language and visual
cues than using language alone. Also, when learning new
tasks, words simply cannot convey as much information
as video demonstrations (Dasari & Gupta, 2021). In addition, human communication is inherently multimodal, often
combining speech with expressive gestures and demonstrations (Drijvers & Holler, 2023). Therefore, we are motivated to enhance a robot’s comprehension of multimodal
task prompts that interleave text and images.
Training a robot to interpret multimodal prompts involves
several challenges. The vision signals in the prompt can
represent target objects, delineate a specific sub-goal, or
offer in-context demonstrations. The robot must understand the underlying transition dynamics suggested by the
multimodal prompts before tackling the overall task objective. This requires the robot to infer state transitions from
language instructions, and deducing actions from image
demonstrations, a concept known as inverse dynamic prediction. Furthermore, it is crucial for the robot to focus on
critical visual details, such as the orientation of an object
shown in the image, as this can significantly influence its
action prediction.

∗

Work being done during internship at Amazon AGI.
Department of Computer Science, University of California, Santa
Barbara, USA 2 Amazon AGI 3 Department of Computer Science,
University of California, Santa Cruz, USA. Correspondence to:
Jiachen Li <jiachen li@ucsb.edu>.

1

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

