Position: Scarce Resource Allocations That Rely On Machine Learning
Should Be Randomized
Shomik Jain 1 Kathleen Creel 2 Ashia Wilson 1 3

Abstract

work on algorithmic fairness relies on deterministic algorithms to incorporate fairness. Once algorithmic bias has
been reduced to the extent possible, the algorithm allocates
resources to the top candidate(s). If Alice is the top-ranked
candidate for every job or has the most expected qualityadjusted life-years, she should deterministically receive the
job offer or organ every time.

Contrary to traditional deterministic notions of
algorithmic fairness, this paper argues that fairly
allocating scarce resources using machine learning often requires randomness. We address
why, when, and how to randomize by proposing
stochastic procedures that more adequately account for all of the claims that individuals have to
allocations of social goods or opportunities.

Recent works on arbitrariness and fairness suggest that even
counterfactual non-determinism can be unfair. If there exist
many possible models with similar predictive performance
but slightly different decisions on individuals, a state of
affairs called “predictive multiplicity” (Marx et al., 2020)
or “model multiplicity” (Black et al., 2022), it is unfair to
naively pick one of the models for our decision-making algorithm (Hsu & Calmon, 2022). Instead, we should reduce
multiplicity by altering the training process to reduce the
variance that leads to diverging predictions (Cooper et al.,
2023), especially on under-represented individuals (Ganesh
et al., 2023), iterate until predictions agree about individuals (Roth et al., 2023) or even abstain from making predictions on some people altogether (Cooper et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
Sometimes resources or opportunities are scarce: jobs, welfare benefits, or life-saving medicines cannot be divided
among all those who deserve them. Worse yet, it is often
unclear which individuals are most deserving. Perhaps they
all are. Decision-makers hope to use algorithmic systems
to allocate scarce resources and goods fairly. But without
careful attention, it is easy for algorithms to replicate or
amplify the biases and inequalities in their training data.
The fair machine learning community has developed sophisticated theoretical and formal tools to reduce algorithmic
bias, increase fairness, and promote justice. However, these
tools are almost exclusively deterministic. For example,
employers with more qualified applicants than job openings
often rely on hiring algorithms to screen applicants for interviews (Raghavan et al., 2020). These algorithms assign
a score or ranking to candidates. Employers then threshold
these scores or rankings to deterministically pick candidates
to interview. Similarly, healthcare providers often have a
limited supply of life-saving medical resources such as ventilators, therapeutics, or organs. Patients are often triaged
based on algorithms that predict their survival rate or life
expectancy post-treatment (Chin et al., 2023). Most existing

While sharing the goal of reducing bias and increasing
fairness, this work argues that the fair machine learning
community has underutilized non-determinism and randomization as tools to achieve fairness. In some settings that
involve algorithmic decision-making, we contend that nondeterminism is required for fair outcomes. In what follows,
we first motivate why and when fairness requires randomization. We adopt philosopher John Broome’s concept of the
value of lotteries in fairness to argue that randomization is
needed in scarce resource settings to respect the claims that
individuals have to resources, even if they do not receive
them, by giving each person with a claim a chance.
Second, we argue that because algorithmic predictions involve uncertainty, it is unfair to those on whom we make
mistakes to deterministically commit to those mistakes. This
is especially true in multi-shot contexts in which each individual is affected by multiple decision-makers or a series
of decisions over time. Across an ecosystem of multiple
decision-makers, consistently allocating scarce resources
and goods to the same candidate(s) can be sub-optimal, as
it prevents the decision-makers from learning (Kleinberg

1

Institute for Data, Systems, and Society, MIT 2 Department
of Philosophy & Religion and Khoury College of Computer
Sciences, Northeastern University 3 Department of Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science, MIT. Correspondence to:
<shomikj@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

