Representation Surgery: Theory and Practice of Affine Steering

Shashwat Singh * 1 Shauli Ravfogel * 2 Jonathan Herzig 3 Roee Aharoni 3
Ryan Cotterell 4 Ponnurangam Kumaraguru 1

Abstract
Language models often exhibit undesirable behavior, e.g., generating toxic or gender-biased text.
In the case of neural language models, an encoding of the undesirable behavior is often present
in the model’s representations. Thus, one natural (and common) approach to prevent the model
from exhibiting undesirable behavior is to steer
the model’s representations in a manner that reduces the probability of it generating undesirable
text. This paper investigates the formal and empirical properties of steering functions, i.e., transformation of the neural language model’s representations that alter its behavior. First, we derive two
optimal, in the least-squares sense, affine steering
functions under different constraints. Our theory
provides justification for existing approaches and
offers a novel, improved steering approach. Second, we offer a series of experiments that demonstrate the empirical effectiveness of the methods
in mitigating bias and reducing toxic generation.

Figure 1. Left: A steering function f (·) is fit to map representations of a source concept (red) to a target concept (blue). Right:
An illustration of an application of the fit steering function f (·)
during autoregressive generation to mitigate toxicity.

surgery is called steering, whose goal is to shift a subset of
the representations towards a target concept in such a way
that the representations encode that concept. For instance,
one may wish to steer the representations towards those
that encode non-toxic text to prevent the model from generating harmful content (Wallace et al., 2019; Sheng et al.,
2019). While there are many manners to steer representations, this paper focuses on affine steering functions that
constitute a minimal change to the representations. Our paper provides the basic theory to support common techniques
already present in the literature.

https://github.com/shauliravfogel/affine-steering

1. Introduction

The key conceptual point in our paper is the connection
between concept erasure techniques and steering (Ravfogel
et al., 2020; 2022a;b; Belrose et al., 2023; Guerner et al.,
2023). Concept erasure techniques remove specific concepts
from the representations. For instance, in the case of gender,
one could apply a concept erasure technique to prevent the
model from being able to distinguish between male and
female-centric text. Such an application may be particularly
relevant for mitigating gender bias, as text generated by
models often encodes societal biases with respect to gender
(Bolukbasi et al., 2016; Zhao et al., 2018).

Language models (LMs) based on neural networks contain
representations that encode diverse aspects of natural language. The manipulation of these representations, referred
to as representation surgery, enables to both better understand the model’s behavior and to shape the text it generates
(Bolukbasi et al., 2016; Ravfogel et al., 2020; Elazar et al.,
2021; Feder et al., 2021; Meng et al., 2022; Geva et al., 2021;
Ghandeharioun et al., 2024). One form of representation
*

Equal contribution 1 IIIT Hyderabad 2 Bar-Ilan University. Work done during an internship at Google Research.
3
Google Research 4 ETH Zurich. Correspondence to: Shashwat Singh <shashwat.s@research.iiit.ac.in>, Shauli Ravfogel
<shauli.ravfogel@gmail.com>.

However, in the context of toxicity, concept erasure techniques make less sense. If one erases the concept of toxicity
from the model’s representations, the outcome may be that
the model loses the ability to distinguish between toxic and
non-toxic text. And, in fact, the model could potentially gen-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

