InterLUDE: Interactions between Labeled and Unlabeled Data
to Enhance Semi-Supervised Learning

Zhe Huang * 1 Xiaowei Yu * 2 Dajiang Zhu 2 Michael C. Hughes 1

Abstract

(e.g. images without corresponding labels) may be naturally far more abundant and accessible. This disparity has
led to the growing importance of semi-supervised learning
(SSL) (Zhu, 2005; Van Engelen and Hoos, 2020), which
aims to learn from a small labeled set and a much larger
unlabeled set. SSL can be applied to many learning tasks,
such as image classification (Oliver et al., 2018), object
detection (Xu et al., 2021a; Li et al., 2022), and segmentation (Chen et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2023).

Semi-supervised learning (SSL) seeks to enhance
task performance by training on both labeled and
unlabeled data. Mainstream SSL image classification methods mostly optimize a loss that additively combines a supervised classification objective with a regularization term derived solely
from unlabeled data. This formulation often neglects the potential for interaction between labeled and unlabeled images. In this paper, we
introduce InterLUDE, a new approach to enhance
SSL made of two parts that each benefit from
labeled-unlabeled interaction. The first part, embedding fusion, interpolates between labeled and
unlabeled embeddings to improve representation
learning. The second part is a new loss, grounded
in the principle of consistency regularization, that
aims to minimize discrepancies in the model’s predictions between labeled versus unlabeled inputs.
Experiments on standard closed-set SSL benchmarks and a medical SSL task with an uncurated
unlabeled set show clear benefits to our approach.
On the STL-10 dataset with only 40 labels, InterLUDE achieves 3.2% error rate, while the best
previous method obtains 6.3%.

This paper focuses on SSL for image classification. Over
the years, numerous SSL paradigms have been proposed
(Blum and Mitchell, 1998; Min et al., 2020; Kingma et al.,
2014; Kumar et al., 2017; Nalisnick et al., 2019; Liu et al.,
2019; Iscen et al., 2019). The current prevailing paradigm
trains deep neural classifiers to jointly optimize the sum
of two losses: a supervised classification objective like
cross-entropy evaluated only on labeled data and a regularization term computed solely from the unlabeled data.
This paradigm provides a simple yet effective framework
for achieving state-of-the-art results (Laine and Aila, 2016;
Tarvainen and Valpola, 2017; Sohn et al., 2020; Xu et al.,
2021b; Wang et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023).
Despite these advancements, a key limitation of this deep
SSL paradigm is that labeled and unlabeled data are largely
handled separately, with images from each data type routed
to separate loss functions. We contend that a lack of deeper
interaction fails to fully harness the potential of unlabeled
data. Others have recently pointed out this disconnect between the two data types in deep SSL training (Huang et al.,
2023a). Earlier efforts have explored some interactions between data types, such as graph-propagated pseudolabels (Iscen et al., 2019) or augmentations derived from interaction
of raw features (Berthelot et al., 2019b;a). However, the
effective design of representations and losses that benefit
from labeled-unlabeled interaction remains underexplored.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have revolutionized various fields
with their strong performance at supervised tasks. However, their effectiveness often hinges on the availability of
large labeled datasets. This requirement presents a significant bottleneck, as in many applications labeled data can be
scarce and expensive to obtain due to the need for manual
annotation by human experts. In contrast, unlabeled data

In response to this challenge, we introduce InterLUDE, a
novel SSL algorithm that facilitates direct interaction between labeled and unlabeled data in both representations
and losses to enhance SSL performance. Our contributions
are:

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Tufts
University, Medford, MA, USA 2 Department of Computer Science,
University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX, USA. Correspondence to: Zhe Huang <zhe.huang@tufts.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Code: https://github.com/tufts-ml/InterLUDE/

1

