Towards Neural Architecture Search through Hierarchical Generative Modeling

Lichuan Xiang 1 * Łukasz Dudziak 2 * Mohamed S. Abdelfattah 3 Abhinav Mehrotra 2
Nicholas D. Lane 4 5 Hongkai Wen 1 2

Abstract

optimizing a machine learning (ML) system.

Neural Architecture Search (NAS) aims to automate deep neural network design across various applications, while a good search space design is core to NAS performance. A too-narrow
search space may fail to cover diverse task requirements, whereas a too-broad one can escalate
computational expenses and reduce efficiency. In
this work, we aim to address this challenge by
leaning on the recent advances in generative modelling – we propose a novel method that can navigate through an extremely large, general-purpose
initial search space efficiently by training a twolevel generative model hierarchy. The first level
uses Conditional Continuous Normalizing Flow
(CCNF) for micro-cell design, while the second
employs a transformer-based sequence generator to craft macro architectures aligned with task
needs and architectural constraints. To ensure
computational feasibility, we pre-train the generative models in a task-agnostic manner using a metric space of graph and zero-cost (ZC) similarities
between architectures. We show our approach can
achieve state-of-the-art performance among other
low-cost NAS methods across different tasks on
CIFAR-10/100, ImageNet and NAS-Bench-360.

Neural Architecture Search (NAS), as described by Zoph &
Le (2017), is a process designed to automatically identify
the most effective deep neural network configurations from
a specified, discrete group of options, commonly known
as a search space. NAS methodologies have demonstrated
their efficacy and surpassed the performance of manually
designed networks in many tasks. However, the practical
application of NAS is constrained by various challenges,
including search efficiency, robustness, and the ability to
transfer findings effectively across diverse datasets or tasks,
as noted by White et al. (2023)
In this paper, we focus on advancing NAS by tackling one of
the challenges that remain somewhat overlooked, possibly
due to its particular complexity – the challenge of being
limited by the initial NAS search space, which is often rigid
and hand-crafted. In practice, although carefully designed
search spaces can improve NAS performance (Radosavovic
et al., 2020), e.g. decreasing search time or improving the
chance of finding good-performing architectures, it limits
the applicability of NAS approaches to those tasks where
strong/sensible search spaces are available. More importantly, by definition, the performance of any NAS approach
is strictly associated with the quality of its search space –
even the best searching algorithm can only produce results
as good as the best candidate model from within the search
space.

1. Introduction

This inherent relationship between the statistical properties
of a search space and the cost-performance trade-off in NAS
is well-known. It has motivated researchers to explore the
problem of designing better search spaces, resulting in several methods attempting to automate this process (Zhou
et al., 2021; Hu et al., 2021; 2020). Generally speaking,
automated search space design methods can be seen as mappings from one search space to another, S → A, where
typically A ⊂ S and |A| ≪ |S|. In other words, these
methods focus on identifying a subset (A) of a larger search
space (S) that exhibits desired statistical properties, which
is then used by a chosen NAS algorithm to find individual
models. Compared to performing NAS directly on S, they
are more efficient due to the relaxed objective in the first
stage, effectively resulting in hybrid systems combining

Designing more accurate and efficient deep neural networks
(DNNs) has been one of the primary areas of focus in machine learning research in recent years. However, developing a novel architecture is often accompanied by burdensome trial-and-error in an attempt to find an optimal
DNN configuration. More recently, this process has been
aided by a broad family of algorithms designed to automate
*
Equal contribution 1 University of Warwick, UK 2 Samsung
AI Centre Cambridge, UK 3 Cornell University, US 4 University of
Cambridge, UK 5 Flower Labs, UK. Correspondence to: Hongkai
Wen <hongkai.wen@warwick.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

