Image Fusion via Vision-Language Model

Zixiang Zhao 1 2 Lilun Deng 1 Haowen Bai 1 Yukun Cui 1 Zhipeng Zhang 2 3 Yulun Zhang 4
Haotong Qin 2 Dongdong Chen 5 Jiangshe Zhang 1 Peng Wang 3 Luc Van Gool 2 6 7

Abstract

Text Paragraph Generation

“In this image, the scene is lively with various objects and vehicles
on a street. Two people can be seen riding skateboards, adding
movement and energy to the scene. Nearby, a person is riding a
bicycle, positioned between two distinct landmarks. A man on a
skateboard is slightly to the right……”

Text Paragraph
Generation

k,v
q

Text Feature 1

c

c

Image
Decoder

Text Encoder
(BLIP2)

Cross Attention

Vision Feature 1
Vision Feature 2

q

Image
Encoder

Text Encoder
(BLIP2)

k,v

walking on the street, a man on a bicycle, and several cars parked or
driving in the area. A large white building stands out in the
background, adding architectural interest to the scene …”

Fusion
Image

xN

ChatGPT

“In this image, we see a busy street with people riding bicycles. The
image captures different scenes of the street, including a man

Text Feature 2

Image Pairs

Image Caption
Dense Caption
Segment Anything

Cross Attention

Image fusion integrates essential information
from multiple images into a single composite,
enhancing structures, textures, and refining imperfections. Existing methods predominantly focus on pixel-level and semantic visual features
for recognition, but often overlook the deeper
text-level semantic information beyond vision.
Therefore, we introduce a novel fusion paradigm
named image Fusion via vIsion-Language Model
(FILM), for the first time, utilizing explicit textual information from source images to guide the
fusion process. Specifically, FILM generates semantic prompts from images and inputs them into
ChatGPT for comprehensive textual descriptions.
These descriptions are fused within the textual
domain and guide the visual information fusion,
enhancing feature extraction and contextual understanding, directed by textual semantic information
via cross-attention. FILM has shown promising
results in four image fusion tasks: infrared-visible,
medical, multi-exposure, and multi-focus image
fusion. We also propose a vision-language dataset
containing ChatGPT-generated paragraph descriptions for the eight image fusion datasets across
four fusion tasks, facilitating future research in
vision-language model-based image fusion. Code
and dataset are available at https://github.
com/Zhaozixiang1228/IF-FILM.

xN

Figure 1: Workflow for our FILM. Input images are first processed
to create prompts for ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2023), which then generate detailed textual descriptions. These descriptions help to get
fused textual features via the frozen BLIP2 (Li et al., 2023b) model.
Then, these textual features are fused and guide the extraction and
fusion of visual features via cross-attention, enhancing contextual
understanding with text-based semantic information. Finally, the
fusion image is output by the image decoder.

combines information from multiple source images to create a single image that is more informative and suitable for
human or machine perception. The realm of image fusion
encompasses several sub-tasks, each addressing unique challenges and applications. Representatively, infrared-visible
image fusion combines infrared and visible images, enhancing object representation under varied illumination conditions (Zhao et al., 2023b;c). Medical image fusion integrates
different modalities of clinical images such as MRI and CT
scans, offering a more comprehensive view for diagnosis
and treatment planning (James & Dasarathy, 2014; Xu &
Ma, 2021; Li et al., 2023c). Multi-exposure image fusion
merges images taken with different exposure settings to capture a wider range of luminance, which is crucial in high
dynamic range imaging (Ma et al., 2020b; 2017). Lastly,
multi-focus image fusion merges images focused on different planes to produce a uniformly sharp image, invaluable
in microscopy and macro photography (Deng & Dragotti,
2021; Zhang, 2021b).

1. Introduction
Image fusion (Zhao et al., 2023b;c; Liu et al., 2022a; Zhang,
2021b), standing as a critical technique in computer vision,
1
Xi’an Jiaotong University, China 2 ETH Zürich, Switzerland
Northwestern Polytechnical University, China 4 MoE Key Lab of
Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
China 5 Heriot-Watt University, United Kingdom 6 KU Leuven, Belgium 7 INSAIT, Bulgaria. Correspondence to: Yulun Zhang <yulun100@gmail.com>, Dongdong Chen <d.chen@hw.ac.uk>.
3

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Despite its widespread application, the current state of im1

