Efficient Adaptation in Mixed-Motive Environments
via Hierarchical Opponent Modeling and Planning

Yizhe Huang 1 2 Anji Liu 3 Fanqi Kong 2 4 Yaodong Yang 1 2 Song-Chun Zhu 1 2 5 Xue FengB 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

Constructing agents being able to rapidly adapt to previously
unseen agents is a longstanding challenge for Artificial Intelligence. We refer to this ability as few-shot adaptation. Previous work has proposed well-performed MARL algorithms
to study few-shot adaptation in zero-sum games (Vinyals
et al., 2019; Vezhnevets et al., 2020) and common-interest
environments (Barrett et al., 2011; Hu et al., 2020; Mahajan et al., 2022; Mirsky et al., 2022; Bauer et al., 2023).
These environments involve a predefined competitive or
cooperative relationship between agents. However, the majority of realistic multi-agent decision-making scenarios are
not confined to these situations and should be abstracted
as mixed-motive environments (Komorita & Parks, 1995;
Dafoe et al., 2020), where the relationships between agents
are non-deterministic, and the best responses of an agent
may change with others’ behavior. A policy, that is unable
to quickly adapt to co-players, may harm not only the focal
agent’s interest but also the entire group’s benefit. Therefore,
fast adapting to new co-players in mixed-motive environments warrants significant attention, but there has been little
focus on this aspect.

Despite the recent successes of multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) algorithms, efficiently adapting to co-players in mixed-motive environments remains a significant challenge. One
feasible approach is to hierarchically model coplayers’ behavior based on inferring their characteristics. However, these methods often encounter
difficulties in efficient reasoning and utilization
of inferred information. To address these issues,
we propose Hierarchical Opponent modeling and
Planning (HOP), a novel multi-agent decisionmaking algorithm that enables few-shot adaptation to unseen policies in mixed-motive environments. HOP is hierarchically composed of two
modules: an opponent modeling module that infers others’ goals and learns corresponding goalconditioned policies, and a planning module that
employs Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) to
identify the best response. Our approach improves
efficiency by updating beliefs about others’ goals
both across and within episodes and by using information from the opponent modeling module
to guide planning. Experimental results demonstrate that in mixed-motive environments, HOP
exhibits superior few-shot adaptation capabilities
when interacting with various unseen agents, and
excels in self-play scenarios. Furthermore, the
emergence of social intelligence during our experiments underscores the potential of our approach
in complex multi-agent environments.

In this paper, we focus on the few-shot adaptation to unseen
agents in mixed-motive environments. Many algorithms
struggle to perform well in mixed-motive environments
despite success in zero-sum and pure-cooperative environments, because they use efficient techniques specific to reward structures, such as minimax (Littman, 1994; Li et al.,
2019), Double Oracle (McMahan et al., 2003; Balduzzi
et al., 2019) or IGM condition (Sunehag et al., 2017; Son
et al., 2019; Rashid et al., 2020), which are not applicable in mixed-motive environments. The non-deterministic
relationships between agents and the general-sum reward
structure make decision-making and few-shot adaptation
more challenging in mixed-motive environments compared
with zero-sum and pure-cooperative environments.

1

Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University 2 State
Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, BIGAI
3
University of California, Los Angeles 4 Tsinghua University
5
PKU-WUHAN Institute for Artificial Intelligence. Correspondence to: Xue Feng <fengxue@bigai.ai>.

According to cognitive psychology and related disciplines,
humans’ ability to rapidly solve previously unseen problems depends on hierarchical cognitive mechanisms (Butz
& Kutter, 2016; Kleiman-Weiner et al., 2016; Eppe et al.,
2022). This hierarchical structure unifies high-level goal
reasoning with low-level action planning. Meanwhile, re-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

