Active Adaptive Experimental Design for Treatment Effect Estimation
with Covariate Choice
Masahiro Kato 1 Akihiro Oga 1 Wataru Komatsubara 1 Ryo Inokuchi 1

Abstract

to the treatment, and the other to the control (Imbens &
Rubin, 2015). Among the quantities representing causal
effects, this study focuses on an average treatment effect
(ATE), which defines a causal effect as the difference between the expected outcomes of binary treatments.

This study designs an adaptive experiment for
efficiently estimating average treatment effects
(ATEs). In each round of our adaptive experiment,
an experimenter sequentially samples an experimental unit, assigns a treatment, and observes the
corresponding outcome immediately. At the end
of the experiment, the experimenter estimates an
ATE using the gathered samples. The objective
is to estimate the ATE with a smaller asymptotic
variance. Existing studies have designed experiments that adaptively optimize the propensity
score (treatment-assignment probability). As a
generalization of such an approach, we propose
optimizing the covariate density as well as the
propensity score. First, we derive the efficient covariate density and propensity score that minimize
the semiparametric efficiency bound and find that
optimizing both covariate density and propensity
score minimizes the semiparametric efficiency
bound more effectively than optimizing only the
propensity score. Next, we design an adaptive
experiment using the efficient covariate density
and propensity score sequentially estimated during the experiment. Lastly, we propose an ATE
estimator whose asymptotic variance aligns with
the minimized semiparametric efficiency bound.

Treatments are an abstraction of an experimenter’s choices,
including drugs, online advertisements, and economic policies, which are also referred to differently, such as actions
and arms. A difference in outcomes of binary treatments
(treatment effect) is often considered a causal effect (Imbens & Rubin, 2015). However, due to the counterfactual
property, individual treatment effects cannot be observed.
Therefore, we use ATEs to capture causality.
A fundamental experimental approach for estimating ATEs
is a randomized control trial (RCT). In an RCT, one of the
binary treatments is randomly assigned to each experimental unit to obtain an unbiased estimator of ATEs. While
RCTs are the gold standard and reliable (Hariton & Locascio, 2018), they often require large sample sizes, which can
be costly. To reduce the sample size as much as possible,
or to reduce an estimation error given a sample size, adaptive experimental designs have gained increasing attention
across various fields (van der Laan, 2008; Hahn et al., 2011;
Chow & Chang, 2011; Villar et al., 2015; FDA, 2019).
For estimating ATEs efficiently (with smaller asymptotic
variances), van der Laan (2008) and Hahn et al. (2011)
design adaptive experiments that optimize the propensity
score (treatment-assignment probability). They show that
by optimizing the propensity score, we can minimize the
asymptotic variance of ATE estimators. Note that an asymptotic variance can be interpreted as an asymptotic mean
squared error (MSE) of ATE estimation. Furthermore, in
hypothesis testing, as an asymptotic variance decreases, the
sample size required for hypothesis testing also decreases.
Tabord-Meehan (2022), Kato et al. (2020), and Cook et al.
(2023) design refined experiments based on this approach.

1. Introduction
Experimental approaches play a pivotal role in uncovering causality in various fields of science and industrial applications, such as epidemiology and economics (SheinChung Chow, 2005; Hahn et al., 2011; Chow & Chang,
2011; FDA, 2019). This study focuses on cases with binary
treatments. Typically, one of these treatments corresponds
1

As a generalization of this approach, we consider a novel setting where an experimenter can sample experimental units
based on their covariates and covariate density set by the
experimenter. We show that by optimizing the covariate density as well as the propensity score, we can further minimize
asymptotic variances compared to adaptive experiments that

Mizuho-DL Financial Technology Co., Ltd., Tokyo,
Japan.
Correspondence to: Masahiro Kato <masahirokato@fintec.co.jp>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

