Can Looped Transformers Learn to Implement Multi-step
Gradient Descent for In-context Learning?

Khashayar Gatmiry 1 Nikunj Saunshi 2 Sashank Reddi 2 Stefanie Jegelka 1 Sanjiv Kumar 2

Abstract

of-the-art models for various natural language and vision
tasks. Large scale Transformer models have demonstrated
remarkable capabilities to solve many difficult problems,
including those requiring multi-step reasoning through large
language models (Brown et al., 2020; Wei et al., 2022b).
One such particularly appealing property is their few-shot
learning ability, where the functionality and predictions of
the model adapt to additional context provided in the input,
without having to update the model weights. This ability
of the model, typically referred to as “in-context learning”,
has been crucial to their success in various applications.
Recently, there has been a surge of interest to understand
this phenomenon, particularly since Garg et al. (2022) empirically showed that Transformers can be trained to solve
many in-context learning problems based on linear regression and decision trees. Motivated by this empirical success,
Von Oswald et al. (2023); Akyürek et al. (2022) theoretically
showed the following intriguing expressivity result: multilayer Transformers with linear self-attention can implement
gradient descent for linear regression where each layer of
Transformer implements one step of gradient descent. In
other words, they hypothesize that the in-context learning
ability results from approximating gradient-based few-shot
learning within its forward pass. Panigrahi et al. (2023),
further, extended this result to more general model classes.

The remarkable capability of Transformers to
show reasoning and few-shot abilities, without
any fine-tuning, is widely conjectured to stem
from their ability to implicitly simulate a multistep algorithms – such as gradient descent – with
their weights in a single forward pass. Recently,
there has been progress in understanding this
complex phenomenon from an expressivity point
of view, by demonstrating that Transformers can
express such multi-step algorithms. However,
our knowledge about the more fundamental
aspect of its learnability, beyond single layer
models, is very limited. In particular, can training
Transformers enable convergence to algorithmic
solutions? In this work we resolve this for
in-context linear regression with linear looped
Transformers – a multi-layer model with weight
sharing that is conjectured to have an inductive
bias to learn fix-point iterative algorithms. More
specifically, for this setting we show that the
global minimizer of the population training loss
implements multi-step preconditioned gradient
descent, with a preconditioner that adapts to the
data distribution. Furthermore, we show a fast
convergence for gradient flow on the regression
loss, despite the non-convexity of the landscape,
by proving a novel gradient dominance condition.
To our knowledge, this is the first theoretical
analysis for multi-layer Transformer in this
setting. We further validate our theoretical
findings through synthetic experiments.

While such an approximation is interesting from the point of
view of expressivity, it is unclear if the Transformer model
can learn to implement such algorithms. To this end, Ahn
et al. (2023); Zhang et al. (2023) theoretically show, in a
Gaussian linear regression setting, that the global minimizers of a one-layer model essentially simulate a single step
of preconditioned gradient descent, and that gradient flow
converges to this solution. Ahn et al. (2023) further show for
the multi-layer case that a single step of gradient descent can
be implemented by some stationary points of the loss. However, a fundamental characterization of all the stationary
points for multi-layer Transformer, and the convergence to a
stationary point that implements multi-step gradient descent,
remains a challenging and important open question.

1. Introduction
Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) have completely revolutionized the field of machine learning and have led to state1
MIT 2 Google Research. Correspondence to: Khashayar Gatmiry <gatmiry@mit.edu>.

In this work, we focus our attention on the learnability of
such multi-step algorithms by Transformer models. Instead
of multi-layer models, we consider a closely related but

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

