Transitional Uncertainty with Layered Intermediate Predictions

Ryan Benkert 1 Mohit Prabhushankar 1 Ghassan AlRegib 1

Abstract

(Liu et al., 2020), or the softmax confidence of the output
(Mukhoti et al., 2023). While score design plays a crucial
role in measuring uncertainty, the choice is dictated by application and uncertainty characteristics (Kendall & Gal,
2017). The second principle concerns information availability, namely whether the network can preserve features
that reflect uncertainty information and does not “collapse”
uncertain data points to certain representations (Van Amersfoort et al., 2020). We refer to the latter principle as feature
preservation.

In this paper, we discuss feature engineering for
single-pass uncertainty estimation. For accurate
uncertainty estimates, neural networks must extract differences in the feature space that quantify
uncertainty. This could be achieved by current
single-pass approaches that maintain feature distances between data points as they traverse the
network. While initial results are promising, maintaining feature distances within the network representations frequently inhibits information compression and opposes the learning objective. We
study this effect theoretically and empirically to
arrive at a simple conclusion: preserving feature
distances in the output is beneficial when the preserved features contribute to learning the label distribution and act in opposition otherwise. We then
propose Transitional Uncertainty with Layered
Intermediate Predictions (TULIP) as a simple
approach to address the shortcomings of current
single-pass estimators. Specifically, we implement feature preservation by extracting features
from intermediate representations before information is collapsed by subsequent layers. We refer to
the underlying preservation mechanism as transitional feature preservation. We show that TULIP
matches or outperforms current single-pass methods on standard benchmarks and in practical settings where these methods are less reliable (imbalances, complex architectures, medical modalities).

Despite their critical importance, preserving features is not
trivial in neural networks. In particular, information compression is a desirable property of neural networks and a
central component of the learning problem (Tishby et al.,
2000). In spite of this discrepancy, current single-pass
uncertainty methods preserve features by maintaining distances between data points in the output and risk inhibiting compression of application irrelevant information (Liu
et al., 2020; Van Amersfoort et al., 2020; van Amersfoort
et al., 2021; Mukhoti et al., 2023; Kwon et al., 2020; Prabhushankar & AlRegib). As a result, several recent studies
have shown practical limitations of current single-pass methods such as their susceptibility to distributional shift (Postels
et al., 2022). We provide a simple illustration of this effect
in Figure 1a. The left plot shows the 2D neural network
output features of two clusters when trained without explicit feature preservation. The network collapses the class
clusters to single points creating a challenging setting for
uncertainty estimation. The center plot shows the same
2D classification problem, but depicts a network trained
with feature preservation constraints on the output. These
disadvantages motivate the search for alternative feature
preservation approaches.

1. Introduction

To this end, a more conservative strategy preserves features
in the collection of multiple representations of the same
sample (Malinin & Gales, 2018). From a preservation perspective, the approach is preferred as feature distances are
encoded in differences (e.g. spread) of the individual sample representations and does not require constraining the
compression property. We term this approach as transitional feature preservation and illustrate a toy example in
the right plot of Figure 1a. We show three different representations of the same two clusters collected from different
sources hw1,2,3 . While the sources collapse points individu-

Effective single-pass uncertainty estimation in deep learning
is governed by two design principals. The first is defining an
output score that reflects uncertainty. For instance, we can
measure uncertainty through distance from the training data
1

School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA. Correspondence to: Ryan
Benkert <rbenkert3@gatech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

