Invariant Risk Minimization Is A Total Variation Model
Zhao-Rong Lai 1 Weiwen Wang 1

Abstract

The key to solving this misclassification problem is to distinguish between the invariant features (animal shapes) and
the spurious features (landscapes) which lead to distributional shift. Invariant Risk Minimization (IRM, (Arjovsky
et al., 2020)) emerges as a learning paradigm that estimates
nonlinear, invariant, and causal predictors from multiple
training environments for such out-of-distribution (OOD)
generalization issue. It introduces a gradient norm penalty
that measures the optimality of the dummy classifier at each
environment. Different variants of IRM have been proposed
since then, such as Risk Extrapolation (REx, Krueger et al.
2021), SparseIRM (Zhou et al., 2022), jointly-learning with
auxiliary information (ZIN, Lin et al. 2022), and invariant feature learning through independent variables (TIVA,
Tan et al. 2023). These works improve the robustness and
extendability of IRM.

Invariant risk minimization (IRM) is an arising approach to generalize invariant features to different
environments in machine learning. While most
related works focus on new IRM settings or new
application scenarios, the mathematical essence
of IRM remains to be properly explained. We verify that IRM is essentially a total variation based
on L2 norm (TV-ℓ2 ) of the learning risk with respect to the classifier variable. Moreover, we propose a novel IRM framework based on the TV-ℓ1
model. It not only expands the classes of functions that can be used as the learning risk and the
feature extractor, but also has robust performance
in denoising and invariant feature preservation
based on the coarea formula. We also illustrate
some requirements for IRM-TV-ℓ1 to achieve outof-distribution generalization. Experimental results show that the proposed framework achieves
competitive performance in several benchmark
machine learning scenarios.

In this paper, we investigate the mathematical essence of
IRM and find that it can be absorbed in a traditional and
widely-used operator in mathematics: total variation (TV).
TV has long been used in various fields of mathematics and
engineering, like optimal control, data transmission, sensing
and denoising. For example, TV based on ℓ1 norm (TV-ℓ1 ,
(Rudin et al., 1992)) is exploited to develop noise removal
algorithms in signal processing. TV-ℓ1 can also be used in
image restoration and processing (Chan et al., 2006; Chen
et al., 2006). In other aspects, TV-ℓ1 is also a tractable
approach to data-driven scale selection and function approximation (Chan & Esedoglu, 2005).

1. Introduction
Many machine learning tasks can be reduced to minimizing
the learning risk, which is properly designed according to
the task. Specifically, the learning risk is empirically minimized on the training set, but the learned model should be
used on the unseen data. If there are significant differences
between the features of the training and unseen data, the
performance of the learning system may deteriorate (Recht
et al., 2019; Arjovsky et al., 2020; Lin et al., 2022). For
example, if a convolutional neural network (CNN) is trained
with pictures of cows in grass and camels in deserts, it may
fail to classify easy samples of cows in deserts. This is because the CNN minimizes the training error by classifying
grass and deserts as cows and camels, respectively.

Based on this motivation, we reveal some useful mathematical properties of TV-based IRM models that can be
exploited in machine learning scenarios. 1. We formulate
and verify that the existing IRM framework is essentially a
TV-ℓ2 model. 2. We propose a novel IRM framework based
on the TV-ℓ1 model (IRM-TV-ℓ1 ). It has two advantages: 1)
The set of TV-ℓ1 integrable functions is larger than that of
TV-ℓ2 integrable functions when the measure is finite (this
is the case in IRM-TV-ℓ2 ), hence more classes of functions
are allowed as the learning risk and the feature extractor in
IRM-TV-ℓ1 . 2) TV-ℓ1 has robust performance in denoising
and preserving sharp features based on the coarea formula.
This property helps to shape a blocky (piecewise-constant)
learning risk that is more robust to the environment change.
3. We investigate some requirements for IRM-TV-ℓ1 to
achieve OOD generalization, such as a more flexible penalty

1

Department of Mathematics, College of Information Science
and Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Weiwen Wang <wangww29@jnu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

