An Effective Dynamic Gradient Calibration Method for Continual Learning

Weichen Lin * 1 Jiaxiang Chen * 1 Ruomin Huang 2 Hu Ding 3

Abstract

2021; He et al., 2016), and pattern recognition (Bai et al.,
2021; Zhu et al., 2016). Usually we assume that the whole
training data is stored in our facility and the DNN models
can be trained offline by using Stochastic Gradient Descent
(SGD) algorithms (Bottou et al., 1991; 2018). However,
real-world applications often require us to consider training
lifelong models, where the tasks and data are accumulated
in a streaming fashion (Van de Ven & Tolias, 2019; Parisi
et al., 2019). For example, with the popularity of smart
devices, a large amount of new data is generated every day.
A model needs to make full use of these new data to improve its performance while keeping old knowledge from
being forgotten. Those applications motivate us to study
the problem of continual learning (CL) (Kirkpatrick et al.,
2017; Li & Hoiem, 2017), where its goal is to develop effective method for gleaning insights from current data while
retaining information from prior training data.

Continual learning (CL) is a fundamental topic
in machine learning, where the goal is to train a
model with continuously incoming data and tasks.
Due to the memory limit, we cannot store all the
historical data, and therefore confront the “catastrophic forgetting” problem, i.e., the performance
on the previous tasks can substantially decrease
because of the missing information in the latter
period. Though a number of elegant methods
have been proposed, the catastrophic forgetting
phenomenon still cannot be well avoided in practice. In this paper, we study the problem from the
gradient perspective, where our aim is to develop
an effective algorithm to calibrate the gradient in
each updating step of the model; namely, our goal
is to guide the model to be updated in the right
direction under the situation that a large amount
of historical data are unavailable. Our idea is
partly inspired by the seminal stochastic variance
reduction methods (e.g., SVRG and SAGA) for
reducing the variance of gradient estimation in
stochastic gradient descent algorithms. Another
benefit is that our approach can be used as a general tool, which is able to be incorporated with
several existing popular CL methods to achieve
better performance. We also conduct a set of experiments on several benchmark datasets to evaluate the performance in practice.

A significant challenge that CL encounters is “catastrophic
forgetting” (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017; McCloskey & Cohen,
1989; Goodfellow et al., 2014b), wherein the exclusive focus
on the current set of examples could result in a dramatic
deterioration in the performance on previously learned data.
This phenomenon is primarily attributed to limited storage
and computational resources during the training process;
otherwise, one could directly train the model from scratch
using all the saved data. To address this issue, we need
to develop efficient algorithm for training neural networks
from a continuous stream of non-i.i.d. samples, with the
goal of mitigating catastrophic forgetting while effectively
managing computational costs and memory footprint.
A number of elegant CL methods have been proposed to
alleviate the catastrophic forgetting issue (Wang et al., 2023;
De Lange et al., 2021; Mai et al., 2022). One representative
CL approach is referred to as “Experience Replay (ER)”
(Ratcliff, 1990; Chaudhry et al., 2019b), which has shown
promising performance in several continual learning scenarios (Prabhu et al., 2023; Arani et al., 2022; Farquhar & Gal,
2018). Roughly speaking, the ER method utilizes reservoir
sampling (Vitter, 1985) to maintain historical data in the
buffer, then extract new incoming training data with random
samplings for learning the current task. Though the intuition is simple, the ER method currently is one of the most
popular CL approaches that incurs moderate computational
and storage demands. Moreover, several recently proposed

1. Introduction
In the past years, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) demonstrate remarkable performance for many different tasks in
artificial intelligence, such as image generation (Ho et al.,
2020; Goodfellow et al., 2014a), classification (Liu et al.,
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Data Science, University of
Science and Technology of China, Anhui, China. 2 Duke University 3 School of Computer Science and Technology, University of
Science and Technology of China, Anhui, China. Correspondence
to: Hu Ding <huding@ustc.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

