PAGER: Accurate Failure Characterization in Deep Regression Models

Jayaraman J. Thiagarajan 1 Vivek Narayanaswamy 1 Puja Trivedi 2 Rushil Anirudh 3

Abstract

insight that uncertainties alone are insufficient for a comprehensive characterization of failures in regression models. Figure 1 empirically illustrates the lack of correlation
between uncertainty and the true risk using a simple 1D
function (with two experiment designs) – low uncertainty
regimes can still correspond to a higher risk due to feature heterogeneity in the training data (Seedat et al., 2022),
and similarly data regimes outside the training support may
correspond to low risk if the model extrapolates well.

Safe deployment of AI models requires proactive detection of failures to prevent costly errors.
To this end, we study the important problem of
detecting failures in deep regression models. Existing approaches rely on epistemic uncertainty
estimates or inconsistency w.r.t the training data to
identify failure. Interestingly, we find that while
uncertainties are necessary they are insufficient to
accurately characterize failure in practice. Hence,
we introduce PAGER (Principled Analysis of Generalization Errors in Regressors), a framework to
systematically detect and characterize failures in
deep regressors. Built upon the principle of anchored training in deep models, PAGER unifies
both epistemic uncertainty and complementary
manifold non-conformity scores to accurately organize samples into different risk regimes.

To circumvent this, we introduce PAGER (Principled
Analysis of Generalization Errors in Regressors), a new
framework for failure analysis. A key contribution of this
work is that we advocate for incorporating manifold nonconformity, i.e., adherence to the joint data distribution, as
an essential complement to uncertainties. Building upon
the principle of anchored training (Thiagarajan et al., 2022),
we make a critical finding that non-conformity scores can
be estimated through reverse anchoring without the need
for auxiliary models. Additionally, we propose a flexible
analysis of model errors through the concept of risk regimes,
thus avoiding the need for a rigid definition of failure or
additional calibration data. Finally, we introduce a suite
of metrics to holistically assess failure detectors in regression tasks. Empirical results reveal that, when compared
to state-of-the-art detectors, the risk regimes identified by
PAGER align best with the true risk.

1. Introduction
Ensuring the safety of AI models involves proactively detecting failures to help avoid costly errors. While existing efforts
have predominantly focused on classification models (Guillory et al., 2021; Narayanaswamy et al., 2022; Baek et al.,
2022), we are interested more challenging problem of failure detection in deep regressors. Though continuous-valued
prediction is prevalent in high-impact applications including
healthcare (Luo et al., 2022), physical sciences (Raissi et al.,
2019) and reinforcement learning, the notion of failure in
regression models is often application-specific.

2. Background and Related Work
Preliminaries. We consider a predictive model F , parameterized by θ, trained on a labeled dataset D = {(xi , yi )}M
i=1
with M samples. Each input xi ∈ X and label yi ∈ y
belong to the spaces of inputs X (in d−dimensions) and
continuous-valued targets y respectively. Given a nonnegative loss function L, e.g., absolute error |y − ŷ|,
the sample-level risk of a predictor can be defined as
R(x; Fθ ) = Ey|x L(y, Fθ (x)). Since estimating true risk
is non-trivial due to the need for access to the unknown
joint distribution P (X, y), an alternative is to identify risk
regimes in accordance to the expected risk. We now define the different risk regimes that one needs to characterize: (i) In-distribution (ID): This is the scenario where
P (xt ∈ X) > 0 and P (xt ∈ D) > 0, i.e., there is

A common approach is to use epistemic uncertainty (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017; Gal & Ghahramani, 2016; He
et al., 2020; Amini et al., 2020) as a surrogate for expected
risk (Lahlou et al., 2023). However, we uncover a crucial
1

Lawrence Livermore National Labs, CA, USA 2 University of
Michigan, USA 3 Amazon, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Jayaraman J. Thiagarajan <jjayaram@llnl.gov>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

