Exact Soft Analytical Side-Channel Attacks using Tractable Circuits

Thomas Wedenig 1 Rishub Nagpal 2 Gaëtan Cassiers 3 Stefan Mangard 2 Robert Peharz 1

Abstract

defining, analysing and designing cryptographic algorithms,
which form the backbone of our modern information society. Specifically, side-channel attacks attempt to learn
about secret material used in a cryptographic computation
by observing implementation artifacts, commonly called
leakages, such as timing information (Kocher, 1996), electromagnetic emissions (Gandolfi et al., 2001), and power
consumption (Kocher et al., 1999). Most contemporary attacks use these leakages to reason about the internal state of
a cryptographic algorithm in a probabilistic manner. Specifically, in template attacks (Chari et al., 2002) the attacker
has access to a clone of the device under attack and can
run the algorithm repeatedly with randomly generated keys
and plaintexts as inputs. Simultaneously, the attacker also
records leakage information during all runs, e.g. the power
trace of the device. Using this data, the attacker can easily
build a set of probabilistic models, predicting distributions
of intermediate values conditional on the leakage.

Detecting weaknesses in cryptographic algorithms is of utmost importance for designing secure information systems. The state-of-the-art
soft analytical side-channel attack (SASCA) uses
physical leakage information to make probabilistic predictions about intermediate computations
and combines these “guesses” with the known
algorithmic logic to compute the posterior distribution over the key. This attack is commonly performed via loopy belief propagation, which, however, lacks guarantees in terms of convergence
and inference quality. In this paper, we develop
a fast and exact inference method for SASCA,
denoted as ExSASCA, by leveraging knowledge
compilation and tractable probabilistic circuits.
When attacking the Advanced Encryption Standard (AES), the most widely used encryption algorithm to date, ExSASCA outperforms SASCA
by more than 31% top-1 success rate absolute.
By leveraging sparse belief messages, this performance is achieved with little more computational
cost than SASCA, and about 3 orders of magnitude less than exact inference via exhaustive
enumeration. Even with dense belief messages,
ExSASCA still uses 6 times less computations
than exhaustive inference.

The attacker’s goal is now to combine these value distributions (“soft guesses”) and the (hard logical) knowledge
about the algorithm to infer the posterior distribution of the
secret key. A naı̈ve exhaustive computation of this posterior is prohibitive for practical attacks as a single leakage
might require hours of compute time. As a remedy, the
state-of-the-art soft analytical side-channel attack (SASCA)
(Veyrat-Charvillon et al., 2014) uses loopy belief propagation (BP) on a factor graph representation of the cryptographic algorithm, to produce an approximate key posterior.
However, loopy BP has limited theoretical underpinnings
as neither convergence is granted, nor does it guarantee accurate posterior estimates in case of convergence (Knoll,
2022). Consequently, while SASCA can detect weaknesses
in cryptosystems, an unsuccessful SASCA does not imply
any certificate that the leakage cannot be exploited further.
On the contrary, it is straightforward to construct examples
where inference is in fact easy but loopy BP fails catastrophically.

1. Introduction
Unifying learning, logical reasoning and probabilistic inference at scale has a wide range of applications, such as
error correcting codes, verification and system diagnostics.
In particular, cryptographic attacks play a central role in
1

Institute of Theoretical Computer Science, Graz University
of Technology, Graz, Austria 2 Institute of Applied Information
Processing and Communications, Graz University of Technology,
Graz, Austria 3 Institute of Information and Communication Technologies, Electronics and Applied Mathematics (ICTM), UCLouvain, Ottignies-Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium. Correspondence to:
Thomas Wedenig <thomas.wedenig@tugraz.at>.

In this paper, we develop a fast and exact inference algorithm for SASCA, denoted as ExSASCA, for the Advanced
Encryption Standard (AES), the most prominent and widely
used encryption algorithm to date. To this end, we build
on recent results from knowledge compilation (Darwiche &
Marquis, 2002; Darwiche, 2011) and tractable probabilistic
circuits (Kisa et al., 2014; Vergari et al., 2020). Similarly as

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

