Improving Accuracy-robustness Trade-off via
Pixel Reweighted Adversarial Training

Jiacheng Zhang 1 Feng Liu 1 Dawei Zhou 2 Jingfeng Zhang 3 Tongliang Liu 4

Abstract

Kumar et al. (2020) show that by adding imperceptible adversarial noise, a well-trained model misclassifies a ‘Stop’
traffic sign as a ‘Yield’ traffic sign. To make sure the trained
model is robust to AEs, adversarial training (AT) stands out
as a representative defensive framework (Goodfellow et al.,
2015; Madry et al., 2018), which trains a model with generated AEs. Normally, AEs are crafted by intentionally adding
perturbations to the natural images, aiming to mislead the
model into making erroneous outputs.

Adversarial training (AT) trains models using
adversarial examples (AEs), which are natural
images modified with specific perturbations to
mislead the model. These perturbations are constrained by a predefined perturbation budget ϵ and
are equally applied to each pixel within an image.
However, in this paper, we discover that not all
pixels contribute equally to the accuracy on AEs
(i.e., robustness) and accuracy on natural images
(i.e., accuracy). Motivated by this finding, we
propose Pixel-reweighted AdveRsarial Training
(PART), a new framework that partially reduces
ϵ for less influential pixels, guiding the model
to focus more on key regions that affect its outputs. Specifically, we first use class activation
mapping (CAM) methods to identify important
pixel regions, then we keep the perturbation budget for these regions while lowering it for the
remaining regions when generating AEs. In the
end, we use these pixel-reweighted AEs to train
a model. PART achieves a notable improvement
in accuracy without compromising robustness on
CIFAR-10, SVHN and TinyImagenet-200, justifying the necessity to allocate distinct weights to
different pixel regions in robust classification.

In existing AT methods, e.g., AT (Madry et al., 2018),
TRADES (Zhang et al., 2019) and MART (Wang et al.,
2020), the magnitude of perturbations (for generating AEs)
is usually constrained by a predefined perturbation budget,
denoted as ϵ, and keeps the same on each pixel within an
image by assuming a ℓ∞ -norm constraint. Based on a ℓ∞ norm constraint, one AE can be generated by solving the
following constraint optimization problem:
max ℓ(f (x + ∆), y), subject to ∥∆∥∞ ≤ ϵ,
∆

(1)

where ℓ is a loss function, f is a model, x ∈ Rd is a natural
image, y is the true label of x, ∆ ∈ [−ϵ, ϵ]d is the adversarial perturbation added to x, ∥ · ∥∞ is the ℓ∞ -norm, d is the
data dimension, and ϵ is the maximum allowed perturbation
budget. Let ∆∗ be the solution of the above optimization
problem, then x̃ = x + ∆∗ is the generated AE. Given
that ∥∆∥∞ ≤ ϵ, there is an implicit assumption in this AE
generation process: all pixels have the same perturbation
budget ϵ. We argue that this assumption may overlook the
fact that different pixel regions influence the model’s outputs differently (Geirhos et al., 2019; Brendel & Bethge,
2019; Hermann & Lampinen, 2020).

1. Introduction
Since the discovery of adversarial examples (AEs) by
Szegedy et al. (2014), the security of deep learning models
has become an area of growing concern, especially in critical applications such as autonomous driving. For instance,

To the best of our knowledge, how the discrepancies of
pixels would affect image classification in AT (i.e., robust
classification) has not been well-investigated. Therefore,
it is natural to raise the following question: Are all pixels
equally important in robust classification?

1

School of Computing and Information Systems, The
University of Melbourne 2 State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks, Xidian University 3 School of Computer Science, The University of Auckland / RIKEN AIP
4
Sydney AI Centre, The University of Sydney. Correspondence to: Feng Liu <fengliu.ml@gmail.com>, Tongliang Liu
<tliang.liu@gmail.com>.

In this paper, we mainly focus on ℓ∞ -norm constraint (we
provide analysis on ℓ2 -norm constraint in Appendix A). By
conducting a proof-of-concept experiment, we find that not
all pixels contribute equally to the accuracy on AEs (i.e., robustness) and accuracy on natural images (i.e., accuracy). In

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

