Leverage Class-Specific Accuracy to Guide Data Generation for Improving
Image Classification

Jay Gala 1 Pengtao Xie 1 2

Abstract

thetic training images, augmenting the limited real training
data, and have demonstrated promising effectiveness.

In many image classification applications, the
number of labeled training images is limited,
which leads to model overfitting. To mitigate
the lack of training data, deep generative models
have been leveraged to generate synthetic training
data. However, existing methods generate data
for individual classes based on how much training
data they have without considering their actual
data needs. To address this limitation, we propose
needs-aware image generation, which automatically identifies the different data needs of individual classes based on their classification performance and divides a limited data generation budget into these classes according to their needs. We
propose a multi-level optimization based framework which performs four learning stages in an
end-to-end manner. Experiments on both imbalanced and balanced classification datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method.

Different classes within a classification task may require
varying amounts of synthetic training data, with these needs
often being dictated by the classification performance of individual classes. For instance, in class-imbalanced datasets,
the number of training examples can vary greatly between
classes, leading to performance disparities (Cui et al., 2019b;
Huang et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2018; Kim et al., 2020).
Those classes with poorer performance often need more
synthetic training data. Even in class-balanced datasets,
classification accuracy can differ between classes (He et al.,
2016a; 2019). Some classes may possess more complex or
diverse features, making them more challenging for classifiers to learn and accurately distinguish. This variation
in classification accuracy results in different classes having
distinct requirements for synthetic data.
Due to computation and memory constraints, there is a limit
to the number of synthetic images that can be generated,
referred to as the data generation budget. It is crucial to
allocate more of this budget to worse-performing classes
that require more synthetic training data and less to betterperforming ones. However, existing data generation methods (Azizi et al., 2023; Trabucco et al., 2023; Zhou et al.,
2023a; Zheng et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023; Antoniou et al.,
2017; Mariani et al., 2018; Such et al., 2020) cannot properly divide a limited data generation budget between classes
based on their actual data needs. They simply distribute the
budget based on the number of training examples in each
class, assuming that a class with fewer training examples
needs more synthetic training data. However, this assumption does not always hold in many real-world applications.
For example, a class with similar data examples, which are
distinct from other classes, may already exhibit excellent
classification performance even if the amount of training
data is limited. In such a case, there would be less need for
synthetic training data for this class.

1. Introduction
Image classification (He et al., 2016b) is a fundamental
problem in computer vision and machine learning. In many
applications, due to the high annotation cost (Tian et al.,
2020), it is challenging to obtain large amounts of labeled
training images. Trained on small-sized datasets, models
tend to overfit the training data and generalize poorly on test
data (Neyshabur et al., 2017). To address this problem, many
approaches (Azizi et al., 2023; Trabucco et al., 2023; Zhou
et al., 2023a; Zheng et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023; Antoniou
et al., 2017; Mariani et al., 2018; Such et al., 2020) have
been proposed to leverage deep generative models (Ho et al.,
2020; Song et al., 2021; Goodfellow et al., 2014; Kingma
et al., 2019; Rezende & Mohamed, 2015) to generate syn1

University of California San Diego 2 Mohamed bin Zayed
University of Artificial Intelligence. Correspondence to: Pengtao
Xie <p1xie@ucsd.edu>.

To address the limitations of existing methods, we propose
a multi-level optimization (MLO) (Sato et al., 2021) based
framework for needs-aware data generation. Instead of relying on the number of training images in each class, our
framework assesses the data needs of individual classes

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

