On the Embedding Collapse When Scaling Up Recommendation Models

Xingzhuo Guo 1 * Junwei Pan 2 Ximei Wang 2 Baixu Chen 1 Jie Jiang 2 Mingsheng Long 1

Abstract

adopted in a wide range of online applications, such as Ecommerce, social media, news feeds, and music streaming.
Researchers have developed deep-learning-based recommendation models to dig feature representations flexibly.
These models have been successfully deployed across a
multitude of application scenarios, thereby demonstrating
their widespread adoption and effectiveness.

Recent advances in foundation models have led to
a promising trend of developing large recommendation models to leverage vast amounts of available data. Still, mainstream models remain embarrassingly small in size and naı̈ve enlarging does
not lead to sufficient performance gain, suggesting a deficiency in the model scalability. In this
paper, we identify the embedding collapse phenomenon as the inhibition of scalability, wherein
the embedding matrix tends to occupy a lowdimensional subspace. Through empirical and
theoretical analysis, we demonstrate a two-sided
effect of feature interaction specific to recommendation models. On the one hand, interacting with
collapsed embeddings restricts embedding learning and exacerbates the collapse issue. On the
other hand, interaction is crucial in mitigating the
fitting of spurious features as a scalability guarantee. Based on our analysis, we propose a simple
yet effective multi-embedding design incorporating embedding-set-specific interaction modules to
learn embedding sets with large diversity and thus
reduce collapse. Extensive experiments demonstrate that this proposed design provides consistent scalability and effective collapse mitigation
for various recommendation models. Code is
available at this repository: https://github.
com/thuml/Multi-Embedding.

Motivated by the advancement of large foundation models (Kirillov et al., 2023; OpenAI, 2023; Radford et al.,
2021; Rombach et al., 2022) that benefit from increasing
parameters, it should have been a promising trend to scale
up the recommendation model size to use the data amount
fully. Yet counterintuitively, as the most-weighted component critical for performance (Qu et al., 2016; Lian et al.,
2018; Wang et al., 2021), the embeddings of recommendation models are typically tuned too small such as a size of
10 (Zhu et al., 2022), and thus do not adequately capture
the magnitude of data. Worsely, increasing the embedding
size does not sufficiently improve the performance or even
hurts the model, as shown in Figure 1a. This suggests a
deficiency in the model scalability of existing architecture
designs, constraining the potential upper bound for recommender systems.
To figure out the reason behind it, we take a spectral analysis
on the learned embedding matrices based on singular value
decomposition and exhibit the normalized singular values
in Figure 1b. Surprisingly, most singular values are significantly small, i.e., the learned embedding matrices are nearly
low-rank, which we refer to as the embedding collapse phenomenon. With the enlarged model size, the model does not
learn to capture a larger dimension of information, implying a learning process with ineffective parameter utilization,
which restricts the scalability.

1. Introduction
Recommender systems are important machine learning scenarios that predict users’ actions on items based on tremendous multi-field categorical data (Zhang et al., 2016), which
play an indispensable role in our daily lives to help people
discover information about their interests and have been

In this work, we study the mechanism behind the embedding collapse through empirical and theoretical analysis and
shed light on the two-sided effect on model scalability of the
feature interaction module, the cornerstone of recommendation models to model higher-order correlations. On the one
hand, interaction with collapsed embeddings will constrain
the embedding learning and, thus, in turn, aggravate the
collapse issue. On the other hand, the feature interaction
also plays a vital role in reducing overfitting when scaling
up models, which cannot be restricted or removed.

*
Work partially done while an intern at Tencent Inc. 1 School
of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, China 2 Tencent Inc,
China. Xingzhuo Guo <gxz23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>. Correspondence to: Mingsheng Long <mingsheng@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

