Target Networks and Over-parameterization Stabilize Off-policy Bootstrapping
with Function Approximation

Fengdi Che 1 Chenjun Xiao 2 Jincheng Mei 3 Bo Dai 3 4 Ramki Gummadi 3 Oscar A Ramirez 5 6
Christopher K Harris 6 7 A. Rupam Mahmood 1 8 Dale Schuurmans 1 3 8

Abstract

with an unqualified policy can pose life-threatening risks
(Levine et al. 2020). The ability to perform off-policy evaluation can also enhance data efficiency, for example, through
techniques like experience replay (Lin 1992). Typically,
estimation from offline data does not enforce constraints on
the collection procedure, which allows for the inclusion of
diverse sources, such as driving data from multiple drivers
or online text from alternative platforms. A key challenge,
however, is that offline data might only cover part of the
state space, which leads to technical difficulties that are not
encountered when learning from continual online data.

We prove that the combination of a target network
and over-parameterized linear function approximation establishes a weaker convergence condition for bootstrapped value estimation in certain
cases, even with off-policy data. Our condition is
naturally satisfied for expected updates over the
entire state-action space or learning with a batch
of complete trajectories from episodic Markov
decision processes. Notably, using only a target network or an over-parameterized model does
not provide such a convergence guarantee. Additionally, we extend our results to learning with
truncated trajectories, showing that convergence
is achievable for all tasks with minor modifications, akin to value truncation for the final states in
trajectories. Our primary result focuses on temporal difference estimation for prediction, providing
high-probability value estimation error bounds
and empirical analysis on Baird’s counterexample
and a Four-room task. Furthermore, we explore
the control setting, demonstrating that similar convergence conditions apply to Q-learning.

Temporal difference (TD) estimation (Sutton & Barto 2018),
where value estimates are formed by bootstrapping from the
Bellman equation, has emerged as one of the most widely
deployed value estimation techniques. Despite its popularity, however, the deadly triad can thwart TD algorithms in
offline learning. It is well known that the combination of
off-policy data, function approximation, and bootstrapping
can cause the divergence of such algorithms; in the underparameterized setting, a TD fixed point might not even exist
(Tsitsiklis & Van Roy 1996). To address this issue, L2regularization is often introduced to ensure the existence of
a fixed point, and several algorithms, such as LSTD (Yu &
Bertsekas 2009) and TD with a target parameter (Zhang et al.
2021), have been shown to converge to a regularized fixed
point. However, this regularized point can result in larger
estimation errors than simply using a zero initialization of
the parameters (Manek & Kolter 2022).

1. Introduction
Off-policy value evaluation with offline data considers the
challenge of evaluating the expected discounted cumulative reward of a given policy using a dataset that was not
necessarily collected according to the target policy. Such a
scenario is common in real-world applications, such as selfdriving vehicles and healthcare, where active data collection

Over-parameterization is another approach for ensuring the
existence of a TD fixed point (Xiao et al. 2021, Thomas
2022). In the offline setting, an over-parameterized model is
defined to be one that has more parameters than the number
of distinct data points in the dataset. Unfortunately, even
over-parameterized TD still suffers from the deadly triad; in
Figure 1 below we observe that over-parameterized linear
TD still diverges on Baird’s counterexample (Baird 1995).

1

Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta
School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Shenzhen 3 Google DeepMind 4 School of Computational Science
and Engineering, Georgia Tech 5 Figure 6 The work was done while
the author was at Google. 7 Uber 8 CIFAR AI Chair, Amii. Fengdi
Che <fengdi@ualberta.ca> Correspondence to: Chenjun Xiao
<chenjunx@cuhk.edu.cn>.
2

Our paper establishes the convergence condition for TD
with offline data when both a target network and an overparameterized linear model are incorporated, as shown in
Section 3. Our condition is naturally satisfied for expected
updates using the entire state-action space, ensuring guaran-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

