QuRating: Selecting High-Quality Data for Training Language Models

Alexander Wettig 1 Aatmik Gupta 1 Saumya Malik 1 Danqi Chen 1

Abstract

Quality Criterion

Selecting high-quality pre-training data is important for creating capable language models, but
existing methods rely on simple heuristics. We
introduce QuRating, a method for selecting pretraining data that can capture human intuitions
about data quality. In this paper, we investigate
four qualities—writing style, required expertise,
facts & trivia, and educational value—and find
that LLMs are able to discern these qualities, especially when making pairwise judgments of texts.
We train a QuRater model to learn scalar ratings
from pairwise judgments, and use it to annotate a
260B training corpus with quality ratings for each
of the four criteria. In our experiments, we select
30B tokens according to the different quality ratings and train 1.3B-parameter language models
on the selected data. We find that it is important
to balance quality and diversity. When we sample using quality ratings as logits over documents,
our models obtain lower perplexity and stronger
in-context learning performance than baselines.
Our best model is based on educational value and
performs similarly to a model trained with uniform sampling for 50% more steps. Beyond data
selection, we use the quality ratings to construct a
training curriculum which improves performance
without changing the training dataset. We extensively analyze the quality ratings and discuss their
characteristics, biases, and wider implications.2

Writing Style / Educational Value /

Facts & Trivia / Required Expertise

Text A
Rank with LLM


Collect

Train


GPT-3.5-turbo

Judgments

QuRater Model

A

B

Text B

Web-Scale Data

Assign


Select Data


Train


(SlimPajama)

Quality Ratings

(QuRatedPajama)

Language Model

Figure 1. In QuRating, we obtain comparative judgements from
an LLM to train a QuRater model, which assigns scalar quality
ratings to the documents in a language model training corpus.

et al., 2022; Abbas et al., 2023), finding the right balance
of domains (Touvron et al., 2023a; Xie et al., 2023a), or
selecting data that resembles a high-quality corpus (Brown
et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2023; Xie et al., 2023b).
However, the ideal properties of training data remain hard to
characterize; an improved understanding could enable open
research to train stronger models under resource constraints.
In this work, we aim to capture the abstract qualities of texts
which humans intuitively perceive. As part of our approach,
which we call QuRating (quality rating),3 (1) we compare
pairs of texts along a quality criterion, (2) we train a model
that translates the resulting judgments into scalar quality
ratings, (3) we use these ratings to select pre-training data,
and (4) we identify which abstract qualities are valuable
by training language models on the selected subsets and
evaluating their performance.

1. Introduction
There is increasing evidence that choosing the right training
data is essential for producing state-of-the-art large language
models (LLMs) (Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2023;
Rae et al., 2021). Researchers have found that model performance can be improved by deduplicating training data (Lee

Throughout the paper, we focus on four particular qualities
of a text as our criteria for data selection: the text’s writing
style, the amount of facts & trivia it contains, its educational
value, and the required expertise needed to understand it.
These qualities are necessarily subjective. However, we
verify that GPT-3.5-turbo can discern their presence in clearcut cases. In particular, we find that LLMs produce more
stable and accurate judgments when prompted to compare

1

Department of Computer Science & Princeton Language
and Intelligence (PLI), Princeton University. Correspondence to:
Alexander Wettig <awettig@cs.princeton.edu>.

2

To encourage further research, we release our prompts,
models, and data at https://github.com/princeton-nlp/QuRating.
3
QuRating/QuRater can be pronounced like curating/curator.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

