Defense against Backdoor Attack on Pre-trained Language Models
via Head Pruning and Attention Normalization

Xingyi Zhao 1 Depeng Xu 2 Shuhan Yuan 1

Abstract
Pre-trained language models (PLMs) are commonly used for various downstream natural language processing tasks via fine-tuning. However,
recent studies have demonstrated that PLMs are
vulnerable to backdoor attacks, which can mislabel poisoned samples to target outputs even after a
vanilla fine-tuning process. The key challenge for
defending against the backdoored PLMs is that
end users who adopt the PLMs for their downstream tasks usually do not have any knowledge
about the attacking strategies, such as triggers. To
tackle this challenge, in this work, we propose a
backdoor mitigation approach, PURE, via head
pruning and normalization of attention weights.
The idea is to prune the attention heads that are
potentially affected by poisoned texts with only
clean texts on hand and then further normalize the
weights of remaining attention heads to mitigate
the backdoor impacts. We conduct experiments
to defend against various backdoor attacks on the
classification task. The experimental results show
the effectiveness of PURE in lowering the attack
success rate without sacrificing the performance
on clean texts. The code is available at https:
//github.com/xingyizhao/PURE.

Figure 1: Illustration of backdoor attack on the pre-trained
language model and user’s fine-tuning.

pre-training process, users prefer to download the released
PLMs and fine-tune them for their downstream tasks (Devlin
et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2019).
With the widespread adoption of the pre-train and fine-tune
paradigm in NLP, users often depend on third-party sources
(e.g., Hugging Face) for accessing PLMs. However, recent
studies have revealed that PLMs can be injected with backdoors that cannot be removed even after users’ fine-tuning,
which poses a significant security threat (Kurita et al., 2020;
Li et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2021a; Zhang et al., 2021; Yang
et al., 2021c; Qi et al., 2021c). Specifically, as shown in
Figure 1, the attacker first constructs a poisoned dataset by
injecting a special pattern called trigger (e.g., rare tokens
(Kurita et al., 2020; Li et al., 2021)) into the clean data and
switches their labels to a target label. Then, the attacker
fine-tunes the clean PLM with the joint of clean and poisoned data, transforming it into a poisoned PLM, which is
later uploaded to a third party. The poisoned PLM is then
downloaded and fine-tuned by users on their private clean
data. Since the triggers rarely exist in users’ private clean
data, the backdoors remain unchanged even after users’ finetuning. Therefore, the attacker can manipulate the users’
model to predict the target label via poisoned data.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed great success of pre-trained
language models (PLMs) in natural language processing
(NLP). These models are first pre-trained by a large amount
of unlabeled data and then fine-tuned on various downstream
tasks (Howard & Ruder, 2018; Wang et al., 2018; Devlin
et al., 2019). Due to the high computational cost of the
1
Computer Science Department, Utah State University, Logan UT, USA 2 Department of Software & Information Systems, Charlotte NC, USA. Correspondence to: Xingyi Zhao
<xingyi.zhao@usu.edu>.

Existing defense strategies against backdoor attacks on
PLMs mainly focus on backdoor model detection (Azizi
et al., 2021; Shen et al., 2022; Lyu et al., 2022) and poisoned text detection (Qi et al., 2021a; Yang et al., 2021b).

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

