A Doubly Recursive Stochastic Compositional Gradient Descent Method for
Federated Multi-Level Compositional Optimization

Hongchang Gao 1

Abstract

and n ∈ {1, 2, · · · , N }. Throughout this paper, it is as(k)
sumed that Fn (·) is a non-linear function. The stochastic
multi-level compositional optimization (SMCO) problem
has a wide range of applications, such as multi-step modelagnostic meta-learning (Finn et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2020),
the stochastic training of graph neural networks (Yu et al.,
2022; Balasubramanian et al., 2022), and risk-averse portfolio optimization (Yang et al., 2019), etc.

Federated compositional optimization has been
actively studied in the past few years. However,
existing methods mainly focus on the two-level
compositional optimization problem, which cannot be directly applied to the multi-level counterparts. Moreover, the convergence rate of existing
federated two-level compositional optimization
learning algorithms fails to achieve linear speedup
with respect to the number of workers under heterogeneous settings. After identifying the reason
for this failure, we developed a novel federated
stochastic multi-level compositional optimization
algorithm by introducing a novel Jacobian-vector
product estimator. This innovation mitigates both
the heterogeneity issue and the communication
efficiency issue simultaneously. We then theoretically proved that our algorithm can achieve
the level-independent and linear speedup convergence rate for nonconvex problems. To our knowledge, this is the first time that a federated learning
algorithm can achieve such a favorable convergence rate for multi-level compositional problems.
Moreover, experimental results confirm the efficacy of our algorithm.

In the past few years, there have been increasing efforts
(Yang et al., 2019; Balasubramanian et al., 2022; Jiang et al.,
2022; Chen et al., 2020; Zhang & Xiao, 2019b) to solve the
stochastic multi-level compositional optimization problem.
A significant challenge in solving SMCO problems lies in
that each level function can introduce bias when computed
on random samples, which could lead to a slow convergence
rate. In particular, (Yang et al., 2019) shows that the standard stochastic multi-level compositional gradient descent
algorithm’s convergence rate has exponential dependence
on the number of levels K, which is referred to as the leveldependent convergence rate. Later, (Balasubramanian et al.,
2022) developed a multi-level nested linearized averaging
algorithm, which improves the convergence rate from exponential to polynomial dependence on K, when certain
constants are ignored. Such a convergence rate is referred
to as the level-independent convergence rate in the literature (Balasubramanian et al., 2022). Recently, (Zhang &
Xiao, 2019b) and (Jiang et al., 2022) leveraged the variance reduction techniques (Fang et al., 2018; Nguyen et al.,
2017; Cutkosky & Orabona, 2019) for estimating both innerlevel functions and gradients to accelerate the convergence
rate, whose sample complexity can match traditional noncompositional optimization algorithms (Fang et al., 2018;
Nguyen et al., 2017; Cutkosky & Orabona, 2019). However,
these algorithms restrict their focus solely on the singlemachine setting, which cannot be applied to the federated
learning setting.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we consider the federated stochastic multilevel compositional optimization (FedSMCO) problem:
! !
N
N
1 X (K)
1 X (1)
min Φ(x) =
F
···
F (x) · · · ,
N n=1 n
N n=1 n
x∈Rd0
(1)
(k)
(k)
(k)
where Fn (·) = E[Fn (·; ξn )] : Rdk−1 → Rdk is the kth level function of the n-th worker for k ∈ {1, 2, · · · , K}

To solve the stochastic compositional optimization problem
on distributed data, a series of distributed stochastic compositional optimization algorithms have been developed. In
particular, (Gao & Huang, 2021) introduced the first distributed stochastic compositional gradient descent algorithm
under the decentralized setting for stochastic two-level com-

1

Department of Computer and Information Sciences, Temple
University, Philadelphia, USA. Correspondence to: Hongchang
Gao <hongchang.gao@temple.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

