Size-Invariance Matters: Rethinking Metrics and Losses for
Imbalanced Multi-object Salient Object Detection

Feiran Li 1 2 Qianqian Xu 3 Shilong Bao 1 2 Zhiyong Yang 4
Runmin Cong 5 6 7 Xiaochun Cao 8 Qingming Huang 4 3 9

This paper explores the size-invariance of evaluation metrics in Salient Object Detection (SOD),
especially when multiple targets of diverse sizes
co-exist in the same image. We observe that current metrics are size-sensitive, where larger objects are focused, and smaller ones tend to be
ignored. We argue that the evaluation should be
size-invariant because bias based on size is unjustified without additional semantic information. In
pursuit of this, we propose a generic approach that
evaluates each salient object separately and then
combines the results, effectively alleviating the
imbalance. We further develop an optimization
framework tailored to this goal, achieving considerable improvements in detecting objects of different sizes. Theoretically, we provide evidence
supporting the validity of our new metrics and
present the generalization analysis of SOD. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness
of our method. The code is available at https:
//github.com/Ferry-Li/SI-SOD.

Frequency

Frequency

Abstract

1

3

5

7

9

1

2

3

4

5

6

Size(%)

Number

(a) Average size of objects

(b) Average number of objects

Figure 1. Statistics on dataset MSOD. Fig. 1(a) illustrates the
widely existing small salient objects, with Size(%) as the proportion of the size of an object over the whole image.Fig. 1(b) reveals
that practical SOD scenarios usually involve multiple salient objects.

1. Introduction
Salient object detection (SOD), also known as salient object
segmentation, aims at highlighting visually salient regions
in images (Wang et al., 2022). To achieve this, a SOD
model typically processes an RGB image to generate a binary mask, marking each pixel as either salient (1) or not
(0). Recently, SOD has witnessed great progress in various
applications (Mahadevan & Vasconcelos, 2009; Ren et al.,
2014; Tang et al., 2017; Li et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020a;
Jiang et al., 2023; Gui et al., 2024).

1
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing, China 2 School of Cyber Security, University
of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 3 Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 5 Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China 6 School
of Control Science and Engineering, Shandong University, Jinan, China 7 Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and System
Control, Ministry of Education, Jinan, China 8 School of Cyber
Science and Tech., Shenzhen Campus, Sun Yat-sen University
9
Key Laboratory of Big Data Mining and Knowledge Management, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Qianqian Xu <xuqianqian@ict.ac.cn>, Qingming
Huang <qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn>.

The progress of SOD primarily depends on two factors. One
is the development of sophisticated models (say deep neural
networks), which effectively disentangle diverse feature patterns for accurate SOD detection. Notable methods include
(Wu et al., 2022; Luo et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2023; Ma
et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2021a). The other is the evaluation
and selection of the best models for practical applications.
Generally, a well-performed SOD model should simultaneously embrace a high True Positive Rate (TPR) and a low
False Positive Rate (FPR) (Borji et al., 2019). To this end,
various metrics (typically MAE and F-score) have been
widely considered for evaluation and optimization (Chen
et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2022).

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

In this paper, we argue that current evaluation metrics are
1

