VisionGraph: Leveraging Large Multimodal Models for
Graph Theory Problems in Visual Context

Yunxin Li 1 Baotian Hu 1 Haoyuan Shi 1 Wei Wang 2 Longyue Wang Min Zhang 1

Abstract
Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) have achieved
impressive success in visual reasoning, particularly in visual mathematics. However, problemsolving capabilities in graph theory remain less
explored for LMMs, despite being a crucial aspect of mathematical reasoning that requires accurate understanding of graphical structures and
multi-step reasoning on visual graphs. To step
forward in this direction, we are the first to design a benchmark named VisionGraph, used to
explore the capabilities of advanced LMMs in
solving multimodal graph theory problems. It encompasses eight complex graph problem tasks,
from connectivity to shortest path problems. Subsequently, we present a Description-ProgramReasoning (DPR) chain to enhance the logical
accuracy of reasoning processes through graphical structure description generation and algorithmaware multi-step reasoning. Our extensive study
shows that 1) GPT-4V outperforms Gemini Pro
in multi-step graph reasoning; 2) All LMMs exhibit inferior perception accuracy for graphical
structures, whether in zero/few-shot settings or
with supervised fine-tuning (SFT), which further
affects problem-solving performance; 3) DPR significantly improves the multi-step graph reasoning capabilities of LMMs and the GPT-4V (DPR)
agent achieves SOTA performance.

Figure 1. Two cases of utilizing GPT-4V (Date: 2024.01.17) to
answer easy graph understanding and reasoning questions. We
highlight the incorrect responses using the red words.

Language Models (LLMs) and Large Multimodal Models
(LMMs). Recent works (Luo et al., 2023; Team et al., 2023;
Imani et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a; Li et al., 2023b)
present the rapid development of applying LLMs to help
solve arithmetic and graph reasoning tasks. Compared to
LLMs, the evaluation of mathematical reasoning capabilities
in LMMs is beginning. Lu et al. (2023) recently presented a
comprehensive visual math benchmark, open-ended answer
generation based on questions and visual context. It evaluates the basic mathematical capabilities of LMMs, such
as algebraic reasoning, geometry reasoning, and arithmetic
reasoning. However, the challenging graph theory problemsolving capability has been less explored for LMMs, which
presents a significant aspect of mathematical reasoning capabilities. The graph theory problems also feature prominently
in various research directions and practical scenarios powered by large models, e.g., multimodal graph learning (Ektefaie et al., 2022), AI for Mathematics (Zhang et al., 2023a),
visual-language navigation (Gu et al., 2022; Anderson et al.,

1. Introduction
Mathematical Reasoning is a core aspect for evaluating
the logical reasoning capability (Dai et al., 2023) of Large
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China. 2 School of Cyber Science
and Technology, Shenzhen campus of Sun Yat-sen University,
Shenzhen, China. Yunxin Li<liyunxin987@163.com >. Correspondence to: Baotian Hu <hubaotian@hit.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

