Position: The Platonic Representation Hypothesis

Minyoung Huh * 1 Brian Cheung * 1 Tongzhou Wang * 1 Phillip Isola * 1
The Platonic Representation Hypothesis

Abstract
We argue that representations in AI models, particularly deep networks, are converging. First, we
survey many examples of convergence in the literature: over time and across multiple domains,
the ways by which different neural networks represent data are becoming more aligned. Next, we
demonstrate convergence across data modalities:
as vision models and language models get larger,
they measure distance between datapoints in a
more and more alike way. We hypothesize that
this convergence is driving toward a shared statistical model of reality, akin to Plato’s concept
of an ideal reality. We term such a representation
the platonic representation and discuss several
possible selective pressures toward it. Finally,
we discuss the implications of these trends, their
limitations, and counterexamples to our analysis.
Project Page:
phillipi.github.io/prh
Code:
github.com/minyoungg/platonic-rep

Neural networks, trained with different objectives on
different data and modalities, are converging to a shared
statistical model of reality in their representation spaces.

Figure 1. The Platonic Representation Hypothesis: Images (X)
and text (Y ) are projections of a common underlying reality (Z).
We conjecture that representation learning algorithms will converge on a shared representation of Z, and scaling model size, as
well as data and task diversity, drives this convergence.

1. Introduction
AI systems are rapidly evolving into highly multifunctional
entities. For example, whereas in the past we had specialpurpose solutions for different language processing tasks
(e.g., sentiment analysis, parsing, dialogue), modern large
language models (LLMs) are competent at all these tasks
using a single set of weights (Srivastava et al., 2022). Unified systems are also being built across data modalities:
instead of using a different architecture for processing images versus text, recent models, such as GPT4-V (OpenAI, 2023), Gemini (Google, 2023), and LLaVA (Liu et al.,
2023), handle both modalities with a combined architecture.
More and more systems are built off of general-purpose
pretrained backbones, sometimes called foundation models (Bommasani et al., 2021), that support a large range
of tasks, including robotics (Driess et al., 2023; Brohan
et al., 2023), bioinformatics (Ma et al., 2024), and health-

care (Steinberg et al., 2021). In short, AI systems are becoming increasingly homogeneous in both their architectures
and their capabilities.
This paper explores one aspect of this trend: representational
convergence. We argue that there is a growing similarity
in how datapoints are represented in different neural network models. This similarity spans across different model
architectures, training objectives, and even data modalities.
What has led to this convergence? Will it continue? And
ultimately, where does it end?
Our central hypothesis (position), stated above in Fig. 1,
is that there is indeed an endpoint to this convergence and
a principle that drives it: different models are all trying to
arrive at a representation of reality, meaning a representation of the joint distribution over events in the world that
generate the data we observe. Fig. 1 conveys this hypothesis: there exists a real world (labeled Z), which we measure
with various sensors, such as the camera shown to the left
(X). Other projections of these measurements, such as the

*
Equal contribution 1 MIT. Correspondence to: Minyoung Huh
<minhuh@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

