Predictive Performance Comparison of Decision Policies Under Confounding

Luke Guerdan 1 Amanda Coston 2 Kenneth Holstein 1 Zhiwei Steven Wu 1

Abstract
Predictive models are often introduced to
decision-making tasks under the rationale that
they improve performance over an existing
decision-making policy. However, it is challenging to compare predictive performance against an
existing decision-making policy that is generally
under-specified and dependent on unobservable
factors. These sources of uncertainty are often addressed in practice by making strong assumptions
about the data-generating mechanism. In this
work, we propose a method to compare the predictive performance of decision policies under a
variety of modern identification approaches from
the causal inference and off-policy evaluation literatures (e.g., instrumental variable, marginal sensitivity model, proximal variable). Key to our
method is the insight that there are regions of uncertainty that we can safely ignore in the policy
comparison. We develop a practical approach for
finite-sample estimation of regret intervals under
no assumptions on the parametric form of the
status quo policy. We verify our framework theoretically and via synthetic data experiments. We
conclude with a real-world application using our
framework to support a pre-deployment evaluation of a proposed modification to a healthcare
enrollment policy.

?
?
?
Current policy
New policy

?

?

Figure 1. Illustration of uncertainty in comparing two policies in
a toy setting with X ∈ R2 . Points are labelled by their outcome:
positive (+), negative (-) or unknown (?). Ovals denote the selection
region of a policy. Points that neither policy selects (denoted by
grey) are irrelevant to the comparison. Our method leverages this
to reduce policy comparison uncertainty.

domains, regulatory frameworks have called for organizations to provide explicit comparisons of predictive models
against the status quo they are intended to replace (Wyden;
Johnson & Zhang, 2022). For example, consider two common policy comparison settings of real-world significance.
Example 1.1 (Human vs algorithm decisions). Let the status
quo policy consist of human-only decisions (e.g., pre-trial
release decisions (Kleinberg et al., 2018), medical testing decisions (Mullainathan & Obermeyer, 2019)) made using covariates and unobserved contextual information. We would
like to evaluate whether a model recommending actions by
thresholding risk predictions would constitute an improvement over the current human-only policy (e.g., Rambachan
et al. (2021); Chouldechova et al. (2018)).

1. Introduction
Predictive models are often introduced under the rationale
that they improve performance over an existing decisionmaking policy (Grove et al., 2000). For example, models
have been developed with the goal of improving the accuracy of human decisions in domains such as healthcare,
criminal justice, and education (Baker & Hawn, 2021; Rambachan et al., 2021). Given the high-stakes nature of these

Example 1.2 (Human+algorithm vs algorithm decisions).
Let the status quo policy consist of humans making decisions with the support of a predictive model, covariates,
and unobserved contextual information. We would like to
assess whether decisions made using the predictive model
alone would yield a performance improvement over the
human-algorithm combination (e.g., Cheng et al. (2022)).

1
Carnegie Mellon University. 2 Microsoft Research. Correspondence to: Luke Guerdan <lguerdan@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

