Graph Mixup on Approximate Gromov–Wasserstein Geodesics

Zhichen Zeng 1 Ruizhong Qiu 1 Zhe Xu 1 Zhining Liu 1 Yuchen Yan 1
Tianxin Wei 1 Lei Ying 2 Jingrui He 1 Hanghang Tong 1

Abstract

scarce, inevitably inducing model over-fitting (Ding et al.,
2022). To address this issue, graph data augmentation has
been adopted for better model generalization by generating
synthetic training graphs.

Mixup, which generates synthetic training samples on the data manifold, has been shown to
be highly effective in augmenting Euclidean data.
However, finding a proper data manifold for graph
data is non-trivial, as graphs are non-Euclidean
data in disparate spaces. Though efforts have
been made, most of the existing graph mixup
methods neglect the intrinsic geodesic guarantee, thereby generating inconsistent sample-label
pairs. To address this issue, we propose G EO M IX
to mixup graphs on the Gromov-Wasserstein
(GW) geodesics. A joint space over input graphs
is first defined based on the GW distance, and
graphs are then transformed into the GW space
through equivalence-preserving transformations.
We further show that the linear interpolation of
the transformed graph pairs defines a geodesic
connecting the original pairs on the GW manifold,
hence ensuring the consistency between generated
samples and labels. An accelerated mixup algorithm on the approximate low-dimensional GW
manifold is further proposed. Extensive experiments show that the proposed G EO M IX promotes
the generalization and robustness of GNN models.

Mixup (Zhang et al., 2018) has achieved great success in
computer vision (Zhang et al., 2018; Verma et al., 2019)
and natural language processing (Guo et al., 2019a; Guo,
2020; Chen et al., 2020) in improving model generalization
and robustness. The general idea is to linearly interpolate
sample pairs on the data manifold, which defines a geodesic
between sample pairs in the Euclidean space. However,
mixup on graph data is non-trivial due to three key challenges. First (space disparity), as different graphs lie in
disparate spaces, it is a prerequisite to find a joint space of
graphs, i.e., space of spaces (Sturm, 2012), for mixup. Second (non-Euclidean data), even with a joint graph space, it
is still challenging to interpolate graph pairs as graphs vary
in sizes and are often not well-aligned (Han et al., 2022).
Third (sample–label consistency), it is essential to ensure
the consistency between mixup samples and labels, i.e., similar samples should share similar labels (Guo et al., 2019b;
Kim et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2023a), but it remains unknown
how to define and ensure such consistency for graph data.
To address the space disparity and non-Euclidean issues,
existing methods have been focusing on design practical
interpolation so that mixup in the graph space can be implemented in a similar way as mixup in the Euclidean space.
For example, (Wang et al., 2021; Verma et al., 2021) transform graphs into vector embeddings and (Han et al., 2022;
Guo & Mao, 2021; Ling et al., 2023) transform graph into
well-aligned pairs, and mixup is performed between the
transformed counterparts. A fundamental assumption behind these approaches is that the original graph and the
transformed graph are equivalent so that the mixup samples between transformed graphs correspond to the mixup
samples between the original graphs. Nevertheless, most of
the transformations are not equivalence-preserving, thereby
facing the risk of generating inconsistent sample–label pairs
that hurt, as opposed to benefit, model training. Therefore,
we take a step further and ask:

1. Introduction
In the era of big data and AI, graphs are ubiquitous in various
domains carrying rich information. Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) have achieved remarkable success in enormous
graph learning tasks, including graph classification (Xu
et al., 2018), node classification (Kipf & Welling, 2017;
Xu et al., 2022a), link prediction (Zhang & Chen, 2018;
Yan et al., 2024c;b), and many more. For (semi-)supervised
learning tasks, the superior performance of GNNs largely
depends on the training graphs, which are often noisy and
1

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 2 University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor. Correspondence to: Hanghang Tong
<htong@illinois.edu>.

What kind of interpolation guarantees sample–label consistency in graph mixup from the geodesic perspective?

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

