Inferring the Long-Term Causal Effects of Long-Term Treatments
from Short-Term Experiments

Allen Tran 1 Aurélien Bibaut 2 Nathan Kallus 2 3

Abstract

term surrogate variables and/or an observational dataset that
associates surrogate variables with their eventual long-term
outcomes. The key requirements are that the surrogate(s)
fully mediate the effect of the treatment on the outcome of
interest and that we can identify the effect of the surrogates.

We study inference on the long-term causal effect
of a continual exposure to a novel intervention,
which we term a long-term treatment, based on
an experiment involving only short-term observations. Key examples include the long-term health
effects of regularly-taken medicine or of environmental hazards and the long-term effects on users
of changes to an online platform. This stands
in contrast to short-term treatments or “shocks,”
whose long-term effect can reasonably be mediated by short-term observations, enabling the
use of surrogate methods. Long-term treatments
by definition have direct effects on long-term
outcomes via continual exposure, so surrogacy
conditions cannot reasonably hold. We connect
the problem with offline reinforcement learning,
leveraging doubly-robust estimators to estimate
long-term causal effects for long-term treatments
and construct confidence intervals.

However, the treatment of interest may be explicitly longterm, that is, involving a continuous exposure to a novel intervention that extends beyond the length of the experiment.
For example, persistent environmental hazards, regular medication, or a change to the user experience in a digital setting.
This stands in contrast to short-term treatments, such as a
training course or a pharmacological regimen confined in
time, whose consequences could reasonably be captured
within a short time frame. For long-term treatments, unless
the experiment itself (or the measurement of the surrogates)
is long-term, surrogate methods are incapable of reliably
capturing their effect.
In this paper, we develop a method that is capable of estimating the long-term effects of long-term treatments from
short-term experiments, provided the short-term observations sufficiently characterize the long-term trajectory, even
if they do not mediate the effect on it. The method learns
long-term temporal dynamics directly from the short-run
experimental dataset, which eliminates the need both for
the surrogate assumption and for an observational dataset
linking surrogates to long-term outcomes. Provided these
dynamics persist, this enables the estimation of long-term
effects of arbitrary-length treatments, both short and long.
In contrast, we show that surrogate methods, even when
their assumptions hold, implicitly estimate a truncated effect in our setting, that of a treatment that persists up to the
point that surrogates are measured.

1. Introduction
Long-term effects of interventions are often of primary importance yet their direct measurement is hampered by the
difficulty of performing long-term randomized control trials. For example, both medical and policy trials are often
interested in long-term health or welfare impact, but following subjects for prolonged periods is difficult. Similarly,
businesses in digital settings, constrained by operational considerations and motivated by fast-paced innovation, often
use short-run A/B tests to inform decisions that ultimately
aim to improve long-term outcomes.

In place of the two the key assumptions of surrogate methods (perfect mediation and identification of mediated effect),
we make two novel assumptions which connect the problem of estimating long-term effects from experiments with
offline reinforcement learning (ORL), which broadly considers the problem of evaluating “policies” on their expected
cumulative reward, with evaluation policies potentially differing from the policy generating the data. We make use of
the connection with ORL by leveraging recent literature that
develops efficient doubly-robust estimators for off-policy

Surrogate methods offer a route to connect short term tests
to their longer term outcomes (Athey et al., 2019; Prentice,
1989). These methods rely on the existence of intermediate1

Netflix Inc., Los Angeles, USA 2 Netflix Inc., Los Gatos, USA
Cornell University, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Allen
Tran <allent@netflix.com>.
3

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

