Data-efficient Large Vision Models through Sequential Autoregression

Zhiwei Hao * 1 Jianyuan Guo * 2 Chengcheng Wang * 3
Yehui Tang 3 Han Wu 2 Han HuB 1 Kai Han 3 Chang XuB 2
haozhw@bit.edu.cn; {jianyuan.guo,han.wu}@sydney.edu.au; {chengcheng.wang,yehui.tang,kai.han}@huawei.com

Abstract

tasks given just few examples—represents a pivotal stride
toward artificial general intelligence within the computer
vision community. In the realm of contemporary natural language processing (NLP), large language models trained via
autoregression, such as GPT (Brown et al., 2020; Achiam
et al., 2023), have demonstrated the remarkable ability to
comprehend and generate natural language text, particularly
excelling in complex and nuanced contexts. These models
leverage language sequences as a universal interface, facilitating rapid adaptation to a variety of language-centered
tasks with minimal prompting and examples.

Training general-purpose vision models on purely
sequential visual data, eschewing linguistic inputs, has heralded a new frontier in visual understanding. These models are intended to not
only comprehend but also seamlessly transit to
out-of-domain tasks. However, current endeavors are hamstrung by an over-reliance on colossal models, exemplified by models with upwards
of 3B parameters, and the necessity for an extensive corpus of visual data, often comprising
a staggering 400B tokens (Bai et al., 2023). In
this paper, we delve into the development of an
efficient, autoregression-based vision model, innovatively architected to operate on a limited
dataset. We meticulously demonstrate how this
model achieves proficiency in a spectrum of visual tasks spanning both high-level and low-level
semantic understanding during the testing phase.
Our empirical evaluations underscore the model’s
agility in adapting to various tasks, heralding a
significant reduction in the parameter footprint,
and a marked decrease in training data requirements, thereby paving the way for more sustainable and accessible advancements in the field of
generalist vision models. The code is available at
https://github.com/ggjy/DeLVM.

However, the landscape of computer vision is markedly different. Unlike the uniformity of input-output structures in
language tasks, visual tasks exhibit a rich diversity in their
formats, posing significant challenges to the development
of comparable generalist models. Recently, advances in
LVM (Bai et al., 2023) have redefined ‘visual sentences’,
enabling the representation of both raw images and annotated data without requiring meta-knowledge beyond the
pixel level. This paradigm shift opens a new vista for the
evolution of generalist models within the visual domain.
Nevertheless, while the capability of LVM is bolstered by
the employment of large-scale datasets, such as more than
1.6 billion images, this reliance simultaneously engenders
complexities in the training process of LVM. One obstacle
arises from the imbalance of datasets across different tasks.
Our visual world naturally exhibits a long-tailed distribution of different tasks. The model performance on tasks
with limited data representation is substantially impaired
when there is an uneven distribution of data across tasks,
with certain tasks having an abundance of data and others
suffering from a deficiency. For example, the segmentation benchmark SA-1B (Kirillov et al., 2023), containing
11 million images, provides a wealth of data compared to
the keypoint detection benchmark COCO (Lin et al., 2014),
containing only 0.2 million images. Direct training on the
combined dataset of these two benchmarks results in the
model’s inability to learn keypoint detection due to the overwhelming amount of segmentation data, as iilustrated in
Figure 1. This observation forms the basis of our straightforward data augmentation strategy, which automatically

1. Introduction
Training a generalist model capable of executing diverse
tasks simultaneously—and with the agility to tackle new
*
Equal contribution 1 School of information and Electronics, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China 2 School of
Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia 3 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Beijing, China.
Correspondence to: Han Hu <hhu@bit.edu.cn>, Chang Xu
<c.xu@sydney.edu.au>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

