A2Q+: Improving Accumulator-Aware Weight Quantization

Ian Colbert 1 Alessandro Pappalardo 2 Jakoba Petri-Koenig 2 Yaman Umuroglu 2

Abstract

reducing the standard 32-bit accumulators to 16 bits can
yield a near-optimal 2× increase in throughput and bandwidth efficiency on ARM processors (de Bruin et al., 2020;
Xie et al., 2021) and up to a 1.6× reduction in resource
utilization on FPGAs (Colbert et al., 2023). However, exploiting such an optimization is highly non-trivial in practice
as doing so also incurs a high risk of numerical overflow,
which introduces arithmetic errors that can significantly
degrade model accuracy (Ni et al., 2021).

Quantization techniques commonly reduce the inference costs of neural networks by restricting
the precision of weights and activations. Recent studies show that also reducing the precision of the accumulator can further improve hardware efficiency at the risk of numerical overflow,
which introduces arithmetic errors that can degrade model accuracy. To avoid numerical overflow while maintaining accuracy, recent work proposed accumulator-aware quantization (A2Q)—
a quantization-aware training method that constrains model weights during training to safely use
a target accumulator bit width during inference.
Although this shows promise, we demonstrate
that A2Q relies on an overly restrictive constraint
and a sub-optimal weight initialization strategy
that each introduce superfluous quantization error. To address these shortcomings, we introduce:
(1) an improved bound that alleviates accumulator constraints without compromising overflow
avoidance; and (2) a new strategy for initializing
quantized weights from pre-trained floating-point
checkpoints. We combine these contributions
with weight normalization to introduce A2Q+.
We identify and characterize the various tradeoffs that arise as a consequence of accumulator
constraints and support our analysis with experiments that show A2Q+ significantly improves
these trade-offs when compared to prior methods.

To train quantized neural networks (QNNs) for lowprecision accumulation, Colbert et al. 2023 recently proposed accumulator-aware quantization (A2Q). While prior
approaches had sought to either reduce the risk of numerical
overflow (Xie et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022; Azamat et al.,
2022) or mitigate its impact on model accuracy (Ni et al.,
2021; Blumenfeld et al., 2023), A2Q circumvents arithmetic
errors caused by numerical overflow by constraining model
weights to restrict the range of outputs. In doing so, A2Q
provides state-of-the-art performance for low-precision accumulation with guaranteed overflow avoidance.
Our work contributes to this body of research by further
improving the trade-off between accumulator bit width and
model accuracy. We show that A2Q relies on: (1) an overly
restrictive ℓ1 -norm bound that constrains QNNs more than
necessary; and (2) a sub-optimal initialization strategy that
forces QNNs to recover from superfluous quantization error.
In addressing these shortcomings, we establish a new stateof-the-art for low-precision accumulation with guaranteed
overflow avoidance. Our results show for the first time that
ResNet50 (He et al., 2016) can maintain 95% of its baseline
accuracy when trained on ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009) to
accumulate at 12 bits without overflow, resulting in a +17%
improvement in test top-1 accuracy over A2Q.

1. Introduction
Quantizing neural network weights and activations to lowprecision integers can drastically reduce the inference costs
of multiplications. However, the resulting products are commonly accumulated at high-precision and thus require highprecision additions and registers. Recent studies show that

Our contributions are four-fold: (1) we introduce a new
theoretical analysis for an improved ℓ1 -norm bound that
alleviates accumulator constraints without compromising
overflow avoidance; (2) we introduce a weight initialization
strategy that minimizes the initial weight quantization error
caused by accumulator constraints; (3) we combine (1) and
(2) with weight normalization (Salimans & Kingma, 2016)
to introduce A2Q+ and show significant improvements in
the trade-off between accumulator bit width and model accuracy; and (4) we identify and characterize various trade-offs
that arise as a consequence of accumulator constraints.

1

AMD SW Technology Team, San Diego, California, USA
AMD Research and Advanced Development, Dublin, Ireland.
Correspondence to: Ian Colbert <ian.colbert@amd.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

