Adapt and Diffuse: Sample-adaptive
Reconstruction via Latent Diffusion Models
Zalan Fabian * 1 Berk Tinaz * 1 Mahdi Soltanolkotabi 1

Abstract

1. Introduction

Inverse problems arise in a multitude of applications, where the goal is to recover a clean signal from noisy and possibly (non)linear observations. The difficulty of a reconstruction problem
depends on multiple factors, such as the ground
truth signal structure, the severity of the degradation and the complex interactions between the
above. This results in natural sample-by-sample
variation in the difficulty of a reconstruction problem. Our key observation is that most existing
inverse problem solvers lack the ability to adapt
their compute power to the difficulty of the reconstruction task, resulting in subpar performance
and wasteful resource allocation. We propose a
novel method, severity encoding, to estimate the
degradation severity of corrupted signals in the
latent space of an autoencoder. We show that the
estimated severity has strong correlation with the
true corruption level and can provide useful hints
on the difficulty of reconstruction problems on
a sample-by-sample basis. Furthermore, we propose a reconstruction method based on latent diffusion models that leverages the predicted degradation severities to fine-tune the reverse diffusion sampling trajectory and thus achieve sampleadaptive inference times. Our framework, FlashDiffusion, acts as a wrapper that can be combined
with any latent diffusion-based baseline solver,
imbuing it with sample-adaptivity and acceleration. We perform experiments on both linear and
nonlinear inverse problems and demonstrate that
our technique greatly improves the performance
of the baseline solver and achieves up to 10×
acceleration in mean sampling speed1 .

Inverse problems arise in a multitude of computer vision
(Ledig et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2018), biomedical imaging
(Sriram et al., 2020) and scientific (Hand et al., 2018) applications, where the goal is to recover a clean signal from
noisy and degraded observations. As information is fundamentally lost in the process, structural assumptions on the
clean signal are needed to make recovery possible. Traditional compressed sensing (Candes et al., 2006) approaches
utilize explicit regularizers that encourage sparsity of the
reconstruction in transformation domains. More recently,
data-driven deep learning methods have established new
state-of-the-art in tackling most inverse problems (see an
overview in (Ongie et al., 2020)).
A key shortcoming of available techniques is their inherent
inability to adapt their compute power allocation to the difficulty of reconstructing a given corrupted sample. There
is a natural sample-by-sample variation in the difficulty of
recovery due to multiple factors. First, variations in the measurement process (e. g. more or less additive noise, different
blur kernels) greatly impact the difficulty of reconstruction.
Second, a sample can be inherently difficult to reconstruct
for the particular model, if it is different from examples seen
in the training set (out-of-distribution samples). Third, the
amount of information loss due to the interaction between
the specific sample and the applied degradation can vary
vastly. For instance, applying a blur kernel to an image
consisting of high-frequency textures destroys significantly
more information than applying the same kernel to a smooth
image. Finally, the implicit bias of the model architecture
towards certain signal classes (e.g. piece-wise constant or
smooth for convolutional architectures) can be a key factor
in determining the difficulty of a recovery task. Therefore,
expending the same amount of compute to reconstruct all
examples is potentially wasteful, especially on datasets with
varied corruption parameters.

*

Equal contribution 1 Dept. of Electrical and Comp. Eng.,
Univ. of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA. Correspondence
to: Zalan Fabian <zfabian@usc.edu>.

Sample-adaptive methods that incorporate the difficulty of
a reconstruction problem, or the severity of degradation,
and allocate compute effort accordingly are thus highly desired. To the best of our knowledge, such methods have
not been studied extensively in the literature. Unrolled networks (Zhang & Ghanem, 2018; Sun et al., 2016) have

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
Code is available at https://github.com/
z-fabian/flash-diffusion

1

