Watermark Stealing in Large Language Models

Nikola Jovanović 1 Robin Staab 1 Martin Vechev 1

Abstract
LLM watermarking has attracted attention as a
promising way to detect AI-generated content,
with some works suggesting that current schemes
may already be fit for deployment. In this work
we dispute this claim, identifying watermark stealing (WS) as a fundamental vulnerability of these
schemes. We show that querying the API of
the watermarked LLM to approximately reverseengineer a watermark enables practical spoofing
attacks, as hypothesized in prior work, but also
greatly boosts scrubbing attacks, which was previously unnoticed. We are the first to propose
an automated WS algorithm and use it in the first
comprehensive study of spoofing and scrubbing in
realistic settings. We show that for under $50 an
attacker can both spoof and scrub state-of-the-art
schemes previously considered safe, with average
success rate of over 80%. Our findings challenge
common beliefs about LLM watermarking, stressing the need for more robust schemes. We make
all our code and additional examples available at
https://watermark-stealing.org.

Figure 1: Overview of watermark stealing and the downstream attacks it enables. (1) The attacker queries the watermarked LLM API and builds an approximate model of
the watermarking rules that are determined by the secret
key ξ. (2) The result of this can be used to spoof the watermark, i.e., generate watermarked text without knowing ξ.
(3) Stealing also significantly boosts watermark scrubbing,
i.e., the removal of the watermark from texts.

1. Introduction
Both capabilities and accessibility of large language models
(LLMs) have greatly increased in recent years (Bubeck et al.,
2023; Touvron et al., 2023). The effort and cost required to
produce realistic texts at scale has thus significantly shrunk,
emphasizing the need for reliable detection of AI-generated
text. To address this challenge, researchers have proposed
watermarking schemes that augment LLM-generated text
with a signal, which can later be detected to attribute the text
to the specific LLM that produced it (Kirchenbauer et al.,
2023; Kuditipudi et al., 2024; Zhao et al., 2024).

such as OpenAI, Meta and Alphabet pledging to deploy
watermarks in their products (Bartz & Hu, 2023), the US
President issuing an executive order which includes the call
for standardization of watermarks (Biden, 2023), and the
upcoming EU AI Act stipulating their use (Council of the
European Union, 2024). While recent works suggest that
current schemes may be fit for deployment (Piet et al., 2023;
Kirchenbauer et al., 2024), in this paper we argue the opposite. We make the case that the robustness of current
watermarking schemes to adversarial actors is still poorly
understood and greatly overestimated.

Are LLM watermarks ready for deployment? As initial research showed promising results, the topic has garnered significant attention, with many leading companies
1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich. Correspondence to: Nikola Jovanović <nikola.jovanovic@inf.ethz.ch>.

This work: Watermark stealing in LLMs As a fundamental threat to watermarks, we identify watermark stealing
(illustrated in Fig. 1, top), i.e., the act of reverse-engineering
a watermark by querying the API of the watermarked LLM
in order to build an approximate model of the (secret) wa-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

