The Good, The Bad, and Why: Unveiling Emotions in Generative AI

Cheng Li 1 2 Jindong Wang 1 Yixuan Zhang 3 Kaijie Zhu 1 Xinyi Wang 4 Wenxin Hou 1 Jianxun Lian 1
Fang Luo 4 Qiang Yang 5 Xing Xie 1

Abstract

1

Introduction

Emotion is a multifaceted psychological and physiological
phenomenon that encompasses subjective feelings, physiological responses, and behavioral expressions (Lewis et al.,
2010). Emotions manifest themselves through a confluence
of reflexes, perception, cognition, and behavior, all of which
are subject to modulation by a range of internal and external determinants (Salovey et al., 2009; Russell, 2003). For
instance, in decision-making, emotions emerge as powerful,
ubiquitous, and consistent influencers that can swing from
beneficial to detrimental (Lerner et al., 2015). Studies also
underscore the importance of emotions in steering attention
(Öhman et al., 2001), academia (Pekrun et al., 2002), and
competitive sports (Lazarus, 2000).

Emotion significantly affects our daily behaviors and interactions. Although recent generative AI models, such as large language models,
have shown impressive performance in various
tasks, it remains unclear whether they truly comprehend emotions and why. This paper aims to
address this gap by incorporating psychological
theories to gain a holistic understanding of emotions in generative AI models. Specifically, we
propose three approaches: 1) EmotionPrompt to
enhance the performance of the AI model, 2) EmotionAttack to impair the performance of the AI
model, and 3) EmotionDecode to explain the effects of emotional stimuli, both benign and malignant. Through extensive experiments involving
language and multi-modal models on semantic
understanding, logical reasoning, and generation
tasks, we demonstrate that both textual and visual EmotionPrompt can boost the performance
of AI models while EmotionAttack can hinder it.
More importantly, EmotionDecode reveals that AI
models can comprehend emotional stimuli similar
to the dopamine mechanism in the human brain.
Our work heralds a novel avenue for exploring
psychology to enhance our understanding of generative AI models, thus boosting the research and
development of human-AI collaboration and mitigating potential risks.

The recently emerging large language and multi-modal models have shown remarkable performance in a wide spectrum
of tasks, such as semantic understanding, logical reasoning, and open-ended generation (Bubeck et al., 2023; Wang
et al., 2023b). As advanced AI models become more predominant in everyday life, ranging from communication and
education to economics, it is urgent to understand whether
they can perceive emotions well to enable better human-AI
collaboration. However, the extent to which these models
can comprehend emotion, a distinct human advantage, is
still largely unknown. However, examining the emotion of
AI models is essential to ensure their effective and ethical
integration into society. Neglecting this aspect risks creating AI systems that lack empathy and understanding in
human interactions, leading to potential miscommunications
and ethical challenges. Understanding models’ emotional
capabilities is crucial for developing more advanced and
empathetic AI systems and fostering trust and acceptance
in their real-world applications. Without this focus, we
risk missing out on the full potential of AI to enhance and
complement human experiences.

1

Microsoft Research, Beijing, China 2 CAS, Institute of Software, Beijing, China 3 Department of Computer Science, William
& Mary, Williamsburg, Virginia, America 4 School of Psychology,
Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China 5 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology, Hong Kong, China. Correspondence to: Jindong
Wang <jindong.wang@microsoft.com>.

In this paper, we took the first step towards unveiling the
emotions in AI models by leveraging psychological theories. Specifically, we devised EmotionPrompt and EmotionAttack, which are textual and visual emotional stimuli
that act as additional prompts for the models, as shown in
Figure 1(a). EmotionPrompt was grounded in psychological frameworks, including self-monitoring (Ickes et al.,

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

