Mitigating Catastrophic Forgetting in Online Continual Learning by
Modeling Previous Task Interrelations via Pareto Optimization

Yichen Wu 1 2 * † Hong Wang 3 * Peilin Zhao 2 Yefeng Zheng 3 Ying Wei 1 4 Long-Kai Huang 2

Abstract

changes while retaining previously acquired knowledge.
Despite the remarkable performance of current deep neural
networks (DNNs) on specific tasks, they still encounter challenges when adapting to streaming tasks. One critical issue
is catastrophic forgetting, where acquiring knowledge on a
new task leads to a significant decline in performance on
previously learned tasks. To alleviate this issue, numerous
algorithms have been proposed in continual learning (CL)
area, aiming to enhance the incremental learning ability of
DNNs on streaming tasks (Lopez-Paz & Ranzato, 2017;
Serra et al., 2018; Gupta et al., 2020; Guo et al., 2020; Arani
et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023; Chrysakis & Moens, 2023).

Catastrophic forgetting remains a core challenge
in continual learning (CL), where the models
struggle to retain previous knowledge when learning new tasks. While existing replay-based CL
methods have been proposed to tackle this challenge by utilizing a memory buffer to store data
from previous tasks, they generally overlook
the interdependence between previously learned
tasks and fail to encapsulate the optimally integrated knowledge in previous tasks, leading to
sub-optimal performance of the previous tasks.
Against this issue, we first reformulate replaybased CL methods as a unified hierarchical gradient aggregation framework. We then incorporate
the Pareto optimization to capture the interrelationship among previously learned tasks and design a Pareto-Optimized CL algorithm (POCL),
which effectively enhances the overall performance of past tasks while ensuring the performance of the current task. To further stabilize the
gradients of different tasks, we carefully devise a
hyper-gradient-based implementation manner for
POCL. Comprehensive empirical results demonstrate that the proposed POCL outperforms current state-of-the-art CL methods across multiple
datasets and different settings.

Replay-based methods currently stand as straightforward
yet effective research line in the field of CL. The objective of these methods is to emulate joint training, the upper
bound of CL, which trains all the tasks simultaneously and
optimizes the model θt in the update direction u by fully
exploiting the gradient of every task (as illustrated in Fig. 1).
However, in the absence of full data from previous tasks, it
becomes crucial to approximate their gradients. To this end,
replay-based methods typically employ a small memory
buffer M to store examples from previously encountered
tasks in order to approximately compute the gradient of
every previous task gim . Based on the strategies for manipulating the gradients of previous tasks gim , replay-based
methods can be broadly categorized into experience replay
methods (Rolnick et al., 2019; Buzzega et al., 2020; Arani
et al., 2022; Caccia et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023) and
gradient alignment methods (Lopez-Paz & Ranzato, 2017;
Chaudhry et al., 2018; Guo et al., 2020; Riemer et al., 2019;
Gupta et al., 2020). Specifically, experience replay methods
directly combine every approximated gradient of the previous task gim with the gradient of the current task to help
update model θt . As illustrated in Fig. 1(a), the gradient
update direction u is derived by simply assigning equal
weight to every gim . For gradient alignment methods, they
favor weighting the gradients of previous tasks that conflict
with the gradient of the current task, while disregarding the
others. As exemplified in Fig. 1(b), the update direction
u takes into account g1m that conflicts with the gradient of
the current task g3 , indicated by the negative inner product
⟨g3 , g1m ⟩, while ignoring g2m that is not in conflict with g3 .

1. Introduction
An ideal intelligent system should possess the ability to
incrementally learn, swiftly adapting to environmental
Equal contribution † Work was done when the author interned in Tencent AI Lab 1 City University of Hong Kong, Hong
Kong SAR 2 Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China 3 Tencent Youtu
Lab, Shenzhen, China 4 Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. Correspondence to: Ying Wei <ying.wei@ntu.edu.sg>,
Yichen Wu <wuyichen.am97@gmail.com>, Long-Kai Huang
<hlongkai@gmail.com>.
*

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

