Exploring the Low-Pass Filtering Behavior in Image Super-Resolution

Haoyu Deng 1 Zijing Xu 1 Yule Duan 1 Xiao Wu 1 Wenjie Shu 1 Liang-Jian Deng 1

Abstract
Deep neural networks for image super-resolution
(ISR) have shown significant advantages over traditional approaches like the interpolation. However, they are often criticized as ‘black boxes’
compared to traditional approaches with solid
mathematical foundations. In this paper, we attempt to interpret the behavior of deep neural
networks in ISR using theories from the field of
signal processing. First, we report an intriguing phenomenon, referred to as ‘the sinc phenomenon.’ It occurs when an impulse input is
fed to a neural network. Then, building on this
observation, we propose a method named Hybrid Response Analysis (HyRA) to analyze the
behavior of neural networks in ISR tasks. Specifically, HyRA decomposes a neural network into
a parallel connection of a linear system and a
non-linear system and demonstrates that the linear system functions as a low-pass filter while
the non-linear system injects high-frequency information. Finally, to quantify the injected highfrequency information, we introduce a metric for
image-to-image tasks called Frequency Spectrum
Distribution Similarity (FSDS). FSDS reflects the
distribution similarity of different frequency components and can capture nuances that traditional
metrics may overlook. Code, videos and raw experimental results for this paper can be found in:
https://github.com/RisingEntropy/LPFInISR.

A

B

C

D

I

X4
SR

Figure 1. I is an image in which only the central pixel is 1 and
the other pixels are 0. What would the result look like if image
I is super-resolved using a neural network, A, B, C, or D? Surprisingly, the answer is A. We name this phenomenon as the sinc
phenomenon. In this paper, we give a possible explanation for
this phenomenon.

ages through various techniques. In recent years, with advances in deep learning, growing ISR methods using neural
networks are proposed, bringing the development of ISR
into a new level. While impressive results persistently arise,
the mechanism under ISR networks remain largely unexplored, leading to criticism that they are considered black
boxes. In comparison, traditional methods, such as interpolation or filtering, have strong interpretability. Despite the
principles of traditional methods and neural networks are
different, we can still attempt to explain the behavior of ISR
networks using theories from traditional methods. In this
paper, following this line of thought, we successfully utilize
theories from the field of signal processing techniques to
explain the performance of neural networks in the ISR task.

Please refer to Appx. A for notation conventions.

1. Introduction

The target of the ISR task is to upsample a two-dimensional
signal. In traditional signal processing theory (Oppenheim &
Schafer, 2009; Oppenheim et al., 1996), a feasible method
for upsample involves restoring a discrete low-samplingrate signal to a continuous signal using a low-pass filter,
and then sampling the continuous signal at a higher rate to
obtain a high-sampling-rate signal. An intriguing aspect
of this process is that when we try to upsample a Dirac
δ signal, we will finally get a sinc signal since the sinc
signal is the time-domain waveform of a low-pass filter, (for

The goal of image super-resolution (ISR) is to reconstruct
low-resolution (LR) images into high-resolution (HR) im1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China.
Correspondence to: Liang-Jian Deng
<liangjian.deng@uestc.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

