TERD: A Unified Framework for Safeguarding Diffusion Models
Against Backdoors

Yichuan Mo 1 Hui Huang 2 Mingjie Li 3 Ang Li 2 Yisen Wang 1 4

Abstract

Welling, 2013; Kingma & Dhariwal, 2018), with diffusion
models emerging as a particularly notable representative
(Ho et al., 2020; Rombach et al., 2022a; Yang et al., 2023).
These models have demonstrated their marvelous performances in a diverse range of applications from image generation (Rombach et al., 2022a), content editing (Meng et al.,
2022), zero-shot classification (Li et al., 2023) to adversarial purification (Nie et al., 2022). However, the widespread
application of diffusion models raises concerns about their
security issues like backdoor attacks (Gu et al., 2017; Chen
et al., 2017), where models can be manipulated to produce
harmful outputs under specific conditions, posing significant
legal and ethical risks. Therefore, in this paper, we explore
how to defend against backdoor attacks for diffusion models,
which is less investigated before.

Diffusion models have achieved notable success
in image generation, but they remain highly vulnerable to backdoor attacks, which compromise
their integrity by producing specific undesirable
outputs when presented with a pre-defined trigger. In this paper, we investigate how to protect diffusion models from this dangerous threat.
Specifically, we propose TERD, a backdoor defense framework that builds unified modeling for
current attacks, which enables us to derive an
accessible reversed loss. A trigger reversion strategy is further employed: an initial approximation of the trigger through noise sampled from a
prior distribution, followed by refinement through
differential multi-step samplers. Additionally,
with the reversed trigger, we propose backdoor
detection from the noise space, introducing the
first backdoor input detection approach for diffusion models and a novel model detection algorithm that calculates the KL divergence between reversed and benign distributions. Extensive evaluations demonstrate that TERD secures
a 100% True Positive Rate (TPR) and True Negative Rate (TNR) across datasets of varying resolutions. TERD also demonstrates nice adaptability to other Stochastic Differential Equation
(SDE)-based models. Our code is available at
https://github.com/PKU-ML/TERD.

Unlike common classification models, diffusion models operate on noise outputs rather than class logits, making them
impervious to conventional defenses (Wu & Wang, 2021;
Wu et al., 2022) designed for classification tasks. The challenge is exacerbated by the complexity of their input-output
dynamics over various timesteps, e.g., the model’s behavior changes across different timesteps and the underlying
formulation is often inaccessible to defenders. This significantly hinders the ability to effectively identify and mitigate
backdoor triggers.
To address this challenge, in this paper, we propose a novel
defense strategy that begins by systematically characterizing existing backdoor attacks in diffusion models. Our
approach involves creating unified formulations of backdoor
attacks, enabling us to derive an accessible reversed loss.
For the accessibility of inputs, we introduce a two-stage
trigger reversion process: we first estimate the trigger using noise sampled from a prior distribution, followed by
refinement through differential multi-step samplers. This
process allows for accurate identification and neutralization
of backdoor inputs. Equipped with the estimated trigger, we
can detect backdoor attacks from both the input and model
perspectives in the noise space, leveraging the statistical
characteristics of noise distributions to distinguish between
benign and malicious inputs. We refer to this comprehensive defense framework as TERD (Trigger Estimation and
Refinement for Diffusion). TERD has demonstrated remark-

1. Introduction
In recent years, we have witnessed significant advancements
in generative models (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Kingma &
1
National Key Lab of General Artificial Intelligence, School
of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University, China
2
School of EECS, Peking University, China 3 CISPA Helmholtz
Center for Information Security, Germany 4 Institute for Artificial
Intelligence, Peking University, China. Correspondence to: Yisen
Wang <yisen.wang@pku.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

