Position: Application-Driven Innovation in Machine Learning

David Rolnick 1 Alan Aspuru-Guzik 2 Sara Beery 3 Bistra Dilkina 4 Priya L. Donti 3 Marzyeh Ghassemi 3
Hannah Kerner 5 Claire Monteleoni 6 7 Esther Rolf 8 7 Milind Tambe 8 Adam White 9

Abstract

complex processes, optimize supply chains, and design new
materials (Gopaluni et al., 2020). These kinds of applications, and many others (Wang et al., 2023a), involve diverse
ML tools being used in a multiplicity of ways.

In this position paper, we argue that
application-driven research has been systemically under-valued in the machine learning
community. As applications of machine learning proliferate, innovative algorithms inspired by
specific real-world challenges have become increasingly important. Such work offers the potential for significant impact not merely in domains of application but also in machine learning
itself. In this paper, we describe the paradigm of
application-driven research in machine learning,
contrasting it with the more standard paradigm of
methods-driven research. We illustrate the benefits of application-driven machine learning and
how this approach can productively synergize
with methods-driven work. Despite these benefits, we find that reviewing, hiring, and teaching practices in machine learning often hold back
application-driven innovation. We outline how
these processes may be improved.

The widespread use of machine learning across society
draws on decades of innovation in core ML algorithms, but
also on another type of ML research: Application-driven
innovation. ML algorithms designed in blue-sky, methodsfocused research continue to fall short when used directly for
applications. Bridging the gap requires thoughtful consideration of the challenges of real-world tasks and the properties
of real-world data, and the welcoming of use cases into the
research process. This approach to ML research has much
to contribute to broader innovation in ML methods, as well
as downstream applications. However, application-driven
innovation has characteristics that have led too often to it
being under-valued within the ML community or perceived
as out-of-scope (Rudin & Wagstaff, 2014).
In this paper, we frame the paradigm of application-driven
ML (ADML) research, propose where it fits within the ML
research landscape, and discuss why it is important not just
merely to applications but to advancing ML methods. We
reflect on common failures in understanding ADML work
during reviewing, hiring, and teaching, and how such factors
serve to strongly disincentivize application-oriented work
within ML, in both academia and industry research. Finally,
we suggest steps toward an ML research ecosystem in which
application-driven approaches are recognized and supported
alongside methods-driven work.

1. Introduction
Machine learning (ML) is increasingly being used across diverse fields and sectors, with significant impacts for society.
ML is being used in healthcare to analyze genetic markers, process medical imagery, and digitize health records
(Ghassemi et al., 2020). ML is being used in climate science
to speed up physical simulations, parse satellite data, and
forecast extreme events (Monteleoni et al., 2013; Rolnick
et al., 2022). ML is being used in heavy industry to control

2. Paradigms of Innovation in ML
2.1. Methods-Driven Research

1

McGill University and Mila – Quebec AI Institute, Montreal, Canada 2 University of Toronto and Vector Institute, Toronto,
Canada 3 Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
USA 4 University of Southern California, Los Angeles, USA
5
Arizona State University, Tempe, USA 6 Inria Paris, Paris, France
7
University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, USA 8 Harvard University, Cambridge, USA 9 University of Alberta and Alberta Machine
Intelligence Institute, Edmonton, Canada. Correspondence to:
David Rolnick <drolnick@cs.mcgill.ca>.

The mainstream paradigm of innovation in machine learning methods, which may be referred to as methods-driven
research, focuses on the identification of algorithms with
certain target properties and evaluates these properties using
datasets. Methods-driven ML research has followed various trends over the past several decades (see also Wagstaff
(2012)). For illustration and comparison, we review key
aspects of the paradigm as it currently exists, especially in
deep learning.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

