The Benefits of Reusing Batches for Gradient Descent in Two-Layer Networks:
Breaking the Curse of Information and Leap Exponents

Yatin Dandi 1 2 Emanuele Troiani 1 Luca Arnaboldi 2 Luca Pesce 2 Lenka Zdeborova 1 Florent Krzakala 2

Abstract

thanks to the so-called mean-field analysis (Mei et al., 2018;
Chizat & Bach, 2018; Rotskoff & Vanden-Eijnden, 2022;
Sirignano & Spiliopoulos, 2020)). Most of the theoretical efforts, in particular, focused either on one-pass optimization
algorithms, where each iteration involves a new fresh batch
of data, or to the limit of gradient flow in the population loss.
For high-dimensional synthetic Gaussian data, and a low
dimensional target function (a multi-index model), the class
of functions efficiently learned by these one-pass methods
has been thoroughly analyzed in a series of recent works,
and have been shown to be limited by the so-called information exponent (Ben Arous et al., 2021) and leap exponent
(Abbe et al., 2022; 2023) of the target. These analyses have
sparked many follow-up theoretical works over the last few
months, see, e.g. (Damian et al., 2022; 2023; Dandi et al.,
2023; Bietti et al., 2023; Ba et al., 2023; Moniri et al., 2023;
Mousavi-Hosseini et al., 2023; Zweig & Bruna, 2023).

We investigate the training dynamics of two-layer
neural networks when learning multi-index target
functions. We focus on multi-pass gradient descent (GD) that reuses the batches multiple times
and show that it significantly changes the conclusion about which functions are learnable compared to single-pass gradient descent. In particular, multi-pass GD with finite stepsize is found
to overcome the limitations of gradient flow and
single-pass GD given by the information exponent
(Ben Arous et al., 2021) and leap exponent (Abbe
et al., 2023) of the target function. We show that
upon re-using batches, the network achieves in
just two time steps an overlap with the target subspace even for functions not satisfying the staircase property (Abbe et al., 2021). We characterize
the (broad) class of functions efficiently learned
in finite time. The proof of our results is based on
the analysis of the Dynamical Mean-Field Theory (DMFT). We further provide a closed-form
description of the dynamical process of the lowdimensional projections of the weights, and numerical experiments illustrating the theory.

However, a common practice in machine learning involves
repeatedly traversing the same mini-batch of data. This
paper, therefore, aims to go beyond the constraints of singlepass algorithms and to evaluate whether multiple-pass training overcomes these inherent flaws of single-pass methods.
We focus on gradient descent, certainly the most straightforward procedure in this family. The theoretical framework
we use to prove our main results is based on Dynamical
Mean Field Theory (DMFT), which was developed in the
statistical physics community (Sompolinsky et al., 1988) to
analyze correlated systems, and recently made rigorous in
the context of high dimensional machine-learning problems
in (Celentano et al., 2021; Gerbelot et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed significant theoretical advancements in understanding the dynamics of training neural
networks using gradient descent, to unravel the learning
mechanisms of these networks, particularly how they adapt
to data and identify pivotal features for predicting the target
function. Significant progress has been made over the last
few years in the case of two-layer networks, in large part

Our findings significantly alter the prevailing narrative in
the literature. We demonstrate that gradient descent surpasses the limitations imposed by the information and leap
exponents, achieving a positive correlation with the target
function for a much broader class than the staircase functions (Abbe et al., 2021), even with minimal (that is, two)
repetition of data batches. We characterize the (broad) class
of functions efficiently learned in finite time. Among the
exceptions are symmetric functions that remain a challenge
due to their extended symmetry-breaking times (a natural
feature of physical dynamics (Bouchaud et al., 1998)).

*

Equal contribution 1 Statistical Physics Of Computation Laboratory, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
2
Information Learning and Physics Laboratory, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL). Correspondence to:
<yatin.dandi@epfl.ch>, <emanuele.troiani@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

With independent Gaussian datapoints as inputs, both one1

