Truly No-Regret Learning in Constrained MDPs

Adrian Müller 1 Pragnya Alatur 2 Volkan Cevher 1 Giorgia Ramponi 3 Niao He 2

Abstract

modeled by a different expected cumulative reward signal
that needs to lie above a respective threshold. We consider
the finite-horizon setting, in which an algorithm chooses
a policy in each episode, plays it for one episode, and observes the random transitions, rewards, and constraint rewards along its trajectory.

Constrained Markov decision processes (CMDPs)
are a common way to model safety constraints
in reinforcement learning. State-of-the-art methods for efficiently solving CMDPs are based on
primal-dual algorithms. For these algorithms, all
currently known regret bounds allow for error
cancellations — one can compensate for a constraint violation in one round with a strict constraint satisfaction in another. This makes the
online learning process unsafe since it only guarantees safety for the final (mixture) policy but not
during learning. As Efroni et al. (2020) pointed
out, it is an open question whether primal-dual
algorithms can provably achieve sublinear regret
if we do not allow error cancellations. In this paper, we give the first affirmative answer. We first
generalize a result on last-iterate convergence of
regularized primal-dual schemes to CMDPs with
multiple constraints. Building upon this insight,
we propose a model-based primal-dual algorithm
to learn in an unknown CMDP. We prove that our
algorithm achieves sublinear regret without error
cancellations.

In the literature, there are three standard approaches
for finding an optimal policy in a known CMDP: linear
programming (LP, Altman, 1999), primal-dual (Paternain
et al., 2022), and dual algorithms (Paternain et al., 2019).
If the CMDP is unknown, a common approach to handle
the uncertainty is the classical paradigm of optimism in the
face of uncertainty (Auer et al., 2008). In their influential
paper, Efroni et al. (2020) established comprehensive regret
guarantees for all three types of optimistic algorithms in the
online setup. In practice, especially primal-dual algorithms
are preferred due to their high computational efficiency and
flexibility for policy parameterization, thereby scaling to
high-dimensional problems (Chow et al., 2017; Achiam
et al., 2017; Tessler et al., 2018). Thus, it is important to
rigorously understand the fundamental properties of this
algorithm class. Indeed, there has been a large number of
studies on primal-dual (and dual) approaches for CMDPs
(Ding et al., 2020; 2022b; Liu et al., 2021b; Ding &
Jovanović, 2022; Ghosh et al., 2022; Ding & Lavaei, 2022;
Qiu et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021a; Bai et al., 2022, to list
just a few) since the work of Efroni et al. (2020).

1. Introduction
Classical reinforcement learning (RL, Sutton & Barto, 2018)
aims to solve sequential decision-making problems under
uncertainty. It involves learning a policy while interacting
with an unknown Markov decision process (MDP, Bellman,
1957). However, in many real-world situations, RL algorithms need to solve the task while respecting certain safety
constraints. For example, in autonomous driving and drone
navigation, we must avoid collisions and adhere to traffic
rules to ensure safe behavior (Brunke et al., 2022). Such
safety requirements are commonly described by constrained
Markov decision processes (CMDPs, Altman, 1999). In
CMDPs, the goal is to maximize the expected cumulative
reward while subject to multiple safety constraints, each

However, unlike for LP-based algorithms, the known
bounds for primal-dual (and dual) algorithms suffer from
the fundamental limitation pointed out by Efroni et al. (2020,
Section 2.2): they concern a weaker, less safe notion of
regret. More precisely, the known guarantees bound the sum
of the suboptimalities and the sum of the constraint violations across episodes, where one episode corresponds to one
round of learning. However, a policy can have a negative
constraint violation (by being very safe but obtaining a lower
return than an optimal safe policy) or a positive constraint
violation (by being unsafe but obtaining a higher return than
an optimal safe policy). Thus, terms from these two cases
can cancel each other out when summing the violations
across episodes, a phenomenon referred to as error cancellations (Efroni et al., 2020). An algorithm with sublinear weak
regret may heavily violate safety constraints during learning.
For example, if the policies alternate between the two cases

1
EPFL 2 ETH Zürich 3 University of Zürich. Correspondence to:
Adrian Müller <adrian.luis.mueller@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

