Adaptive-Gradient Policy Optimization: Enhancing Policy Learning in
Non-Smooth Differentiable Simulations
Feng Gao 1 * Liangzhi Shi 1 * Shenao Zhang 2 Zhaoran Wang 2 Yi Wu 1 3

Abstract

the gradient estimation method based on zeroth-order sampling (Schulman et al., 2017), is characterized by a low
sample efficiency. The recent rise of differentiable simulations (Freeman et al., 2021; Heiden et al., 2021; Howell
et al., 2022) introduces a way to tackle the problem of efficiency. By leveraging auto-differentiation tools like PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) and JAX (Bradbury et al., 2018)
or specially crafted differentiable kernels (Xu et al., 2022),
these simulators are well-positioned to provide first-order
simulation gradients of rewards in relation to control inputs.
Such capability holds the potential to significantly speed up
the policy optimization process and to considerably enhance
policy performance.

Recent advancements in differentiable simulators highlight the potential of policy optimization using simulation gradients. Yet, these approaches are largely contingent on the continuity and smoothness of the simulation, which precludes the use of certain simulation engines, such
as Mujoco. To tackle this challenge, we introduce
the adaptive analytic gradient. This method views
the Q function as a surrogate for future returns,
consistent with the Bellman equation. By analyzing the variance of batched gradients, our method
can autonomously opt for a more resilient Q function to compute the gradient when encountering
rough simulation transitions. We also put forth the
Adaptive-Gradient Policy Optimization (AGPO)
algorithm, which leverages our proposed method
for policy learning. On the theoretical side, we
demonstrate AGPO’s convergence, emphasizing
its stable performance under non-smooth dynamics due to low variance. On the empirical side,
our results show that AGPO effectively mitigates
the challenges posed by non-smoothness in policy
learning through differentiable simulation.

While differentiable simulators are emerging tools, similar
ideas on utilizing first-order gradients have been investigated in model-based RL. Parmas et al. (Parmas et al., 2018)
proposed to use the inverse-variance weighting (Fleiss,
1993) for blending first-order reparameterization gradients (Kingma & Welling, 2013) and zeroth-order likelihood
gradients, and showcased the problem of rough optimization landscape. They further extended this idea to use criticbased gradient estimates and made a scalable solution in
(Parmas et al., 2023). Akin to that, leveraging simulation
gradients may not invariably lead to improved policy learning outcomes (Metz et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2022; Suh et al.,
2022; Zhong et al., 2022), especially in scenarios involving
rich contact dynamics. Xu et al. (2022) proposed to truncate
the full task trajectory into short horizons and incorporates
a value function at the horizon’s end to signify future implications. Though effective on their proposed simulation
kernels, this method may falter when horizons encompass
abrupt transitions, i.e., when the simulated dynamics are uneven or discontinuous. Such environments, affected by the
design of the contact model, often present issues that make
it challenging to employ certain methodologies in popular
robot simulators.

1. INTRODUCTION
Learning control policies is vital for robotics and computer
animation. Deep reinforcement learning has recently shown
great promise, excelling in games (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver
et al., 2016), animation generation (Peng et al., 2021; Zhang
et al., 2023a), and robot control (Levine et al., 2016; Lee
et al., 2020; Kaufmann et al., 2023). Yet, these methods need
extensive data to approximate policy gradients (Williams,
1992; Sutton et al., 1999) for model updates. In practice,
*

Equal contribution 1 Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 2 Northwestern
University, Illinois, United States 3 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute, Shanghai, China.
Correspondence to: Feng Gao
<feng.gao220@gmail.com>, Yi Wu <jxwuyi@gmail.com>.

This paper tackles policy learning in non-smooth differentiable simulations. While previous works(Parmas et al.,
2018; Suh et al., 2022) introduced to blend zeroth-order policy gradients (PG) with first-order simulation gradients (SG),
we find that PG cannot well detect the rough region in practice. Observing PG’s challenges in control tasks, we utilize
the Q function for future returns prediction, using its gradi-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

