Constrained Ensemble Exploration for Unsupervised Skill Discovery

Chenjia Bai 1 2 Rushuai Yang 3 Qiaosheng Zhang 1 Kang Xu 4 Yi Chen 3 Ting Xiao 5 Xuelong Li 1 6

Abstract

et al., 2022), which can be notoriously difficult to design
(Kwon et al., 2023). In contrast to RL, other research fields
like language and vision have greatly benefited from unsupervised learning (i.e., without annotations or labels), such
as auto-regressive pre-training for Large Language Model
(LLM) (Han et al., 2021; Touvron et al., 2023) and unsupervised representation learning for images (Chen et al., 2020a;
Clark & Jaini, 2023) that benefit various language and vision tasks. Motivated by this, unsupervised RL aims to learn
meaningful behaviors without extrinsic rewards, where the
learned behaviors can be used to solve various downstream
tasks via fast adaptation for generalizable RL.

Unsupervised Reinforcement Learning (RL) provides a promising paradigm for learning useful
behaviors via reward-free per-training. Existing
methods for unsupervised RL mainly conduct
empowerment-driven skill discovery or entropybased exploration. However, empowerment often
leads to static skills, and pure exploration only
maximizes the state coverage rather than learning useful behaviors. In this paper, we propose a
novel unsupervised RL framework via an ensemble of skills, where each skill performs partition
exploration based on the state prototypes. Thus,
each skill can explore the clustered area locally,
and the ensemble skills maximize the overall state
coverage. We adopt state-distribution constraints
for the skill occupancy and the desired cluster for
learning distinguishable skills. Theoretical analysis is provided for the state entropy and the resulting skill distributions. Based on extensive experiments on several challenging tasks, we find our
method learns well-explored ensemble skills and
achieves superior performance in various downstream tasks compared to previous methods.

In unsupervised RL research, previous methods often conduct empowerment-driven skill discovery to learn distinguishable skills (Gregor et al., 2016; Eysenbach et al., 2019).
Specifically, the agent learns skill-conditional policies by
maximizing an estimation of Mutual Information (MI) between skills and trajectories, which leads to discriminating
skill-conditional policies with different behaviors. However,
such an MI objective often generates static skills with poor
state coverage (Strouse et al., 2022). Recent works partially
address this problem via Lipschitz constraints (Park et al.,
2022; 2023) and random-walk guidance (Kim et al., 2023),
while they still rely on the primary MI objective. Meanwhile, estimating the MI needs variational estimators based
on sampling (Song & Ermon, 2020), which is challenging in
high-dimensional and stochastic environments (Yang et al.,
2023) and also leads to sub-optimal performance (Laskin
et al., 2021). Other methods perform pure exploration via curiosity (Burda et al., 2019) and state entropy (Liu & Abbeel,
2021a;b; Yarats et al., 2021) in environments, while they
only focus on maximizing the state coverage rather than
learning meaningful behaviors for downstream tasks.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 2018) has
demonstrated strong abilities in decision-making for various
applications, including game AI (Schrittwieser et al., 2020;
Ye et al., 2021), self-driving cars (Wu et al., 2022), robotic
manipulation (Hansen et al., 2022; He et al., 2024b;a), and
locomotion tasks (Miki et al., 2022; Shi et al., 2024). However, most successes rely on well-defined reward functions
based on physical prior and domain knowledge (Haldar

In this paper, we take an alternative perspective for unsupervised RL and propose a novel skill discovery framework, named Constrained Ensemble exploration for Skill
Discovery (CeSD). We adopt an ensemble of value functions to learn different skills, where each value function
uses independent intrinsic rewards that encourage the agent
to explore a partition of the state space based on the assigned prototype, without considering the states of other
prototypes. The prototypes are learned by feature clustering
of visited states and can act as representative anchors in the
state visitation space. Based on the ensemble value func-

1
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 2 Shenzhen Research Institute of Northwestern Polytechnical University 3 Hong
Kong University of Science and Technology 4 Tencent 5 East China
University of Science and Technology 6 The Institute of Artificial
Intelligence (TeleAI), China Telecom. Correspondence to: Ting
Xiao <xiaoting@ecust.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

