Gibbs Sampling of Continuous Potentials on a Quantum Computer

Arsalan Motamedi 1 2 Pooya Ronagh 1 2 3 4

Abstract

these models require Gibbs sampling from continuous realvalued functions parameterized by large deep neural networks. However, both the training of and inference from
these models is extremely computationally expensive and
numerically unstable despite using state-of-the-art ML accelerators such as graphical and tensor processing and streaming units (Nijkamp et al., 2019).

Gibbs sampling from continuous real-valued functions is a challenging problem of interest in machine learning. Here we leverage quantum Fourier
transforms to build a quantum algorithm for this
task when the function is periodic. We use the
quantum algorithms for solving linear ordinary
differential equations to solve the Fokker–Planck
equation and prepare a quantum state encoding
the Gibbs distribution. We show that the efficiency of interpolation and differentiation of these
functions on a quantum computer depends on
the rate of decay of the Fourier coefficients of
the Fourier transform of the function. We view
this property as a concentration of measure in
the Fourier domain, and also provide functional
analytic conditions for it. Our algorithm makes
zeroeth order queries to a quantum oracle of
the function and achieves polynomial quantum
speedups in mean estimation in the Gibbs measure for generic non-convex periodic functions.
At high temperatures the algorithm also allows
for exponentially improved precision in sampling
from Morse functions.

The computational challenge in training EBMs is sampling
from the canonical distribution represented by the model
which is the Gibbs distribution
pθ (x) = exp(−Eθ (x))/Zθ

(1)

of an associated d-dimensional energy potential, Eθ : Rd →
R. Here θ ∈ Rm denotes a vectorRof model parameters and
the normalizing constant Zθ = e−Eθ (x) dx is the partition function of pθ . Gibbs sampling is typically done using
Monte Carlo integration of (the overdamped) Langevin dynamics (Du & Mordatch, 2019; Nijkamp et al., 2020), a
stochastic differential equation (SDE) governing diffusion
processes. Despite the limitations imposed by this computational bottleneck, EBMs have been shown to provide
improved representations of classical data. For example,
Grathwohl et al. (2019) and Hill et al. (2020) overcome the
instabilities of the training process on particular datasets to
provide numerical evidence that EBMs can achieve more calibrated and adversarially robust representations compared to
conventional classifiers. We refer the reader to Appendix C
for more details on the usage of Gibbs sampling in the training of and inference from EBMs.

1. Introduction
In recent advances in machine learning (ML), a reincarnation of energy-based models (EBM) has provided stateof-the-art performance in generative modeling (Grathwohl
et al., 2019; Song & Kingma, 2021; Song et al., 2020; Ho
et al., 2020). Unlike the traditional EBMs such as Boltzmann machines and Hopfield neural networks (Ackley et al.,
1985; Hopfield, 1982; Hinton et al., 2006; Hinton, 2007)

In this paper, we investigate using quantum computation
for Gibbs sampling from continuous energy potentials. We
use finite difference techniques for solving differential equations on quantum computers (Berry et al., 2017; Childs &
Liu, 2020; Childs et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2021; Krovi, 2023)
to solve the Fokker–Planck equation (FPE), a second-order
partial differential equation (PDE) admitting the Gibbs distribution as its steady state solution. The FPE and Langevin
dynamics are associated with each other through Itô integration (Evans, 2023). Interestingly, directly solving for
the steady state of the FPE requires solving linear systems
with exponentially poor condition numbers. We therefore
also have to integrate the FPE for a long enough time to
asymptotically converge to the Gibbs state; as such, we do

1

Institute for Quantum Computing, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada 2 Department of Physics & Astronomy, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada
3
Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics, Waterloo, ON, Canada
4
Irréversible, Vancouver, BC, Canada. Correspondence to: Arsalan
Motamedi <arsalan.motamedi@uwaterloo.ca>, Pooya Ronagh
<pooya.ronagh@uwaterloo.ca>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

