Density Ratio Estimation with Doubly Strong Robustness

Ryosuke Nagumo 1 2 Hironori Fujisawa 3 1

Abstract

et al., 2009; Yamada et al., 2011). Consider a density ratio
r(x) = p(x)/q(x), where we call p(x) a reference distribution and q(x) a target distribution. When the data exist
in a region where p(x) or q(x) is small, the density ratio
r(x) tends to be wrongly estimated. This situation occurs,
for example, when p(x) and q(x) have no common support, which is a usual case in the high-dimensional setting
(Rhodes et al., 2020; Kato & Teshima, 2021; Choi et al.,
2021; 2022; Srivastava et al., 2023).

We develop two density ratio estimation (DRE)
methods with robustness to outliers. These are
based on the divergence with a weight function
to weaken the adverse effects of outliers. One is
based on the Unnormalized Kullback-Leibler divergence, called Weighted DRE, and its optimization is a convex problem. The other is based on
the γ-divergence, called γ-DRE, which improves
a normalizing term problem of Weighted DRE.
Its optimization is a DC (Difference of Convex
functions) problem and needs more computation
than a convex problem. These methods have doubly strong robustness, which means robustness
to the heavy contamination of both the reference
and target distributions. Numerical experiments
show that our proposals are more robust than the
previous methods.

Our interest is in the case where outliers contaminate the
main distributions (Maronna et al., 2006; Hampel et al.,
2011). Because outliers exist in a region where the density
functions of the main distribution are small, the outliers
have adverse effects on the estimation of the density ratio.
For density estimation, many robust methods have been proposed, including the Huber loss (Huber, 1964), the trimming
estimator (Hadi & Luceno, 1997), the density power divergence (Basu et al., 1998), and the γ-divergence (Fujisawa
& Eguchi, 2008). These robust estimation methods realized
real-world applications, including yeast gene expression
(Yang & Lozano, 2015) and gene function regulation (Hirose et al., 2017).

1. Introduction
Density ratio estimation (DRE) is a statistical method to
directly estimate the ratio of two probability density functions without estimating each function (Nguyen et al., 2007;
Sugiyama et al., 2012b). DRE is used in many applications,
including change detection (Kawahara & Sugiyama, 2009;
Liu et al., 2013), outlier detection (Hido et al., 2011), covariate shift adaptation (Shimodaira, 2000; Zhang et al., 2023),
and two-sample test (Wornowizki & Fried, 2016; Kim et al.,
2021). Its parametric formulation is also called the differential graphical model (Liu et al., 2014; 2017a;b). Differential
graphical models are used in protein and genetic interaction
mapping (Ideker & Krogan, 2012) and brain imaging (Na
et al., 2020).

For the outlier-robust density ratio estimation, only the limited research has been done as far as we know (Sugiyama
et al., 2012a). The most promising method is Trimmed DRE
(Liu et al., 2017c). This method assumes that outliers have
larger density ratio values than inliers. It also assumes that
only the reference dataset is contaminated while the target
dataset remains clean. Under these assumptions, Trimmed
DRE is shown to be robust experimentally and theoretically.
Although Trimmed DRE is shown to be robust, there are
some limitations to its robustness. The density ratio values of outliers do not necessarily have larger values than
inliers. That breaks the assumption that this method relies
on. Besides, Trimmed DRE is not robust to the contamination of the target dataset, which restricts its usage in
real-world applications. For example, in the change point
detection in time series data, a sequence is divided into subsequences and assigned to the reference and target datasets
sequentially (Liu et al., 2017a). Then, both the reference
and target datasets can include outliers. The robustness to
the reference contamination alone is insufficient for time
series applications.

Density ratio estimation is not robust when the data exist in
a region where the density function values are small (Smola
1
The Graduate University for Advanced Studies (SOKENDAI),
Tokyo, Japan 2 Panasonic Holdings Corporation, Osaka, Japan
3
Institute of Statistical Mathematics, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Ryosuke Nagumo <nagumo@ism.ac.jp>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

