Scaling Tractable Probabilistic Circuits: A Systems Perspective
Anji Liu 1 Kareem Ahmed 1 Guy Van den Broeck 1

Abstract

models are designed to support efficient computation of various probabilistic queries. Probabilistic Circuits (PCs) (Choi
et al., 2020; Vergari et al., 2020) are a unified framework
that abstracts a myriad of tractable model families. PCs
have been applied to many domains such as explainability
and causality (Correia et al., 2020; Wang & Kwiatkowska,
2023), graph link prediction (Loconte et al., 2023), and
neuro-symbolic AI (Xu et al., 2018; Manhaeve et al., 2018;
Ahmed et al., 2022a). In particular, there is a trend of using
PCs’ tractability to control expressive deep generative models, including (large) language models (Zhang et al., 2023),
image diffusion models (Liu et al., 2024), and reinforcement
learning models (Liu et al., 2023b).

Probabilistic Circuits (PCs) are a general framework for tractable deep generative models, which
support exact and efficient probabilistic inference
on their learned distributions. Recent modeling
and training advancements have enabled their application to complex real-world tasks. However,
the time and memory inefficiency of existing PC
implementations hinders further scaling up. This
paper proposes PyJuice, a general GPU implementation design for PCs that improves prior art
in several regards. Specifically, PyJuice is 1-2
orders of magnitude faster than existing systems
(including very recent ones) at training large-scale
PCs. Moreover, PyJuice consumes 2-5x less GPU
memory, which enables us to train larger models. At the core of our system is a compilation
process that converts a PC into a compact representation amenable to efficient block-based parallelization, which significantly reduces IO and
makes it possible to leverage Tensor Cores available in modern GPUs. Empirically, PyJuice can
be used to improve state-of-the-art PCs trained
on image (e.g., ImageNet32) and language (e.g.,
WikiText, CommonGen) datasets. We further establish a new set of baselines on natural image and
language datasets by benchmarking existing PC
structures but with much larger sizes and more
training epochs, with the hope of incentivizing
future research. Code is available at https:
//github.com/Tractables/pyjuice.

The backbone of the application-side advancements is the
recent breakthroughs on the modeling and learning side
of PCs, which include designing better PC structures (Peharz et al., 2020b; Correia et al., 2023; Mathur et al., 2023;
Loconte et al., 2024; Gala et al., 2024), effective structure
learning algorithms (Gens & Pedro, 2013; Dang et al., 2020;
2022; Yang et al., 2023), and distilling from expressive deep
generative models (Liu et al., 2023a). Despite such algorithmic innovations, a fundamental obstacle to further scaling
up PC learning and inference is the time and memory inefficiency of existing implementations, hindering the training of
large PC models and their application to large-scale datasets.
In this work, we develop an efficient and flexible system
called PyJuice that addresses various training and inference
tasks for PCs. As shown in Table 1, PyJuice is orders of
magnitude faster than previous implementations for PCs
(e.g., SPFlow (Molina et al., 2019), EiNet (Peharz et al.,
2020a), and Juice.jl (Dang et al., 2021)) as well as Hidden
Markov Models1 (e.g., Dynamax (Murphy et al., 2023)).
Additionally, as we shall demonstrate in the experiments,
PyJuice is more memory efficient than the baselines, enabling us to train larger PCs with a fixed memory quota.

1. Introduction
Many tasks require not only precise modeling of intricate,
high-dimensional data distributions but also the efficient
execution of probabilistic inference on the learned model.
To satisfy inference-side demands, tractable deep generative

Unlike other deep generative models based on neural network layers that are readily amenable to efficient systems
(e.g., a fully connected layer can be emulated by a single matrix multiplication and addition kernel plus an element-wise
activation kernel), PCs cannot be efficiently computed using
well-established operands due to (i) the unique connection

1

Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles, USA. Correspondence to: Anji Liu <liuanji@cs.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

1

Every HMM has an equivalent PC representation.

