LL ARK

: A Multimodal Instruction-Following Language Model for Music

Josh Gardner 1 Simon Durand 2 Daniel Stoller 2 Rachel Bittner 2

Abstract

(e.g. captioning, transcription) require unique forms of
understanding when applied to music. To date, no model
has made progress in music understanding comparable to
recent multimodal advances in vision and speech.

Music has a unique and complex structure
which is challenging for both expert humans and
existing AI systems to understand, and presents
unique challenges relative to other forms of
audio. We present LL ARK, an instruction-tuned
multimodal model for music understanding. We
detail our process for dataset creation, which
involves augmenting the annotations of diverse
open-source music datasets and converting them
to a unified instruction-tuning format.
We
propose a multimodal architecture for LL ARK,
integrating a pretrained generative model for
music with a pretrained language model. In
evaluations on three types of tasks (music
understanding, captioning, reasoning), we show
that LL ARK matches or outperforms existing
baselines in music understanding, and that
humans show a high degree of agreement with
its responses in captioning and reasoning tasks.
LL ARK is trained entirely from open-source
music data and models, and we make our training
code available along with the release of this
paper. Additional results and audio examples are
at https://bit.ly/llark, and our source
code is available at https://github.com/
spotify-research/llark.

Our work addresses these limitations with a model that
takes (audio, text) pairs as inputs, and produces text
outputs. This form of specifying tasks as text is often
referred to as “instruction-following,” and fine-tuning
pretrained large language models (LLMs) to this end as
“instruction-tuning” (Wei et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022;
Taori et al., 2023). Recent works across many modalities
have demonstrated that this general multimodal approach
(Language + Multimodal → Language) can provide a
foundation for flexible and even zero-shot multimodal
modeling, such as InstructBLIP (Dai et al., 2023), LLaVA
(Liu et al., 2023a), LLaMA-Adapterv2 (Gao et al., 2023)
and Mini-GPT4 (Zhu et al., 2023).
Multimodal LLMs for audio have been an area of active
research (e.g. (Guzhov et al., 2022; Elizalde et al.,
2023; Deshmukh et al., 2023; Girdhar et al., 2023)),
with few exceptions (Doh et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023b;
Manco et al., 2021) focusing specifically on music.
However, the challenges of obtaining large, high-quality,
richly-annotated music datasets has limited the multitask
effectiveness of these works, and most are trained for
individual tasks (question answering, captioning).
This paper presents LL ARK, a model to address the unique
challenges of music understanding. We train LL ARK from
a set of open-source music datasets using an end-to-end
instruction-tuning approach with musical augmentations.
Our contributions include:

1. Introduction
The creation, sharing, discovery, and understanding of
music are important activities for billions of people around
the globe. Music is also distinct from other modalities,
and even other types of audio, addressed by existing AI
systems. For example, core attributes of music, such as
key, tempo, and instrumentation are not present in nonmusical audio. Many tasks studied for non-musical audio

Instruction-Tuning Recipe for Multi-Task Multimodal
Music Modeling: We develop an end-to-end procedure for
transforming diverse, noisy, unaligned music data into a
unified instruction-following format in three task categories
(music understanding, captioning, reasoning), augmenting
the data with musical annotations.

1
University of Washington 2 Spotify. Correspondence to: Josh
Gardner <jpgard@cs.washington.edu>.

Model Architecture: We propose an architecture, shown
in Figure 1, which leverages (1) a pretrained generative
audio encoder, (2) a pretrained language model, and (3)
a simple multimodal projection module that maps encoded

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

