Simultaneous Identification of Models and Parameters of Scientific Simulators
Cornelius Schröder 1 Jakob H. Macke 1 2

Abstract

entific progress has always been driven by competing models, dating back to disputes about the heliocentric system
(Copernicus, 1543). However, newly developed models are
rarely that disruptive; instead, they are often created by combining existing components into larger models. For example, the original SIR model (Kermack & McKendrick, 1927)
describes the dynamics of infectious diseases by three population classes (susceptible, infective, recovered), but was
later expanded to include further epidemiological classes
(e.g., temporary immune groups, Hethcote, 2000). Similar
modularity can be found, for example, in computational
neuroscience models: The original Hodgkin-Huxley model
(Hodgkin & Huxley, 1952) for the dynamics of action potentials consisted of only two voltage-gated ion channels (K + ,
N a+ ), but more recent models (McCormick & Huguenard,
1992; Pospischil et al., 2008) are based on compositions
of a myriad of different channels (Podlaski et al., 2017).
Similarly, there exist many variants of drift-diffusion models (DDM) (Ratcliff, 1978) in cognitive neuroscience: All
of them follow the basic concept of modeling the decision
process by a particle following a stochastic differential equation and eventually hitting a decision-boundary. There are
many possible choices of noise models, drift dependencies,
and boundary conditions. This rich model class and many
of the different components have been extensively studied
on a wide range of experimental measurements (Ratcliff &
McKoon, 2008; Latimer et al., 2015; Turner et al., 2015).

Many scientific models are composed of multiple
discrete components, and scientists often make
heuristic decisions about which components to
include. Bayesian inference provides a mathematical framework for systematically selecting model
components, but defining prior distributions over
model components and developing associated inference schemes has been challenging. We approach this problem in a simulation-based inference framework: We define model priors over
candidate components and, from model simulations, train neural networks to infer joint probability distributions over both model components and
associated parameters. Our method, simulationbased model inference (SBMI), represents distributions over model components as a conditional
mixture of multivariate binary distributions in the
Grassmann formalism. SBMI can be applied to
any compositional stochastic simulator without requiring likelihood evaluations. We evaluate SBMI
on a simple time series model and on two scientific models from neuroscience, and show that it
can discover multiple data-consistent model configurations, and that it reveals non-identifiable
model components and parameters. SBMI provides a powerful tool for data-driven scientific
inquiry which will allow scientists to identify essential model components and make uncertaintyinformed modelling decisions.

How can one automatically infer such models from data,
including both the compositions of components and the associated parameters? One challenge is posed by the fact
that, for many such models, evaluating the likelihood function is not tractable, rendering standard likelihood-based approaches inapplicable. Approximate Bayesian computation
(ABC) (Sisson et al., 2018), offers a framework to deal with
this challenge in a systematic way, and in the last years, the
development of new methods has been fueled by advances
in neural network-based density estimation (Papamakarios
et al., 2021) leading to new simulation-based inference (SBI)
methods (Papamakarios & Murray, 2016; Lueckmann et al.,
2017; Cranmer et al., 2020a). SBI has been successfully
applied to various fields like astronomy (Dax et al., 2022),
robotics (Marlier et al., 2021), neuroscience (Gonçalves
et al., 2020; Deistler et al., 2022; Groschner et al., 2022) and
cognitive science (Radev et al., 2020; Boelts et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Computational models are a powerful tool to condense scientific knowledge into mathematical equations. These models
can be used for interpreting and explaining empirically observed phenomena and predicting future observations. Sci1

Machine Learning in Science, University of Tübingen and
Tübingen AI Center, Germany 2 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Department Empirical Inference, Tübingen, Germany. Correspondence to: Cornelius Schröder, Jakob Macke
<firstname.lastname@uni-tuebingen.de>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

However, in addition to inferring parameters, we also need
1

