Relational Learning in Pre-Trained Models:
A Theory from Hypergraph Recovery Perspective

Yang Chen 1 Cong Fang 1 2 Zhouchen Lin 1 2 3 Bing Liu 4

Abstract

(Frieder et al., 2023), coding (Zhang et al., 2022), commonsense reasoning (Rajani et al., 2019; Zhao et al., 2023b),
and text-to-image generation (Ramesh et al., 2021; Li et al.,
2023b). During interactions with humans, FMs seem to exhibit an understanding of real-world entities to a certain degree, engaging in reasoning based on these entities (Bubeck
et al., 2023). For example, FMs can deduce the entity “table” from descriptions of objects placed on it, such as a cup,
book, or computer, which raises a fundamental question:
how do FMs learn real-world entities from pre-training?

Foundation Models (FMs) have demonstrated remarkable insights into the relational dynamics of
the world, leading to the crucial question: how do
these models acquire an understanding of world
hybrid relations? Traditional statistical learning,
particularly for prediction problems, may overlook the rich and inherently structured information from the data, especially regarding the relationships between objects. We introduce a mathematical model that formalizes relational learning
as hypergraph recovery to study pre-training of
FMs. In our framework, the world is represented
as a hypergraph, with data abstracted as random
samples from hyperedges. We theoretically examine the feasibility of a Pre-Trained Model (PTM)
to recover this hypergraph and analyze the data
efficiency in a minimax near-optimal style. By
integrating rich graph theories into the realm of
PTMs, our mathematical framework offers powerful tools for an in-depth understanding of pretraining from a unique perspective and can be
used under various scenarios. As an example,
we extend the framework to entity alignment in
multimodal learning.

To investigate the learning of entities via pre-training, a
formidable challenge is to formalize how the relationships
between the entities are learned from data. Traditional
statistical learning, such as PAC (Valiant, 1984; Mohri
et al., 2018), particularly in classification problems, typically treats data as pairs of objects and their corresponding
labels, focusing primarily on predicting these absolute labels. However, this approach may overlook the richer, more
nuanced information that data inherently carry, especially
regarding the relationships between objects. For instance,
an image of a camel does not just represent the animal; it
may also encapsulate its context, like a desert background,
offering deeper relational insights on the camel and the context objects. Similarly, in natural language processing, the
meaning of a sentence transcends the mere sum of its words,
revealing complex interdependencies between the entities
represented by the words. At the same time, PTMs, such
as LLMs, often respond to complex relationships between
objects. Recognizing this, a new mathematical model is essential to capture these critical, yet often overlooked, facets
of relational learning in pre-training, crucial for understanding the capabilities and generalization of the PTMs.

1. Introduction
Foundation Models (FMs) (Bommasani et al., 2021; OpenAI, 2023) have emerged as transformative forces in the
realm of artificial intelligence, demonstrating impressive
performance in various real-world tasks such as knowledge
retrieval (Liu et al., 2023), mathematics problem solving

In this work, we propose a novel mathematical framework
based on hypergraph recovery to more fully capture the
essence of relational learning. Specifically, we abstract
the world as a hypergraph: entities are nodes, and relationships between entities are hyperedges. Each hyperedge
is assigned a weight, signifying the strength of the corresponding relation. We formulate relational learning from
pre-training as hypergraph recovery of the world hypergraph
using the information of data. We model data generation
as random sampling from the hyperedges. This data gen-

1
National Key Lab of General Artificial Intelligence, School of
Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University 2 Institute
for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University 3 Pazhou Laboratory
(Huangpu), Guangzhou, China 4 Department of Computer Science,
University of Illinois Chicago. Correspondence to: Cong Fang
<fangcong@pku.edu.cn>, Zhouchen Lin <zlin@pku.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

