Position: Leverage Foundational Models for Black-Box Optimization

Xingyou Song 1 Yingtao Tian 1 Robert Tjarko Lange 2 Chansoo Lee 1 Yujin Tang 2 Yutian Chen 1

Abstract

automated machine learning (Feurer et al., 2015; Real et al.,
2020; Mellor et al., 2021), drug discovery (Turner et al.,
2021), and biological/chemical design (Angermueller et al.,
2020). As an instructive example, in order to improve the
performance for a classification task, one may tune a neural
network’s architecture. Since the accuracy is typically not
differentiable with respect to hyperparameters that express
design decisions such number of layers, as hyperparameters
are varied, one must repeatedly train expensive models over
multiple trials, to obtain a single accuracy metric. In order
to minimize expensive costs, the core challenge in BBO
is to efficiently search for parameters which maximize the
objective.

Undeniably, Large Language Models (LLMs)
have stirred an extraordinary wave of innovation
in the machine learning research domain, resulting in substantial impact across diverse fields
such as reinforcement learning, robotics, and
computer vision. Their incorporation has been
rapid and transformative, marking a significant
paradigm shift in the field of machine learning
research. However, the field of experimental design, grounded on black-box optimization, has
been much less affected by such a paradigm shift,
even though integrating LLMs with optimization
presents a unique landscape ripe for exploration.
In this position paper, we frame the field of blackbox optimization around sequence-based foundation models and organize their relationship with
previous literature. We discuss the most promising ways foundational language models can revolutionize optimization, which include harnessing
the vast wealth of information encapsulated in
free-form text to enrich task comprehension, utilizing highly flexible sequence models such as
Transformers to engineer superior optimization
strategies, and enhancing performance prediction
over previously unseen search spaces.

Traditional black-box algorithms such as random
search (Droste et al., 2006), evolutionary methods (Hansen,
2016), and Bayesian Optimization (Shahriari et al., 2016)
have been developed robustly to optimize a wide range
of black-box objective functions. Ironically, despite the
term “black-box”, many algorithms inherently perform
better based on accurate assumptions about the nature
of the objective function. These assumptions, or priors,
significantly affect the algorithm’s key behaviors, such
as its predictions over the objective landscape using past
observations, and its ability to balance exploration and
exploitation to propose the next query point.
Manually designing these useful priors is difficult and is
exacerbated when the prior may not match real world objectives or the prior for one category of tasks may not easily
generalize to others, leading to high costs of design. One
possible solution is that one may learn the prior if provided
with realistic objective evaluations, leading to efficient BBO
algorithms without needing to explicitly specify the prior.
For instance, if given previous evaluations from multiple
neural network optimization tasks, one may learn a specific
algorithm to better tune the learning rate than a Bayesian
optimization algorithm designed more generally for optimizing smooth functions. This type of data-driven approach
is known as learning to optimize (Li & Malik, 2016; Chen
et al., 2017; 2022a), a sub-area of meta-learning.

1. Introduction
Black-box optimization (BBO) refers to a class of techniques which use minimally observed information to maximize an objective function. Also known as derivative-free
optimization or zeroth-order optimization, the only feedback for an optimizer is the objective value at a given query
point, in the absence of additional information such as gradients and second-order derivatives. BBO is broadly prevalent across domains involving experimental design where
computing gradients is impossible or infeasible, including
1
Google DeepMind 2 Sakana AI. Correspondence to: Xingyou
Song <xingyousong@google.com>.

While there have been numerous emergent works based
on learning to optimize, the optimization community has
not seen wide adoption of these techniques, due to several
common obstacles. To list a few:

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

