Use Your INSTINCT: INSTruction optimization for LLMs
usIng Neural bandits Coupled with Transformers

Xiaoqiang Lin * 1 Zhaoxuan Wu * 2 3 Zhongxiang Dai 4 Wenyang Hu 1 2 Yao Shu 5 See-Kiong Ng 1 2
Patrick Jaillet 4 Bryan Kian Hsiang Low 1

Abstract

tion optimization for ChatGPT and use extensive experiments to show that INSTINCT consistently outperforms baselines in different tasks,
e.g., various instruction induction tasks and the
task of improving zero-shot chain-of-thought instructions. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/xqlin98/INSTINCT.

Large language models (LLMs) have shown remarkable instruction-following capabilities and
achieved impressive performances in various applications. However, the performances of LLMs
depend heavily on the instructions given to them,
which are typically manually tuned with substantial human efforts. Recent work has used the
query-efficient Bayesian optimization (BO) algorithm to automatically optimize the instructions
given to black-box LLMs. However, BO usually
falls short when optimizing highly sophisticated
(e.g., high-dimensional) objective functions, such
as the functions mapping an instruction to the performance of an LLM. This is mainly due to the
limited expressive power of the Gaussian process
(GP) which is used by BO as a surrogate to model
the objective function. Meanwhile, it has been
repeatedly shown that neural networks (NNs), especially pre-trained transformers, possess strong
expressive power and can model highly complex
functions. So, we adopt a neural bandit algorithm
which replaces the GP in BO by an NN surrogate to optimize instructions for black-box LLMs.
More importantly, the neural bandit algorithm allows us to naturally couple the NN surrogate with
the hidden representation learned by a pre-trained
transformer (i.e., an open-source LLM), which
significantly boosts its performance. These motivate us to propose our INSTruction optimization
usIng Neural bandits Coupled with Transformers
(INSTINCT) algorithm. We perform instruc-

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have recently achieved remarkable performances across a variety of tasks (Zhao et al.,
2023; Touvron et al., 2023). This can mainly be attributed to
the strong instruction-following capability of LLMs, which
allows adaptation to various downstream applications (Liu
et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023a). However, it has been widely
observed that the performances of LLMs heavily depend on
the instructions/prompts given to them. These instructions
are typically manually designed, which can be a humanintensive and costly process (Reynolds & McDonell, 2021;
Mishra et al., 2021). Therefore, it is of paramount importance to develop efficient methods to automatically optimize
the instructions/prompts to attain the best performance of
LLMs. In this work, we refer to this problem as instruction
optimization and use instructions/prompts interchangeably.
Some works have adopted gradient-based methods to optimize the instructions of LLMs (Shin et al., 2020; Li &
Liang, 2021; Lester et al., 2021). However, these methods
require access to the gradient of the LLMs and are hence restricted to white-box (i.e., open-source) LLMs, whereas the
most powerful LLMs nowadays are typically black-box (e.g.,
ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2023a) and GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023b)).
Furthermore, even for white-box LLMs, gradient computation becomes resource-intensive and hence less practical
as the models become larger, which is another limitation
of gradient-based methods. Therefore, recent works have
proposed instruction optimization methods not requiring the
model gradient, which are able to optimize the instructions
for black-box LLMs (Zhou et al., 2023; Prasad et al., 2023;
Pryzant et al., 2023). However, these methods are based on
heuristic local search and are hence not able to leverage the
observation history (i.e., the previously queried instructions

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore 2 Institute of Data Science, National
University of Singapore 3 Integrative Sciences and Engineering
Programme, National University of Singapore 4 LIDS and EECS,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 5 Guangdong Lab of AI
and Digital Economy (SZ). Correspondence to: Zhongxiang Dai
<daizx@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

