Ai-Sampler: Adversarial Learning of Markov kernels with involutive maps

Evgenii Egorov * 1 Riccardo Valperga * 2 Efstratios Gavves 2

Abstract

applicable in general and, most importantly, they are asymptotically unbiased (Roberts & Rosenthal, 2004). In the
recent years, the evolution of deep neural networks has notably propelled the field of Variational Inference (Rezende &
Mohamed, 2015; Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende et al.,
2014; Kingma et al., 2016) whilst MCMC methods have
not benefited much from these advances. Using neural networks inside MCMC algorithms would not only result in
more powerful and flexible inference methods, capable of
handling complex, high-dimensional problems more effectively, but also exploit the tremendous advancements in efficiency of hardware specifically designed for neural network
computations, such as GPUs and TPUs. We argue that this
stagnation in developing MCMC algorithms that make use
of neural networks is partly due to the well-known difficulty
of measuring sample quality (see for example Gorham &
Mackey (2015); Brooks et al. (2011)), meaning that systematically establishing the convergence of a chain to its target
distribution, or defining a quality measure for samples from
a Markov chain is challenging. This makes it intrinsically
hard to define an objective function that can be optimized
with stochastic gradient descent to improve the performance
of the Markov chain. In general, the design of a suitable objective function poses a challenge as one must balance two
competing goals: encouraging both high-quality samples
and good exploration of the whole space (Levy et al., 2018).
In light of this, we attempt to answer the simple question:
how can we learn to sample from a given unnormalized distribution, using neural network-based MCMC methods? To
answer, we propose a novel MCMC method that makes use
of time-reversible neural networks for the transition kernel
and derive an upper bound to the total variation distance
between the stationary distribution of the resulting Markov
chain and the target distribution. Our contribution can be
summarized as follows: we first derive an MCMC method
based on reversible neural networks that is trained as an implicit generative model using a novel adversarial objective
from a given empirical data distribution. The proposed objective makes use of a discriminator. We prove the optimal
discriminator to be equivariant with respect to the cyclic
group of order 2 and propose a class of C2 -equivariant functions that can be used to parameterise it. Finally, we use a
bootstrap process to learn to sample from a given analytic
density and show, on various synthetic, and real-world examples, that the Markov chain resulting from the learned

Markov chain Monte Carlo methods have become
popular in statistics as versatile techniques to sample from complicated probability distributions. In
this work, we propose a method to parameterize and train transition kernels of Markov chains
to achieve efficient sampling and good mixing.
This training procedure minimizes the total variation distance between the stationary distribution of the chain and the empirical distribution
of the data. Our approach leverages involutive
Metropolis-Hastings kernels constructed from reversible neural networks that ensure detailed balance by construction. We find that reversibility
also implies C2 -equivariance of the discriminator
function which can be used to restrict its function
space.

1. Introduction
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) is a key approach in
statistics and machine learning when it comes to sampling
from complex unnormalized distributions. MCMC generates samples by setting up a Markov chain that has the target
distribution as its stationary distribution. Once converged,
samples can be obtained by recording states from the chain.
Not only have MCMC methods transformed Bayesian inference, allowing to sample from the untractable posterior
distributions of complex probabilistic models, but they are
also widely used for integral estimation, time-series analysis and many other problems in statistics and probabilistic
modelling (Robert et al., 2004). Together with Variational
Inference (Blei et al., 2017), they are the two primary probabilistic inference methods in machine learning and statistics.
Compared to Variational Inference, MCMC methods are
often less efficient because of their iterative nature, but more
*

Equal contribution 1 Amsterdam Machine Learning Lab, University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands 2 Riccardo Valperga VISLab, University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Correspondence
to: Evgenii Egorov <egorov.evgenyy@ya.ru>, Riccardo Valperga
<r.valperga@uva.nl>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

