Beyond the Norms: Detecting Prediction Errors in Regression Models

Andres Altieri 1 Marco Romanelli 2 Georg Pichler 3 Florence Alberge 4 Pablo Piantanida 5

Abstract

may trigger undesired, and potentially dangerous, predictions such as out-of-distribution detection (Dadalto et al.,
2022; Ming et al., 2023), selective classification (Corbière
et al., 2019; Huang et al., 2020), misclassification detection
(Granese et al., 2021), and adversarial attacks (Goodfellow
et al., 2015; Picot et al., 2023), among others.

This paper tackles the challenge of detecting unreliable behavior in regression algorithms, which
may arise from intrinsic variability (e.g., aleatoric
uncertainty) or modeling errors (e.g., model uncertainty). First, we formally introduce the notion
of unreliability in regression, i.e., when the output
of the regressor exceeds a specified discrepancy
(or error). Then, using powerful tools for probabilistic modeling, we estimate the discrepancy
density, and we measure its statistical diversity using our proposed metric for statistical dissimilarity. In turn, this allows us to derive a data-driven
score that expresses the uncertainty of the regression outcome. We show empirical improvements
in error detection for multiple regression tasks,
consistently outperforming popular baseline approaches, and contributing to the broader field of
uncertainty quantification and safe machine learning systems. Our code is available at https:
//zenodo.org/records/11281964.

Anomalies may stem from intrinsic variability in the data,
i.e., aleatoric uncertainty (Kiureghian & Ditlevsen, 2009).
For instance, certain inputs may exhibit a larger dispersion
of the dependent variable than expected, i.e., heteroscedastic
uncertainty (Kendall & Gal, 2017). Additional sources of
unreliable behavior may be associated with approximation
errors or model uncertainty (Kiureghian & Ditlevsen, 2009),
occurring when the regressor is not statistically close to
potential observations. This discrepancy may arise from various factors such as sub-optimal model selection, inadequate
model fitting, and insufficient training, among others.
The challenge of identifying anomalous predictions in machine learning models is closely connected to the task of
uncertainty quantification, which aims to assess the uncertainty inherent in model predictions (Kotelevskii et al., 2022;
Liu et al., 2020). In classification tasks, the process typically involves estimating a probability distribution across
labels, introducing a clear distinction between correct and
incorrect decisions and a straightforward understanding of
uncertainty. In stark contrast, regression problems often
present a more convoluted landscape: a single regressor
output is not sufficient to evaluate the model uncertainty.
Thus, an additional uncertainty estimation in the form of
a conditional distribution or prediction interval is usually
incorporated.

1. Introduction
In recent years, machine learning has gained ground in fields
such as automatic processing, and autonomous decisionmaking, generating a crucial need for operational safety and
reliability, aiming to prevent catastrophic errors (Amodei
et al., 2016; Antun et al., 2020; Li et al., 2023). The need for
trustworthy models has generated a lot of research in areas
concerned with the identification of anomalous patterns that

This work aims to develop a simple yet effective framework to evaluate the reliability of the predictions of a given
regressor and detect potentially anomalous situations that
may arise. Our approach involves data-driven techniques
to address the inherent challenges in the detection problem,
particularly in compensating for estimation inaccuracies associated with baseline methods relying on the estimation of
the conditional distribution of the dependent target variable.

1

Laboratoire des signaux et systèmes (L2S), Université ParisSaclay CNRS CentraleSupélec, Gif-sur-Yvette, France 2 New York
University, New York, NY, USA 3 Institute of Telecommunications, TU Wien, Vienna, Austria 4 Systèmes et applications des
technologies de l’information et de l’énergie (SATIE), CNRS
Université Paris-Saclay, Gif-sur-Yvette, France 5 International
Laboratory on Learning Systems (ILLS) and Quebec AI Institute (Mila), McGill ETS CNRS Université Paris-Saclay CentraleSupélec, Montreal (QC), Canada. Correspondence to: Andres
Altieri <andres.altieri@centralesupelec.fr>, Marco Romanelli
<mr6852@nyu.edu>.

1.1. Contributions

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Our main contributions can be summarized as follows:

1

