On The Statistical Complexity of Offline Decision-Making

Thanh Nguyen-Tang 1 Raman Arora 1

Abstract

interaction is prohibitive (Ernst et al., 2005; Lange et al.,
2012; Levine et al., 2020).

We study the statistical complexity of offline
decision-making with function approximation,
establishing (near) minimax-optimal rates for
stochastic contextual bandits and Markov decision
processes. The performance limits are captured by
the pseudo-dimension of the (value) function class
and a new characterization of the behavior policy
that strictly subsumes all the previous notions of
data coverage in the offline decision-making literature. In addition, we seek to understand the
benefits of using offline data in online decisionmaking and show nearly minimax-optimal rates
in a wide range of regimes.

Nevertheless, learning good policies from offline data
presents a unique challenge not present in online decisionmaking: distributional shift. In essence, the policy that
interacts with the environment and collects data differs from
the target policy we aim to learn. This challenge becomes
more pronounced in real-world problems with large state
spaces, where it necessitates function approximation to generalize from observed states to unseen ones.
Representation learning is a basic challenge in machine
learning. It is not surprising, then, that function approximation plays a pivotal role in reinforcement learning (RL) problems with large state spaces, mirroring its significance in
statistical learning theory (Vapnik, 2013). Empirically, deep
RL, which employs neural networks for function approximation, has achieved remarkable success across diverse
tasks (Mnih et al., 2015; Schulman et al., 2017). The choice
of function approximation class determines the inductive
bias we inject into learning, e.g., our belief that the learner’s
environment is relatively simple even though the state space
may be large.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved remarkable empirical success in a wide range of challenging tasks, from
playing video games at the same level as humans (Mnih
et al., 2015), surpassing champions at the game of Go (Silver et al., 2018), to defeating top-ranked professional players in StarCraft (Vinyals et al., 2019). However, many of
these systems require extensive online interaction in gameplay with other players who are experts at the task or some
form of self-play (Li et al., 2016; Ouyang et al., 2022).
Such online interaction may not be affordable in many realworld scenarios due to concerns about cost, safety, and
ethics (e.g., healthcare and autonomous driving). Even in
domains where online interaction is possible (e.g., dialogue
systems), we would still prefer to utilize available historical,
pre-collected datasets to learn useful decision-making policies efficiently. Such an approach would allow leveraging
plentiful data, possibly replicating the success that supervised learning has had recently (LeCun et al., 2015). Offline
RL has emerged as an alternative to allow learning from
existing datasets and is particularly attractive when online

It is natural, then, to understand different function approximation classes in terms of a tight characterization of their
complexity and learnability. In statistical supervised learning, specific combinatorial properties of the function class
are known to completely characterize sample-efficient supervised learning in both realizable and agnostic settings (Vapnik & Chervonenkis, 1971; Alon et al., 1997; Attias et al.,
2023). For offline RL, a similar characterization is not
known. With that as our motivation, we pose the following
fundamental question that has largely remained unanswered:
What is a sufficient and necessary condition for learnability
in offline RL with function approximation?
We note that given the additional challenge of distribution
shift in offline RL, such a characterization would depend
not only on the properties of the function class but, more importantly, on the quality of the offline dataset. The existing
literature on offline RL provides theoretical understanding
only for limited scenarios of distributional shifts. These
works capture the quality of offline data via a notion of
data coverage. The strongest of these notions is that of
uniform coverage, which requires that the behavior policy

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore 21218, USA. Correspondence to:
Thanh Nguyen-Tang <nguyent@cs.jhu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

