Transferable Facial Privacy Protection against Blind Face Restoration via
Domain-Consistent Adversarial Obfuscation
Kui Zhang 1 Hang Zhou 2 Jie Zhang 3 Wenbo Zhou 1 Weiming Zhang 1 Nenghai Yu 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Recently, the rapid development of deep learning has advanced computer vision comprehensively. To train vision
models, a massive amount of data is being utilized, which
may contain sensitive or unauthorized data collection, thus
inevitably raising concerns about personal privacy invasion.
Face privacy protection, one of the most significant issues
among personal privacy has been studied promptly, and it
can be categorized into two: reliable defense and reliable
service. On the one hand, reliable defense (Cherepanova
et al., 2020; Shan et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2021b; Huang
et al., 2021; Tolosana et al., 2020; Sun et al., 2018)targets to
protect face images from unauthorized face analysis models
due to the widespread deployment of surveillance devices
and the popularity of social media at the moment. Adversarial attacks are used to produce noise to defend against face
recognition. On the other hand, reliable service (Hukkelås
et al., 2019; Maximov et al., 2020; Gafni et al., 2019; Kuang
et al., 2021; Li et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2019; Chen et al.,
2021) takes advantage of generative models to produce massive realistic fake faces for computer vision tasks, which
avoids the possibility of access to real face data, leading
to reliably applying existing datasets for face-related tasks
such as face detection and recognition.

With the rise of social media and the proliferation of facial recognition surveillance, concerns surrounding privacy have escalated significantly. While numerous studies have concentrated
on safeguarding users against unauthorized face
recognition, a new and often overlooked issue
has emerged due to advances in facial restoration
techniques: traditional methods of facial obfuscation may no longer provide a secure shield, as
they can potentially expose anonymous information to human perception. Our empirical study
shows that blind face restoration (BFR) models
can restore obfuscated faces with high probability by simply retraining them on obfuscated (e.g.,
pixelated) faces. To address it, we propose a transferable adversarial obfuscation method for privacy
protection against BFR models. Specifically, we
observed a common characteristic among BFR
models, namely, their capability to approximate
an inverse mapping of a transformation from a
high-quality image domain to a low-quality image
domain. Leveraging this shared model attribute,
we have developed a domain-consistent adversarial method for generating obfuscated images. In
essence, our method is designed to minimize overfitting to surrogate models during the perturbation
generation, thereby enhancing the generalization
of adversarial obfuscated facial images. Extensive
experiments on various BFR models demonstrate
the effectiveness and transferability of the proposed method.

Although these studies mitigate face privacy eavesdropping
caused by unauthorized neural face recognition, the growing focus on privacy protection has overlooked another critical issue: privacy breach of obfuscated faces. In many
public settings, law enforcement agencies, and the media
anonymize unauthorized faces to protect privacy by operations like pixelation to influence perception purposely. However, recent work (Yang et al., 2020a; 2021a; Wang et al.,
2021; 2022; Zhou et al., 2022) on blind face restoration
(BFR) reveals that even low-quality face images that have
undergone complex degradation can be recovered to faces
with realistic details and rich identity information. Two examples of face privacy leakage are shown in Figure 1. Upon
processing mosaic images through BFR models, obfuscated
images are invalid and it is difficult for human observers to
differentiate between restored and unpixelated faces.

1

University of Science and Technology of China 2 Simon Fraser
University 3 Nanyang Technological University. Correspondence
to: Weiming Zhang <zhangwm@ustc.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Contemporary anonymization methods for face privacy protection are limited to a great extent. Existing obfuscation
1

