Human-like Category Learning by Injecting Ecological Priors from Large
Language Models into Neural Networks

Akshay K. Jagadish 1 2 Julian Coda-Forno 1 2 Mirko Thalmann 1 2 Eric Schulz * 1 2 Marcel Binz * 1 2

Abstract

and understand cognition in the light of naturalistic environments. Later on, Simon (1990) famously argued that human
decision-making is like the two blades of a scissor, with one
blade representing the cognitive processes of the mind and
the other the structure of the environment in which the mind
operates. Todd & Gigerenzer (2012) furthered this notion
by introducing the term ecological rationality, suggesting
that minds are adapted to their environments through the
use of simple, context-specific strategies.

Ecological rationality refers to the notion that humans are rational agents adapted to their environment. However, testing this theory remains
challenging due to two reasons: the difficulty
in defining what tasks are ecologically valid and
building rational models for these tasks. In this
work, we demonstrate that large language models can generate cognitive tasks, specifically category learning tasks, that match the statistics of
real-world tasks, thereby addressing the first challenge. We tackle the second challenge by deriving
rational agents adapted to these tasks using the
framework of meta-learning, leading to a class of
models called ecologically rational meta-learned
inference (ERMI). ERMI quantitatively explains
human data better than seven other cognitive models in two different experiments. It additionally
matches human behavior on a qualitative level:
(1) it finds the same tasks difficult that humans
find difficult, (2) it becomes more reliant on an
exemplar-based strategy for assigning categories
with learning, and (3) it generalizes to unseen
stimuli in a human-like way. Furthermore, we
show that ERMI’s ecologically valid priors allow
it to achieve state-of-the-art performance on the
OpenML-CC18 classification benchmark.

However, it has remained challenging to build computational models that describe how people implement strategies
adapted to their environment for two reasons. First, defining
ecologically valid tasks is still an open problem (Barker,
1968; Neisser, 1987; Hammond, 1998) and second, even
if we have access to such tasks, it is challenging to build
models that solve them rationally.
In the present paper, we address both of these challenges.
We show that large language models (LLMs) – having been
trained on large amounts of human-generated text – can
serve as a useful tool for generating ecologically valid tasks,
thereby addressing the first challenge. To address the second
challenge, we then derive rational learning algorithms for
these tasks using the framework of meta-learning (Pratt
& Thrun, 1998; Hochreiter et al., 2001; Binz et al., 2023),
leading to a class of models that we call ecologically rational
meta-learned inference (ERMI).
We illustrate our approach using the domain of category
learning (Ashby & Maddox, 2005) — one of the beststudied areas of cognitive science. We begin by verifying
that LLMs can generate category learning tasks whose statistics match real-world classification data sets (Bischl et al.,
2019). Following this, we show that ERMI quantitatively
explains human data from two different category learning
experiments better than seven other cognitive models. Furthermore, ERMI aligns with human behavior qualitatively:
(1) it finds the same tasks difficult that humans find difficult,
(2) it shows the same transition of categorization strategies
as humans, and (3) it generalizes to unseen stimuli in a
human-like way. Taken together, these results suggest that
we can explain human category learning to a large extent
using the principle of ecological rationality.

1. Introduction
Ecological rationality refers to the idea that humans are rational agents adapted to the ecological environments they
interact with. Nearly seventy years ago, Brunswik (1955)
emphasized that we have to move beyond laboratory settings
*

Equal contribution 1 Computational Principles of Intelligence
Lab, Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics, Tübingen,
Germany 2 Institute for Human-Centered AI, Helmholtz Computational Health Center, Munich, Germany. Correspondence to:
Akshay K. Jagadish <akshaykjagadish@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

