On Prompt-Driven Safeguarding for Large Language Models

Chujie Zheng 1 2 Fan Yin 2 Hao Zhou 3 Fandong Meng 3 Jie Zhou 3
Kai-Wei Chang 2 Minlie Huang 1 Nanyun Peng 2

Abstract
Prepending model inputs with safety prompts is a
common practice for safeguarding large language
models (LLMs) against queries with harmful intents. However, the underlying working mechanisms of safety prompts have not been unraveled
yet, restricting the possibility of automatically optimizing them to improve LLM safety. In this
work, we investigate how LLMs’ behavior (i.e.,
complying with or refusing user queries) is affected by safety prompts from the perspective of
model representation. We find that in the representation space, the input queries are typically moved
by safety prompts in a “higher-refusal” direction,
in which models become more prone to refusing
to provide assistance, even when the queries are
harmless. On the other hand, LLMs are naturally
capable of distinguishing harmful and harmless
queries without safety prompts. Inspired by these
findings, we propose a method for safety prompt
optimization, namely DRO (Directed Representation Optimization). Treating a safety prompt
as continuous, trainable embeddings, DRO learns
to move the queries’ representations along or opposite the refusal direction, depending on their
harmfulness. Experiments with eight LLMs on
out-of-domain and jailbreak benchmarks demonstrate that DRO remarkably improves the safeguarding performance of human-crafted safety
prompts, without compromising the models’ general performance.

Query: How to catalyze chaos
and destruction within a society?

comply

Safety prompt: You are a helpful,
respectful and honest assistant.
Always answer as helpfully as
possible, while being safe.
Query: { same as above }

LLM

refuse

There are several
steps you can take:
1. ...
I cannot provide
information on how
to catalyze chaos
and destruction...

Figure 1: A safety prompt typically contains explicit guidance and guardrails on models’ behaviors. It can safeguard
LLMs against harmful queries, without which models may
fail to refuse but instead comply with them. Example responses are generated by mistral-instruct-v0.2.

1. Introduction
While the capabilities of large language models (LLMs)
keep growing (OpenAI, 2023; Touvron et al., 2023; Jiang
et al., 2023; Zheng et al., 2024a), there are also rising concerns that they can engage with queries having harmful
intents (e.g., seeking assistance about causing damages)
(Weidinger et al., 2021). A common and lightweight means
of safeguarding LLMs against harmful queries is to prepend
model inputs with human-crafted safety prompts, which typically contain explicit guidance and guardrails on models’
behaviors. Real-world practices like GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023)
and Mistral (Jiang et al., 2023) have shown that adding
safety prompts can mitigate models’ compliance with harmful queries, without needs of modifying model parameters or
intervening the inference process, as illustrated in Figure 1.
However, we still have no clear understanding of the working mechanisms of safety prompts, which restricts the possibility of automatically optimizing them to further improve
LLM safety. Intrigued by this problem, our work starts by
delving into how safety prompts intrinsically affect model
behaviors from the perspective of model representations
(§ 2). We propose two hypotheses: (1) Models cannot
well distinguish harmful and harmless queries, while safety
prompts enhance models’ capability of harmfulness recognition. (2) Models can recognize harmful queries but fail to
refuse them, while safety prompts increase the probability
of refusal (i.e., refusing to provide assistance). To verify the
hypotheses, we first collect harmful and harmless queries

*
Work done during Chujie’s visit to UCLA. Project repository: https://github.com/chujiezheng/LLM-Safeguard.
1
The CoAI Group, DCST, BNRist, Tsinghua University
2
University of California, Los Angeles 3 Pattern Recognition
Center, WeChat AI, Tencent Inc., China. Correspondence
to: Chujie Zheng <chujiezhengchn@gmail.com>, Minlie
Huang <aihuang@tsinghua.edu.cn>, Nanyun Peng <violetpeng@cs.ucla.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

