Human Alignment of Large Language Models through
Online Preference Optimisation

Daniele Calandriello * 1 Zhaohan Daniel Guo * 1 Remi Munos * 1 Mark Rowland * 1 Yunhao Tang 1
Bernardo Avila Pires 1 Pierre Harvey Richemond 1 Charline Le Lan 1 Michal Valko 1 Tianqi Liu 1
Rishabh Joshi 1 Zeyu Zheng 1 Bilal Piot * 1

1. Introduction

Abstract
Ensuring alignment of language models’ outputs
with human preferences is critical to guarantee a
useful, safe, and pleasant user experience. Thus,
human alignment has been extensively studied recently and several methods such as Reinforcement
Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF), Direct
Preference Optimisation (DPO) and Sequence
Likelihood Calibration (SLiC) have emerged. In
this paper, our contribution is two-fold. First, we
show the equivalence between two recent alignment methods, namely Identity Preference Optimisation (IPO) and Nash Mirror Descent (NashMD). Second, we introduce a generalisation of
IPO, named IPO-MD, that leverages the regularised sampling approach proposed by Nash-MD.
This equivalence may seem surprising at first
sight, since IPO is an offline method whereas
Nash-MD is an online method using a preference model. However, this equivalence can be
proven when we consider the online version of
IPO, that is when both generations are sampled
by the online policy and annotated by a trained
preference model. Optimising the IPO loss with
such a stream of data becomes then equivalent
to finding the Nash equilibrium of the preference
model through self-play. Building on this equivalence, we introduce the IPO-MD algorithm that
generates data with a mixture policy (between
the online and reference policy) similarly as the
general Nash-MD algorithm. We compare onlineIPO and IPO-MD to different online versions of
existing losses on preference data such as DPO
and SLiC on a summarisation task.

Learning from feedback is a common approach to align the
behaviour of artificial agents with human preferences (Knox
& Stone, 2008; Griffith et al., 2013; Christiano et al., 2017;
Warnell et al., 2018). In recent years, reinforcement learning
from human feedback has become a common paradigm
for fine-tuning large language models (Glaese et al., 2022;
OpenAI, 2022).
The traditional approach to fine-tuning of large language
models from human preferences is to learn a reward signal under the Bradley-Terry (BT) model (Bradley & Terry,
1952), and then perform reinforcement learning (RL) against
this learnt reward signal (Christiano et al., 2017). Recently,
Rafailov et al. (2023) proposed an alternative model-free
approach, direct preference optimisation (DPO). DPO is
mathematically equivalent to the method above, in the sense
that the minimiser of the population loss is identical (Azar
et al., 2023), yet DPO bypasses the learning of the reward
signal. Both approaches, however, rely on the BT model.
Recently, two particular approaches to directly optimise
against preference probabilities themselves, rather than a
Bradley-Terry-derived reward function have been proposed.
Identity preference optimisation (Azar et al., 2023, IPO) is
an algorithm that aims to optimise preference probabilities
against a fixed data distribution, and does so with an offline
contrastive loss, as with DPO. By contrast, Nash-MD-PG
(Munos et al., 2023) is an algorithm that aims to find a Nash
equilibrium with respect to the preference probabilities, via
online policy gradient updates against a regularised policy.
Both algorithms have appealing properties, though on the
face of it are unrelated: one is an offline contrastive algorithm optimising against a fixed policy, the other is an online
algorithm aiming to find a Nash equilibrium.

*
Equal contribution 1 Google DeepMind. Correspondence
to: Daniele Calandriello <dcalandriello@google.com>, Zhaohan Daniel Guo <danielguo@google.com>, Michal Valko
<michal.valko@inria.fr>.

In this work we bridge the gap between IPO and NashMD-PG, and use this theoretical bridge to propose a novel
class of preference optimisation algorithms. Specifically,
our principal contributions are: first, we identify several
key factors of variation between IPO and Nash-MD-PG, including their use of offline/online data, contrastivity of their

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

