Going beyond Compositions, DDPMs Can Produce Zero-Shot Interpolations

Justin Deschenaux * 1 Igor Krawczuk * 2 Grigorios G. Chrysos 3 2 Volkan Cevher 2

Abstract
Composition

Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models
(DDPMs) exhibit remarkable capabilities in
image generation, with studies suggesting that
they can generalize by composing latent factors
learned from the training data. In this work, we
go further and study DDPMs trained on strictly
separate subsets of the data distribution with large
gaps on the support of the latent factors. We show
that such a model can effectively generate images
in the unexplored, intermediate regions of the
distribution. For instance, when trained on clearly
smiling and non-smiling faces, we demonstrate a
sampling procedure which can generate slightly
smiling faces without reference images (zero-shot
interpolation). We replicate these findings for
other attributes as well as other datasets. Our
code is available on GitHub.

Interpolation

Train examples
Test examples

Figure 1: Assume that the characteristic of real samples is
influenced by some latent variables zi (e.g. color and shape).
If the support of the latent space is a cartesian product of the
individual latent variables (e.g. pairs (color, shape) typically
finite and discrete), we say that the samples depend on combinations of the individual latent variables. Conversely,
if the latent variables zi are defined on a closed interval (e.g.
zi ∈ [0, 1]), such that any value of zi induces a meaningful
sample (e.g. any color in between green and pink), then
we say that there exists an interpolation between extreme
samples, where the extreme examples are samples whose
latent are close to the extrema of their support (e.g. pure
pink or pure green colors).

1. Introduction
In recent years Diffusion models (DM) (Sohl-Dickstein
et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021) have emerged
as highly successful generative methods for content synthesis (Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021; Rombach et al., 2022; Du
et al., 2020). As observed by Okawa et al. (2023) and others, DMs are capable of leveraging compositionality, an
important concept in psychology (Frege & Gabriel, 1980),
philosophy (Pelletier, 1994) and linguistics (Williams, 1983)
which refers to the human capability to combine attributes
into novel configurations. For instance, after observing
smiling people with both long hair and frowning people
with short hair, humans can imagine smiling short-haired
individuals. Furthermore, humans are able to interpolate

attributes as well, e.g. they will be able to imagine shorthaired individuals with mild smiles or neutral expressions
as well. Crucially, interpolating implicitly assumes there
exists a latent factor governing a set of attributes, inducing a
natural ranking of samples according to the factor of interest.
In the sequel, we will refer to attributes as the expressions
corresponding to a latent variable which induces a ranking.
Remarkably, we observe that diffusion models are capable of interpolation without being trained on instances
with intermediate expressions of the latent factor. In the
example, a generative model capable of interpolation would
not be exposed to neutral individuals or mild smiles and
frowns, yet could generate samples exhibiting these facial
expressions.

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, École
Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland 2 LIONS, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL),
Lausanne, Switzerland 3 Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, University of Wisconsin-Madison, USA. Correspondence to: Justin Deschenaux <justin.deschenaux@gmail.com>,
Igor Krawczuk <igor@krawczuk.eu>.

Interpolation abilities are crucial to address questions related
to fairness and bias mitigation in machine learning through
generative models (Sattigeri et al., 2019; Rajabi & Garibay,
2021; Tan et al., 2021). Indeed, a model able to interpolate
would allow generating nuanced samples even when the
training dataset contains little diversity. This is especially
important because the data collection process might filter out
instances that do not meet ad-hoc criteria. Such procedure

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

