M EDUSA: Simple LLM Inference Acceleration Framework with Multiple
Decoding Heads

Tianle Cai * 1 2 Yuhong Li * 3 Zhengyang Geng 4 Hongwu Peng 5 Jason D. Lee 1 Deming Chen 3 Tri Dao 1 2

Abstract

M EDUSA on models of various sizes and training procedures. Our experiments demonstrate
that M EDUSA-1 can achieve over 2.2× speedup
without compromising generation quality, while
M EDUSA-2 further improves the speedup to 2.32.8×.

Large Language Models (LLMs) employ autoregressive decoding that requires sequential computation, with each step reliant on the previous
one’s output. This creates a bottleneck as each
step necessitates moving the full model parameters from High-Bandwidth Memory (HBM) to
the accelerator’s cache. While methods such as
speculative decoding have been suggested to address this issue, their implementation is impeded
by the challenges associated with acquiring and
maintaining a separate draft model. In this paper, we present M EDUSA, an efficient method
that augments LLM inference by adding extra
decoding heads to predict multiple subsequent
tokens in parallel. Using a tree-based attention
mechanism, M EDUSA constructs multiple candidate continuations and verifies them simultaneously in each decoding step. By leveraging
parallel processing, M EDUSA substantially reduces the number of decoding steps required. We
present two levels of fine-tuning procedures for
M EDUSA to meet the needs of different use cases:
M EDUSA-1: M EDUSA is directly fine-tuned on
top of a frozen backbone LLM, enabling lossless
inference acceleration. M EDUSA-2: M EDUSA
is fine-tuned together with the backbone LLM,
enabling better prediction accuracy of M EDUSA
heads and higher speedup but needing a special
training recipe that preserves the model’s capabilities. Moreover, we propose several extensions
that improve or expand the utility of M EDUSA,
including a self-distillation to handle situations
where no training data is available and a typical
acceptance scheme to boost the acceptance rate
while maintaining generation quality. We evaluate

1. Introduction
The recent advancements in Large Language Models
(LLMs) have demonstrated that the quality of language
generation significantly improves with an increase in model
size, reaching billions of parameters (Brown et al., 2020;
Chowdhery et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022; Hoffmann et al.,
2022; OpenAI, 2023; Google, 2023; Touvron et al., 2023).
However, this growth has led to an increase in inference
latency, which poses a significant challenge in practical applications. From a system perspective, LLM inference is
predominantly memory-bandwidth-bound (Shazeer, 2019;
Kim et al., 2023), with the main latency bottleneck stemming from accelerators’ memory bandwidth rather than
arithmetic computations. This bottleneck is inherent to
the sequential nature of auto-regressive decoding, where
each forward pass requires transferring the complete model
parameters from High-Bandwidth Memory (HBM) to the
accelerator’s cache. This process, which generates only a
single token, underutilizes the arithmetic computation potential of modern accelerators, leading to inefficiency.
To address this, one approach to speed up LLM inference
involves increasing the arithmetic intensity (the ratio of total
floating-point operations (FLOPs) to total data movement)
of the decoding process and reducing the number of decoding steps. In line with this idea, speculative decoding has
been proposed (Leviathan et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023;
Xia et al., 2023; Miao et al., 2023). This method uses a
smaller draft model to generate a token sequence, which is
then refined by the original, larger model for acceptable continuation. However, obtaining an appropriate draft model
remains challenging, and it’s even harder to integrate the
draft model into a distributed system (Chen et al., 2023).

*
Equal contribution 1 Princeton University 2 Together AI
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 4 Carnegie Mellon University 5 University of Connecticut. Correspondence to: Tianle Cai
<tianle.cai@princeton.edu>, Yuhong Li <leeyh@illinois.edu>.
3

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Instead of using a separate draft model to sequentially generate candidate outputs, in this paper, we revisit and re1

