Geometry-Calibrated DRO: Combating Over-Pessimism
with Free Energy Implications

Jiashuo Liu 1 * Jiayun Wu 1 * Tianyu Wang 2 Hao Zou 3 Bo Li 4 Peng Cui 1

Abstract

Gao & Kleywegt, 2022; Gao et al., 2022) aims to optimize
against the worst-case risk distribution within a predefined
uncertainty set. This uncertainty set is centered around the
training distribution, and generalization performance can be
guaranteed when the test distribution falls within this set.

Machine learning algorithms minimizing average
risk are susceptible to distributional shifts. Distributionally Robust Optimization (DRO) addresses
this issue by optimizing the worst-case risk within
an uncertainty set. However, DRO suffers from
over-pessimism, leading to low-confidence predictions, poor parameter estimations as well as poor
generalization. In this work, we conduct a theoretical analysis of a probable root cause of overpessimism: excessive focus on noisy samples. To
alleviate the impact of noise, we incorporate data
geometry into calibration terms in DRO, resulting in our novel Geometry-Calibrated DRO (GCDRO) for regression. We establish the connection
between our risk objective and the Helmholtz free
energy in statistical physics, and this free-energybased risk can extend to standard DRO methods.
Leveraging gradient flow in Wasserstein space,
we develop an approximate minimax optimization
algorithm with a bounded error ratio and elucidate
how our approach mitigates noisy sample effects.
Comprehensive experiments confirm GCDRO’s
superiority over conventional DRO methods.

However, DRO methods have been found to experience
the over-pessimism problem in practice (Hu et al., 2018;
Zhai et al., 2021) (i.e., low-confidence predictions, poor
parameter estimations, and generalization). Recent studies
have sought to address this issue. From the uncertainty set
perspective, Blanchet et al. (2019b); Liu et al. (2022a;b) proposed data-driven methods to learn distance metrics from
data. However, these approaches remain vulnerable to noisy
samples, as demonstrated in Table 2. Recently, Słowik &
Bottou (2022); Agarwal & Zhang (2022) observed that DRO
may overly focus on sub-populations with higher noise levels, leading to suboptimal generalization. Consequently,
from the risk objective perspective, they suggest incorporating calibration terms to mitigate this issue. Nevertheless,
applicable calibration terms either require expert knowledge or are computationally intensive, and few practical
algorithms have been proposed.
To devise a practical calibration term for DRO, we first aim
to identify the root causes of over-pessimism, which we
attribute to the excessive focus on noisy samples that frequently exhibit higher prediction errors. For typical DRO
methods (Namkoong & Duchi, 2017; Staib & Jegelka, 2019;
Duchi & Namkoong, 2021; Liu et al., 2022b), based on
a simple yet insightful linear example, we theoretically
demonstrate that the variance of estimated parameters becomes substantially large when noisy samples have higher
densities, in line with the empirical findings reported in
(Zhai et al., 2021). Furthermore, we demonstrate that existing outlier-robust regression methods are not directly applicable for mitigating noisy samples in DRO scenarios
where both noisy samples and distribution shifts coexist,
highlighting the non-trivial nature of this problem.

1. Introduction
Machine learning algorithms with empirical risk minimization (ERM) have been shown to perform poorly under distribution shifts, especially sub-population shifts where substantial data subsets are underrepresented in the average
risk due to their small sample sizes. As an alternative, Distributionally Robust Optimization (DRO) (Namkoong &
Duchi, 2017; Blanchet & Murthy, 2019; Liu et al., 2022a;
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science and
Technology, Tsinghua University 2 Department of Industrial
Engineering and Operations Research, Columbia University
3
Zhongguancun Lab 4 School of Economics and Management,
Tsinghua University. Correspondence to: Jiashuo Liu <liujiashuo77@gmail.com>, Peng Cui <cuip@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

In this work, inspired by the ideas in (Słowik & Bottou,
2022; Agarwal & Zhang, 2022), we design calibration terms,
i.e., total variation and entropy regularization, to prevent
DRO from excessively focusing on random noisy samples.
In conjunction with the Geometric Wasserstein uncertainty

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

