Fast and Sample Efficient Multi-Task Representation Learning
in Stochastic Contextual Bandits
Jiabin Lin 1 Shana Moothedath 1 Namrata Vaswani 1

Abstract

Multi-task representation learning is the problem of learning
a common low-dimensional representation among multiple
related tasks (Caruana, 1997). Multi-task learning enables
models to tackle multiple related tasks simultaneously, leveraging common patterns and improving overall performance
(Zhang & Yang, 2018; Wang et al., 2016; Thekumparampil
et al., 2021). By sharing knowledge across tasks, multitask learning can lead to more efficient and effective models,
especially when data is limited or expensive. Multi-task bandit learning has gained interest recently (Deshmukh et al.,
2017; Fang & Tao, 2015; Cella et al., 2023; Hu et al., 2021;
Yang et al., 2020; Lin & Moothedath, 2024). Many applications of CBs, such as recommending movies or TV shows
to users and suggesting personalized treatment plans for
patients with various medical conditions, involve related
tasks. These applications can significantly benefit from
this approach, as demonstrated in our empirical analysis in
Section 6. This paper investigates the benefit of using representation learning in CBs theoretically and experimentally.

We study how representation learning can improve the learning efficiency of contextual bandit
problems. We study the setting where we play
T contextual linear bandits with dimension d simultaneously, and these T bandit tasks collectively share a common linear representation with
a dimensionality of r ≪ d. We present a new
algorithm based on alternating projected gradient descent (GD) and minimization estimator to
recover a low-rank feature matrix. Using the proposed estimator, we present a multi-task learning
algorithm for linear contextual bandits and prove
the regret bound of our algorithm. We presented
experiments and compared the performance of
our algorithm against benchmark algorithms.

1. Introduction

While representation learning has demonstrated remarkable
success across various applications (Bengio et al., 2013),
its theoretical understanding still remains underexplored. A
prevalent assumption in the literature is the presence of a
shared common representation among different tasks. (Maurer et al., 2016) introduced a general approach to learning
data representation in both multi-task supervised learning
and learning-to-learn scenarios. (Du et al., 2020) delved
into few-shot learning through representation learning, making assumptions about a common representation shared between source and target tasks. (Tripuraneni et al., 2021)
specifically addressed the challenge of multi-task linear
regression with low-rank representation, presenting algorithms with robust statistical rates. Related parallel works
address the same mathematical problem (referred to as lowrank column-wise compressive sensing) or its generalization
(called low-rank phase retrieval) and provide better - sampleefficient and faster - solutions (Nayer et al., 2019; Nayer &
Vaswani, 2021; 2023; Collins et al., 2021; Vaswani, 2024).

Contextual Bandits (CB) represent an online learning problem wherein sequential decisions are made based on observed contexts, aiming to optimize rewards in a dynamic
environment with immediate feedback. In CBs, the environment presents a context in each round, and in response, the
agent selects an action that yields a reward. The agent’s objective is to choose actions to maximize cumulative reward
over N rounds. This introduces the exploration-exploitation
dilemma, as the agent must balance exploratory actions to
estimate the environment’s reward function and exploitative
actions that maximize the overall return (Bubeck & CesaBianchi, 2012; Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2020). CB algorithms find applications in various fields, including robotics
(Srivastava et al., 2014), clinical trials (Aziz et al., 2021),
communications (Anandkumar et al., 2011), and recommender systems (Li et al., 2010).
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Iowa
State University, Ames IA 50011-1250, USA. Correspondence to:
Jiabin Lin <jiabin@iastate.edu>.

Motivated by the outcomes of multi-task learning in supervised learning, numerous recent works have explored
the advantages of representation learning in the context of
sequential decision-making problems, including reinforcement learning (RL) and bandit learning. Our paper studies

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

