Learning to Explore in POMDPs with Informational Rewards

Annie Xie 1 Logan Mondal Bhamidipaty 1 Evan Zheran Liu 2 Joey Hong 3 Sergey Levine 3 Chelsea Finn 1

Abstract

to drive to work in the shortest amount of time is difficult if
information about traffic and road blockages is unknown. A
common way to simplify learning under such partial observability is to provide the learner with privileged information
at training time, such as the full underlying states. Prior
approaches leverage this privileged information to train an
omniscient expert, which then supervises a policy without
such information (Levine et al., 2016; Pan et al., 2017; Pinto
et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2020; Baisero & Amato, 2021;
Lambrechts et al., 2023). While the expert supervision is
useful for solving the task, it leaves a critical aspect unaddressed: how to explore and actually gather the information
used by the expert.

Standard exploration methods typically rely on
random coverage of the state space or coveragepromoting exploration bonuses. However, in partially observed settings, the biggest exploration
challenge is often posed by the need to discover
information-gathering strategies—e.g., an agent
that has to navigate to a location in traffic might
learn to first check traffic conditions and then
choose a route. In this work, we design a POMDP
agent that gathers information about the hidden
state, using ideas from the meta-exploration literature. Our approach provides an exploration bonus
that rewards the agent for gathering information
about the state that is relevant for completing the
task. While this requires the agent to know what
this information is during training, it can obtained
in several ways: in the most general case, offpolicy algorithms can leverage knowledge about
the entire trajectory to determine such information
in hindsight, but the user can also provide prior
knowledge (e.g., privileged information) to help
inform the training process. Through experiments
in several partially-observed environments, we
find that our approach is competitive with prior
methods when minimal exploration is needed, but
substantially outperforms them when more complex strategies are required. Our algorithm also
shows the ability to learn without any privileged
information, by reasoning about the entire trajectory in hindsight and and effectively using any
information it reveals about the hidden state.

To better understand this issue, consider the naı̈ve approach
of training a policy without privileged information to directly imitate an expert with access to such information.
Applied to our example of efficiently driving to work, an
omniscient person with knowledge of the road and traffic
conditions can directly take the optimal route. However,
people do not typically know the exact conditions a priori
and instead must initially rely on traffic reports and observable cues on the road to make their decision. In other
words, the optimal policy without omniscient information is
gather information, and simply imitating the omniscient expert does not yield this exploration or information-gathering
strategy. Initial attempts to address this issue combine expert imitation with a standard reinforcement learning (RL)
objective to maximize the reward in the hopes of learning
behaviors beyond those of the privileged expert (Baisero &
Amato, 2021; Weihs et al., 2021; Nguyen et al., 2022; Walsman et al., 2022; Shenfeld et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023).
However, such approaches can struggle because learning
complex information-gathering strategies from the generic
RL objective can be challenging.

1. Introduction

More generally, optimally behaving in a partially-observable
Markov decision process (POMDP) (Kaelbling et al., 1998)
requires both exploiting known information to solve the
task, and exploring to reduce uncertainty; and many existing POMDP methods that leverage privileged information
do not address the latter. On the other hand, the meta-RL
literature has carefully studied such exploration for a special
case of POMDPs, known as hidden parameter Markov decision processes (Doshi-Velez & Konidaris, 2016), where the
unobserved component of the state is fixed throughout an

In many realistic decision-making problems, the agent lacks
full information about the environment state, which makes
learning to act optimally challenging. For example, learning
1
Stanford University 2 Imbue 3 UC Berkeley. Correspondence
to: Annie Xie <anniexie@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

