Projecting Molecules into Synthesizable Chemical Spaces

Shitong Luo * 1 Wenhao Gao * 2 Zuofan Wu * 1 Jian Peng 1 Connor W. Coley 2 Jianzhu Ma 3

Abstract

the most promising candidates for subsequent validation.
These libraries are usually commercial catalogs (make-ondemand compounds) from chemical vendors (Lyu et al.,
2019) and generally consist of molecules with assured synthesizability (Enamine, 2023). However, screening large
numbers of molecules is a time-intensive process. Moreover,
even libraries on the scale of billions present only a tiny fraction of the theoretical chemical space (Figure 1a), which
is nearly infinite in the number of potential synthesizable
small molecules (Bohacek et al., 1996). This means that
many potentially valuable molecules might not be included
in these libraries. Additionally, as the size of the library
increases, so does the cost of screening, which in turn limits
the effectiveness and efficiency of virtual screening in the
drug discovery process.

Discovering new drug molecules is a pivotal yet
challenging process due to the near-infinitely
large chemical space and notorious demands on
time and resources. Numerous generative models
have recently been introduced to accelerate the
drug discovery process, but their progression to
experimental validation remains limited, largely
due to a lack of consideration for synthetic accessibility in practical settings. In this work, we
introduce a novel framework that is capable of
generating new chemical structures while ensuring synthetic accessibility. Specifically, we introduce a postfix notation of synthetic pathways
to represent molecules in chemical space. Then,
we design a transformer-based model to translate
molecular graphs into postfix notations of synthesis. We highlight the model’s ability to: (a)
perform bottom-up synthesis planning more accurately, (b) generate structurally similar, synthesizable analogs for unsynthesizable molecules proposed by generative models with their properties
preserved, and (c) explore the local synthesizable
chemical space around hit molecules.

De novo molecular design methods, unlike virtual screening, dynamically create molecules tailored to specific objectives like protein binding and bioactivity. Early methods of this kind typically adopt combinatorial optimization
(Venkatasubramanian et al., 1995; Jensen, 2019; Brown
et al., 2019), while recently, neural network enhanced optimization (You et al., 2018; Fu et al., 2021) and generative modeling (Gómez-Bombarelli et al., 2018; Jin et al.,
2018) have become popular. These methods aren’t constrained by the limitations of virtual libraries, enabling the
efficient exploration of novel chemical entities (see Figure 1c). However, a notable defect with most existing generative models is their tendency to propose synthetically
infeasible molecules (Figure 1c) (Gao & Coley, 2020), a
concern particularly pronounced in structure-based drug design, an area of increasing interest (Bohacek et al., 1996;
Luo et al., 2021; Fu et al., 2022). This issue stems from the
inherent ignorance of synthetic accessibility in formulations
of most existing generative algorithms, in which molecules
are constructed using SMILES strings or atoms and motifs
as fundamental units (Gao et al., 2022). This often leads
to chemical structures that fall outside synthesizable chemical spaces, posing practical challenges in the experimental
validation as well as production of such designs.

1. Introduction
Designing novel drug molecules, a process that aims to identify molecular structures with desired properties, is known
to be notoriously complex, time- and resource-consuming
(Wouters et al., 2020). Methods that could accelerate the
discovery process are thus of significant interest in medicinal science and the pharmaceutical industry. Historically,
two principal computational methodologies have been employed in drug design: virtual screening (Shoichet, 2004)
and de novo design (Hartenfeller & Schneider, 2011). Virtual screening involves predicting properties for a predefined
set of molecules, known as virtual libraries, and identifying
*

Equal contribution 1 Helixon Research 2 Massachusetts Institute
of Technology 3 Tsinghua University. Correspondence to: Shitong
Luo <luost26@gmail.com>.

Incorporating synthesizability as an additional optimization
criterion is a common strategy, yet it introduces complex
challenges. Synthesizability is difficult to define precisely
due to its sensitivity to subtle structural differences, reaction
selectivity, and building block availability inherent in chem-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

