Multi-Region Markovian Gaussian Process: An Efficient Method to Discover
Directional Communications Across Multiple Brain Regions

Weihan Li 1 Chengrui Li 1 Yule Wang 1 Anqi Wu 1

Abstract

ings typically present a complex view of this concurrent
communication—for example, neurons may concurrently
represent overlapping neural activities within a certain region. Therefore, uncovering the interactions between different brain regions presents a challenging task.

Studying the complex interactions between different brain regions is crucial in neuroscience.
Various statistical methods have explored the latent communication across multiple brain regions.
Two main categories are the Gaussian Process
(GP) and Linear Dynamical System (LDS), each
with unique strengths. The GP-based approach effectively discovers latent variables with frequency
bands and communication directions. Conversely,
the LDS-based approach is computationally efficient but lacks powerful expressiveness in latent representation. In this study, we merge both
methodologies by creating an LDS mirroring a
multi-output GP, termed Multi-Region Markovian
Gaussian Process (MRM-GP). Our work establishes a connection between an LDS and a multioutput GP that explicitly models frequencies and
phase delays within the latent space of neural
recordings. Consequently, the model achieves a
linear inference cost over time points and provides
an interpretable low-dimensional representation,
revealing communication directions across brain
regions and separating oscillatory communications into different frequency bands.

Many statistical methodologies have been employed to address the challenge of understanding communications across
multiple brain regions. Hultman et al. 2018 examined multiregion local field potential data and identified frequencybased interactions across brain regions using a Gaussian Process Factor Analysis model. Following a similar approach,
Gokcen et al. 2022; 2023 suggested that latent variables
can be divided into across- and within-region components.
This model was applied to disentangle the concurrent and
bidirectional communications across brain regions with a
multi-output Squared Exponential kernel. Glaser et al. 2020
developed a switching linear dynamic system to uncover
low-dimensional interactions among multiple brain regions.
This method captured regions responsible for transitioning
between latent states by specifying a novel transition rule.
Broadly categorized into Gaussian Process (GP) and Linear
Dynamical System (LDS) classes, these methods offer distinct advantages. The GP-based approach, leveraging the
robust representational capability of multi-output kernels,
performs well in discovering latent variables with crucial
information, such as frequencies and directional communications. Conversely, the LDS-based approach, while computationally efficient with a linear cost in time points, lacks
the powerful expressiveness of GP in latent representation.

1. Introduction
The number of simultaneous neural recordings from various
brain regions has increased recently. These recordings offer opportunities to explore the mechanisms through which
inter-areal communication supports brain function (Kohn
et al., 2020). Brain regions linked to sensory and cognitive functions often display interconnectedness, with signals
transmitted bidirectionally and potentially simultaneously
(Harris & Mrsic-Flogel, 2013; Miller et al., 2018; Wang
et al., 2024). However, the high-dimensional neural record-

Our goal is to combine the strengths of both methodologies
by constructing an LDS that mirrors a GP. Several studies have explored this connection: Hartikainen & Särkkä
2010 established a framework about converting a singleoutput GP with Matern or Squared Exponential kernel to
an LDS, which relied on spectral factorization (Sayed &
Kailath, 2001). Building upon this, Solin & Särkkä 2014
proposed the conversion for single-output periodic kernels,
and Särkkä et al. 2013 extended the single-output conversions to a spatiotemporal GP. However, applying these conversions for GP-based multi-region methods is non-trivial
because a gap exists in converting a multi-output GP to an
LDS. One approach to bridge this gap is to assume the kernel

1

School of Computational Science & Engineering, Georgia
Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA. Correspondence to: Anqi
Wu <anqiwu@gatech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

