Learning to Remove Cuts in Integer Linear Programming

Pol Puigdemont * 1 2 Stratis Skoulakis * 1 Grigorios G Chrysos 3 Volkan Cevher 1

Abstract

Despite the fact that ILPs are N P-hard (Bixby et al., 2004),
heuristics, such as the cutting plane method (Gomory, 1960)
or branch and bound (Land & Doig, 1960a; Zarpellon et al.,
2021) have proven to be extremely valuable.

Cutting plane methods are a fundamental approach for solving integer linear programs (ILPs).
In each iteration of such methods, additional linear constraints (cuts) are introduced to the constraint set with the aim of excluding the previous
fractional optimal solution while not affecting the
optimal integer solution. In this work, we explore
a novel approach within cutting plane methods:
instead of only adding new cuts, we also consider
the removal of previous cuts introduced at any
of the preceding iterations of the method under
a learnable parametric criteria. We demonstrate
that in fundamental combinatorial optimization
settings such cut removal policies can lead to significant improvements over both human-based
and machine learning-guided cut addition policies even when implemented with simple models.

The cutting plane method, proposed by Gomory (Gomory,
1960), is one of the most fundamental approaches for solving ILPs. The idea is to iteratively solve relaxed versions of
the original problem (1) by dropping the integrality requirement, thus obtaining a linear program (LP) that is computationally tractable to solve. More precisely, by dropping the
integrality constraints, we obtain the following LP:
⋆
zfrac
:= minn {c⊤ x : Ax ≤ b, x ∈ Rn }.
x∈R

⋆
⋆
It is clear that zfrac
≤ zint
. The cornerstone idea of the
⋆
cutting plane methods is to tighten the bound zfrac
by adding
⋆
cutting planes (Gomory, 1960) that increase zfrac
but leave
⋆
zint
unchanged.

Modern solvers (Bestuzheva et al., 2023; Gurobi, 2021) use
cutting planes to tighten the bounds on the linear programs
(LPs) that are solved iteratively in the cutting plane method
(Gomory, 1960) and the branch-and-bound method (Land
& Doig, 1960b). There are multiple types of cutting planes
that can increase the value of the respective LP relaxation.
Namely, Gomory showed that for ILPs with m constraints,
there are as much as m possible Gomory cuts (Gomory,
1960) (Apendix A.2 contains details on how to obtain Gomory cuts). Although adding all possible cutting planes
would yield stronger tightening of the LP relaxation and
thus faster convergence, the number of constraints would
grow exponentially over the iterations, making the problem
infeasible (Wesselmann & Stuhl, 2012). Consequently, all
cutting plane methods select a small number of possible cuts
to add at each iteration (Balas et al., 1993; Amaldi et al.,
2014; Andreello et al., 2007; Tang et al., 2020; Paulus et al.,
2022).

1. Introduction
Integer linear programming (ILP) has numerous applications in engineering (Miller et al., 1960), operational research (Eiselt & Sandblom, 2000), and finance (Konno &
Yamamoto, 2008). In fact, any combinatorial optimization
problem can be formulated as an ILP (Conforti et al., 2014).
ILP is a constrained optimization formulation in which the
variables need to take integer values while satisfying some
linear constraints. More precisely, an ILP with n variables
and m linear constraints admits the form,
⋆
zint
:= minn {c⊤ x : Ax ≤ b, xj ∈ Z},
x∈R

(2)

(1)

where c ∈ Zn , A ∈ Zm×n and b ∈ Zm .
*
Equal contribution 1 LIONS, École Polytechnique Fédérale
de Lausanne, Switzerland 2 Work developed during an exchange
coming from Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC), Spain
3
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University
of Wisconsin-Madison, USA. Correspondence to: Pol Puigdemont
<polpuigdemont@gmail.com>.

In practice, the cut addition policy—determining which
cut to add at each iteration—plays a crucial role in the
convergence properties of the method and over several handcrafted heuristics have been proposed (Balas et al., 1993;
Andreello et al., 2007; Amaldi et al., 2014; Coniglio &
Tieves, 2015). For instance, the SCIP solver (Bestuzheva
et al., 2023) employs a weighted sum of features such as
integer support and parallelism to rank the cuts.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

