Bayesian Exploration Networks

Mattie Fellows * 1 Brandon Kaplowitz * 2 Christian Schroeder de Witt 1 Shimon Whiteson 3

Abstract

learning characterises the uncertainty in unknown governing variables in the MDP by inferring a posterior over their
values conditioned on observed histories of interactions.
Using the posterior it is possible to marginalise across unknown variables and derive a belief transition distribution
that characterises how the uncertainty will evolve over all
future timesteps. The resulting Bayesian RL (BRL) objective transforms a learning problem into a planning problem
with a well defined set of optimal policies, known as Bayesoptimal policies, which are a gold standard for exploration
(Martin, 1967; Duff, 2002). Moreover, any non-Bayesian
policy is suboptimal in terms of optimising the expected returns according to the belief induced by the prior and model
of the state and reward transition distributions.

Bayesian reinforcement learning (RL) offers a
principled and elegant approach for sequential
decision making under uncertainty. Most notably, Bayesian agents do not face an exploration/exploitation dilemma, a major pathology of
frequentist methods. However theoretical understanding of model-free approaches is lacking. In
this paper, we introduce a novel Bayesian modelfree formulation and the first analysis showing that model-free approaches can yield Bayesoptimal policies. We show all existing modelfree approaches make approximations that yield
policies that can be arbitrarily Bayes-suboptimal.
As a first step towards model-free Bayes optimality, we introduce the Bayesian exploration
network (BEN) which uses normalising flows to
model both the aleatoric uncertainty (via density
estimation) and epistemic uncertainty (via variational inference) in the Bellman operator. In
the limit of complete optimisation, BEN learns
true Bayes-optimal policies, but like in variational expectation-maximisation, partial optimisation renders our approach tractable. Empirical results demonstrate that BEN can learn true
Bayes-optimal policies in tasks where existing
model-free approaches fail.

Despite the formal theoretical benefits, learning Bayesoptimal policies remains a significant challenge due to
several sources of intractability. Firstly, model-based approaches must maintain a posterior over a model of the state
transition dynamics, which is notoriously computationally
complex for even low dimensional state spaces (Wasserman, 2006). Secondly, even if it is tractable to calculate and
maintain the posterior, the marginalisation needed to find
the Bayesian transition and reward distributions requires
high dimensional integrals. Finally, given the Bayesian
distributions, a planning problem must then be solved in
belief space for every history-augmented state to obtain the
Bayes-optimal policy.
Alternatively, model-free approaches characterise uncertainty in a Bellman operator. This avoids the issues of
modelling uncertainty in high dimensional transition distributions, as Bellman operators require the specification of
a one-dimensional conditional distribution. Whilst modelfree approaches to BRL exist, little is known about their
theoretical properties. Our main contribution is to provide a
theoretical analysis to answer three core questions: I) Can
model-free approaches learn Bayes-optimal policies? II)
What are the relative benefits of model-free approaches?
and III) Are existing model-free approaches Bayes-optimal?
We answer these questions by introducing a novel modelfree formulation that is provably Bayes-optimal whilst still
characterising uncertainty in a low-dimensional distribution
over Bellman operators. Moreover, we prove that all existing methods inadvertently solve an approximation to the
true Bayesian objective that prevents them from learning a

1. Introduction
In reinforcement learning (RL), an agent is tasked with learning an optimal policy that maximises expected return in a
Markov decision process (MDP). In most cases, the agent
is in a learning setting and does not know the underlying
MDP a priori: typically, the reward and transition distributions are unknown. A Bayesian approach to reinforcement
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom 2 Department of Economics, New York University, New York, United States of America 3 Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford,
Oxford, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Mattie Fellows
<matthew.fellows@eng.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

