Conformal Prediction Sets Improve Human Decision Making

Jesse C. Cresswell 1 Yi Sui 1 Bhargava Kumar 2 Noël Vouitsis 1

Abstract

That’s easy,
I know it’s…

In response to everyday queries, humans explicitly signal uncertainty and offer alternative answers when they are unsure. Machine learning models that output calibrated prediction sets
through conformal prediction mimic this human
behaviour; larger sets signal greater uncertainty
while providing alternatives. In this work, we
study the usefulness of conformal prediction sets
as an aid for human decision making by conducting a pre-registered randomized controlled trial
with conformal prediction sets provided to human
subjects. With statistical significance, we find
that when humans are given conformal prediction
sets their accuracy on tasks improves compared
to fixed-size prediction sets with the same coverage guarantee. The results show that quantifying
model uncertainty with conformal prediction is
helpful for human-in-the-loop decision making
and human-AI teams.

Input Data

Model

I’m not
sure but…

It’s either
A or B…

Softmax Scores Prediction Sets
Dog

Dog,
Fork,
Melon

Figure 1: Top: Humans express uncertainty through explicit
signalling, and by offering alternatives. Bottom: Conformal prediction allows machine learning models to do the
same by outputting prediction sets with size calibrated to
model uncertainty. Larger sets signal greater uncertainty
and provide alternative answers.

1. Introduction
that are most likely to be correct according to the model
using some heuristic notion of confidence. Perhaps the most
straightforward way to construct prediction sets in the classification context is by including the top-k values according
to softmax outputs for a fixed k (Grycko, 1993). Top-k
prediction sets are useful for providing alternatives and can
even furnish statistical guarantees (Chzhen et al., 2021);
however, they do not quantify uncertainty.

When answering questions, humans naturally provide information on how confident we are in our answers. If unsure,
we signal uncertainty to others (Smith & Clark, 1993), and
offer alternatives (Berlyne, 1962) (Figure 1). On the other
hand, standard methods for discriminative machine learning often output only a single answer without quantifying
the uncertainty in the prediction (Abdar et al., 2021). The
lack of uncertainty quantification and lack of alternative
predictions greatly limits the usefulness of machine learning
models for real-world decision making.

Conformal prediction (Vovk et al., 2005) is a generalpurpose method for transforming heuristic notions of uncertainty into rigorous ones through the use of calibrated
prediction sets. Conformal sets usually are designed so that
the set size indicates how confident the model is about a
particular input, with larger sets signalling more uncertainty
(Figure 1). The hallmark of conformal prediction is its risk
control; conformal sets will only fail to contain the ground
truth with a pre-specified error rate. Furthermore, conformal prediction is widely applicable since it can be used with
any pre-trained model, and does not rely on distributional
assumptions, nor on infinite-data limits (Angelopoulos &
Bates, 2021). It has been successfully applied in real-world

Prediction sets are a useful tool for augmenting the output
of a discriminative model. Rather than outputting a single
prediction, a model can output a set of predictions, which
may contain zero, one, or multiple possible values. Generally, prediction sets are constructed to contain the values
1
Layer 6 AI 2 TD Securities. Correspondence to: Jesse C.
Cresswell <jesse@layer6.ai>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

