Implicit Representations via Operator Learning

Sourav Pal 1 Harshavardhan Adepu 1 Clinton Wang 2 Polina Golland 2 Vikas Singh 1

Abstract
The idea of representing a signal as the weights of
a neural network, called Implicit Neural Representations (INRs), has led to exciting implications for
compression, view synthesis and 3D volumetric
data understanding. One problem in this setting
pertains to the use of INRs for downstream processing tasks. Despite some conceptual results,
this remains challenging because the INR for a
given image/signal often exists in isolation. What
does the neighborhood around a given INR correspond to? Based on this question, we offer
an operator theoretic reformulation of the INR
model, which we call Operator INR (or O-INR).
At a high level, instead of mapping positional encodings to a signal, O-INR maps one function
space to another function space. A practical form
of this general casting is obtained by appealing
to Integral Transforms. The resultant model does
not need multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs), used in
most existing INR models – we show that convolutions are sufficient and offer benefits including
numerically stable behavior. We show that O-INR
can easily handle most problem settings in the
literature, and offers a similar performance profile as baselines. These benefits come with minimal, if any, compromise. Our code is available at
https://github.com/vsingh-group/oinr.

Figure 1. Overview of O-INR: f1 , f2 , f3 ∈ F are input functions
acting on the domain Ω. O-INR maps these functions to their
corresponding signals (functions) h1 , h2 , h3 ∈ H.

et al., 2019; Jiang et al., 2020) for applications in image
super-resolution (Chen et al., 2021), texture synthesis (Oechsle et al., 2019; Sun et al., 2023), inverse problems (Sun
et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2021b; Niemeyer et al., 2020), and
view synthesis (Mildenhall et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2022).
From one signal to a set of signals. INRs typically consist
of a neural network that is trained to map each coordinate
of a given signal’s domain to its measurements/values, and
so are also known as coordinate-value networks. The mapping is learned via a neural network and gives a compact
representation of the signal (Sitzmann et al., 2020; Fathony
et al., 2021; Srinivasan et al., 2023). The discussion above
describes the case of one signal (or image). When given
a set of signals, we may derive an INR for each signal in
the set – Dupont et al. (2022a) then uses these functions
(called functa) as data for downstream tasks. Alternatively,
one can estimate a meta-learned “base” (INR) network, and
associate each data sample (or signal) in the dataset as a
modulation of the base network (Dupont et al., 2022b), akin
to random effects modulating fixed effects in mixed effects
models (Lindstrom & Bates, 1990). The modulation can
also be accomplished in other ways as we will see later
(Feng et al., 2022), via introducing a surrogate vector which
is tied to a specific INR through conditioning. Now, if the
data samples were ordered with respect to a surrogate variable, we get a set of INRs where each sample specific INR
can be considered as a level set with discrete values denoting the levels of the surrogate variable. Our goal is to study
and develop this interpretation, see Fig. 1.

1. Introduction
If we treat a given signal as a map from the domain of
measurement to the range space, can neural networks help
estimate this mapping? One instantiation of this idea is popularly known as Implicit Neural Representations (INRs)
(Sitzmann et al., 2020; Tancik et al., 2020; Mildenhall
et al., 2021; Fathony et al., 2021) which can parameterize
spatial/spatio-temporal data (Gropp et al., 2020; Niemeyer
1
University of Wisconsin–Madison 2 Massachusetts Institute of
Technology. Correspondence to: Sourav Pal <spal9@wisc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

