AutoOS: Make Your OS More Powerful
by Exploiting Large Language Models

Huilai Chen 1 2 Yuanbo Wen 1 Limin Cheng 3 Shouxu Kuang 2 3 Yumeng Liu 3 Weijia Li 2 3 Ling Li 3
Rui Zhang 1 Xinkai Song 1 Wei Li 1 Qi Guo 1 Yunji Chen 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

With the development of AIoT (Artificial Intelligence of
Things), the application of embedded systems has become
increasingly widespread (Liu et al., 2023b; IoT, 2023). In
order to accommodate the growing complexity and diversity
of AIoT applications, customizing and optimizing operating
system (OS) kernel configurations has become essential for
maximizing system performance (Kuo et al., 2020b), particularly in light of embedded devices’ constrained hardware
resources (Lin et al., 2020). While vendors typically offer default configurations for generality (Kuo et al., 2020a),
these presets frequently fail to meet the specific optimization
goals, thus presenting substantial opportunities for OS kernel tuning to unlock the full potential of the entire system’s
capabilities.

With the rapid development of Artificial Intelligence of Things (AIoT), customizing and optimizing operating system (OS) kernel configurations
for various AIoT application scenarios is crucial
for maximizing system performance. However,
existing approaches falter due to the overwhelming problem complexity (i.e., over 15,000 configuration options in the Linux kernel), together with
the huge evaluation costs and error-prone options
that may result in OS boot-up failure, which all
make it an unresolved problem to optimize the
Linux kernel automatically. In this paper, we introduce AutoOS, a novel framework exploiting
Large Language Models for customizing and optimizing OS kernel configurations automatically
for various AIoT application scenarios. Inspired
by the inherently directory-structured kernel configuration process, we first formulate our research
problem as optimizing on a dynamic tree. We
then propose a novel framework integrating a state
machine-based traversal algorithm as the observeprune-propose-act-correct loop, which can effectively refine the optimization space and ensure
a successful OS boot-up. Experimental results
show that AutoOS can automatically customize
and optimize the OS kernel configurations without
human effort. More importantly, AutoOS even
achieves better performance by up to 25% than
vendor-provided configuration.

However, such performance optimization is so challenging
in three-fold. Firstly, the Linux kernel has more than 15,000
configuration options (Oh et al., 2021; Franz et al., 2021),
creating a vast and intricate optimization space where options interact with each other and exhibit interdependencies
(Mortara & Collet, 2021), making optimizing performance
daunting. For example, combining two sets of good performance configuration options directly often results in poor
performance. Secondly, the performance evaluation for
every configuration is time-consuming (Xia et al., 2023)
(e.g., 1∼2 hours), involving several steps like OS kernel
compilation, installation, boot-up, and performance testing.
Thirdly, as many functional-related options exist, the entire
optimization process is error-prone, which may lead to OS
boot-up failure. Overall, tuning OS kernel configurations
is a complex black-box optimization problem for non-OS
professionals who need more expert knowledge.
The difficulty of this problem makes existing approaches
including Neural network approaches (Herzog et al., 2021;
Martin et al., 2021; Zhang & Huang, 2019) and Bayesian
optimization approaches (Jung et al., 2021; Shar et al., 2023)
unsurprisingly ineffective. Neural network approaches can
learn and adapt to perform a specific task by training a
computational model from a well-established dataset (Akgun et al., 2020; Hao et al., 2020; Doudali et al., 2019).
However, these approaches require considerable manual ef-

1

State Key Lab of Processors, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 2 University
of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 3 Intelligent
Software Research Center, Institute of Software, CAS, Beijing,
China. Correspondence to: Ling Li <liling@iscas.ac.cn>, Qi Guo
<guoqi@ict.ac.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

