Integrating Global Context Contrast and Local Sensitivity for
Blind Image Quality Assessment

Xudong Li * 1 Runze Hu * 2 Jingyuan Zheng 3 Yan Zhang 1 Shengchuan Zhang 1 Xiawu Zheng 1 Ke Li 4
Yunhang Shen 4 Yutao Liu 5 Pingyang Dai 1 Rongrong Ji 1
Cropped Image

Classified Image

Abstract

Contrastive Learning

Car

Blind Image Quality Assessment (BIQA) mirrors
subjective made by human observers. Generally,
humans favor comparing relative qualities over
predicting absolute qualities directly. However,
current BIQA models focus on mining the “local”
context, i.e., the relationship between information
among individual images and the absolute quality
of the image, ignoring the “global” context of the
relative quality contrast among different images in
the training data. In this paper, we present the Perceptual Context and Sensitivity BIQA (CSIQA),
a novel contrastive learning paradigm that seamlessly integrates “global” and “local” perspectives
into the BIQA. Specifically, the CSIQA comprises
two primary components: 1) A Quality Context
Contrastive Learning module, which is equipped
with different contrastive learning strategies to effectively capture potential quality correlations in
the global context of the dataset. 2) A Qualityaware Mask Attention Module, which employs
the random mask to ensure the consistency with
visual local sensitivity, thereby improving the
model’s perception of local distortions. Extensive experiments on eight standard BIQA datasets
demonstrate the superior performance to the stateof-the-art BIQA methods.

Distortion Image

Finetune

Re p
el
Different
Content

Mos

(a) Previous Supervised BIQA

(b) Previous Contrastive Learning BIQA
Global Context

Training Dataset
Similar
Quality

At t r a
Local Sensitivities

Repe

ct

l

Dissim
ilar
Quality
(c) Perceptual Context and Sensitivity Method (Ours)

Figure 1. The illustration of the difference between previous BIQA
methods and ours. (a) Previous supervised BIQA methods predominantly rely on semantic features to directly learn image quality,
neglecting the inherent Global context contrastive. (b) Previous BIQA with distortion-based contrastive learning focuses on
maximizing similarity between different views of the same image
but ignores similarity across different content images with similar
quality. (c) In CSIQA, we fully explore the above two properties
by using quality-based contrastive learning with a fine-grained
contrast sample selection mechanism and quality-aware masked
attention, which obtain comprehensive quality-aware features.

1. Introduction
Image Quality Assessment (IQA) (Madhusudana et al.,
2022; Ding et al., 2020; Gu et al., 2020; Hu et al., 2021)
is devoted to estimating the perceptive quality of a digital image consistent with the human visual system (HVS).
It has been applied in many computer vision pieces of research (Hu et al., 2022), such as image restoration (Banham
& Katsaggelos, 1997) and super-resolution (Dong et al.,
2015). IQA methods are generally classified into three
types based on the availability of reference images, i.e. fullreference (Sheikh et al., 2006), reduced-reference (Wang
et al., 2016), and no-reference or blind IQA (BIQA) (Wu
et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2024).

*
Equal contribution 1 Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted
Perception and Efficient Computing, Ministry of Education of
2
China, Xiamen University, 361005, P.R. China.
School of
Information and Electronics, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100080, China. 3 School of Medicine, Xiamen University.
4
Tencent Youtu Lab. 5 School of Computer Science and Technology, Ocean University of China.. Correspondence to: Yan Zhang
<bzhy986@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

