MaSS: Multi-attribute Selective Suppression for Utility-preserving Data
Transformation from an Information-theoretic Perspective

Yizhuo Chen * 1 2 Chun-Fu (Richard) Chen * 2 Hsiang Hsu 2 Shaohan Hu 2 Marco Pistoia 2 Tarek Abdelzaher 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

The recent rapid advances and wide adoption of machine
learning technologies are largely attributed to not only the
explosive growth in raw computing power, but also the unprecedented availability of large-scale datasets, for example,
the monumental computer vision dataset ImageNet (Deng
et al., 2009), the large multi-lingual web corpus Common
Crawl (2023), and the widely used UCI HAR dataset (Anguita et al., 2013). While the vast amount of data serves
as the rich basis for machine learning algorithms to learn
from, the ubiquitous data collection and usage have drawn
serious privacy concerns since people’s private and sensitive
information could be leaked through inadvertent mishandling as well as deliberate malicious exploitation. Therefore,
various regulatory policies, such as GDPR and CCPA, have
been drafted and put in place to guardrail the handling and
usage of data. While such legislative solutions do generally
help mitigate the privacy concerns, they also tend to pose
blanket restrictions that result in degraded data availability.
Therefore, there has been a growing interest in developing
more sophisticated, flexible technical solutions.

The growing richness of large-scale datasets has
been crucial in driving the rapid advancement
and wide adoption of machine learning technologies. The massive collection and usage of data,
however, pose an increasing risk for people’s private and sensitive information due to either inadvertent mishandling or malicious exploitation.
Besides legislative solutions, many technical approaches have been proposed towards data privacy
protection. However, they bear various limitations such as leading to degraded data availability
and utility, or relying on heuristics and lacking
solid theoretical bases. To overcome these limitations, we propose a formal information-theoretic
definition for this utility-preserving privacy protection problem, and design a data-driven learnable data transformation framework that is capable of selectively suppressing sensitive attributes
from target datasets while preserving the other
useful attributes, regardless of whether or not
they are known in advance or explicitly annotated
for preservation. We provide rigorous theoretical
analyses on the operational bounds for our framework, and carry out comprehensive experimental
evaluations using datasets of a variety of modalities, including facial images, voice audio clips,
and human activity motion sensor signals. Results
demonstrate the effectiveness and generalizability
of our method under various configurations on a
multitude of tasks. Our source code is available
at this URL.

Towards this goal, many techniques have been proposed.
One of the most well-known studies is the protection against
membership inference attacks, also known as Differential
Privacy (Dwork et al., 2014; Mironov, 2017; Abadi et al.,
2016). It focuses on preventing attackers from differentiating between two neighboring sets of samples by observing
the change in the distribution of output statistics. Another
widely discussed notion of privacy is the protection against
attribute inference attacks, often referred to as Informationtheoretic (IT) Privacy (Hukkelås et al., 2019; Bertran et al.,
2019; Huang et al., 2018; Hsu et al., 2020). This line of
work aims at transforming a dataset to remove or suppress
its sensitive attributes while preserving its utility for downstream tasks. In this paper, we focus our discussion on
providing IT Privacy protection.

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, USA 2 Global Technology
Applied Research, JPMorgan Chase, USA. Correspondence to:
Yizhuo Chen <yizhuoc@illinois.edu>, Chun-Fu (Richard) Chen
<richard.cf.chen@jpmchase.com>.

Developing a data transformation framework for IT Privacy presents multiple challenges. Specifically, we identified 5 desired properties for an IT Privacy data transformation framework, which can be summarized as SUIFT: 1)
Sensitivity suppression: the capability to suppress annotated
sensitive attributes from the dataset; 2) Utility preservation:

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

