Scaling Exponents Across Parameterizations and Optimizers

Katie Everett 1 2 Lechao Xiao 1 Mitchell Wortsman 3 Alexander A. Alemi 1 Roman Novak 3 Peter J. Liu 1
Izzeddin Gur 1 Jascha Sohl-Dickstein 3 Leslie Pack Kaelbling 2 Jaehoon Lee 1 Jeffrey Pennington 1

Abstract

model width, model depth, context length, batch size and
training horizon. Among the scaling dimensions, the existing literature for width scaling has the most extensive
theoretical results. Yang & Hu (2021) and Yang & Littwin
(2023) define a space of width-scaling parameterizations for
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and Adam respectively.
Based on the goals of ensuring the activations remain at
constant scale and the logits do not exceed constant scale
with respect to width, they derive constraints for stability
and non-triviality of a parameterization that predict how the
learning rate should scale with width.

Robust and effective scaling of models from small
to large width typically requires the precise adjustment of many algorithmic and architectural
details, such as parameterization and optimizer
choices. In this work, we propose a new perspective on parameterization by investigating a
key assumption in prior work about the alignment
between parameters and data and derive new theoretical results under weaker assumptions and a
broader set of optimizers. Our extensive empirical
investigation includes tens of thousands of models trained with all combinations of three optimizers, four parameterizations, several alignment
assumptions, more than a dozen learning rates,
and fourteen model sizes up to 26.8B parameters.
We find that the best learning rate scaling prescription would often have been excluded by the
assumptions in prior work. Our results show that
all parameterizations, not just maximal update
parameterization (muP), can achieve hyperparameter transfer; moreover, our novel per-layer learning rate prescription for standard parameterization
outperforms muP. Finally, we demonstrate that
an overlooked aspect of parameterization, the epsilon parameter in Adam, must be scaled correctly
to avoid gradient underflow and propose Adamatan2, a new numerically stable, scale-invariant
version of Adam that eliminates the epsilon hyperparameter entirely.

The derivations of these constraints make a key assumption:
the updates to the parameters are assumed to be sufficiently
correlated with the data distribution to impact the scaling
exponent of the activations. We refer to this correlation as
“alignment” because, when correlated, the parameter and
data vectors point in similar directions. However, the literature is lacking in extensive empirical measurements of when,
where, and how much alignment accumulates between the
parameters and activations during training and its impact on
the scaling exponents of the learning rate. Moreover, the
characterization of parameterizations into feature learning
and kernel limits are specific to the alignment assumptions.
In this paper, we take a broad perspective on the theory
and practice of width scaling across parameterizations and
optimizers. Our theoretical contributions consider a more
general space of parameterizations which explicitly quantify
the contribution of several distinct alignment terms; under
specific alignment assumptions we recover prior work as a
special case. We propose a metric for alignment that we use
in our empirical investigation. In addition, we develop new
parameterization theory for a family of adaptive optimizers
with parameter scaling, including Adafactor.

1. Introduction
A neural network parameterization is a prescription for scaling a set of important quantities with respect to a set of
scaling dimensions. Most often, the parameterized quantities include the initialization scale, parameter multipliers and learning rate, and scaling dimensions may include

In our experiments, we measure alignment throughout training across optimizers, parameterizations and model sizes.
Our measurements suggest that existing theory may be
overly conservative, thereby excluding interesting parameterizations. We show that for all parameterizations and
optimizers, there are theoretically motivated per-layer learning rate exponents that improve performance over global
learning rate baselines, and in numerous settings the best
performing exponents would have been excluded by the

1
Google DeepMind 2 MIT 3 Work done at Google DeepMind.
Correspondence to: Katie Everett <everettk@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

