Physics of Language Models: Part 3.1, Knowledge Storage and Extraction

Zeyuan Allen-Zhu 1 Yuanzhi Li 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Knowledge is crucial for human cognition and communication, allowing us to comprehend and utilize information.
For humans, this often involves memorization, the process
of storing and retrieving information in the brain. For example, after reading a biography of Abraham Lincoln, we
can memorize the information and later answer questions
like “Where was Lincoln born?” or “What is Lincoln’s
birthday?” Memorization enables us to extract and manipulate knowledge from the sentences we read or hear, recognize the entities, relations, and facts expressed in the text,
and apply logical and causal reasoning to infer new information or answer queries (Anderson & Milson, 1989; Baddeley, 1997; Craik & Jennings, 1992; Zlotnik & Vansintjan,
2019).

Large language models (LLMs) can store a vast
amount of world knowledge, often extractable
via question-answering (e.g., “What is Abraham
Lincoln’s birthday?”). However, do they answer such questions based on exposure to similar questions during training (i.e., cheating), or
by genuinely learning to extract knowledge from
sources like Wikipedia? In this paper, we investigate this issue using a controlled biography dataset. We find a strong correlation between the model’s ability to extract knowledge
and various diversity measures of the training
data. Essentially, for knowledge to be reliably
extracted, it must be sufficiently augmented (e.g.,
through paraphrasing, sentence shuffling) during
pretraining. Without such augmentation, knowledge may be memorized but not extractable,
leading to 0% accuracy, regardless of subsequent
instruction fine-tuning. To understand why this
occurs, we employ (nearly) linear probing to
demonstrate a strong connection between the observed correlation and how the model internally
encodes knowledge — whether it is linearly encoded in the hidden embeddings of entity names
or distributed across other token embeddings in
the training text. This paper provides several
key recommendations for LLM pretraining in
the industry: (1) rewrite the pretraining data
— using small, auxiliary models — to provide
knowledge augmentation, and (2) incorporate
more instruction-finetuning data into the pretraining stage before it becomes too late.

In this paper, we explore how transformer-based language models memorize knowledge during training and
extract it during inference. This is distinct from in-context
learning or RAG (Lewis et al., 2020), where the model is
given a paragraph during inference and immediately answers questions about it. We focus on factual knowledge
(e.g., knowledge graph) that a language model needs to
memorize from the training corpus, encode in its weights,
and extract later during inference.
We stress that memorizing all sentences in the training data
does not ensure that the model can extract or manipulate
the factual knowledge from the sentences during inference.
Language models can reproduce the exact input during inference, but this doesn’t necessarily mean they can use
these sentences to answer factual questions related to them.
Hence, we differentiate between “memorization of knowledge” in language models and traditional memorization in
machine learning, which merely means the model can fit
the exact training data, but doesn’t imply the model can extract the knowledge flexibly from the data after training.

An extended video of this paper is available at https://
youtu.be/YSHzKmEianc. Full and future editions of the
paper can be found on https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.
14316. 1 Meta / FAIR Labs, USA 2 MBZUAI, UAE. Correspondence to: Zeyuan Allen-Zhu <zeyuanallenzhu@meta.com>,
Yuanzhi Li <Yuanzhi.Li@mbzuai.ac.ae>.

For example, if the training data includes Lincoln’s biography, the model can memorize and reproduce the sentence
“Abraham Lincoln was born in Hodgenville, K.Y.” when
given the prompt “Abraham Lincoln was born in”, but it
might not be able to answer the question “Which city was
Abraham Lincoln born in?” Therefore, a key question is:

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

How do language models memorize knowledge during
1

