Topological Neural Networks go Persistent, Equivariant, and Continuous

Yogesh Verma 1 Amauri H. Souza 1 2 Vikas Garg 1 3

Abstract

Topological deep learning (TDL) (Papillon et al., 2023)
views graphs as 1-dimensional simplicial complexes, and
employs general abstractions to process data with higherorder relational structures. TNNs, a broad class of topological neural architectures, have yielded state-of-the-art
performance on various machine learning tasks (Dong et al.,
2020; Chen et al., 2019; Barbarossa and Sardellitti, 2020),
showcasing high potential for numerous applications.

Topological Neural Networks (TNNs) incorporate
higher-order relational information beyond pairwise interactions, enabling richer representations
than Graph Neural Networks (GNNs). Concurrently, topological descriptors based on persistent
homology (PH) are being increasingly employed
to augment the GNNs. We investigate the benefits
of integrating these two paradigms. Specifically,
we introduce TopNets as a broad framework that
subsumes and unifies various methods in the intersection of GNNs/TNNs and PH such as (generalizations of) RePHINE and TOGL. TopNets can
also be readily adapted to handle (symmetries
in) geometric complexes, extending the scope
of TNNs and PH to spatial settings. Theoretically, we show that PH descriptors can provably
enhance the expressivity of simplicial messagepassing networks. Empirically, (continuous and
E(n)-equivariant extensions of) TopNets achieve
strong performance across diverse tasks, including antibody design, molecular dynamics simulation, and drug property prediction.

Simultaneously, descriptors based on PH (Horn et al., 2021;
Carrière et al., 2020; Immonen et al., 2023), a workhorse
from topological data analysis (TDA), capture important
topological information such as the number of components
and independent loops. Augmenting GNNs with persistent
features affords powerful representations. However, the merits of integrating persistence in TNNs remain unexplored. In
particular, numerous real-world tasks involving topological
objects exhibit symmetries under the Euclidean group E(n),
such as translations, rotations, and reflections. Examples
range from predicting molecular properties (Ramakrishnan
et al., 2014), 3D atomic systems (Duval et al., 2023), to generative design and beyond. While various approaches use
these symmetries effectively, including Tensor Field Networks (Thomas et al., 2018), SE(3) Transformers (Fuchs
et al., 2020), EGNNs (Satorras et al., 2021), and EMPSNs
(Eijkelboom et al., 2023), their expressivity remains limited
as they fail to capture certain topological structures (Joshi
et al., 2023) in geometrical simplicial complexes.

1. Introduction

We strive to bridge this gap with a general recipe to leverage
the best of both worlds. Specifically, we propose TopNets
(Topological Persistent Neural Networks) as a comprehensive framework unifying TNNs and PH. Our approach allows us to seamlessly accommodate additional contextual
cues; e.g., TopNets can process spatial information via geometric color filtrations. We analyze TopNets from both theoretical and practical perspectives, illuminating their promise
across diverse tasks.

Relational data in diverse settings such as social networks
(Freeman, 2004), and proteins (Jha et al., 2022) can be
effectively abstracted via graphs. GNNs have enabled considerable success in representing such data (Bronstein et al.,
2021). However, their limitations such as inability to distinguish non-isomorphic graphs and compute graph properties
(Xu et al., 2019; Weisfeiler and Leman, 1968; Garg et al.,
2020) have spurred research efforts toward designing more
powerful models that can leverage higher-order interactions,
e.g., hierarchical part-whole relations.

We reinforce the versatility of TopNets by designing their
continuous counterparts, defining associated Neural ODEs
over simplicial complexes and elucidating error bounds between the discrete and continuous systems. We thus build on
the remarkable success of Neural ODEs (Chen et al., 2018;
Kim et al., 2023; Marion, 2023) across various domains,
including spatiotemporal forecasting (Yildiz et al., 2019; Li

1

Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, Finland
Federal Institute of Ceará 3 YaiYai Ltd. Correspondence to: Yogesh Verma <yogesh.verma@aalto.fi>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

