Locally Interdependent Multi-Agent MDP: Theoretical Framework for
Decentralized Agents with Dynamic Dependencies

Alex DeWeese 1 Guannan Qu 1

Abstract

introduced either artificially to improve scalability or by
physical constraints caused by communication limitations.
Another challenge is, that while each agent has their own
dynamics, they are interacting with the set of nearby agents
that are dynamically varying. The presence of such dynamic
interactions makes the decision problem for different agents
highly coupled and nontrivial.

Many multi-agent systems in practice are decentralized and have dynamically varying dependencies. There has been a lack of attempts in the literature to analyze these systems theoretically. In
this paper, we propose and theoretically analyze
a decentralized model with dynamically varying
dependencies called the Locally Interdependent
Multi-Agent MDP. This model can represent problems in many disparate domains such as cooperative navigation, obstacle avoidance, and formation
control. Despite the intractability that general partially observable multi-agent systems suffer from,
we propose three closed-form policies that are theoretically near-optimal in this setting and can be
scalable to compute and store. Consequentially,
we reveal a fundamental property of Locally Interdependent Multi-Agent MDP’s that the partially
observable decentralized solution is exponentially
close to the fully observable solution with respect
to the visibility radius. We then discuss extensions
of our closed-form policies to further improve
tractability. We conclude by providing simulations to investigate some long horizon behaviors
of our closed-form policies.

With the recent successes in Reinforcement Learning (RL),
there has been an increasing desire to use this emerging
tool for these types of decentralized multi-agent systems
with locally dynamic agent interactions. However, most of
the work in this area is empirical ((Lowe et al., 2017; Han
et al., 2020; Batra et al., 2022; Long et al., 2018; Baldazo
et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2019; Palanisamy, 2020; Aradi,
2020)). This is because it is non-trivial to create a model that
accurately represents the decentralized partial observability
and dynamic local dependencies of agents while producing
theoretically sound and relatively tractable solutions. In
addition to the empirical work, there has been a growing
literature on theoretical MARL, but none attempt to model
and solve the challenges brought by the decentralized partial
observability and local dynamic agent interactions (Qu et al.,
2022; 2020a;b; Lin et al., 2021; Kar et al., 2013; Zhang et al.,
2018; Suttle et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021).
The discussions above naturally motivate the question:
Can we theoretically model and find near-optimal policies
for decentralized agents with dynamic local dependencies
in a scalable manner?

1. Introduction
Many important real-world multi-agent applications are decentralized and have local dynamic relationships between
agents. Examples cut across a broad spectrum of areas
including obstacle avoidance, cooperative navigation, formation control. The decentralized nature of the problem
presents a key challenge because agents have limited access to the state information of other agents. This may be

We answer this question affirmatively with our contributions
described below.
1.1. Contributions
For our first contribution, we propose a novel setting called
the Locally Interdependent Multi-Agent MDP. It is a cooperative setting that consists of multiple agents acting in a
common metric space. It models dynamic proximity-based
relationships that allow agents within a distance R to influence and depend on one another. Furthermore, agents
within proximity V are also permitted to communicate with
each other. As the location of the agents can dynamically
change, both the “dependence graph” and the “communica-

1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie
Mellon University, Pittsburgh PA, USA. Correspondence to:
Alex DeWeese <mdeweese@andrew.cmu.edu>, Guannan Qu
<gqu@andrew.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

