Revisiting Scalable Hessian Diagonal Approximations
for Applications in Reinforcement Learning

Mohamed Elsayed 1 2 Homayoon Farrahi 1 2 Felix Dangel 3 A. Rupam Mahmood 1 2 4

Abstract

Mahmood 2024) in pruning (LeCun et al. 1989, Hassibi and
Stork 1992, Singh and Alistarh 2020). However, computing
the Hessian entries is generally expensive, preventing its usage in systems that require small memory and computation.
This is reflected in the minimal adoption of second-order
methods compared to their first-order counterparts.

Second-order information is valuable for many
applications but challenging to compute. Several works focus on computing or approximating
Hessian diagonals, but even this simplification introduces significant additional costs compared to
computing a gradient. In the absence of efficient
exact computation schemes for Hessian diagonals, we revisit an early approximation scheme
proposed by Becker and LeCun (1989, BL89),
which has a cost similar to gradients and appears
to have been overlooked by the community. We
introduce HesScale, an improvement over BL89,
which adds negligible extra computation. On
small networks, we find that this improvement is
of higher quality than all alternatives, even those
with theoretical guarantees, such as unbiasedness,
while being much cheaper to compute. We use
this insight in reinforcement learning problems
where small networks are used and demonstrate
HesScale in second-order optimization and scaling the step-size parameter. In our experiments,
HesScale optimizes faster than existing methods
and improves stability through step-size scaling.
These findings are promising for scaling secondorder methods in larger models in the future.1

Many second-order methods rely on some approximation
of the Hessian entries to make computation less prohibitive.
For example, a type of truncated-Newton method called
Hessian-free methods (Martens et al. 2010) exploits the
Hessian-vector product (Pearlmutter 1994, Bekas et al.
2007). However, such methods might require many iterations per update or additional techniques to achieve stability
when used in optimization, adding computational overhead
(Martens and Sutskever 2011). Some variations only approximate the diagonals of the Hessian matrix using stochastic
estimation with matrix-free computations (e.g., Chapelle
et al. 2011, Martens et al. 2012, Yao et al. 2021), but they
may produce low-quality approximations of the Hessian
entries (Jahani et al. 2021). Other methods impose probabilistic modeling assumptions and estimate a block diagonal
Fisher information matrix (Martens and Grosse 2015, Botev
et al. 2017), but they are more expensive to compute.
A long-overlooked approach is deterministic diagonal approximations to the Hessian. Specifically, the method proposed by Becker and LeCun (1989), which we call BL89,
can be implemented as efficiently as first-order methods. We
call this method, along with other cheap methods (e.g., Yao
et al. 2021) with the same computational and memory complexities as the gradient, scalable second-order methods,
distinguishing them from methods with superlinear computational or memory complexity (e.g., Mizutani and Dreyfus
2008, Botev et al. 2017, Dangel et al. 2020a). Despite the
promise of scalable second-order optimization, the approximation quality of BL89 is shown to be poor (Hassibi and
Stork 1992, Martens et al. 2012). A scalable second-order
method with a high-quality approximation is still needed.

1. Introduction
Second-order information—the entries of the Hessian
matrix—is paramount in a wide spectrum of applications,
including preconditioning in optimization (Martens and
Grosse 2015, Yao et al. 2021, Shen et al. 2024), and estimating the importance of weights or neurons (Elsayed and
1
Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Canada 2 Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute 3 Vector
Institute, Toronto, Canada 4 CIFAR AI Chair. Correspondence to:
Mohamed Elsayed <mohamedelsayed@ualberta.ca>.

Scalable second-order methods can benefit reinforcement
learning (RL) in at least three ways: sample efficiency, stability, and robustness. Second-order optimization can help
with sample efficiency due to faster convergence (Wu et al.
2017). Moreover, step-size scaling schemes (e.g., Martens

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
Code is available at:
https://github.com/mohmdelsayed/HesScale

1

