Ambiguity-Aware Abductive Learning

Hao-Yuan He 1 2 Hui Sun 1 2 Zheng Xie 1 Ming Li 1 2
Abductive Learning (ABL) (Zhou, 2019; Dai et al., 2019)
represents a novel framework seamlessly integrating machine learning systems with logical reasoning systems.
Within this framework, the machine learning model is
trained to transform raw input data, e.g., images and text,
into sub-symbolic concepts; concurrently, the logical model
is designed to conduct reasoning based on these concepts.
Logical reasoning, facilitated through abductive reasoning (Magnani, 2009), is employed to identify the accurate
concepts of unlabeled instances; these identified concepts
are then utilized to update the machine learning model
through supervised learning.

Abstract
Abductive Learning (ABL) is a promising framework for integrating sub-symbolic perception and
logical reasoning through abduction. In this case,
the abduction process provides supervision for
the perception model from the background knowledge. Nevertheless, this process naturally contains uncertainty, since the knowledge base may
be satisfied by numerous potential candidates.
This implies that the result of the abduction process, i.e., a set of candidates, is ambiguous; both
correct and incorrect candidates are mixed in this
set. The prior art of Abductive Learning selects
the candidate that has the minimal inconsistency
of the knowledge base. However, this method
overlooks the ambiguity in the abduction process
and is prone to error when it fails to identify the
correct candidates. To address this, we propose
Ambiguity-Aware Abductive Learning (A3 BL),
which evaluates all potential candidates and their
probabilities, thus preventing the model from
falling into sub-optimal solutions. Both experimental results and theoretical analyses prove that
A3 BL markedly enhances ABL by efficiently exploiting the ambiguous abduced supervision.

Consider the following illustrative example: the digit equation SUM( , ) = 3 is presented, accompanied by the
background knowledge that it represents a digit addition
task. Initially, the machine learning model identifies
=1
and
= 1. However, upon logical inference, it is deduced
that 1 + 1 ̸= 3. Nonetheless, a plausible explanation is
proposed:
= 1,
= 2, aligning with the background
knowledge and thereby validating the equation.
Although the above procedure seems feasible, ambiguity
still persists. The term ambiguity in this context means
that the abduction process yields not only the correct result
but also other validate candidates (Magnani, 2009), such
as [ = 0,
= 3], · · · , [ = 3,
= 0], which are reasonable hypotheses given the existing background knowledge. The use of such ambiguous supervision derived from
abductive reasoning brings significant challenges to model
training processes. To address this issue, prior studies (Dai
et al., 2019) have selected the nearest candidate (e.g., in
terms of Hamming distance) to the model’s prediction as
pseudo-labels for learning. In this case, the accurate identification of candidates depends heavily on the performance of
the perception model. When training the perception model
from scratch, the initial recognitions are often unreliable,
which means that the closest candidate of the abduction
results may not be the correct one. Further training on these
selected candidates as supervision data may lead to the perception model becoming entrapped in a sub-optimal state.
Therefore, it still remains a challenge to properly utilize the
ambiguity of abduction candidates in the ABL framework.

1. Introduction
Currently, machine learning methods are achieving significant success in perception (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Vaswani
et al., 2017). However, real-world learning tasks usually
require not only the perception ability but also the logical reasoning ability (Kahneman, 2011). To address the
limitations of current machine learning methods, the next
generation of Artificial Intelligence calls for the integration of data-driven machine learning and knowledge-driven
symbolic reasoning (Zhou, 2019).
1
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China 2 School of Artificial Intelligence,
Nanjing University, Nanjing, China. Correspondence to: Ming Li
<lim@lamda.nju.edu.cn>.

To address the ambiguity in the abduction results, this paper introduces the concept of Ambiguity-Aware Abductive

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

