Local Feature Selection without Label or Feature Leakage
for Interpretable Machine Learning Predictions

Harrie Oosterhuis * 1 Lijun Lyu * 2 Avishek Anand 2

Abstract

d-dimensional feature vector representation and yi as its
accompanying label to be predicted. A feature selector ζ
takes xi as input and outputs a feature mask hi ∈ {0, 1}d ,
either through a stochastic or deterministic process: hi ∼
ζ(xi ). Let xi ⊙ hi indicate the masked features that results
from applying hi to xi , where all non-selected features are
masked. We denote a masked feature with ∅, to clearly
differentiate it from a zero value, and the jth element in a
vector with [j]:
(
xi [j] if hi [j] = 1,
(xi ⊙ hi )[j] :=
(1)
∅
if hi [j] = 0.

Local feature selection in machine learning provides instance-specific explanations by focusing
on the most relevant features for each prediction,
enhancing the interpretability of complex models.
However, such methods tend to produce misleading explanations by encoding additional information in their selections. In this work, we attribute
the problem of misleading selections by formalizing the concepts of label and feature leakage. We
rigorously derive the necessary and sufficient conditions under which we can guarantee no leakage,
and show existing methods do not meet these conditions. Furthermore, we propose the first local
feature selection method that is proven to have no
leakage called SUWR. Our experimental results
indicate that SUWR is less prone to overfitting
and combines state-of-the-art predictive performance with high feature-selection sparsity. Our
generic and easily extendable formal approach
provides a strong theoretical basis for future work
on interpretability with reliable explanations.

here ζ is a local selector and produces a different mask for
each instance. We note that local feature selection differs
from global feature selection which reveals feature importance on the dataset level, as it has a fixed mask for all
instances (Balın et al., 2019; Lemhadri et al., 2021; Yamada et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2021). By being able to vary
masks, local methods are more flexible and can give more
in-depth insight into the importance of features in individual
instances (Yoon et al., 2018; Arik & Pfister, 2021).
A widely used setup for local feature selection is to follow a
selector-predictor architecture that is typically jointly optimized (Yoon et al., 2018; Jethani et al., 2021; Arik & Pfister,
2021). More precisely, let f be the predictor model that can
take masked features as input: f (x ⊙ h), importantly, h can
be inferred exactly from x ⊙ h. The optimization of the
selector ζ and predictor f is usually based on a linear combination of a prediction loss L and the sparsity of a mask ∥h∥
to enforce high sparsity (and hence interpretability). For a
dataset of N instances, we use:

1. Introduction
Feature attributions and feature selections in interpretable
machine learning (ML) help users understand how much
each input feature influences the output of the model (Du
et al., 2019; Molnar, 2020). One prominent family of methods are designed for local feature selection, a.k.a. instancewise feature selection, for interpretable ML (Gurrapu et al.,
2023). These approaches aim to only select the mostimportant features per instance and to exclude the rest during
inference (Li et al., 2017), thereby making the predictions
by the model easier to interpret.

L(ζ,f ):=

N


1X
Ehi ∼ζ(xi ) L(f (xi ⊙hi ), yi )+λ∥hi ∥ , (2)
N i=1

where the parameter λ ∈ R>0 balances feature sparsity
against predictive performance. The loss thus incentivizes
the exclusion of features that do not contribute to high predictive performance, consequently, the selector should learn
only to select the features that are the most important for
accurate predictions.

Let i refer to an instance in a dataset with xi ∈ Rd as its
*

Equal contribution 1 Radboud University, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands 2 TU Delft, Delft, The Netherlands. Correspondence
to: Harrie Oosterhuis <harrie.oosterhuis@ru.nl>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Whilst the reasoning behind the local feature selection approach appears intuitive, previous work has found a funda1

