Initial Guessing Bias:
How Untrained Networks Favor Some Classes
Emanuele Francazi 1 2 Aurelien Lucchi 3 Marco Baity-Jesi 2

Abstract

crucial for developing more predictable and robust models.
Additionally, the ethical and fairness implications of biased
model predictions have become crucial in responsible machine learning development (Fuchs, 2018; Parraga et al.,
2022; Siddique et al., 2023; Louppe et al., 2017).
In this paper, we study how different choices in architecture
design and data pre-processing influence the predictions
of neural networks at initialization. This leads us to the
discovery of a previously unexplored phenomenon, which
we illustrate in Fig. 1, where the initial predictions made
by untrained neural networks are biased. We name this
phenomenon Initial Guessing Bias (IGB). IGB challenges
naive assumptions about DNNs and informs crucial design
decisions. Our study elucidates how, beyond effects that
may be induced by the structure of the data itself, the design of the model plays a crucial role in shaping the initial
predictive bias of the model. Specifically, our work makes
the following contributions:

Understanding and controlling biasing effects in
neural networks is crucial for ensuring accurate
and fair model performance. In the context of classification problems, we derive a theoretical analysis demonstrating that the structure of a deep neural network (DNN) can condition the model to assign all predictions to the same class, even before
the beginning of training, and in the absence of explicit biases. We prove that, besides dataset properties, the presence of this phenomenon, which
we call Initial Guessing Bias (IGB), is influenced
by model choices including dataset preprocessing methods, and architectural decisions, such
as activation functions, max-pooling layers, and
network depth. Our analysis of IGB provides
valuable information for selecting network architectures and initializing models. We also highlight
theoretical consequences, such as a breakdown of
node-permutation symmetry, a violation of selfaveraging and non-trivial effects that depth has on
IGB.

• Identification and formalization of IGB: We are the
first to observe and formally articulate the concept of IGB.
Its relevance lies in:
◦ Showing that a model can be biased toward specific
predictions, before it even saw the data it will be trained
on.
◦ Guiding critical design choices in terms of architecture,
initialization, and data standardization.
◦ Revealing a symmetry breaking and a violation of selfaveraging, which are common working hypotheses.
◦ Influencing the initial phase of learning dynamics,
whose behaviour is affected by the level of IGB.

1. Introduction
In the field of deep learning, the art of designing neural
networks often traverses a terrain where empirical practices
overshadow theoretical foundations. The design of DNNs
involves a complex array of decisions, each of which can significantly influence the network’s performance and learning
dynamics (Liu et al., 2017; Khanday & Sofi, 2021). Choices
such as data standardization, activation functions, and initial weight configurations, pivotal for network performance,
are typically guided by heuristic methods due to limited
theoretical insights. A deeper theoretical understanding is

• Demonstration of IGB’s robustness: Through a comprehensive analysis, we establish the robustness of IGB
across various settings:
◦ We demonstrate the dependence of IGB on activation
function choices and outline general rules for identifying IGB-inducing functions.
◦ We uncover the role of max pooling in generating and
intensifying IGB.
◦ We show how data preprocessing procedures are crucial
in activating and amplifying IGB.

1

Physics Department, EPFL, Switzerland 2 SIAM Department,
Eawag, Switzerland 3 Department of Mathematics and Computer
Science, University of Basel, Switzerland. Correspondence to:
Emanuele Francazi <emanuele.francazi@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

