Defense against Model Extraction Attack by Bayesian Active Watermarking

Zhenyi Wang 1 Yihan Wu 1 Heng Huang 1

Abstract

labeled data, thus these deep learning models are considered
as a form of intellectual property (IP) (Sun et al., 2023; Hong
et al., 2024). Model extraction or stealing is to replicate
the functionality of the pre-trained commercial black-box
model (victim model) solely through query access. Attackers may utilize these cloned models for financial gain or
other purposes. Consequently, there is a pressing need for
defense against model extraction. However, safeguarding
against model extraction to preserve model IP is challenging, due to the requirements for efficiency, effectiveness,
and the preservation of model utility.

Model extraction is to obtain a cloned model that
replicates the functionality of a black-box victim
model solely through query-based access. Present
defense strategies exhibit shortcomings, manifesting as: (1) computational or memory inefficiencies during deployment; or (2) dependence on
expensive defensive training methods that mandate the re-training of the victim model; or (3)
watermarking-based methods only passively detect model theft without actively preventing model
extraction. To address these limitations, we introduce an innovative Bayesian active watermarking technique to fine-tune the victim model and
learn the watermark posterior distribution conditioned on input data. The fine-tuning process
aims to maximize the log-likelihood on watermarked in-distribution training data for preserving
model utility while simultaneously maximizing
the change of model’s outputs on watermarked
out-of-distribution data, thereby achieving effective defense. During deployment, a watermark is
randomly sampled from the estimated watermark
posterior. This watermark is then added to the
input query, and the victim model returns the prediction based on the watermarked input query to
users. This proactive defense approach requires
only slight fine-tuning of the victim model without the need of full re-training and demonstrates
high efficiency in terms of memory and computation during deployment. Rigorous theoretical
analysis and comprehensive experimental results
demonstrate the efficacy of our proposed method.

Despite the plethora of defense methods developed to safeguard against model extraction, the existing approaches are
riddled with several limitations. On one hand, current active
defense methods exhibit either computation inefficiency during deployment due to the many times of backpropagation
during test time (Orekondy et al., 2020; Mazeika et al., 2022)
or memory inefficiency due to ensemble of multiple models
(Kariyappa et al., 2021b), hindering their practical viability.
Alternatively, they may demand costly defensive training
with distributionally robust optimization (Wang et al., 2023),
necessitating alterations to the original training procedure
for re-training. This, in turn, leads to a substantial increase
in additional training costs. On the other hand, existing
watermark-based methods (Jia et al., 2021a), while offering
a form of defense, are passive in nature. These methods
can only furnish evidence of model theft after the fact but
lack the proactive capability to prevent the extraction of the
model from occurring in the first place.
To tackle the aforementioned challenges, we propose a novel
probabilistic Bayesian active watermarking technique designed to fine-tune the pre-trained victim model to prevent
model extraction. We choose a probabilistic approach for its
multiple benefits: (1) Adding a probabilistic watermark during deployment increases uncertainty for attackers, making
it harder to determine the model’s parameters. (2) Introducing inconsistent or incorrect gradient information complicates model extraction for attackers. (3) The method enhances resilience against various adaptive model extraction
techniques by introducing significant randomness, increasing the difficulty of reverse engineering. Specifically, in
the fine-tuning phase, our primary goal is to make minimal
adjustments to the victim model while obtaining a watermark posterior based on observed data. We maximize the

1. Introduction
Training deep learning models as commercial products demands significant computational resources and expensive
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park, USA. Correspondence to: Zhenyi Wang
<zwang169@umd.edu>, Heng Huang <heng@umd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

