Learning Scale-Aware Spatio-temporal Implicit Representation
for Event-based Motion Deblurring

Wei Yu 1 Jianing Li 2 Shengping Zhang 1 Xiangyang Ji 3

Abstract

τ

𝑇

ℎ

Hybrid
EVS/CIS
Sensor
𝑤

LR Events 𝐸

Existing event-based motion deblurring methods
mostly focus on restoring images with the same
spatial and temporal scales as events. However,
the unknown scales of images and events in the
real world pose great challenges and have rarely
been explored. To address this gap, we propose a novel Scale-Aware Spatio-temporal Network (SASNet) to flexibly restore blurred images with event streams at arbitrary scales. The
core idea is to implicitly aggregate both spatial
and temporal correspondence features of images
and events to generalize at continuous scales.
To restore highly blurred local areas, we develop a Spatial Implicit Representation Module
(SIRM) to aggregate spatial correlation at any
resolution through event encoding sampling. To
tackle global motion blur, a Temporal Implicit
Representation Module (TIRM) is presented to
learn temporal correlation via temporal shift operations with long-term aggregation. Additionally, we build a High-resolution Hybrid Deblur
(H2D) dataset using a new-generation hybrid
event-based sensor, which comprises images with
naturally spatially aligned and temporally synchronized events at various scales. Experiments
demonstrate that our SASNet outperforms stateof-the-art methods on both synthetic GoPro and
real H2D datasets, especially in high-speed motion scenarios. Code and dataset are available at
https://github.com/aipixel/SASNet.

(a)

SASNet

Shutter Period 𝑇

Exposure Duration τ

HR Sharp Image 𝐼𝑅
𝐻

ℛ𝑠 𝐼𝐵 , 𝐸 ,
ℛ𝑡 (τ , 𝑇)
Scales

𝑊
HR Blurry Image 𝐼𝐵

(b)

Blurry Image

EFNet

REFID

SASNet (Ours)

Ground Truth

Figure 1. (a) Illustration of our arbitrary-scale event-based deblurring task, where Rs and Rt denote spatial and temporal scales,
respectively. (b) Visual comparison results between EFNet (Sun
et al., 2022), REFID (Sun et al., 2023), and our SASNet under the
scale differences scenario.

1. Introduction
With the wide use of CMOS Image Sensors (CIS) and bioinspired Event Vision Sensors (EVS) in robots (Rebecq
et al., 2018) and autonomous vehicles (Gallego et al., 2020),
event-based vision tasks have attracted increasing attention (Hidalgo-Carrió et al., 2022; Gao et al., 2022; Zhang
et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2023b). Due to the microsecond-level
low latency of EVS, necessary motion information can be
inherently captured from events to help alleviate motion
blurring in CIS frames (Chen et al., 2024b). Consequently,
Event-based Motion Deblurring (EMD) has become a prominent topic in computational photography.

1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Weihai, China 2 School of Computer Science,
Peking University, Beijing, China. 3 Department of Automation,
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.. Correspondence to: Shengping Zhang <s.zhang@hit.edu.cn>.

Despite the advancements in existing EMD solutions (Sun
et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023b), practical applications are
still hindered by two limitations. Dataset Limitation: Existing event-based deblurring datasets (Zhang et al., 2023a;
Cho et al., 2023) are usually collected from cameras with
low spatial resolution (e.g., DAVIS346 with 346×260) or
binocular camera systems using beam splitters, which are

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

