On the Error-Propagation of Inexact Hotelling’s Deflation
for Principal Component Analysis

Fangshuo Liao 1 Junhyung Lyle Kim 1 Cruz Barnum 2 Anastasios Kyrillidis 1

Mutual Information

Abstract
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) aims to find
subspaces spanned by the so-called principal components that best represent the variance in the
dataset. The deflation method is a popular metaalgorithm that sequentially finds individual principal components, starting from the most important
ones and working towards the less important ones.
However, as deflation proceeds, numerical errors
from the imprecise estimation of principal components propagate due to its sequential nature.
This paper mathematically characterizes the error
propagation of the inexact Hotelling’s deflation
method. We consider two scenarios: i) when the
sub-routine for finding the leading eigenvector is
abstract and can represent various algorithms; and
ii) when power iteration is used as the sub-routine.
In the latter case, the additional directional information from power iteration allows us to obtain a
tighter error bound than the sub-routine agnostic
case. For both scenarios, we explicitly characterize how the errors progress and affect subsequent
principal component estimations.

K=5
K=15

0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
25

50

75 100 125 150 175 200
Num PowIter Steps

Figure 1. Spectral clustering of MNIST dataset using inexact deflation method in Algorithm 1. As the number of power iteration
steps increases (x-axis), clustering performance, measured by the
mutual information metric, also improves. A similar pattern is
observed for recovering different numbers of eigenvectors.

of the first principal component, which is a vector that captures the most variance in the data. Mathematically, singlecomponent PCA can be described as:
u∗1 = PCA(Σ) =

arg max v> Σv,

(1)

v∈Rd :kvk2 =1
d×d

where Σ = n1 · YY> ∈ R
is the empirical covariance matrix given a set of n centered d-dimensional datapoints Y ∈ Rd×n .
It is sometimes helpful to know not only the first but also
the top-K principal components, especially in the highdimensional regime. This is becoming more relevant in the
modern machine learning era, where the number of features
reaches as large as billions (Fedus et al., 2022; Touvron
et al., 2023). Mathematically, the multi-component PCA
(K ≥ 1) can be formulated as the following constrained
optimization problem:

1. Introduction
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) (Pearson, 1901;
Hotelling, 1933) is a fundamental tool for data analysis with
applications that range from statistics to machine learning
and can be used for dimensionality reduction, classification, and clustering, to name a few (Majumdar, 2009; Wang
et al., 2013; d’Aspremont et al., 2007; Jiang et al., 2011;
Zou et al., 2006). Since its proposition Pearson (1901),
many algorithms for PCA have been devised, even recently
(Allen-Zhu & Li, 2017), to efficiently find approximations
*

0.35

U∗ =

arg max
V∈{Q:,:K : Q∈SO(d)}

hΣV, Vi ,

(2)

where SO(d) denotes the group of rotations about a fixed
point in d-dimensional Euclidean space. Since U∗ contains
the first K columns of an orthogonal matrix, each principal
component U:,k must be a unit vector, and the pairwise
principal components, say U∗:,k1 , U∗:,k2 for k1 6= k2 , are
orthogonal. A popular method for solving (2) is the deflation
method (Hotelling, 1933) via sequentially solving (1), which
is the focus of our work.

1

Equal contribution
Department of Computer Science,
Rice University, Houston, U.S.A. 2 Department of Computer
Science, UIUC. Correspondence to: Fangshuo Liao <Fangshuo.Liao@rice.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

