Why do Variational Autoencoders Really Promote Disentanglement?

Pratik Bhowal 1 Achint Soni 2 Sirisha Rambhatla 3

Abstract
Despite not being designed for this purpose,
the use of variational autoencoders (VAEs) has
proven remarkably effective for disentangled
representation learning (DRL). Recent research
attributes this success to certain characteristics of
the loss function that prevent latent space rotation,
or hypothesize about the orthogonality properties
of the decoder by drawing parallels with principal
component analysis (PCA). This hypothesis,
however, has only been tested experimentally
for linear VAEs, and the theoretical justification
still remains an open problem. Moreover,
since real-world VAEs are often inherently
non-linear due to the use of neural architectures,
understanding DRL capabilities of real-world
VAEs remains a critical task. Our work takes
a step towards understanding disentanglement
in real-world VAEs to theoretically establish
how the orthogonality properties of the
decoder promotes disentanglement in practical
applications. Complementary to our theoretical
contributions,
our experimental results
corroborate our analysis. Code is available
at https://github.com/criticalml-uw/
Disentanglement-in-VAE.

Figure 1. Varying a single latent variable, keeping all the other
latent variables the same in the dSprites dataset changes only the
vertical position of the object in the images while keeping the rest
of its attributes constant demonstrating disentanglement.

observed data. A widely accepted definition of DRL posits
that each latent variable should encode a single generative
factor of the data, as depicted in Fig. 1(Higgins et al., 2018)1
This characteristic makes Disentangled Representations
(DRs) particularly useful for learning interpretable latent
spaces (Shen et al., 2022; Nie et al., 2023; Han et al., 2022).
Furthermore, this emphasis on interpretability makes DRs a
key tool for latent space manipulation, which is essential not
only in fields like computer vision (Stammer et al., 2022;
Wang et al., 2023; He et al., 2023; Li et al., 2022; Ruan
et al., 2022), but also in text based media generation (Wu
et al., 2023).
Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) are widely used to
learn DRs, owing to their probabilistic encoder-decoder
structure and a latent space well-suited for generative
modeling. Many benchmark DRL architectures, like β-VAE
(Higgins et al., 2016), DIP-VAE (Kumar et al., 2017),
and β-TCVAE (Chen et al., 2018b), are rooted in the
VAE framework. These architectures generally outperform
GAN-based methods, such as InfoGAN (Chen et al., 2016)
and DR-GAN (Tran et al., 2017) particularly in terms of
stability and quality of generation. Furthermore, recent
works in promoting disentanglement in diffusion models
also utilize this VAE-like probabilistic encoder-decoder
model (Zhang et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2023), underscoring
the need to understand the mechanisms by which DRL is
promoted by VAEs.

1. Introduction
Learning human interpretable concepts in generative
modeling is crucial for their reliable and controllable
application in real-world scenarios (Voynov & Babenko,
2020; Härkönen et al., 2020). A promising avenue in
this realm is Disentangled Representation Learning (DRL),
which aims to uncover the hidden factors of variation in the
1
NVIDIA, India 2 Department of Computer Science,
University of Waterloo, Ontario, Canada 3 Department
of Management Science and Engineering, University of
Waterloo, Ontario, Canada.
Correspondence to: Pratik
Bhowal <pratikbhowal1999@gmail.com>, Sirisha Rambhatla
<sirisha.rambhatla@uwaterloo.ca>.

While VAEs have found success for DRL, somewhat
surprisingly they were not designed for this representation
learning task. Consequently, explaining the DRL properties
of VAEs has been a focal point in recent research (Burgess
1
Some works (Locatello et al., 2019; 2020), propose that
DRL techniques use inherent biases present in data and the
disentanglement metrics to disentangle as more than one set of
generative factors can generate statistically identical data.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

