Bayesian Power Steering: An Effective Approach for
Domain Adaptation of Diffusion Models

Ding Huang 1 Ting Li 1 Jian Huang 1
Particularly, in computer vision, significant efforts have been
devoted to developing large-scale diffusion models. For
instance, the Stable Diffusion (SD, Rombach et al. (2022))
is trained utilizing the LAION-5B dataset (Schuhmann et al.,
2022), a large publicly available text-image dataset, with a
staggering magnitude of 585 billion.

Abstract
We propose a Bayesian framework for fine-tuning
large diffusion models with a novel network structure called Bayesian Power Steering (BPS) 2 . We
clarify the meaning behind adaptation from a
large probability space to a small probability
space and explore the task of fine-tuning pretrained models using learnable modules from a
Bayesian perspective. BPS extracts task-specific
knowledge from a pre-trained model’s learned
prior distribution. It efficiently leverages large diffusion models, differentially intervening different
hidden features with a head-heavy and foot-light
configuration. Experiments highlight the superiority of BPS over contemporary methods across a
range of tasks even with limited amount of data.
Notably, BPS attains an FID score of 10.49 under
the sketch condition on the COCO17 dataset.

The target
probability space

The prior
probability space

Figure 1. The relationship between the probability spaces learned
by the pre-trained model (the prior probability space or large
probability space) and the target task (the target probability space
or small probability space). Different colors represent different
densities at various locations on the manifold.

1. Introduction
The diversity and abundance of data contributes to the exceptional generative capabilities of large-scale models. They
can capture intricate details in the large probability space
of images. However, numerous data-driven modeling tasks
typically focus on a specific subset of the entire image space,
as illustrated in Figure 1. Moreover, the size of the training data available for these tasks is considerably smaller
compared to expansive datasets such as LAION-5B. This
limitation is especially evident in user-customized scenarios, where the available number of samples provided by
users is often limited. Consequently, learning this smaller
probability space poses a significant challenge.

The advent of diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al.,
2020b) and their extensions (Song et al., 2020a; Nichol &
Dhariwal, 2021; Huang et al., 2023), has enabled effective
learning of intricate probability measures for diverse data
types, including images (Ho et al., 2022; Rombach et al.,
2022; Saharia et al., 2022; Ho et al., 2022), audio (Kong
et al., 2020), and 3D bioimaging data (Luo & Hu, 2021;
Poole et al., 2022; Shi et al., 2023; Pinaya et al., 2022). For
these generative models, the quantity of training data plays
a crucial role in influencing both the precision of probability
measure estimation and the generalization capacity, enabling
them to extrapolate effectively within the probability space.

Pre-trained large models, which encapsulate information
across the large probability space and exhibit exceptional
generalization abilities, offer a potential solution to the challenge posed by limited training data sizes. This prompts us
to ask the question: can the judicious deployment of such
pre-trained large-scale models, in conjunction with carefully
curated specialized datasets, effectively facilitate the transition from a large probability space to a small probability
space?

1

Department of Applied Mathematics, The Hong Kong
Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China.
Correspondence to: Ting Li <tingeric.li@polyu.edu.hk>, Jian Huang
<j.huang@polyu.edu.hk>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
2
Code and models are available at https://github.com/
DingDing33/BPS-v1-1.

1

