Generalization Analysis for Multi-Label Learning

Yi-Fan Zhang 1 2 Min-Ling Zhang 2 3

Abstract

ciated with a set of labels instead of a single label. The goal
of multi-label learning is to learn a hypothesis which can
predict the proper sets of labels for unseen instances. It has
made important advances in text categorization (Schapire
& Singer, 2000; Rubin et al., 2012), multimedia content
annotation (Boutell et al., 2004; Cabral et al., 2011), bioinformatics (Barutçuoglu et al., 2006; Cesa-Bianchi et al.,
2012) and other fields (Yu et al., 2005). Although multilabel learning has achieved impressive empirical advances
across a wide range of tasks (Zhang & Zhou, 2014), the
problem of understanding multi-label learning theoretically
remains relatively under-explored.

Despite great advances in algorithms for multilabel learning, research on the theoretical analysis
of generalization is still in the early stage. Some
recent theoretical results has investigated the generalization performance of multi-label learning
under several evaluation metrics, however, how
to reduce the dependency on the number of labels, explicitly introduce label correlations, and
quantitatively analyze the impact of various inductive biases in the generalization analysis of
multi-label learning is still a crucial and open
problem. In an attempt to make up for the gap
in the generalization theory of multi-label learning, we develop several novel vector-contraction
inequalities, which exploit the Lipschitz continuity of loss functions, and derive generalization bounds with a weaker dependency on the
number of labels than the state of the art in the
case of decoupling the relationship among different components, which serves as theoretical
guarantees for the generalization of multi-label
learning. In addition, we derive the generalization bound for Macro-Averaged AUC and analyze
its relationship with class-imbalance. The mild
bounds without strong assumptions explain the
good generalization ability of multi-label learning
with first-order label correlations and high-order
label correlations induced by norm regularizers.

As we all know, the generalization ability, i.e., the performance of learning machines trained on certain datasets on
unseen data, of learning machines is an important question of theoretical research in machine learning, and it is
no exception for multi-label learning. Efforts to explain
why multi-label models generalize well is an important
open problem in multi-label learning community. Uniform
convergence is a powerful tool in learning theory for understanding the generalization ability of learners, and it is also
used in the generalization analysis of multi-label learning
(Yu et al., 2014; Xu et al., 2016; Wu & Zhu, 2020; Wu et al.,
2021b;a). However, the progress on the generalization analysis of multi-label learning appears to be severely scarce. A
satisfactory and complete study of the generalization analysis for multi-label learning should include three aspects:
1) the reduction of the dependency on the number of labels
of the generalization bounds, 2) the explicit introduction
of label correlations in the generalization analysis, and 3)
the impact of various inductive biases on the generalization
performance. First of all, the generalization analysis of
multi-label learning is more difficult than that of traditional
supervised learning since their difference in problem settings. In particular, the vector-valued output of multi-label
learning makes the typical theoretical results not applicable
to multi-label learning (Maurer, 2016; Wu & Zhu, 2020).
Hence, how to reduce the dependency on the number of
labels of the generalization bounds is a very critical problem. Secondly, the consideration of label correlations can
often effectively improve the generalization performance of
multi-label learning (Zhang & Zhou, 2014), so it is very necessary to explicitly and formally introduce label correlations
in the generalization analysis. Finally, the impressive em-

1. Introduction
Multi-label learning is one of the most studied and important machine learning paradigms in practice, in which each
object is represented by a single instance while being asso1
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China 2 Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration (Southeast University), Ministry
of Education, China 3 School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China. Correspondence to: Min-Ling Zhang <zhangml@seu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

