Sub-token ViT Embedding via Stochastic Resonance Transformers

Dong Lao 1 Yangchao Wu 1 Tian Yu Liu 1 Alex Wong 2 Stefano Soatto 1

Abstract

the counter-intuitive nature of spatial quantization, Vision
Transformers (ViTs) (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) achieve stateof-the-art performance in many vision tasks. So we focus on
developing methods to harness pre-trained ViTs and overcome their limitations in representing spatial details at fine
granularity due to the fixed spatial quantization of tokens.

Vision Transformer (ViT) architectures represent
images as collections of high-dimensional vectorized tokens, each corresponding to a rectangular
non-overlapping patch. This representation trades
spatial granularity for embedding dimensionality, and results in semantically rich but spatially
coarsely quantized feature maps. In order to retrieve spatial details beneficial to fine-grained inference tasks we propose a training-free method
inspired by “stochastic resonance.” Specifically,
we perform sub-token spatial transformations to
the input data, and aggregate the resulting ViT
features after applying the inverse transformation. The resulting “Stochastic Resonance Transformer” (SRT) retains the rich semantic information of the original representation, but grounds
it on a finer-scale spatial domain, partly mitigating the coarse effect of spatial tokenization.
SRT is applicable across any layer of any ViT
architecture, consistently boosting performance
on several tasks including segmentation, classification, depth estimation, and others by up to
14.9% without the need for any fine-tuning. Code:
https://github.com/donglao/srt.

The standard remedy for quantization artifacts is antialiasing. In one-dimensional digitized signals such as audio, anti-aliasing refers to weighted averaging of nearby
samples in the discrete topology, or equivalently averaging versions of the signal translated by integer multiples
of the original sampling interval. For images, in addition
to sampling the translation group, one also has to sample
the scale group, so as to capture the varying size of the
projection of objects onto the image plane. Various network
architectures comprise spatial average pooling, which is
translational anti-aliasing, whereas the notion of domainsize pooling and domain anti-aliasing has been championed
by (Dong & Soatto, 2015). Anti-aliasing is typically performed by convolving the discrete signal with a generic (not
data-dependent) kernel. The optimal kernel is unbounded,
so any finite implementation is necessarily lossy and cannot
“recreate information” lost in the sampling process. Similarly, super-resolution algorithms hallucinate missing details
either using generic priors or data other than the signal in
question (Buades et al., 2005).
“Stochastic Resonance” (Benzi et al., 1981) is a qualitatively
different process whereby the limitations imposed by a fixed
quantization threshold can be overcome simply by shifting
the signal by sub-threshold additive perturbations. This
results in sampling beyond the Nyquist limit otherwise imposed by the quantizer. We extend this process, originally
employed in cochlear implants, to translation not of the
value of the signal (additive perturbations) but its domain
(translation). The same process can also be applied to domain size (scale). Stochastic resonance can be thought of as
a form of data augmentation or adaptive quantization. We
further simplify it by choosing deterministic, rather than
randomly sampled, perturbations. The perturbed token embeddings are aggregated statistically to first-order (mean or
median) to yield a sub-token embedding. First-order statistics can be used for visual tasks, for instance, unsupervised
object segmentation, and second-order statistics as a weight
for adaptive regularization.

1. Introduction
The Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017), originally designed for modeling language which is naturally
quantized into discrete objects (sub-word “tokens”), is a
poor fit for vision tasks due to the lack of a natural scale
for spatial discretization: The same object can disappear
within a pixel or fill the entire image plane depending on
its distance from the camera. In theory, one could create tokens for patches of all sizes and positions, but at significant
computational expense due to the complexity of transformers, which is quadratic in the number of tokens. Despite
1
UCLA Vision Lab 2 Yale Vision Lab. Correspondence to:
Dong Lao <lao@cs.ucla.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

