E2 GAN: Efficient Training of Efficient GANs for Image-to-Image Translation

Yifan Gong * 1 2 Zheng Zhan * 2 Qing Jin 1 Yanyu Li 1 2 Yerlan Idelbayev 2 Xian Liu 1 Andrey Zharkov 1
Kfir Aberman 1 Sergey Tulyakov 1 Yanzhi Wang 2 Jian Ren 1
Project Page: https://yifanfanfanfan.github.io/e2gan/

Abstract

1. Introduction
Recent development of diffusion-based image editing models has witnessed remarkable progress in synthesizing contents containing photo-realistic details full of imagination (Saharia et al., 2022; Rombach et al., 2022; Ramesh
et al., 2021; 2022). Albeit being creative and powerful,
these generative models typically require a huge amount
of computation even for inference and storage for saving
weights. For example, Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al.,
2022) has more than one billion parameters and takes 30
seconds to conduct an iterative denoising process to get one
image on T4 GPU. Such low-efficiency issue prohibits their
real-time application on mobile devices (Li et al., 2023).

One highly promising direction for enabling flexible real-time on-device image editing is utilizing data distillation by leveraging large-scale
text-to-image diffusion models to generate paired
datasets used for training generative adversarial
networks (GANs). This approach notably alleviates the stringent requirements typically imposed
by high-end commercial GPUs for performing image editing with diffusion models. However, unlike text-to-image diffusion models, each distilled
GAN is specialized for a specific image editing
task, necessitating costly training efforts to obtain
models for various concepts. In this work, we
introduce and address a novel research direction:
can the process of distilling GANs from diffusion
models be made significantly more efficient? To
achieve this goal, we propose a series of innovative techniques. First, we construct a base GAN
model with generalized features, adaptable to different concepts through fine-tuning, eliminating
the need for training from scratch. Second, we
identify crucial layers within the base GAN model
and employ Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) with
a simple yet effective rank search process, rather
than fine-tuning the entire base model. Third, we
investigate the minimal amount of data necessary
for fine-tuning, further reducing the overall training time. Extensive experiments show that we
can efficiently empower GANs with the ability to
perform real-time high-quality image editing on
mobile devices with remarkably reduced training
and storage costs for each concept.

Existing works try to tackle the problem through two main
directions. One is accelerating the diffusion models by designing efficient model architecture or reducing the number
of denoising steps (Salimans & Ho, 2022; Meng et al., 2022;
Li et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2023). However, these efforts
still struggle to obtain models that can run in real-time on
mobile devices (Li et al., 2023). Another area focuses on
data distillation, where diffusion models are leveraged to
create datasets to train other mobile-friendly models, such
as generative adversarial networks (GANs) for image-toimage translation (Zhao et al., 2021; Parmar et al., 2023).
Nevertheless, although GAN is efficient for on-device deployment, each new concept still asks for the costly training
of a GAN model from scratch.
In this work, we propose and aim to address a new research
direction: can the GAN models be trained efficiently under
the data distillation pipeline to perform real-time on-device
image editing?
To tackle the challenge, we introduce E2 GAN, powered
with the following techniques for the Efficient training and
Efficient inference of GAN models with the help of diffusion models:

*

Equal contribution, work is done during Yifan’s internship at
Snap Inc. 1 Snap Inc. 2 Northeastern University. Correspondence
to: Jian Ren <jren@snapchat.com>.

• First, we construct a base GAN model trained from
various concepts and the corresponding edited images
obtained from diffusion models. It enables efficient
transfer learning for different new concepts by finetuning, rather than training models from scratch, to

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

