Vanilla Bayesian Optimization Performs Great in High Dimensions

Carl Hvarfner 1 Erik O. Hellsten 1 2 Luigi Nardi 1 2

Abstract

optimization (BO) in high dimensions has been substantial,
making it one of the most frequently addressed challenges
in the BO research community (Kandasamy et al., 2015;
Wang et al., 2016; Nayebi et al., 2019; Eriksson et al., 2019;
Eriksson & Jankowiak, 2021; Papenmeier et al., 2022; 2023;
Ziomek & Bou Ammar, 2023).

High-dimensional problems have long been considered the Achilles’ heel of Bayesian optimization. Spurred by the curse of dimensionality, a
large collection of algorithms aim to make it more
performant in this setting, commonly by imposing
various simplifying assumptions on the objective.
In this paper, we identify the degeneracies that
make vanilla Bayesian optimization poorly suited
to high-dimensional tasks, and further show how
existing algorithms address these degeneracies
through the lens of lowering the model complexity. Moreover, we propose an enhancement to
the prior assumptions that are typical to vanilla
Bayesian optimization, which reduces the complexity to manageable levels without imposing
structural restrictions on the objective. Our modification - a simple scaling of the Gaussian process
lengthscale prior with the dimensionality - reveals
that standard Bayesian optimization works drastically better than previously thought in high dimensions, clearly outperforming existing state-of-theart algorithms on multiple commonly considered
real-world high-dimensional tasks.

While approaches are plentiful and diverse, they all share
a common characteristic: they employ restrictions on the
objective which reduces its a-priori assumed complexity
by contracting the search space. This in turn decreases
distances between data points and prospective queries, increasing their correlation, thus making GP inference more
informative. Assuming a degree of complexity which enables meaningful correlation is essential to efficiently optimize problems of any dimensionality. Nevertheless, the
high-complexity, low-correlation issue presents itself most
clearly in the high-dimensional setting.
In this paper, we hypothesize that the shortcomings of
vanilla BO in high dimensions are strictly a consequence of
the complexity assumptions imposed on the objective. To
that end, we view existing high-dimensional BO (HDBO)
approaches through the lens of model complexity, which
arises from their structural assumptions. Thereafter, we
modify standard BO to follow a similarly complexity reduced structure, simply by appropriately scaling the lengthscale prior of the GP kernel. Consequently, we effectively
circumvent the well-established Curse of Dimensionality
(CoD) without introducing any of the conventional structural
restrictions on the objective that are prevalent in HDBO. We
demonstrate that standard BO works drastically better than
previously thought for high-dimensional tasks, outclassing
existing high-dimensional BO algorithms on a wide range
of real-world problems. Further, we aim to shed light on
the inner workings of the BO machinery and why minimal
changes in assumptions yield a dramatic increase in performance. The result is a performant vanilla BO algorithm for
dimensionalities well into the thousands.

1. Introduction
In Bayesian optimization, complexity and dimensionality
are intrinsically interlinked — the higher the problem dimensionality, the harder it is to optimize. The exuberance
of space, and large distance between observations, makes
the size of high-variance regions along the boundary of the
search space exponentially large (Malu et al., 2021; Binois
& Wycoff, 2022). Moreover, the growing number of parameters of the Gaussian Process (GP) surrogate in relation
to the number of observations makes accurate modeling of
the problem at hand exceedingly difficult. In recent years,
the effort to create methods that achieve efficient Bayesian

Formally, we make the following contributions:

1
Lund University, Lund, Sweden 2 DBTune, Malmö, Sweden.
Correspondence to: Carl Hvarfner <carl.hvarfner@cs.lth.se>.

1. We demonstrate the crucial difference between dimensionality and complexity in BO, highlighting the failure
modes related to high assumed complexity and relate
existing HDBO classes to a reduction in complexity.

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

