A Geometric Explanation of the Likelihood OOD Detection Paradox

Hamidreza Kamkari 1 2 3 Brendan Leigh Ross 1 Jesse C. Cresswell 1 Anthony L. Caterini 1
Rahul G. Krishnan 2 3 Gabriel Loaiza-Ganem 1

Abstract

applications ranging from finance (Sirignano & Cont, 2019)
to medical diagnostics (Esteva et al., 2017). In areas as
critical as autonomous driving (Bojarski et al., 2016) and
medical imaging (Litjens et al., 2017; Adnan et al., 2022),
these models, while proficient with in-distribution data, may
give overconfident or plainly incorrect outputs when faced
with OOD samples (Wei et al., 2022).

Likelihood-based deep generative models
(DGMs) commonly exhibit a puzzling behaviour:
when trained on a relatively complex dataset,
they assign higher likelihood values to out-ofdistribution (OOD) data from simpler sources.
Adding to the mystery, OOD samples are
never generated by these DGMs despite having
higher likelihoods. This two-pronged paradox
has yet to be conclusively explained, making
likelihood-based OOD detection unreliable.
Our primary observation is that high-likelihood
regions will not be generated if they contain
minimal probability mass. We demonstrate how
this seeming contradiction of large densities
yet low probability mass can occur around data
confined to low-dimensional manifolds. We also
show that this scenario can be identified through
local intrinsic dimension (LID) estimation, and
propose a method for OOD detection which pairs
the likelihoods and LID estimates obtained from
a pre-trained DGM. Our method can be applied
to normalizing flows and score-based diffusion
models, and obtains results which match or
surpass state-of-the-art OOD detection benchmarks using the same DGM backbones. Our
code is available at https://github.com/
layer6ai-labs/dgm_ood_detection.

We focus on OOD detection using likelihood-based deep
generative models (DGMs), which aim to learn the density
that generated the observed data. Maximum-likelihood and
related objectives operate by increasing model likelihoods
or appropriate surrogates on training data, and since probability densities must be normalized, one might expect lower
likelihoods for OOD points. Likelihood-based DGMs such
as normalizing flows (NFs) (Dinh et al., 2017; Kingma &
Dhariwal, 2018; Durkan et al., 2019) and diffusion models
(DMs) (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020; Song
et al., 2021b;a) have proven to be powerful DGMs that can
render photo-realistic images. Given these successes, it
seems reasonable to attempt OOD detection by thresholding
the likelihood of a query datum under a trained model.
Surprisingly, likelihood-based DGMs trained on more complex datasets assign higher likelihoods to OOD datapoints
taken from simpler datasets (Choi et al., 2018; Nalisnick
et al., 2019a; Havtorn et al., 2021). This becomes even more
puzzling in light of the facts that (i) said DGMs are trained
to assign high likelihoods to in-distribution data without
having been exposed to OOD data, and (ii) they only generate samples which are visually much more similar to the
training data. In this work, we explore the following explanation for how both these observations can simultaneously
be true (Zhang et al., 2021):

1. Introduction
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection (Quiñonero-Candela
et al., 2008; Rabanser et al., 2019; Ginsberg et al., 2023)
is crucial for ensuring the safety and reliability of machine
learning models given their deep integration into real-world

OOD datapoints can be assigned higher likelihoods while
not being generated if they belong to regions of low
probability mass.

1

Layer 6 AI 2 University of Toronto 3 Vector Institute. Correspondence to: Hamidreza Kamkari, Brendan Leigh Ross, Jesse C.
Cresswell, Anthony L. Caterini, Gabriel Loaiza-Ganem <{hamid,
brendan, jesse, anthony, gabriel}@layer6.ai>, Rahul G. Krishnan
<rahulgk@cs.toronto.edu>.

Figure 1 illustrates that regions assigned high density by
a model may integrate to very little probability mass. Our
key insight is that when OOD data is “simpler” in the sense
that it concentrates on a manifold of lower dimension than
in-distribution data, the phenomenon depicted in Figure 1
becomes completely consistent with empirical observations.
Based on this insight, we develop a new understanding of

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

