Soft Prompt Recovers Compressed LLMs, Transferably

Zhaozhuo Xu * 1 Zirui Liu * 2 Beidi Chen 3 Shaochen (Henry) Zhong 2 Yuxin Tang 2 Jue Wang 4
Kaixiong Zhou 5 Xia Hu 2 Anshumali Shrivastava 2 6

Abstract

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) (Radford et al., 2018;
2019; Brown et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2022; Touvron et al.,
2023a) has revolutionized the field of Natural Language
Processing (NLP). Notably, LLMs are known for their generalization to unseen tasks without additional fine-tuning
(Brown et al., 2020). Despite their remarkable adaptability, LLMs are very expensive to deploy (Chen et al., 2023;
Wu et al., 2023). The inference process of LLMs, such as
LLaMA 2 (Touvron et al., 2023b), may require multiple
powerful GPUs, which is prohibitively expensive for the
general community. Consequently, it is crucial to facilitate LLM inference on more accessible hardware, such as a
single gaming GPU, which inherently has limited computational and memory resources.

Model compression is one of the most popular
approaches to improve the accessibility of Large
Language Models (LLMs) by reducing their memory footprint. However, the gaining of such efficiency benefits often simultaneously demands
extensive engineering efforts and intricate designs
to mitigate the performance decline.
In this
work, we leverage (Soft) Prompt Tuning in its
most vanilla form and discover such conventionally learned soft prompts can recover the performance of compressed LLMs. More surprisingly,
we observe such recovery effect to be transferable
among different tasks and models (albeit natural
tokenizer and dimensionality limitations), resulting in further overhead reduction and yet, subverting the common belief that learned soft prompts
are task-specific. Our work is fully orthogonal
and compatible with model compression frameworks such as pruning and quantization, where
we enable up to 8× compressed LLM (with a
joint 4-bit quantization and 50% weight pruning
compression) to match its uncompressed counterparts on popular benchmarks. We note that we are
the first to reveal vanilla Parameter-Efficient FineTuning (PEFT) techniques have the potential to
be utilized under a compression recovery context,
opening a new line of opportunities for model accessibility advancement while freeing our fellow
researchers from the previously present engineering burdens and constraints. The code is available
at https://github.com/zirui-ray-liu/compress-thenprompt.

To address this problem, model compression methods are
widely employed to reduce the model size and inference
latency, such as quantization (Nagel et al., 2020; Dettmers
et al., 2022; Xiao et al., 2022; Frantar et al., 2022) and pruning (Frantar & Alistarh, 2023). These methods essentially
trade off model quality in return for reduced latency and
model size. Thus, there is an inevitable trade-off between
accuracy and efficiency, resulting in a noticeable reduction
in the model’s accuracy and, consequently, the overall performance benefits of LLMs. To get a sense, as shown in
Figure 1, the full model (LLaMA-7B) can provide accurate
answers to all three simple questions. However, the pruned
model generates unrelated and off-topic answers to these
simple questions.

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Stevens
Institute of Technology 2 Department of Computer Science, Rice
University 3 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Carnegie Mellon University 4 Together AI 5 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, North Carolina State University
6
ThirdAI Corp.. Correspondence to: Xia Hu <xia.hu@rice.edu>,
Anshumali Shrivastava <anshumali@rice.edu>.

LLMs, regardless of whether compressed or not, are controlled through user-provided natural language specifications of the task, or prompts, which illustrate how to complete a task. Prompts can influence the generation quality of
LLMs. Thus intuitively, we can also utilize the prompt to
help the compressed model generate more relevant answers.
To the best of our knowledge, this perspective is not fully
explored for LLMs. Thus one natural question is, for a
compressed model, can we design a prompt that helps it
correct its predictions accordingly?

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

In this paper, we offer an intriguing exploration of the above
question. As shown in Figure 1, we manually attach the
prompt “Please carefully examine the weight matrix within

*

1

