Zeroth-Order Methods for Constrained Nonconvex Nonsmooth
Stochastic Optimization

Zhuanghua Liu 1 2 Cheng Chen 3 Luo Luo 4 5 Bryan Kian Hsiang Low 1

Abstract

learning applications including adversarial attack (Carlini
& Wagner, 2017; Madry et al., 2017), regularized support
vector machine (Smola & Schölkopf, 1998; Zhang, 2010)
and training Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Gulrajani et al., 2017; Miyato et al., 2018).

This paper studies the problem of solving nonconvex nonsmooth optimization over a closed convex set. Most previous works tackle such problems by transforming the constrained problem
into an unconstrained problem. However, they
only provide asymptotic convergence analysis for
their methods. In this work, we provide the nonasymptotic convergence analysis for solving constrained nonconvex nonsmooth optimization. We
first generalize classical gradient mapping and the
Frank–Wolfe gap in the nonsmooth setting. Then
we introduce novel notions of approximate stationarity concerning such generalized quantities.
We also propose several stochastic zeroth-order
algorithms for the problem, along with their nonasymptotic convergence guarantees of obtaining
the proposed approximate stationarity. Finally, we
conduct numerical experiments that demonstrate
the effectiveness of our algorithms.

Existing research (Curtis & Overton, 2012; Tang et al.,
2014; Hare et al., 2016; Curtis et al., 2017; Hoseini Monjezi & Nobakhtian, 2021) for constrained nonconvex nonsmooth optimization mainly focuses on transforming the constrained problem into an unconstrained problem that can be
solved with techniques developed in the unconstrained setting. Though their methods enjoy asymptotic convergence,
little is known about the non-asymptotic convergence rates
of these algorithms. One of the difficulties is the choice
of convergence criteria that measure the progress of the
algorithm. The gradient mapping and Frank–Wolfe gap,
which are widely used as the convergence criteria in the constrained smooth problem, are unfortunately not suitable for
the nonsmooth setting because their definitions require the
gradient to be well-defined at every point in the feasible set.
One possible solution is to generalize such quantities with
the Clarke subdifferential, which considers the set of generalized gradients at the current iterate. Nevertheless, we show
that the approximate stationarity concerning such quantities
does not permit a finite-time analysis for any algorithm. Inspired by the definition of (δ, ϵ)-Goldstein stationary points
for unconstrained nonconvex nonsmooth problems (Zhang
et al., 2020; Lin et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023; Cutkosky
et al., 2023; Kornowski & Shamir, 2023), we propose the
generalized gradient mapping and δ-Frank–Wolfe gap as the
extensions of the gradient mapping and the Frank–Wolfe
gap by leveraging the Goldstein δ-subdifferential (Goldstein, 1977), which considers the convex combination of
all generalized gradients in the neighborhood of current
iterate. Furthermore, we define the (γ, δ, ϵ)-generalized
Goldstein stationary point and the (δ, ϵ)-Goldstein Frank–
Wolfe stationary point as the approximate stationarity for
our problem.

1. Introduction
This paper considers the following constrained stochastic
optimization problem
min F (x) := Eξ∼P [f (x; ξ)]
x∈Ω

(1)

where the stochastic component f (x; ξ), indexed by some
random variable ξ , is probably nonconvex and nonsmooth,
and the feasible set Ω ⊆ Rd is convex and compact. Such
problems are very common in many real-world machine
1
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore 2 CNRS@CREATE LTD, 1 Create
Way, #08-01 CREATE Tower, Singapore 138602 3 Shanghai Key
Laboratory of Trustworthy Computing, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China 4 School of Data Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China 5 Shanghai Key Laboratory for Contemporary Applied Mathematics. Correspondence to: Luo Luo <luoluo@fudan.edu.cn>.

Armed with the refined approximate stationarity, we propose
zeroth-order projection-based and projection-free stochastic
optimization algorithms for solving the problem (1) in finite
time. Specifically, we rigorously show that the zeroth-order

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

