Binary Decomposition: A Problem Transformation Perspective
for Open-Set Semi-Supervised Learning

Jun-Yi Hang 1 2 Min-Ling Zhang 1 2

Abstract
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) is a classical machine learning paradigm dealing with labeled and
unlabeled data. However, it often suffers performance degradation in real-world open-set scenarios, where unlabeled data contains outliers from
novel categories that do not appear in labeled data.
Existing studies commonly tackle this challenging open-set SSL problem with detect-and-filter
strategy, which attempts to purify unlabeled data
by detecting and filtering outliers. In this paper,
we propose a novel binary decomposition strategy,
which refrains from error-prone procedure of outlier detection by directly transforming the original
open-set SSL problem into a number of standard
binary SSL problems. Accordingly, a concise yet
effective approach named B DMatch is presented.
B DMatch confronts two attendant issues brought
by binary decomposition, i.e. class-imbalance and
representation-compromise, with adaptive logit
adjustment and label-specific feature learning respectively. Comprehensive experiments on diversified benchmarks clearly validate the superiority
of B DMatch as well as the effectiveness of our
binary decomposition strategy.

Figure 1. An exemplary open-set semi-supervised learning scenario. Unlabeled set contains outliers from novel categories that
do not appear in labeled set.

categorization (Xie et al., 2020).
Most existing SSL approaches are designed under the
closed-world assumption, i.e. labeled and unlabeled data
share exactly the same label space. However, such a closedworld assumption is rather strict or even impractical in realworld scenarios. Without the intervention of human annotators, unlabeled set inevitably contains outliers from novel
categories that do not appear in labeled set, as shown in
Figure 1. Thus, a realistic setting called open-set semisupervised learning (Oliver et al., 2018) arises, which aims
to induce a prediction model that can both accurately classify inliers from seen categories and correctly reject outliers
from novel categories.
A straightforward strategy for open-set SSL is to purify unlabeled set by detecting and filtering outliers. Following this
strategy, existing works either rely on heuristic criterions
(Chen et al., 2020; He et al., 2022a; Du et al., 2023), or
learn a parameterized detector (Guo et al., 2020; Yu et al.,
2020; Saito et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2023c) to filter out
potential outliers from unlabeled set so that classifier can
be induced on purified unlabeled data with standard SSL
approaches. However, this detect-and-filter strategy may
lead to suboptimal performance, since it is not an easy job
to obtain a reliable detection function with no labeled outlier
but only limited inliers.

1. Introduction
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) allows to improve model
performance by leveraging unlabeled data when available
labeled data is insufficient (Engelen & Hoos, 2020; Yang
et al., 2023). As a classical machine learning paradigm,
SSL has been widely studied in various tasks, such as image
annotation (Sohn et al., 2020; Shi et al., 2023) and text
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China 2 Key Laboratory of Computer
Network and Information Integration (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China. Correspondence to: Min-Ling Zhang
<zhangml@seu.edu.cn>.

In this paper, a novel strategy to tackle open-set SSL problem is proposed, which refrains from error-prone procedure of outlier detection in existing detect-and-filter strategy.
From the perspective of problem transformation, our binary

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

