Graphon Mean Field Games with a Representative Player: Analysis and
Learning Algorithm

Fuzhong Zhou 1 Chenyu Zhang 2 Xu Chen 3 Xuan Di 3

Abstract

players interacting with others only via an aggregate population, usually a population measure, instead of individual
states or actions directly.

We propose a discrete time graphon game formulation on continuous state and action spaces
using a representative player to study stochastic games with heterogeneous interaction among
agents. This formulation admits both philosophical and mathematical advantages, compared to a
widely adopted formulation using a continuum of
players. We prove the existence and uniqueness of
the graphon equilibrium with mild assumptions,
and show that this equilibrium can be used to construct an approximate solution for finite player
game on networks, which is challenging to analyze and solve due to curse of dimensionality.
An online oracle-free learning algorithm is developed to solve the equilibrium numerically, and
sample complexity analysis is provided for its
convergence.

Mean field games (MFGs) (Huang et al., 2006; Lasry &
Lions, 2007) is a type of mean field model which describes
the limiting behavior of its corresponding finite player game
as the number of players is large, and their analytical properties are now well-studied (Carmona & Delarue, 2018).
The model is build upon the assumption that the interaction among players are homogeneous, in the sense that all
players follow the same state distribution. As one interacts
with the population only through the measure, all players
react in a same manner and considering one representative
is straightforward and appropriate.
As a generalization to MFGs, graphon mean field games
(GMFGs or graphon games) are developed (Caines &
Huang, 2021; Gao et al., 2021; Aurell et al., 2022; Cui
& Koeppl, 2022; Tangpi & Zhou, 2024) to tackle the limiting behavior of finite player games with heterogeneous
agents who interact asymmetrically, deemed as games on
networks. In such network games, the interactions are given
by a weighted graph (network), where each player is represented by a vertex and the interaction intensities among
players are depicted by edge weights. Each player reacts to
an interaction-weighted average of other individuals’ empirical state measure, which is made precise in Section 3.
As a limiting model, GMFGs models a continuum of players whose interaction intensities are given by a graphon
W ∈ L1 [0, 1]2 , which is a natural limit of finite graphs and
can be deemed as a weighted graph on infinitely many vertices labeled by the continuum [0, 1]. Rather than depending
on states of some specific individuals, a player in the game
reacts only to an average of the population state distribution,
which is weighted as individuals of different types (different
vertices in the graphon) exert heterogeneous influence on
the current player.

1. Introduction
Many real-world applications, such as flocking (Perrin et al.,
2021), epidemiology (Cui et al., 2022), and autonomous
driving (Huang et al., 2020) involve multiagent systems,
where agents optimize individual cumulative rewards by
selecting sequential actions in an (in)finite horizon, while
interacting strategically among one another. In discrete
time, such finite player games form Markov games (Littman,
1994; Solan & Vieille, 2015; Yang et al., 2018b). At a Nash
equilibrium (NE), nobody can improve her payoff by unilaterally switching her individual action policies. The NE is
challenging to solve when the population size grows due to
curse of dimensionality (Wang et al., 2020). To address such
a challenge, mean field formulations are proposed to model
1
Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA 2 Data Science
Institute, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA 3 Department
of Civil Engineering and Engineering Mechanics, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Xuan Di
<sharon.di@columbia.edu>.

GMFGs cover a wider range of real-world applications
than MFGs, as it allows more flexibility with heterogeneous interaction. They are applicable to problems in finance, economics, and engineering, including for instance
high-frequency trading, social opinion dynamics and autonomous vehicle driving. Because the equilibrium of GM-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

