Towards Understanding the Word Sensitivity of Attention Layers:
A Study via Random Features

Simone Bombari 1 Marco Mondelli 1

Abstract

and non-linearities, which model e.g. fully connected and
convolutional layers. In contrast, the recent impressive results achieved by large language models (Brown et al., 2020;
Bubeck et al., 2023) are largely attributed to the introduction of transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017), which are in
turn based on attention layers (Bahdanau et al., 2015; Kim
et al., 2017). Hence, isolating the unique features of the
attention mechanism stands out as a critical challenge to
understand the success of transformers, thus paving the way
to the principled design of large language models.

Understanding the reasons behind the exceptional
success of transformers requires a better analysis
of why attention layers are suitable for NLP tasks.
In particular, such tasks require predictive models
to capture contextual meaning which often depends on one or few words, even if the sentence is
long. Our work studies this key property, dubbed
word sensitivity (WS), in the prototypical setting
of random features. We show that attention layers enjoy high WS, namely, there exists a vector
in the space of embeddings that largely perturbs
the random attention features map. The argument
critically exploits the role of the softmax in the
attention layer, highlighting its benefit compared
to other activations (e.g., ReLU). In contrast,√
the
WS of standard random features is of order 1/ n,
n being the number of words in the textual sample,
and thus it decays with the length of the context.
We then translate these results on the word sensitivity into generalization bounds: due to their
low WS, random features provably cannot learn
to distinguish between two sentences that differ
only in a single word; in contrast, due to their
high WS, random attention features have higher
generalization capabilities. We validate our theoretical results with experimental evidence over the
BERT-Base word embeddings of the imdb review
dataset.

Recent work tackling this problem characterizes the sample complexities required by simplified attention models
(Edelman et al., 2022; Fu et al., 2023). However, learning
is limited to a specific set of targets, such as sparse functions (Edelman et al., 2022) or functions of the correlations
between the first query token and key tokens (Fu et al.,
2023). This paper takes a different perspective and starts
from the simple empirical observation that one or few words
can change the meaning of a sentence. Think, for example,
to the pair of sentences “I love her much” and “I love her
smile”, where replacing a single word alters the meaning of
the text. This is captured by the BERT-Base model (Devlin
et al., 2019), which shows a different attention score pattern over these two sentences (see Figure 1, left). Another
example can be found in the table on the right of Figure 1,
where changing one word in the prompt would require a
well-behaved model (in this case, Llama2-7b (Touvron et al.,
2023)) to modify its output. In general, language models
need to have a high word sensitivity to capture semantic
changes when just a single word is modified in the context,
which motivates the following question:

1. Introduction
Deep learning theory has provided a quantitative description
of phenomena routinely occuring in state-of-the-art models, such as double-descent (Nakkiran et al., 2020; Mei &
Montanari, 2022), benign overfitting (Bartlett et al., 2020;
Belkin, 2021), and feature learning (Ba et al., 2022; Damian
et al., 2022). However, most existing works focus on architectures given by the composition of matrix multiplications

Do attention layers have a larger word sensitivity
than fully connected architectures?
To formalize the problem, we represent the textual data
with X ∈ Rn×d , where the n rows represent the word
embeddings in Rd . Then, we define the word sensitivity
(WS) in (4), as a measure of how changing a row in X
modifies the embedding of a given feature map. We focus
our study on the prototypical setting of random features, i.e.,
where the weights of the layers are random. In particular,
we consider (i) the random features (RF) map (Rahimi &
Recht, 2007), defined in (1), and (ii) the random attention

1
Institute of Science and Technology, Austria. Correspondence
to: Simone Bombari <simone.bombari@ista.ac.at>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

