Out-of-Distribution Detection via Deep Multi-Comprehension Ensemble

Chenhui Xu 1 Fuxun Yu 1 Zirui Xu 1 Nathan Inkawhich 2 Xiang Chen 1

Abstract

can introduce significant challenges to the generalization
performance of these models. Due to reliability and safety
concerns, it is crucial to identify when input data is OOD.
Significant research efforts have been devoted to detecting
OOD samples (Liang et al., 2018; Hendrycks et al., 2019;
Ren et al., 2019; Huang et al., 2021), as well as the estimation of uncertainty (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017) in
neural network models.

Recent research works demonstrate that one
of the significant factors for the model Out-ofDistribution detection performance is the scale
of the OOD feature representation field. Consequently, model ensemble emerges as a trending
method to expand this feature representation field
leveraging expected model diversity. However,
by proposing novel qualitative and quantitative
model ensemble evaluation methods (i.e., Loss
Basin/Barrier Visualization and Self-Coupling Index), we reveal that the previous ensemble methods incorporate affine-transformable weights with
limited variability and fail to provide desired feature representation diversity. Therefore, we escalate the traditional model ensemble dimensions
(different weight initialization, data holdout, etc.)
into distinct supervision tasks, which we name
as Multi-Comprehension (MC) Ensemble. MC
Ensemble leverages various training tasks to form
different comprehensions of the data and labels,
resulting in the extension of the feature representation field. In experiments, we demonstrate the
superior performance of the MC Ensemble strategy in the OOD detection task compared to both
the naive Deep Ensemble method and the standalone model of comparable size.

In practice, researchers proposed combining multiple independent models to enhance the robustness of model predictions against OOD samples (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017;
Zaidi et al., 2021; Malinin et al., 2020; Kariyappa et al.,
2021; Li et al., 2021; Xue et al., 2022). Inspired by the
Bagging (Breiman, 1996), one of the most representative
works — Deep Ensembles (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017)
was proposed, which calculates the average of the posterior
probabilities generated by multiple models with different
initializations. This approach delivers an ensemble model
that is more pervasive and scalable for OOD detection.
However, recent work (Abe et al., 2022) claims that the ensemble diversity does not meaningfully contribute to a Deep
Ensemble’s OOD detection performance improvement. This
means that Deep Ensemble’s performance is consistent with
that of a single model of equivalent size. We observe this
phenomenon and attribute it to the fact that the diversity
provided by naive Deep Ensemble through different model
initializations is not significant enough. Specifically, the individuals in a naive ensemble tend to exhibit a considerable
lack of diversity in feature representation.

1. Introduction

This is because, although the individual models of the deep
ensemble seem different due to diverse initializations and
partial datasets, they still adopt the same training criterion,
forming a monotonic comprehension. As shown in Table 1,
for example, models trained with cross-entropy loss always
try to directly find the mapping from data to labels. The
formation of this single comprehension is accompanied by
intrinsic mode connectivity (Pagliardini et al., 2022; Frankle
et al., 2020; Ainsworth et al., 2023) among neural networks.
With only a single training criterion, individual models in
an ensemble are usually mode-connected and thus are not
sufficient to generate a diversity of feature representations
that can boost the OOD detector.

State-of-the-art neural network models often exhibit overconfidence in their predictions due to their training and
generalization in a static and closed environment. Specifically, these models assume that the distribution of test samples is identical to that of the training samples. However,
this assumption may not hold in the open world, as outof-distribution (OOD) samples can arise from unreliable
data sources or adversarial attacks. Such OOD samples
1

George Mason University 2 Air Force Research Laboratory.
Correspondence to: Xiang Chen <xchen26@gmu.edu>, First
Author: Chenhui Xu <cxu21@gmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

As diversity is the key to the model ensemble, we propose
1

