Restoring balance: principled under/oversampling of data for optimal
classification
Emanuele Loffredo * 1 Mauro Pastore * 1 Simona Cocco 1 Rémi Monasson 1

Abstract

in the training data are significantly under-represented, yet
correct identification of these rare examples is crucial for
performance (Weiss, 2004). For such imbalanced datasets,
machine learning methods struggle to achieve good classification performances when tested fairly (He & Ma, 2013).

Class imbalance in real-world data poses a
common bottleneck for machine learning tasks,
since achieving good generalization on underrepresented examples is often challenging. Mitigation strategies, such as under or oversampling
the data depending on their abundances, are routinely proposed and tested empirically, but how
they should adapt to the data statistics remains
poorly understood. In this work, we determine
exact analytical expressions of the generalization
curves in the high-dimensional regime for linear
classifiers (Support Vector Machines). We also
provide a sharp prediction of the effects of under/oversampling strategies depending on class
imbalance, first and second moments of the data,
and the metrics of performance considered. We
show that mixed strategies involving under and
oversampling of data lead to performance improvement. Through numerical experiments, we
show the relevance of our theoretical predictions
on real datasets, on deeper architectures and with
sampling strategies based on unsupervised probabilistic models.

Due to its wide-spread and intrinsic nature, the issue of
learning with class imbalance has long been studied in the
computer science literature. Systematic empirical studies,
assessing the performances of various architectures and
algorithms with imbalanced data have been carried out (Japkowicz & Stephen, 2002; Akbani et al., 2004; Lemnaru &
Potolea, 2012; Buda et al., 2018), with a renewed interest
in the era of big data and deep learning (Ghosh et al., 2022;
Johnson & Khoshgoftaar, 2019). Various strategies (Anand
et al., 1993; Laurikkala, 2001; Chawla et al., 2002; Batista
et al., 2004; He et al., 2008; Alshammari et al., 2022) based
on restoring balance in the training set can be found in textbooks (He & Ma, 2013; Fernández et al., 2018). Despite
this considerable body of work, a theoretical understanding
of learning with class imbalance remains elusive, which possibly impedes the design of optimal, task-adapted strategies.
In this work we propose a probabilistic setting that faithfully
takes into account the imbalance ratio and essential features
of the data, such as their first and second moments, in which
the performances of linear classifiers can be analytically
derived in the high-dimensional limit using the framework
of the statistical mechanics of learning (Engel & Van den
Broeck, 2001). Based on this theory we can identify strategies to under or oversample the data in, respectively, the
majority and minority classes offering optimal performances
for the metrics of interest.

1. Introduction
Many real-world classification tasks, e.g. in automated
medical diagnostics (Krawczyk et al., 2016; Fotouhi et al.,
2019), molecular biology (Wang et al., 2006; Yang et al.,
2012; Cheng et al., 2015; Song et al., 2021; Ansari & White,
2023), text classification (Liu et al., 2009; 2017), ... are
plagued by the so-called curse of class imbalance (Kubat &
Matwin, 1997; Lemaître et al., 2017): one or more classes

Summary of the main results. We report here the main
results of our work.

*
Equal contribution 1 Laboratoire de physique de l’École
normale supérieure, CNRS-UMR8023, PSL University, Sorbonne University, Université Paris-Cité 24 rue Lhomond,
75005 Paris, France.
Correspondence to:
Emanuele
Loffredo <emanuele.loffredo@phys.ens.fr>, Mauro Pastore
<mauro.pastore@phys.ens.fr>.

In Sec. 2, we analytically characterize the asymptotic performances of linear classifiers trained on imbalanced datasets,
when data points are discrete multi-state variables. These
asymptotics are based on the so-called replica method from
statistical physics.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

We provide quantitative behaviors of various metrics within
this setting – such as confusion matrix, accuracy (ACC),
balanced accuracy (BA) and area under the ROC curve
1

