Iterative Regularized Policy Optimization with Imperfect Demonstrations

Xudong Gong 1 2 Dawei Feng 1 2 Kele Xu 1 2 Yuanzhao Zhai 1 2
Chengkang Yao 3 Weijia Wang 3 Bo Ding 1 2 Huaimin Wang 1 2

Abstract

efficiency, making it a prevalent choice for applications in
games (Silver et al., 2016; Vinyals et al., 2019) and control
systems (Shukla et al., 2020; Oh et al., 2023). However,
the efficacy of IL crucially depends on the availability of
a substantial number of high-quality demonstrations (Kim
et al., 2013; Wu et al., 2019). In practical scenarios, only a
limited supply of imperfect demonstrations is often accessible, due to factors such as inexperience, fatigue, or unnecessary operations by demonstrators (Sasaki & Yamashina,
2020; Hedlund-Botti & Gombolay, 2023). Consequently,
policies learned through IL tend to be constrained by the
quality of these imperfect demonstrations (Brown et al.,
2020). The challenge at hand lies in devising methodologies
to extract superior policies from such imperfect demonstrations, which constitutes a pivotal obstacle in IL research
(Sasaki & Yamashina, 2020; Xu et al., 2022).

Imitation learning heavily relies on the quality
of provided demonstrations. In scenarios where
demonstrations are imperfect and rare, a prevalent approach for refining policies is through online fine-tuning with reinforcement learning, in
which a Kullback–Leibler (KL) regularization
is often employed to stabilize the learning process. However, our investigation reveals that on
the one hand, imperfect demonstrations can bias
the online learning process, the KL regularization will further constrain the improvement of
online policy exploration. To address the above
issues, we propose Iterative Regularized Policy
Optimization (IRPO), a framework that involves
iterative offline imitation learning and online reinforcement exploration. Specifically, the policy learned online is used to serve as the demonstrator for successive learning iterations, with a
demonstration boosting to consistently enhance
the quality of demonstrations. Experimental validations conducted across widely used benchmarks
and a novel fixed-wing UAV control task consistently demonstrate the effectiveness of IRPO
in improving both the demonstration quality and
the policy performance. Our code is available at
https://github.com/GongXudong/IRPO.

A promising approach to address the aforementioned challenge involves further refining the policy acquired through
offline IL with online learning, such as RL (Kim et al., 2013;
Wu et al., 2019; Huang et al., 2022). In this offline-to-online
approach, the primary objective during offline learning is
to maximize the likelihood of actions (Pomerleau, 1991) or
the occupancy measure (Ho & Ermon, 2016). However, a
notable distinction arises when transitioning from offline to
online learning, as the objective of online learning (Sutton
& Barto, 2018) shifts towards maximizing cumulative rewards in the task environment. This difference in objectives
introduces instability into the transition process (Vinyals
et al., 2019; Baker et al., 2022). To mitigate this instability,
distance-based regularizations, often employing KL divergence (Rohatgi & Saleh, 2015; Vieillard et al., 2020), are
commonly incorporated into the optimization objective of
online learning (Vinyals et al., 2019; Baker et al., 2022;
Ramrakhya et al., 2023). The regularization term plays a
crucial role in stabilizing the training process by constraining differences between two policies (Rudner et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
Imitation Learning (IL) (Zheng et al., 2022) is a paradigm
in which an agent acquires task proficiency by imitating
the behavior of a demonstrator or expert. Unlike reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 2018), which relies
on trial and error, IL offers distinct advantages in sample
1

College of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, Hunan, China 2 State Key Laboratory of Complex
& Critical Software Environment, Changsha, Hunan, China 3 Flight
Automatic Control Research Institute, AVIC, Xian, Shanxi, China.
Correspondence to: Dawei Feng <davyfeng.c@qq.com>.

Despite its success, the offline-to-online learning approach
encounters two significant challenges when dealing with
imperfect demonstrations. Over-constrained Exploration
due to KL Regularization: One notable issue arises in the
form of over-constrained exploration during online learning,
induced by the KL regularization (Over-constrained exploration). This regularization method imposes limitations on

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

