A Field Guide for Pacing Budget and ROS Constraints

Santiago R. Balseiro 1 2 Kshipra Bhawalkar 1 Zhe Feng 1 Haihao Lu 1 Vahab Mirrokni 1
Balasubramanian Sivan 1 Di Wang 1

Abstract

Budget pacing is a popular service offered by most advertising platforms that allows advertisers to specify their budgets
and then optimizes advertiser bids in real-time to maximize
advertisers’ return subject to the spend being at most the
budget. In the past few years, thanks to the increasing availability of ROS-related metrics, and the vastly improved
conversion prediction models, autobidding products have
seen a prominent rise in adoption (Center, [n. d.]; Google,
2023a). These tools provide value-optimizing real-time bidding subject to return-on-spend (ROS) constraints (on top of
the existing budget constraints). Autobidding takes as input
high-level advertiser goals like the target cost per conversion
or acquisition and places real-time bids on a per-query basis
to optimize advertiser returns.

Budget pacing is a popular service that has been
offered by major internet advertising platforms
since their inception. In the past few years, autobidding products that provide real-time bidding
as a service to advertisers have seen a prominent
rise in adoption. A popular autobidding stategy
is value maximization subject to return-on-spend
(ROS) constraints. For historical or business reasons, the systems that govern these two services,
namely budget pacing and ROS pacing, are not
necessarily always a single unified and coordinated entity that optimizes a global objective subject to both constraints. The purpose of this work
is to theoretically and empirically compare algorithms with different degrees of coordination
between these two pacing systems. In particular,
we compare (a) a fully-decoupled sequential algorithm; (b) a minimally-coupled min-pacing algorithm; (c) a fully-coupled dual-based algorithm.
Our main contribution is to theoretically analyze
the min-pacing algorithm and show that it attains
similar guarantees to the fully-coupled canonical
dual-based algorithm. On the other hand, we show
that the sequential algorithm, even though appealing by virtue of being fully decoupled, could
badly violate the constraints. We validate our theoretical findings empirically by showing that the
min-pacing algorithm performs almost as well
as the canonical dual-based algorithm on a semisynthetic dataset that was generated from a large
online advertising platform’s auction data.

The algorithms that govern budget and ROS pacing, namely
value-optimization subject to budget and ROS constraints,
are not necessarily always a unified entity that optimizes
a global objective. See Appendix B for a detailed discussion on the reasons. These services are often managed by
different business units within the same organization or by
different organizations altogether (many third-party demandside platforms offer autobidding services). This results in
different algorithms independently choosing/modifying advertisers’ bids. This is not surprising in light of the meaningful gap between the times at which these products gained
traction, with budget pacing systems having been standard
and popular much earlier. As a result, even if the objectives of both services are aligned, the presence of budget
and ROS constraints can introduce inefficiencies in the bidding process when the systems are decoupled. How do the
fully decoupled and fully coupled optimal pacing services
compare? Is there a way to operate the pacing service that
obtains the best of both worlds: i.e., (a) maintain the theoretical guarantees of the fully coupled optimal pacing service,
while (b) still being only minimally coupled? Our contribution in this work is to design and analyze an algorithm that
approaches the best of both worlds. We establish this fact
both theoretically and empirically.

1. Introduction
Internet advertisers purchase advertising opportunities by
bidding in real-time auctions, and, to control their expenditures, it is common for advertisers to set budgets for their
campaigns (Google, 2023b; Meta, 2023; Twitter, 2023).
1
Google Research, USA 2 Columbia University, NYC, USA.
Correspondence to: Di Wang <wadi@google.com>.

1.1. Pacing Services
Pacing services are online algorithms that adaptively adjust advertisers’ bids based on auction feedback to maximize certain objectives while satisfying different constraint.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

