Connecting the Dots: Collaborative Fine-tuning for
Black-Box Vision-Language Models

Zhengbo Wang 1 2 Jian Liang 2 3 Ran He 2 3 Zilei Wang 1 Tieniu Tan 2 3 4

1. Introduction

Abstract

In recent years, large-scale pretrained vision-language models have garnered much attention. By establishing a link
between images and natural language, these models exhibit
impressive zero-shot capabilities and remarkable transfer
ability (Radford et al., 2021; Jia et al., 2021; Alayrac et al.,
2022; Li et al., 2022), demonstrating potential in learning
open-world concepts. One of the most successful largescale pretrained vision-language models is CLIP (Radford
et al., 2021). After pretraining, CLIP (Radford et al., 2021)
can perform zero-shot recognition by merely providing the
class names. The classification weights are generated by the
language encoder through prompting (Liu et al., 2023).

With the emergence of pretrained vision-language
models (VLMs), considerable efforts have been
devoted to fine-tuning them for downstream tasks.
Despite the progress made in designing efficient
fine-tuning methods, such methods require access
to the model’s parameters, which can be challenging as model owners often opt to provide
their models as a black box to safeguard model
ownership. This paper proposes a Collaborative
Fine-Tuning (CraFT) approach for fine-tuning
black-box VLMs to downstream tasks, where one
only has access to the input prompts and the output predictions of the model. CraFT comprises
two modules, a prompt generation module for
learning text prompts and a prediction refinement
module for enhancing output predictions in residual style. Additionally, we introduce an auxiliary prediction-consistent loss to promote consistent optimization across these modules. These
modules are optimized by a novel collaborative
training algorithm. Extensive experiments on fewshot classification over 15 datasets demonstrate
the superiority of CraFT. The results show that
CraFT achieves a decent gain of about 12% with
16-shot datasets and only 8,000 queries. Moreover, CraFT trains faster and uses only about 1/80
of the memory footprint for deployment, while
sacrificing only 1.62% compared to the whitebox method. Our code is publicly available at
https://github.com/mrflogs/CraFT.

Besides its remarkable zero-shot ability, recent studies have
found that CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) also possesses astonishing transfer ability (Zhou et al., 2022b; Zhang et al.,
2022; Lu et al., 2022). For example, CoOp (Zhou et al.,
2022b) can achieve a 15% improvement compared to zeroshot CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) with only 16 samples
per class by fine-tuning a mere 16k parameters. However,
these methods assume we have access to the model parameters, which is unrealistic in the current era. Training large
vision-language models typically requires extensive computational resources and data, thus leading to high training
costs. Therefore, model owners seldom release the model
and the weights to protect the model ownership. Typically,
model owners deploy the models as a service, such as GPT4 (OpenAI, 2023), where we can only obtain the input and
output. Thus, it is crucial to explore ways to fine-tune powerful vision-language models in the black-box scenario.
To address the aforementioned challenge, we propose
Collaborative Fine-Tuning (CraFT), a parameter- and dataefficient fine-tuning approach for black-box VLMs. The
CraFT framework comprises three key components. Firstly,
it incorporates a prompt generation module designed to learn
global text prompts tailored to downstream datasets. Given
the unavailability of gradients from the black-box model, we
leverage derivative-free optimization (DFO) for the module,
inspired by prior works (Sun et al., 2022b;a). The DFO
method assumes that the module’s parameters adhere to a
parameterized distribution. By sampling solutions from this
distribution and calculating the corresponding loss values,

1

University of Science and Technology of China 2 NLPR &
MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy
of Sciences 4 Nanjing University. Correspondence to: Jian Liang
<liangjian92@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

