Self-Play Fine-Tuning Converts Weak Language Models to Strong Language
Models
Zixiang Chen * 1 Yihe Deng * 1 Huizhuo Yuan * 1 Kaixuan Ji 1 Quanquan Gu 1

Abstract

1

Harnessing the power of human-annotated data
through Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) is pivotal
for advancing Large Language Models (LLMs).
In this paper, we delve into the prospect of growing a strong LLM out of a weak one without the
need for acquiring additional human-annotated
data. We propose a new fine-tuning method
called Self-Play fIne-tuNing (SPIN), which starts
from a supervised fine-tuned model. At the heart
of SPIN lies a self-play mechanism, where the
LLM refines its capability by playing against instances of itself. More specifically, the LLM
generates its own training data from its previous iterations, refining its policy by discerning
these self-generated responses from those obtained from human-annotated data. Our method
progressively elevates the LLM from a nascent
model to a formidable one, unlocking the full potential of human-annotated demonstration data
for SFT. Theoretically, we prove that the global
optimum to the training objective function of our
method is achieved only when the LLM policy
aligns with the target data distribution. Empirically, we evaluate our method on several benchmark datasets including the HuggingFace Open
LLM Leaderboard, MT-Bench, and datasets from
Big-Bench. Our results show that SPIN can significantly improve the LLM’s performance across
a variety of benchmarks and even outperform
models trained through direct preference optimization (DPO) supplemented with extra GPT-4
preference data. This sheds light on the promise
of self-play, enabling the achievement of humanlevel performance in LLMs without the need
for expert opponents. Codes are available at
https://github.com/uclaml/SPIN.

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have began a groundbreaking era in artificial general intelligence (AGI), demonstrating extraordinary capabilities across a wide range of
domains that require intricate reasoning and specialized
knowledge. These models excel in areas such as mathematical reasoning/problem solving (Cobbe et al., 2021;
Wei et al., 2022; Lewkowycz et al., 2022), code generation/programming (Chen et al., 2021; Austin et al., 2021; Li
et al., 2022), text generation (Bubeck et al., 2023; Anil et al.,
2023; Touvron et al., 2023), summarization and creative
writing, among others. A significant advancement in LLMs
is the post-pre-training alignment with the more desirable
behaviors (Mishra et al., 2021; Victor et al., 2022; Chung
et al., 2022; Thoppilan et al., 2022), a process often reliant
on the costly human-annotated data. Typical alignment
methods include Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) (Ouyang
et al., 2022; Tunstall et al., 2023a) based on human demonstrations, and Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) (Christiano et al., 2017; Ziegler et al., 2019;
Stiennon et al., 2020; Bai et al., 2022a) based on human
preferences.
All the aforementioned alignment methods require a substantial volume of human annotated data. Therefore, there
is increasing interest in developing fine-tuning methods that
can effectively utilize human data, thereby streamlining the
alignment process. This motivates us to study fine-tuning
LLMs without the need for additional human-annotated data
beyond the fine-tuning dataset. Our study is also related to
the broader goal of converting weak models to strong models without the requirement for extra training data, which
is of central interest in machine learning that can be traced
back to the boosting algorithms (Kearns & Valiant, 1994;
Schapire, 1990; Freund, 1995; Freund & Schapire, 1997).
The self-training algorithm (Vapnik, 1999; Grandvalet &
Bengio, 2004; Lee, 2013) has also been proved to be able to
convert weak learners to strong learners in mixture models
without the need for additional labeled data (Frei et al., 2022;
Kou et al., 2022). However, the pursuit of autonomously
enhancing a weak LLM without external guidance is both
intriguing and understudied. This raises the following question:

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. Correspondence
to: Quanquan Gu <qgu@cs.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

