Sign Rank Limitations for Inner Product Graph Decoders

Su Hyeong Lee 1 Qingqi Zhang 1 Risi Kondor 1 2

Abstract

array of decoders for shallow embedding schemes such as
Laplacian Eigenmaps (Belkin & Niyogi 2001), DeepWalk
(Perozzi et al. 2014), and node2vec (Grover & Leskovec
2016). In particular, many decoders start by extracting an
ideal representation of the graph input by taking inner products between the latent embeddings of each node (Ahmed
et al. 2013; Cao et al. 2015; Ou et al. 2016). Inner productbased algorithms also play a critical role in many other
fields of machine learning, such as in computing the similarity in word vector representations in Skip-Gram Negative
Sampling (Mikolov et al. 2013; Levy & Goldberg 2014).

Inner product-based decoders are among the most
influential frameworks used to extract meaningful
data from latent embeddings. However, such decoders have shown limitations in representation
capacity in numerous works within the literature,
which have been particularly notable in graph reconstruction problems. In this paper, we provide
the first theoretical elucidation of this pervasive
phenomenon in graph data, and suggest straightforward modifications to circumvent this issue
without deviating from the inner product framework.

Since its conception and popularization by Kipf & Welling,
2016 for Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), inner product
decoders have empirically been demonstrated to have limitations on expressiveness (Hamilton 2020). This impediment appears to persist universally whenever inner product
decoders are deployed, for instance when latent representations are generated probabilistically using adversarial training to extract maximal node-relational information (Pan
et al. 2018). To our knowledge, no theoretical studies in the
literature have elucidated this pervasive phenomenon.

1. Introduction
1.1. Background
Real world graph data pertinent to scientific applications
often reside within high-dimensional, non-Euclidean spaces
where a succinct representation remains elusive (Sala et al.
2018; Bronstein et al. 2017; Gu et al. 2018). For instance,
in biochemistry or molecular drug design, the multinodal
nature of the molecular backbone of interest necessitates
devising sophisticated statistical techniques to capture essential node-relational attributes of the data inside of a lowdimensional latent space (Bordes et al. 2013; David et al.
2020; Chenthamarakshan et al. 2020).

In this paper, we formalize the notion of low dimensionality
in latent representations using the sign rank (Alon et al.
2017; Hatami et al. 2022), and provide a deterministic bound
on the minimum latent feature dimension necessary for a
faithful reconstruction of the embedded graph. Furthermore,
we present examples of pedagogical graph structures for
which complexifying the latent space permits significantly
lower dimensional latent encodings to be used. Afterwards,
we design a decoding architecture which drastically expands
the representation capacity of inner product decoders that
subsume the expressivity of the aforementioned complex
GNN.

Deep learning has achieved great success in distilling compact latent representations from complex graph data which
preserves their structural integrity (Zeng et al. 2022b; Zeng
et al. 2022a). Once the latent vectors have been synthesized,
they can be channeled into trainable decoders to perform various tasks such as graph/link reconstruction (Kipf & Welling
2016; Grover & Leskovec 2016; Li et al. 2023) or node clustering (Wang et al. 2017; Park et al. 2019; Kanada et al.
2018). The literature has seen the emergence of a diverse

Section 1 discusses the motivation, related work, and our
contributions. Section 2 formulates the problem and generates low-rank graphs. Section 3 categorically motivates
and proves a lower bound on the minimum latent dimension necessary for a faithful graph reconstruction. Section 4
details an augmentation scheme to boost decoder representation capacity. Section 5 presents the experiments, and the
conclusion and possible extensions are given in Section 6.

1

Department of Statistics, University of Chicago 2 Department
of Computer Science, University of Chicago. Correspondence to:
Su Hyeong Lee <sulee@uchicago.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

