GeoAB: Towards Realistic Antibody Design and Reliable Affinity Maturation

Haitao Lin* 1 2 Lirong Wu* 2 Yufei Huang 2 Yunfan Liu 2
Odin Zhang 1 Yuanqing Zhou 2 Rui Sun 2 Stan Z. Li† 2

Abstract

discovery and protein design (Jumper et al., 2021; Dauparas
et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2022; 2023). To be specific, increasing works are emerging for antibody design, which considers antigens and conserved regions (non-CDRs) as context
information, to achieve the co-design of the sequence and
structure of the target CDRs (Kong et al., 2023a; Jin et al.,
2021). Besides, based on the co-design models, the optimization of the antibody by mutating amino acids in the
CDRs to enhance the binding affinity can be realized, which
is called affinity maturation (Cai et al., 2023). Iterative Target Augmentation (ITA) is proposed to fulfill the affinity
maturation tasks (Yang et al., 2020), by iteratively adding
co-design models’ prediction of the mutant antibodies structures and sequences with higher affinity predicted by another
pretrained model to the training set and thus to guide and
retrain the co-design models to generate antibodies of high
affinity. However, several problems still exist, and we focus
on two of them: (i) authenticity of the generated structure
and (ii) rationality of the affinity maturation.

Increasing works for antibody design are emerging to generate sequences and structures in Complementarity Determining Regions (CDRs), but
problems still exist. We focus on two of them: (i)
authenticity of the generated structure and (ii)
rationality of the affinity maturation, and propose G EOAB as a solution. In specific, GeoABDesigner generates CDR structures with realistic
internal geometries, composed of a generative
geometry initializer (Geo-Initializer) and a position refiner (Geo-Refiner); GeoAB-Optimizer
achieves affinity maturation by accurately predicting both the mutation effects and structures of
mutant antibodies with the same network architecture as Geo-Refiner. Experiments show that
G EOAB achieves state-of-the-art performance in
CDR co-design and mutation effect predictions,
and fulfills the discussed tasks effectively.

To illustrate problem (i), we claim that in the structure design of the CDRs, these methods usually ignore geometry
constraints of protein structures, such as peptide planar and
inflexible geometries like bond lengths (Robinson et al.,
2014), causing the unrealistic modeling of the CDR structures. Figure 1 gives an illustration of the distribution gap
between partial inflexible internal geometries (bond length,
angles, and inflexible torsions) and redundant ones (flexible torsions) of the structures generated by state-of-the-art
methods and real-world proteins (Sec. 5.1 gives details).

1. Introduction
Antibodies are immune proteins that can bind to a kind
of antigen protein so as to recognize and neutralize the
pathogen (Basu et al., 2019). There are two heavy chains
and two light chains in an antibody, leading the antibodies
to Y-shaped proteins. In each chain, three variable regions
determine the binding property of the antibody towards the
antigen, which are called Complementarity Determining
Regions (CDRs). Therefore, to design antibodies that bind
to specific antigens with desirable properties, the key problem is to establish computational approaches to accurately
identify the 3D structures and 1D sequence of the amino
acids in the CDRs because the large combinatorial space
of amino acid types results in infeasible and unaffordable
validation of wet-lab experiments.

For problem (ii), these methods first employ a trained model
with sequences and structures as input to predict the change
in binding free energy (∆∆G) and exploit the ITA algorithm to tackle the optimization. This procedure is irrational due to two problems. First, the used ∆∆G-predictor
requires mutant types’ structures as input, while they are
usually unknown, so it uses predicted structures by methods like Rosetta programs (Park et al., 2016) as training
instances. However, the generated mutant antibodies by the
co-design models are of different domains from the training
ones, resulting in the unreliability of the predicted ∆∆G
(See Fig. 5 as an example). Secondly, the inaccurate prediction of ∆∆G cannot guide the ITA reliably to generate
antibodies toward affinity maturation targets. The other ap-

Recently, deep learning has revolutionized fields like drug
*

Equal contribution 1 Zhejiang University. 2 AI Lab, Research
Center for Industries of the Future, Westlake University. Correspondence to: Stan Z. Li <Stan.ZQ.Li@westlake.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

