Graph2Tac: Online Representation Learning of Formal Math Concepts

Lasse Blaauwbroek * 1 Miroslav Olšák * 2 † Jason Rute * 3 Fidel Ivan Schaposnik Massolo 1 Jelle Piepenbrock 4 5
Vasily Pestun 1 3 ‡

Abstract

with the help of other lemmas. On a high level, entire
formalization projects concerning different mathematical
topics may also depend on one another. The result is an
enormous web of formal mathematical knowledge. In its
center, one finds the most foundational parts of mathematics
such as logic and arithmetic. Towards the outskirts of the
web, the mathematics becomes increasingly specialized, as
knowledge is built towards specific goals such as proving
the four-color theorem (Gonthier, 2008). As the web of
formal mathematics matures, its core stabilizes into static
knowledge while the outskirts are ever-changing, as new
insights emerge, connections are made and new theorems
are developed.

In proof assistants, the physical proximity between two formal mathematical concepts is a
strong predictor of their mutual relevance. Furthermore, lemmas with close proximity regularly
exhibit similar proof structures. We show that
this locality property can be exploited through online learning techniques to obtain solving agents
that far surpass offline learners when asked to
prove theorems in an unseen mathematical setting. We extensively benchmark two such online
solvers implemented in the Tactician platform for
the Coq proof assistant: First, Tactician’s online
k-nearest neighbor solver, which can learn from
recent proofs, shows a 1.72× improvement in theorems proved over an offline equivalent. Second,
we introduce a graph neural network, Graph2Tac,
with a novel approach to build hierarchical representations for new definitions. Graph2Tac’s
online definition task realizes a 1.5× improvement in theorems solved over an offline baseline. The k-NN and Graph2Tac solvers rely on
orthogonal online data, making them highly complementary. Their combination improves 1.27×
over their individual performances. Both solvers
outperform all other general-purpose provers for
Coq, including CoqHammer, Proverbot9001, and
a transformer baseline by at least 1.48× and are
available for practical use by end-users.

A good mathematician, whether human or artificial, should
possess a deep and intuitive understanding of the static,
foundational core of mathematics. This is gained through
training and practice (in the case of an AI, on a large, offline corpus). However, a mathematician must also have the
capability to quickly gain a working understanding of the
concepts, lemmas, and proving techniques in a new mathematical domain. This is a learned skill. An experienced
mathematician can grok a new math concept from its definition and perhaps by looking at a few examples. For an
AI, this amounts to “online representation learning”: It must
have a procedure to quickly build new representations for
concepts, without having to retrain from scratch.
In this work, we explore online representation learning
for the Coq proof assistant (The Coq Development Team,
2023) through the Tactician platform (Blaauwbroek, 2023;
Blaauwbroek et al., 2020b). This platform provides a largescale dataset and machine-to-machine interaction protocols
that give an external proving agent (solver) online access to
the full internal formal knowledge base loaded into Coq. We
evaluate the capabilities of two online solvers, Tactician’s
built-in k-nearest neighbor (k-NN) solver (Blaauwbroek
et al., 2020a; Zhang et al., 2021) and a novel model called
Graph2Tac against a number of baselines.

1. Introduction
Formal libraries of mathematics are structured hierarchically.
Definitions build on top of each other and lemmas are proven
*
Equal contribution 1 IHES 2 University of Cambridge 3 IBM
Research 4 Radboud University 5 Czech Technical University in
Prague †Work performed at IHES ‡Work performed while at
IHES and IBM Research until June 2022. Correspondence to:
Lasse Blaauwbroek <lasse@blaauwbroek.eu>, Jason Rute <jason.rute@ibm.com>.

Figure 1 summarizes the the paradigm of both online solvers.
During offline training, the model develops a deep understanding of the mathematics found in a static Coq dataset. It
also learns to represent new information in an online manner. During evaluation, Graph2Tac incorporates information

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

