Data-free Neural Representation Compression
with Riemannian Neural Dynamics

Zhengqi Pei 1 2 Anran Zhang 1 2 Shuhui Wang 1 3 Xiangyang Ji 4 Qingming Huang 5 1 3

Abstract

2022a; Gu & Dao, 2023; Pei & Wang, 2023). Mathematically, any weight-based neural architecture can be interpreted as neurons in a Euclidean neuronal state space (Pei
& Wang, 2023), which treats the neural weights as the dynamic relation between neuronal states in Euclidean neuronal state space. This dynamics-inspired approach transforms a weights-based neural model into a neurons-based
one, which typically requires fewer parameters since a single neuron can be associated with many neural weights.
Thus, neurons seem like a more global unit of representation. However, Euclidean space’s overly simplified nature
results in a lower and underfitted representation capacity for
the neural models. It is necessary to interpret and analyze
neural models using more flexible nonlinear metrics beyond
those accompanied by Euclidean space.

Neural models are equivalent to dynamic systems
from a physics-inspired view, implying that computation on neural networks can be interpreted
as the dynamical interactions between neurons.
However, existing work models neuronal interaction as a weight-based linear transformation, and
the nonlinearity comes from the nonlinear activation functions, which leads to limited nonlinearity
and data-fitting ability of the whole neural model.
Inspired by Riemannian geometry, we interpret
neural structures by projecting neurons onto the
Riemannian neuronal state space and model neuronal interaction with Riemannian metric (RieM ),
which provides a neural representation framework
with higher parameter efficiency. With RieM , we
further design a novel data-free neural compression mechanism that does not require additional
fine-tuning with real data. Using backbones like
ResNet and Vision Transformer, we conduct extensive experiments on datasets such as MNIST,
CIFAR-100, ImageNet-1k, and COCO object detection. Empirical results show that, under equal
compression rates and computational complexity,
models compressed with RieM achieve superior
inference accuracy compared to existing data-free
compression methods.

Among various mathematical frameworks, Riemannian geometry (Petersen, 2006) extends the classical Euclidean
spaces via the Riemannian manifolds dealing with curved
nonlinear spaces (Lee & Lee, 2012). In the context of neural
models, Riemannian geometry excels in depicting nonlinearity, offering greater flexibility in modeling the connections
among neurons compared to Euclidean spaces. Riemannian
metrics can capture interactions between different dimensions of the neuronal state space. They treat these interdimensional relations as additional hidden dimensions without
adding extra trainable parameters. This feature is critical
because we require a highly expressive metric function to define relations between neurons, enabling the representation
of every weight matrix in neural models in a neuron-centric
manner with fewer parameters. If we were to compute
relations between neurons using Euclidean metrics, the resulting weight matrix would be a low-rank distance matrix.
This would significantly diminish the expressive power in
comparison to weights-based neural models, highlighting
the limitations of Euclidean metrics in this context. Therefore, it is indispensable to introduce nonlinear Riemannian
metrics to enhance the expressive power of neuron-based
models. Theoretically, the resulting Riemannian neuronal
state space can possess higher representational capacity and
parameter efficiency.

1. Introduction
Integrating neural models with dynamical systems can provide theoretically solid insights into the learning theory of
neural representation (Liu & Theodorou, 2019; Li et al.,
1
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences. 2 School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese
Academy of Sciences. 3 Peng Cheng Laboratory. 4 Department of
Automation, Tsinghua University. 5 School of Computer Science
and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences..
Correspondence to: Shuhui Wang <wangshuhui@ict.ac.cn>.

There have been several attempts (Shao et al., 2018; Kaul
& Lall, 2019) to interpret data modeling using Riemannian

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

