Tilting the Odds at the Lottery:
the Interplay of Overparameterisation and Curricula in Neural Networks

Stefano Sarao Mannelli 1 Yaraslau Ivashynka 2 Andrew Saxe 1 Luca Saglietti 2

Abstract

generalisation. However, curriculum learning has not entered the standard pipeline of deep learning applications, and
large-scale studies show that indeed for these models the
curriculum benefits seem to be marginal (Wu et al., 2021).

A wide range of empirical and theoretical works
have shown that overparameterisation can amplify
the performance of neural networks. According
to the lottery ticket hypothesis, overparameterised
networks have an increased chance of containing
a sub-network that is well-initialised to solve the
task at hand. A more parsimonious approach,
inspired by animal learning, consists in guiding
the learner towards solving the task by curating
the order of the examples, i.e. providing a
curriculum. However, this learning strategy
seems to be hardly beneficial in deep learning
applications. In this work, we undertake an
analytical study that connects curriculum learning
and overparameterisation. In particular, we
investigate their interplay in the online learning
setting for a 2-layer network in the XOR-like
Gaussian Mixture problem. Our results show that
a high degree of overparameterisation—while
simplifying the problem—can limit the benefit
from curricula, providing a theoretical account of
the ineffectiveness of curricula in deep learning.

The apparent contradiction between theory and applications
is at the centre of this study. We address this issue by identifying a potential cause: the high degree of overparameterisation, an ever-present feature of deep learning, which can
erode the margin of improvement of curriculum learning. In
particular, we provide an extensive analytical study of curriculum learning and over-parameterisation in the XOR-like
Gaussian mixture model (Refinetti et al., 2021; Ben Arous
et al., 2023). As we will see, this learning problem encapsulates a crucial ingredient of hard learning problems —the
coexistence of a few relevant features hidden among many
irrelevant ones. From our study, we obtain the following
main contributions:
• We disentangle the advantages of curriculum learning,
giving a detailed account of its impact on relevant
manifold discovery and labelling rule identification,
and we show that curriculum can compensate for a
wide range of poor initialisations;
• We connect these results with the observation that—
according to the lottery ticket hypothesis (Frankle &
Carbin, 2019)—a similar role can be played by overparameterisation.

1. Introduction
The ineffectiveness of curriculum learning in training deep
networks is a puzzling empirical observation. Simple experiments (Bengio et al., 2009) and recent theoretical results
(Weinshall et al., 2018; Abbe et al., 2021; Saglietti et al.,
2022; Sorscher et al., 2022; Cornacchia & Mossel, 2023;
Tong et al., 2023) point out several potential benefits from
adopting this learning paradigm in a machine learning context, including learning speed-ups and better asymptotic

• We investigate whether overparameterisation and curriculum can create a positive synergy in boosting learning performance, and find that eventually—if the degree of overparameterisation is sufficiently high—the
effect of curricula vanishes;
• Finally, we test our predictions in realistic datasets,
empirically confirming the results.

1

Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit & Sainsbury Wellcome Centre, University College London, London, UK 2 Department of Computing Sciences, Bocconi
University, Milano, Italy.
Correspondence to: Stefano
Sarao Mannelli <s.saraomannelli@ucl.ac.uk>, Luca Saglietti
<luca.saglietti@unibocconi.it>.

Related works. The theory of curriculum learning in ML
is still in its early stages of development. In Weinshall et al.
(2018); Weinshall & Amir (2020), the authors analysed the
effects on convergence speed of presenting easy vs. hard
samples, showing that easy samples lead to faster learning.
However, these studies did not account for the importance of

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

