Parallel Affine Transformation Tuning of Markov Chain Monte Carlo

Philip Schär 1 Michael Habeck 1 Daniel Rudolf 2

Abstract

ing
R

ϱ(x)dx
,
ϱ(x)dx
Rd

ν(A) = R A
The performance of Markov chain Monte Carlo
samplers strongly depends on the properties of
the target distribution such as its covariance structure, the location of its probability mass and its
tail behavior. We explore the use of bijective
affine transformations of the sample space to improve the properties of the target distribution and
thereby the performance of samplers running in
the transformed space. In particular, we propose
a flexible and user-friendly scheme for adaptively
learning the affine transformation during sampling. Moreover, the combination of our scheme
with Gibbsian polar slice sampling is shown to
produce samples of high quality at comparatively
low computational cost in several settings based
on real-world data.

A ∈ B(Rd ).

(1)

We may evaluate ϱ at any given point, but we generally
cannot evaluate ν and do not even know the normalization constant of ϱ (the denominator in (1)). The task is to
sample – approximately – from ν, i.e. to generate realizations x0 , x1 , · · · ∈ Rd of random variables X0 , X1 , . . . on
(Rd , B(Rd )) such that the distribution PXn := P ◦ Xn−1 of
Xn is close to ν in some sense, at least for large enough n.
A powerful approach for solving the sampling problem is
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC). An MCMC sampler
generates a truncated realization x0 , . . . , xm of a Markov
chain (Xn )n∈N0 with some initial distribution ξ and a transition kernel1 P on Rd × B(Rd ) that leaves ν invariant.
For commonly used MCMC methods, there are theoretical
results ensuring that PXn converges to ν, meaning
n→∞

TV(PXn , ν) = TV(ξP n , ν) −→ 0,
under weak assumptions on ϱ and ξ, where TV denotes the
total variation distance.

1. Introduction

In real-world applications of MCMC methods, information
about essential properties of the target distribution, such
as the covariance structure or the number, location and relative importance of modes, is often not available. Therefore, MCMC users typically resort to generic off-the-shelf
samplers like random walk Metropolis (RWM) (Metropolis
et al., 1953), the Metropolis-adjusted Langevin algorithm
(MALA) (Roberts & Tweedie, 1996), Hamiltonian Monte
Carlo (HMC) (Neal, 1996) or hybrid uniform slice sampling (Neal, 2003). Although these methods are in principle
able to address sampling problems with very little a priori
information about the target, their performance is often suboptimal, especially in high dimensions, resulting in slow
convergence and long-lasting autocorrelations. If some information about the target is available, “informed” MCMC
methods that can explicitly incorporate this knowledge
into their transition mechanisms often vastly outperform
the generic uninformed methods. Instances of informed
MCMC samplers include independent Metropolis-Hastings
(IMH) (Tierney, 1994), the preconditioned Crank-Nicolson

A variety of methods in probabilistic inference and machine
learning relies on the ability to generate (approximate) samples from a high-dimensional probability distribution. But
methods generating samples of high quality tend to be slow,
so that the sampling can pose a severe computational bottleneck. Here we develop a new approach to address the
general black-box sampling problem on Rd for arbitrary
dimensions d ∈ N.
Let us start with the concrete formulation of the aforementioned problem. Whenever random variables are introduced
in the following, we implicitly require them to be defined
on a sufficiently rich common probability space (Ω, F, P).
The target distribution ν on (Rd , B(Rd )) is given through
a potentially unnormalized density ϱ : Rd → [0, ∞[, mean1
Microscopic Image Analysis Group, Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Jena, Germany 2 Faculty of Computer Science and
Mathematics, University of Passau, Passau, Germany. Correspondence to: Daniel Rudolf <daniel.rudolf@uni-passau.de>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1
For basic knowledge regarding the definitions and properties
of transition kernels see e.g. Rudolf (2012).

1

