ReLUs Are Sufficient for Learning Implicit Neural Representations

Joseph Shenouda 1 Yamin Zhou 2 Robert D. Nowak 1

Abstract
Motivated by the growing theoretical understanding of neural networks that employ the Rectified
Linear Unit (ReLU) as their activation function,
we revisit the use of ReLU activation functions for
learning implicit neural representations (INRs).
Inspired by second order B-spline wavelets, we incorporate a set of simple constraints to the ReLU
neurons in each layer of a deep neural network
(DNN) to remedy the spectral bias. This in turn
enables its use for various INR tasks. Empirically,
we demonstrate that, contrary to popular belief,
one can learn state-of-the-art INRs based on a
DNN composed of only ReLU neurons. Next, by
leveraging recent theoretical works which characterize the kinds of functions ReLU neural networks learn, we provide a way to quantify the
regularity of the learned function. This offers
a principled approach to selecting the hyperparameters in INR architectures. We substantiate
our claims through experiments in signal representation, super resolution, and computed tomography, demonstrating the versatility and effectiveness of our method. The code for all experiments can be found at https://github.
com/joeshenouda/relu-inrs.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. (Left) A plot of the second order B-spline wavelet activation function. The red lines indicate the seven non-local ReLU
functions that make up a single second order B-spline wavelet,
shown in black. (Right) A BW-ReLU neural network with two
neurons represented as a constrained ReLU network with 14 neurons. Within each group the orientation of each ReLU relative to
the others is fixed. The input and output weights are learned and
shared across groups of neurons. Shared input/output weights are
denoted by the same color.

ous representations of images, unlike image classification
tasks which train DNNs on high-dimensional data. INRs
learn a continuous representation of an image by training
a DNN on the low-dimensional coordinates of the image.
For such imaging tasks, the success of the INR hinges on
the ability of the DNN to efficiently approximate and learn
high-frequency components of the image. This has, thus far,
prohibited the use of DNNs with ReLU activations as they
have been shown to exhibit a spectral bias (Rahaman et al.,
2019)—an inherent bias of ReLU DNNs which causes them
to struggle in approximating high-frequency functions when
trained via gradient descent.

1. Introduction
Recently, training deep neural networks (DNNs) to learn
implicit neural representations (INRs) has led to advancements in various vision-related tasks. These include, but are
not limited to, computer graphics (Mildenhall et al., 2021),
image processing (Chen et al., 2021), and signal representation (Sitzmann et al., 2020). They have also shown great
promise in biomedical imaging, where they can be used for
sparse-view computed tomography (CT) (Sun et al., 2021;
Wu et al., 2023). Many INR tasks involve learning continu-

Therefore, in order to circumvent this problem while still
utilizing the power of neural networks, practitioners in the
INR community have adopted preprocessing techniques
(Mildenhall et al., 2021; Tancik et al., 2020) and many nonstandard activation functions. These include, but are not
limited to, the sine function (Sitzmann et al., 2020), the
Gaussian function (Ramasinghe & Lucey, 2022), or the
complex Gabor wavelet (Saragadam et al., 2023). However, using these highly unorthodox activation functions has
raised many questions about the theoretical properties of

1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Wisconsin-Madison 2 Department of Computer Sciences,
University of Wisconsin-Madison. Correspondence to: Joseph
Shenouda <jshenouda@wisc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

