Neurodegenerative Brain Network Classification
via Adaptive Diffusion with Temporal Regularization

Hyuna Cho 1 Jaeyoon Sim 1 Guorong Wu 2 Won Hwa Kim 1

Abstract

(i.e., labels) are nominally discriminated (Gao & Ji, 2019;
Zhang et al., 2018), the neurodegenerative diagnostic groups
demonstrate temporal dynamics. Accurately characterizing
the disease progression is essential for precise diagnosis;
however, most existing cross-sectional brain network classifiers do not adequately address the evolving nature of the
diseases (Wang et al., 2023; Qu et al., 2023).

Analysis of neurodegenerative diseases on brain
connectomes is important in facilitating early diagnosis and predicting its onset. However, investigation of the progressive and irreversible dynamics of these diseases remains underexplored
in cross-sectional studies as its diagnostic groups
are considered independent. Also, as in many
real-world graphs, brain networks exhibit intricate
structures with both homophily and heterophily.
To address these challenges, we propose Adaptive
Graph diffusion network with Temporal regularization (AGT). AGT introduces node-wise convolution to adaptively capture low (i.e., homophily)
and high-frequency (i.e., heterophily) characteristics within an optimally tailored range for each
node. Moreover, AGT captures sequential variations within progressive diagnostic groups with a
novel temporal regularization, considering the relative feature distance between the groups in the latent space. As a result, our proposed model yields
interpretable results at both node-level and grouplevel. The superiority of our method is validated
on two neurodegenerative disease benchmarks for
graph classification: Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) and Parkinson’s Progression Markers Initiative (PPMI) datasets.

Several issues, other than the temporal nature, make the
analysis even more challenging. As in many real-world
graphs such as social networks (Yanardag & Vishwanathan,
2015), molecule structures (Ramakrishnan et al., 2014; Axelrod et al., 2022), and traffic flows (Chen et al., 2001),
brain networks are high-dimensional and sparse, i.e., only
a small fraction of edges are present comprising heterogeneous structures while the number of possible edges is at the
order of N 2 with N nodes. Moreover, graph components
of different orders, i.e., nodes (0-simplex) and edges (1simplex), need to be analyzed interactively. Although nodes
and edges are interdependent under homophily condition, it
is not universally applicable to every brain connectivity. As
brain networks may exhibit heterophily, where dissimilar
regions physically attach, this interplay between homophily
and heterophily intertwines nodes and edges, and makes
their analysis difficult.
Therefore, capturing localized characteristics between node
and edge features becomes imperative in understanding the
intricacies of these diverse relationships. Traditional Graph
Neural Networks (GNNs) have shown successful results
in solving various tasks on graphs. However, they do not
effectively emphasize the nuances or variations between
connected nodes with different properties (Kipf & Welling,
2017; Wu et al., 2019). This is because the convolution
layers aggregate information from direct neighbor nodes
uniformly across the entire nodes. By repeatedly stacking
graph convolution layers, the notorious oversmoothing issue arises in which the information is excessively averaged
around each node.

1. Introduction
Consider a neurodegenerative brain connectome study
where each sample is represented as a graph, i.e., brain
regions of interest (ROIs) correspond to nodes and connectomic features represent edges, and a subset of brain
networks progressively deteriorates over time due to a disease. Unlike typical classification tasks where the groups
1

Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH),
South Korea 2 University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, USA.
Correspondence to: Won Hwa Kim <wonhwa@postech.ac.kr>.

To handle the aforementioned issues, we propose Adaptive
Graph diffusion network with Temporal regularization
(AGT) for neurodegenerative brain network classification.
Overall, AGT has two key ideas: 1) Node-variant convolution that adjusts the amount of smoothing or coarsening the

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

