Light and Optimal Schrödinger Bridge Matching

Nikita Gushchin * 1 Sergei Kholkin * 1 Evgeny Burnaev 1 2 Alexander Korotin 1 2

Abstract
Schrödinger Bridges (SB) have recently gained
the attention of the ML community as a promising
extension of classic diffusion models which is also
interconnected to the Entropic Optimal Transport
(EOT). Recent solvers for SB exploit the pervasive
bridge matching procedures. Such procedures aim
to recover a stochastic process transporting the
mass between distributions given only a transport
plan between them. In particular, given the EOT
plan, these procedures can be adapted to solve
SB. This fact is heavily exploited by recent works
giving rise to matching-based SB solvers. The cornerstone here is recovering the EOT plan: recent
works either use heuristical approximations (e.g.,
the minibatch OT) or establish iterative matching
procedures which by the design accumulate the
error during the training. We address these limitations and propose a novel procedure to learn SB
which we call the optimal Schrödinger bridge
matching. It exploits the optimal parameterization of the diffusion process and provably recovers
the SB process (a) with a single bridge matching
step and (b) with arbitrary transport plan as the
input. Furthermore, we show that the optimal
bridge matching objective coincides with the recently discovered energy-based modeling (EBM)
objectives to learn EOT/SB. Inspired by this observation, we develop a light solver (which we
call LightSB-M) to implement optimal matching
in practice using the Gaussian mixture parameterization of the adjusted Schrödinger potential. We
experimentally showcase the performance of our
solver in a range of practical tasks. The code for
our solver can be found at https://github.
com/SKholkin/LightSB-Matching.

Figure 1: Unpaired adult → child translation with our
LightSB-M solver applied in the latent space of ALAE
(Pidhorskyi et al., 2020) for 1024x1024 FFHQ images (Karras et al., 2019). Our LightSB-M solver converges on 4 cpu
cores in several minutes.

*
Equal contribution 1 Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology 2 Artificial Intelligence Research Institute. Correspondence
to: Nikita Gushchin <n.gushchin@skoltech.ru>, Sergei Kholkin
<s.kholkin@skoltech.ru>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

