IIANet: An Intra- and Inter-Modality Attention Network for
Audio-Visual Speech Separation

Kai Li 1 Runxuan Yang 1 Fuchun Sun 1 Xiaolin Hu 1 2 3

1. Introduction

Abstract
Recent research has made significant progress in
designing fusion modules for audio-visual speech
separation. However, they predominantly focus
on multi-modal fusion at a single temporal scale
of auditory and visual features without employing selective attention mechanisms, which is in
sharp contrast with the brain. To address this issue, We propose a novel model called Intra- and
Inter-Attention Network (IIANet), which leverages
the attention mechanism for efficient audio-visual
feature fusion. IIANet consists of two types of
attention blocks: intra-attention (IntraA) and interattention (InterA) blocks, where the InterA blocks
are distributed at the top, middle and bottom of
IIANet. Heavily inspired by the way how human brain selectively focuses on relevant content at various temporal scales, these blocks maintain the ability to learn modality-specific features
and enable the extraction of different semantics
from audio-visual features. Comprehensive experiments on three standard audio-visual separation benchmarks (LRS2, LRS3, and VoxCeleb2)
demonstrate the effectiveness of IIANet, outperforming previous state-of-the-art methods while
maintaining comparable inference time. In particular, the fast version of IIANet (IIANet-fast) has
only 7% of CTCNet’s MACs and is 40% faster
than CTCNet on CPUs while achieving better
separation quality, showing the great potential of
attention mechanism for efficient and effective
multimodal fusion. The source code is released1 .

In our daily lives, audio and visual signals are the primary
means of information transmission, providing rich cues for
humans to obtain valuable information in noisy environments (Cherry, 1953; Arons, 1992). This innate ability is
known as the “cocktail party effect”, also referred to as
“speech separation” in computer science. Speech separation
possesses extensive research significance, such as assisting
individuals with hearing impairments (Summerfield, 1992),
enhancing the auditory experience of wearable devices (Ryumin et al., 2023), etc.
Researchers have previously sought to address the cocktail
party effect through audio streaming alone (Luo & Mesgarani, 2019; Luo et al., 2020; Hu et al., 2021). This task is
called audio-only speech separation (AOSS). However, the
quality of the separation system may decline dramatically
when speech is corrupted by noise (Afouras et al., 2018a).
To address this issue, many researchers have focused on
audio-visual speech separation (AVSS), achieving remarkable progress. Existing AVSS methods can be broadly classified into two categories based on their fusion modules:
CNN-based and Transformer-based. CNN-based methods
(Gao & Grauman, 2021; Li et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2019)
exhibit lower computational complexity and excellent local
feature extraction capabilities, enabling the extraction of
audio-visual information at multiple scales to capture local
contextual relationships. Transformer-based methods (Lee
et al., 2021; Rahimi et al., 2022; Montesinos et al., 2022) can
leverage cross-attention mechanisms to learn associations
across different time steps, effectively handling dynamic
relationships between audio-visual information.
By comparing the working mechanisms of these AVSS
methods and the brain, we find that there are two major
differences. First, auditory and visual information undergoes neural integration at multiple levels of the auditory
and visual pathways, including the thalamus (Halverson &
Freeman, 2006; Cai et al., 2019), A1 and V1 (Mesik et al.,
2015; Eckert et al., 2008), and occipital cortex (Ghazanfar &
Schroeder, 2006; Stein & Stanford, 2008). However, most
AVSS methods integrate audio-visual information only at
either coarse (Gao & Grauman, 2021; Lee et al., 2021) or
fine (Li et al., 2022; Montesinos et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2019;

1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Institute for AI, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084,
China 2 Tsinghua Laboratory of Brain and Intelligence (THBI),
IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China 3 Chinese Institute for Brain Research
(CIBR), Beijing 100010, China. Correspondence to: Xiaolin Hu
<xlhu@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
https://github.com/JusperLee/IIANet

1

