Scaling Laws for Fine-Grained Mixture of Experts

Jan Ludziejewski * 1 2 Jakub Krajewski * 1 2 Kamil Adamczewski 1 Maciej Pióro 1 3 Michał Krutul 1 2
Szymon Antoniak 1 2 Kamil Ciebiera 1 2 Krystian Król 1 2 Tomasz Odrzygóźdź 4 Piotr Sankowski 1 2
Marek Cygan 2 5 Sebastian Jaszczur * 1 2

Abstract

comparable to dense models with significantly lower computational costs.

Mixture of Experts (MoE) models have emerged
as a primary solution for reducing the computational cost of Large Language Models. In this
work, we analyze their scaling properties, highlighting certain arbitrary assumptions present in
the existing literature. In particular, we introduce
a new hyperparameter, granularity, the modification of which allows for the optimal adjustment
of the size of experts. Subsequently, we present
scaling laws for fine-grained MoE, taking into account the number of training tokens, model size,
and granularity. Using these scaling laws, we
derive the optimal training configuration for a
given computational budget. Furthermore, in contrast with previous works, we demonstrate that the
gap in efficiency between dense and MoE models
grows as we scale up the model size and training
budget.

In the context of the current trend of increasing budgets
for training models, a question arises: will MoE models
continue to be attractive in the future? This is an important
issue, as results from other studies (Clark et al., 2022) suggest that the traditional dense models may outperform MoE
as the size of models increases.
In this paper, we argue that previous claims lose their validity when we relax certain implicit assumptions regarding the
training process present in previous research (Clark et al.,
2022). In particular, we refer to the fixed training duration
and the constant size of experts in MoE models.
Our results suggest that a compute-optimal MoE model
trained with a budget of 1020 FLOPs will achieve the same
quality as a dense Transformer trained with a 20× greater
computing budget, with the compute savings rising steadily,
exceeding 40× when budget of 1025 FLOPs is surpassed
(see Figure 1).
Our main contributions are:

1. Introduction
In recent years, we have witnessed Large Language Models
(LLMs) achieve exceptional performance in tasks across numerous domains (Chowdhery et al., 2022; Yin et al., 2023;
Agostinelli et al., 2023). However, training those massive
models incurs high computational costs, measured in millions of GPU-hours, (Touvron et al., 2023b) enabled only
by enormous budgets (Scao et al., 2023) and leading to nonnegligible carbon footprints (Faiz et al., 2024). To combat
these obstacles, the research community has been striving to
increase the efficiency of LLMs. One promising approach
that has lately been gaining visibility is the use of Mixture
of Experts (MoE) methods. Models such as Switch (Fedus
et al., 2022) and Mixtral (Jiang et al., 2024) have already
demonstrated that MoE models can achieve effectiveness

1. Introducing a new hyperparameter - granularity. Adjusting this parameter allows us to determine the optimal size of experts in MoE models, which translates
into increased efficiency (see Figure 1b and Figure 5).
2. Deriving new scaling laws for MoE models that incorporate variable training duration, the number of
parameters, and granularity. Such scaling laws allow
us to calculate optimal training hyperparameters for
MoE models.
3. Demonstrating that, with optimal settings, MoE models
can always outperform traditional Transformers at any
computing budget. This is a conclusion contrary to the
results from (Clark et al., 2022), see Section 6.3.

*

Equal contribution 1 IDEAS NCBR 2 University of Warsaw
Polish Academy of Sciences 4 TradeLink 5 Nomagic. Correspondence to: Sebastian Jaszczur <s.jaszczur@uw.edu.pl>.
3

Additionally, we open-source the code used to produce the
results described in this work at github.com/llm-random/llmrandom.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

