Is Kernel Prediction More Powerful than Gating in
Convolutional Neural Networks?
Lorenz K. Müller 1

Abstract

Gating mechanisms in neural networks are commonly used
in recurrent neural network (RNN) architectures (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997; Chung et al., 2014), where they
have enabled successes in tasks like speech recognition and
machine translation (Lipton et al., 2015). The gating mechanism dynamically controls information flow in these architectures, particularly in the sequence dimension. Additionally, such mechanisms can prevent the vanishing gradient
problem of RNNs (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997).

Neural networks whose weights are the output
of a predictor (HyperNetworks) achieve excellent
performance on many tasks. In ConvNets, kernel
prediction layers are a popular type of HyperNetwork. Previous theoretical work has argued that
a hierarchy of multiplicative interactions exists
in which gating is at the bottom and full weight
prediction, as in HyperNetworks, is at the top.
In this paper, we constructively demonstrate an
equivalence between gating combined with fixed
weight layers and weight prediction, relativizing
the notion of a hierarchy of multiplicative interactions. We further derive an equivalence between a
restricted type of HyperNetwork and factorization
machines. Finally, we find empirically that gating layers can learn to imitate weight prediction
layers with an SGD variant and show a novel practical application in image denoising using kernel
prediction networks. Our reformulation of predicted kernels, combining fixed layers and gating,
reduces memory requirements.

In several applications for which RNNs have been the stateof-the-art approach for some time, now transformer architectures (Vaswani et al., 2017) achieve even better results.
One key aspect in which transformers differ from gating
architectures is how they handle data dependency across the
sequence dimension: Recurrence and gating are supplanted
by dynamic prediction of attention weight matrices (Bahdanau et al., 2016), which express relationships between
positions in the sequence dimension. Transformers have
now also spread to domains like image processing (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021) and recommender systems (Sun et al.,
2019).
Also, many architectures exist in convolutional networks
that use weight prediction (or kernel prediction). In this
context predicting weights can be especially effective when
it enables the ‘feed-forward’ network (for which the weights
are predicted) to be limited to a constrained form: E.g., a
single color transformation matrix per pixel (Gharbi et al.,
2017), a denoising kernel per pixel (Mildenhall et al., 2018)
or an explainable, linear model (Bohle et al., 2021). Additionally, predicted kernels in convolutional networks allow
decoupling parameter count from required FLOPs, which
can benefit lightweight compute settings (Muller, 2021).

1. Introduction
A powerful generalization of neural networks is to transform
their weights from static parameters to dynamic predictions
from the network’s current input. Such networks have been
termed HyperNetworks (Ha et al., 2016) and Fast Weight
Networks (Schmidhuber, 1992). While not always viewed
under this perspective, models of this kind are part of widely
used methods in recommender systems (Rendle, 2010) (Factorization Machines (FM)), natural language processing
(NLP) (Vaswani et al., 2017) (Transformers) and various
image processing tasks (Howard et al., 2019; Bako et al.,
2017) (Attention, Kernel Prediction).

Gating layers have recently been adopted outside their original application sphere in RNNs. In the NLP domain, gMLPs
(Liu et al., 2021) propose to use a gating layer as a stand-in
for the standard multi-headed attention in a transformer-like
architecture. In image enhancement, NAFNet (Chen et al.,
2022) uses multiple forms of linear gating for highly effective image denoising. In implicit representations, elementwise multiplication has also been used as a lightweight
alternative to full HyperNetworks (Mehta et al., 2021).

1

Computing Systems Lab, Huawei Technologies, Zurich,
Switzerland.
Correspondence to:
Lorenz K. Müller
<lorenz.muller@huawei.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Here, we extend the prior perspective (Jayakumar et al.,
1

