Faster Sampling via Stochastic Gradient Proximal Sampler

Xunpeng Huang 1 Difan Zou 2 Hanze Dong 3 Yi-An Ma 4 Tong Zhang 5

Abstract

1. Introduction
Sampling from a target distribution p∗ ∝ exp(−f ) is a
fundamental problem in many research fields such as statistics (Neal, 1993), scientific computing (Robert et al., 1999),
and machine learning (Bishop & Nasrabadi, 2006). Here,
f : Rd → R is referred to as the negative log-density function or energy function of p∗ . To solve this problem, the
Langevin-based sampling algorithms, based on discretizing
the continuous-time Langevin dynamics, are the most popular choices, including Unadjusted Langevin Algorithm
(ULA) (Neal, 1992; Roberts & Tweedie, 1996), Underdamped Langevin Dynamic (ULD) (Cheng et al., 2018; Ma
et al., 2021; Mou et al., 2021). These algorithms have been
extensively investigated both theoretically and empirically.
Notably, Langevin-based algorithms are usually biased, i.e.,
the stationary distribution of ULA and ULD (which are also
Markov processes), will be different from the target distribution p∗ , and the error is governed by the discretization
step size. Thus, Metropolis-adjusted Langevin Algorithm
(MALA) (Roberts & Stramer, 2002; Xifara et al., 2014) was
designed to resolve this issue.

Stochastic gradients have been widely integrated
into Langevin-based methods to improve their
scalability and efficiency in solving large-scale
sampling problems. However, the proximal sampler, which exhibits much faster convergence
than Langevin-based algorithms in the deterministic setting (Lee et al., 2021), has yet to be
explored in its stochastic variants. In this paper, we study the Stochastic Proximal Samplers
(SPS) for sampling from non-log-concave distributions. We first establish a general framework for implementing stochastic proximal samplers and establish the convergence theory accordingly. We show that the convergence to the
target distribution can be guaranteed as long as
the second moment of the algorithm trajectory
is bounded and restricted Gaussian oracles can
be well approximated. We then provide two implementable variants based on Stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics (SGLD) and Metropolisadjusted Langevin algorithm (MALA), giving rise
to SPS-SGLD and SPS-MALA. We further show
that SPS-SGLD and SPS-MALA can achieve ϵsampling error in total variation (TV) distance
within Õ(dϵ−2 ) and Õ(d1/2 ϵ−2 ) gradient complexities, which outperform the best-known result
by at least an Õ(d1/3 ) factor. This enhancement
in performance is corroborated by our empirical
studies on synthetic data with various dimensions,
demonstrating the efficiency of our proposed algorithm.

To achieve the unbiasedness for sampling, Proximal sampler,
similar to proximal point methods in convex optimization,
has been recently developed in Lee et al. (2021). In particular, the core idea of the proximal sampler is to first construct
a joint distribution

2
p∗ (x, y) ∝ exp − f (x) − ∥x − y∥ /(2η)
(1)
whose x-marginal distribution is the same as p∗ . Then, the
iterations follow from the two stages:
• From a given x, sample y|x ∼ p∗ (y|x) = N (x, I).
• From a given y, sample x|y ∼ p∗ (x|y) satisfying

2
p∗ (x|y) ∝ exp − f (x) − ∥x − y∥ /(2η) .
It can be noted that the second stage can be easily implemented even in the non-log-concave setting (i.e., f (x) is
nonconvex), since the target distribution, i.e., p∗ (x|y), is
strongly log-concave when η is properly small. Under this
condition, the proximal sampler achieves a linear convergence rate for different criteria (Chen et al., 2022) when the
proximal oracle can be accessed.

1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 2 The University of Hong Kong 3 Salesforce AI Research
4
University of California, San Diego 5 University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign. Correspondence to: Xunpeng Huang
<xhuangck@connect.ust.hk>, Difan Zou <dzou@cs.hku.hk>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Despite the impressive performance of proximal samplers
in the deterministic setting, where full access to the function
1

