Towards an Understanding of Stepwise Inference in Transformers:
A Synthetic Graph Navigation Model

Mikail Khona 1 2 Maya Okawa 2 Jan Hula 3 Rahul Ramesh 4 2 Kento Nishi 5 2 Robert Dick 6
Ekdeep Singh Lubana* 5 6 Hidenori Tanaka* 2 5
(a)

Abstract

(b)
"Consider a Tower
of Hanoi problem
with three rods. At
start, Rod A has two
disks with radius 3
and 1; Rod B has a
disk of radius 2.
The goal is to move
all disks to rod C.
Think step-by-step."

Stepwise inference protocols, such as scratchpads
and chain-of-thought, help language models solve
complex problems by decomposing them into a
sequence of simpler subproblems. To unravel the
underlying mechanisms of stepwise inference we
propose to study autoregressive Transformer models on a synthetic task that embodies the multistep nature of problems where stepwise inference
is generally most useful. Specifically, we define
a graph navigation problem wherein a model is
tasked with traversing a path from a start to a goal
node on the graph. We find we can empirically reproduce and analyze several phenomena observed
at scale: (i) the stepwise inference reasoning gap,
the cause of which we find in the structure of
the training data; (ii) a diversity-accuracy tradeoff in model generations as sampling temperature
varies; (iii) a simplicity bias in the model’s output;
and (iv) compositional generalization and a primacy bias with in-context exemplars. Overall, our
work introduces a grounded, synthetic framework
for studying stepwise inference and offers mechanistic hypotheses that can lay the foundation for a
deeper understanding of this phenomenon.

Figure 1. Examples of stepwise inference protocols and how
they can be cast as a graph navigation problem. (a) Zero-shot
chain-of-thought (Kojima et al., 2022) involves asking a model to
produce intermediate outputs to perform complex multi-step computations, such as solving the Tower of Hanoi problem. Casting the
configurations of the rods in Tower of Hanoi as nodes of a graph,
we can see that the problem is essentially traversal over states
describing different configurations of the setup to reach the desired
configuration (the goal state). (b) Scratchpad (Nye et al., 2021) improves LLMs’ ability to perform complex multi-step computations,
such as arithmetic, when they write intermediate computation steps
to a buffer called a scratchpad.

emerges with training of Transformers on large-scale language modeling datasets is the ability to perform stepwise
inference, such as zero-shot chain-of-thought (CoT) (Kojima et al., 2022), use of scratchpads (Nye et al., 2021),
few-shot CoT (Wei et al., 2022), and variants of these
protocols (Creswell et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2023; Besta
et al., 2023; Creswell & Shanahan, 2022; Press et al.,
2022). Specifically, in stepwise inference, the model is
asked to or shown exemplars describing how to decompose
a broader problem into multiple sub-problems. Solving
these sub-problems in a step-by-step manner simplifies the
overall task and significantly improves performance (see
Fig. 1). Arguably, stepwise inference protocols are the
workhorse behind the “sparks” of intelligence demonstrated
by LLMs (Bubeck et al., 2023; Suzgun et al., 2022; Lu et al.,
2023; Huang & Chang, 2022)—yet, their inner workings
are poorly understood.

1. Introduction
Transformers, the backbone of large language models
(LLMs), have revolutionized several domains of machine
learning (OpenAI, 2023; Anil et al., 2023; Gemini et al.,
2023; Touvron et al., 2023). An intriguing capability that
*

Equal contribution 1 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
NTT Physics and Informatics Lab 3 Czech Technical University
in Prague and the University of Ostrava 4 University of Pennsylvania 5 Center for Brain Science, Harvard University 6 University of
Michigan. Correspondence to: Mikail Khona <mikail@mit.edu>,
Ekdeep Singh <eslubana@umich.edu>, Hidenori Tanaka <hidenori.tanaka@fas.harvard.edu>.
2

Motivated by the above, we aim to design and study an
abstraction which enables a precise understanding of stepwise inference in Transformers. Specifically, we argue that
tasks which see maximum benefit from stepwise inference

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

