Position: Embracing Negative Results in Machine Learning

Florian Karl 1 2 3 Lukas Malte Kemeter 1 Gabriel Dax 1 Paulina Sierak 1

Abstract

et al., 2023). There are many machine learning publications
that provide value for the research community: works centered around theory and proofs, benchmarks, survey papers
and position papers. However, a large number of machine
learning publications examine a (often novel) method and
then demonstrate its performance on relevant problems;
these are the types of publications we focus on in this work.

Publications proposing novel machine learning
methods are often primarily rated by exhibited
predictive performance on selected problems. In
this position paper we argue that predictive performance alone is not a good indicator for the worth
of a publication. Using it as such even fosters
problems like inefficiencies of the machine learning research community as a whole and setting
wrong incentives for researchers. We therefore
put out a call for the publication of “negative” results, which can help alleviate some of these problems and improve the scientific output of the machine learning research community. To substantiate our position, we present the advantages of
publishing negative results and provide concrete
measures for the community to move towards a
paradigm where their publication is normalized.

Machine learning is largely an empirical science: If something works and demonstrates good performance it is often
deemed a good result and worthy of publication. On the
other hand, if a new method or algorithm is not able to
beat the state-of-the-art on a typical benchmark dataset, researchers might quickly abandon their work as it is unlikely
to be published. Despite being a somewhat confusing term
when it comes to scientific results, such outcomes are often
deemed to be negative results. In science, the terms positive and negative refer to the postulated null hypothesis,
which is then either rejected (positive result) or the results
of experimentation do not allow for a rejection (negative
result).
Definition 1.1. The usual null hypothesis of empirical
machine learning is that a proposed method does not exhibit
significantly better predictive performance than existing
methods on a relevant subset of problems.

Note from the authors: Have some of our publications been
rejected due to lacking competitive results and has this been
frustrating at times? Yes. However, the following position
paper is not a personal vendetta: we truly believe embracing negative results can be an asset for the machine learning
research community and want to present an objective deliberation on why. We hope to convince you, the reader, of the
same in the following pages and spark discussion as well as
change in our community.

In this terminology there is no room for “good” or “bad”
results. However, machine learning as an empirical science
has developed a strong attachment to predictive performance
and it often seems that only very specific positive results,
those that show that a proposed method beats the state-ofthe-art, are considered “good” results. In the context of this
paper, when talking about negative results we refer to the
following, specific case:
Definition 1.2. A negative result in empirical machine
learning research occurs, when the usual null hypothesis
can not be rejected.

1. Introduction
Machine learning has grown into a prominent research field
that has demonstrated large impact on a lot of application
domains. The number of machine learning publications
has grown exponentially along with the number of active
researchers and funding volume (Maslej et al., 2023; Krenn

We want to distinguish between two important subtypes of
negative results: Novel method negative results (NMNR)
and existing method negative results (EMNR). NMNR
mostly refer to submissions proposing a novel method that
does not beat existing state-of-the-art methods with respect
to a suitable performance metric on selected test problems.
EMNR occur, when existing methods, that are considered
state-of-the-art, are demonstrated to have inferior perfor-

1

Fraunhofer Institute for Integrated Circuits IIS, Fraunhofer IIS, Nuremberg, Germany 2 Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität
München, Munich, Germany 3 Munich Center for Machine Learning, Munich, Germany. Correspondence to: Florian Karl <florian.karl@iis.fraunhofer.de>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

