SpikeZIP-TF: Conversion is All You Need for Transformer-based SNN

Kang You * 1 Zekai Xu * 1 Chen Nie 1 Zhijie Deng 1 Qinghai Guo 2 Xiang Wang 2 Zhezhi He 1
CV ImageNet

Abstract
Brain-inspired spiking neural network (SNN) has
attracted great attention because of its high efficiency over the traditional artificial neural network (ANN). Currently, ANN to SNN conversion methods can produce SNNs using convolution neural network as backbone architecture
which achieves on-par accuracy w.r.t ANNs with
ultra-low latency (e.g., 8 time-steps) on computer vision (CV) tasks. Although Transformerbased networks have achieved the prevailing precision on both CV and natural language processing (NLP) tasks, Transformer-based SNNs are
still lagging behind their ANN counterparts. In
this work, we introduce a novel ANN-to-SNN
conversion method, called SpikeZIP-TF, through
which ANN and the converted SNN are exactly
equivalent thus incurring no accuracy degradation. SpikeZIP-TF achieves 83.82% Top-1 accuracy on the CV image classification task with
ImageNet dataset and 93.79% accuracy on the
NLP dataset (SST-2), which both are higher than
SOTA Transformer-based SNNs. The code is publicly available at: https://github.com/IntelligentComputing-Research-Group/SpikeZIP-TF

NLP SST-2

Figure 1. Comparison of Transformer-based SNNs. The markers, represented by circles, star, and triangle shapes, denote the
direct learning (DT) method, ANN-to-SNN (A2S) conversion
method and using both the DT and A2S methods, respectively,
where the area of the scatter corresponds to the model size. Results
show that the pikeZIP-TF generated SNN achieves higher accuracy
with greater model size than the other recent SNNs. The largest
model size of SpikeZIP-TF on ImageNet is 304.33 MB.

and revolutionized various applications. Inspired by the
architecture of the ANN Transformer, introducing the Transformer structure to SNN to improve the SNN accuracy is an
emerging trend (Zhou et al., 2022; Lv et al., 2023).
Currently, methods to train Transformer-based SNN come
in twofold: directly training (DT) and ANN-to-SNN Conversion (A2S) (Roy et al., 2019). The DT methods leverage
back-propagation through time (BPTT) to update the synaptic weights of SNN. Unfortunately, due to the inaccurate
gradient approximation (Neftci et al., 2019) for the nondifferential SNN neuron, e.g., integrate and fire (IF) neuron,
an accuracy gap persists between SNN and its ANN counterpart (Zhou et al., 2024; Lv et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
Spiking neural network (SNN) (Maass, 1997) is a type of
biologically plausible neural network inspired by brains
of living organisms. Unlike modern ANNs (LeCun et al.,
2015) using continuous activation value to propagate information between neurons synchronously, SNNs utilize discrete events or “spikes” for asynchronous neuron-to-neuron
communication and processing (Merolla et al., 2014; Davies
et al., 2018). Meanwhile, in the field of deep learning, Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) have made significant strides

Rather than directly training an SNN, the A2S methods
transfer the parameters of the pre-trained ANN to its SNN
counterpart (Cao et al., 2015) that yields close-to-ANN
accuracy. The previous A2S algorithm achieves the onpar accuracy to ANN with ultra-low latency (e.g., 8 timesteps) on convolution-based SNN (Hu et al., 2023). However, when leveraging the existing A2S algorithms to produce Transformer-based SNNs, it is difficult to build the
equivalence between SNN operators and ANN operators,

*
Equal contribution 1 School of Electronic Information and
Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai,
China 2 Huawei Technologies, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence
to: Zhezhi He <zhezhi.he@sjtu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

