Perfect Alignment May be Poisonous to Graph Contrastive Learning

Jingyu Liu 1 Huayi Tang 1 Yong Liu 1 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have been successfully
applied in various fields (Yang et al., 2022a) such as recommendation systems (He et al., 2020), drug discovery (Liu
et al., 2018), and traffic analysis (Wu et al., 2019), etc (Yang
et al., 2023; 2024; Tang & Liu, 2023). However, most GNNs
require labeled data for training, which may not always be
available. To address this issue, Graph Contrastive Learning
(GCL), which does not rely on labels, has gained popularity as a new approach to graph representation learning
(Veličković et al., 2018; You et al., 2020).

Graph Contrastive Learning (GCL) aims to learn
node representations by aligning positive pairs
and separating negative ones. However, few of
researchers have focused on the inner law behind
specific augmentations used in graph-based learning. What kind of augmentation will help downstream performance, how does contrastive learning actually influence downstream tasks, and why
the magnitude of augmentation matters so much?
This paper seeks to address these questions by
establishing a connection between augmentation
and downstream performance. Our findings reveal
that GCL contributes to downstream tasks mainly
by separating different classes rather than gathering nodes of the same class. So perfect alignment and augmentation overlap which draw all
intra-class samples the same can not fully explain
the success of contrastive learning. Therefore, in
order to understand how augmentation aids the
contrastive learning process, we conduct further
investigations into the generalization, finding that
perfect alignment that draw positive pair the same
could help contrastive loss but is poisonous to generalization, as a result, perfect alignment may not
lead to best downstream performance, so specifically designed augmentation is needed to achieve
appropriate alignment performance and improve
downstream accuracy. We further analyse the result by information theory and graph spectrum
theory and propose two simple but effective methods to verify the theories. The two methods could
be easily applied to various GCL algorithms and
extensive experiments are conducted to prove its
effectiveness. The code is available at https:
//github.com/somebodyhh1/GRACEIS

GCL often generates new graph views through data augmentation (Chen et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2020; Jia & Zhang,
2022; Mumuni et al., 2024). GCL considers nodes augmented from the same as positive samples and others as
negative samples. Subsequently, the model try to maximize
similarity between positive samples and minimize similarity
between negative ones (Wang & Isola, 2020; Hassani &
Khasahmadi, 2020) to learn a better representation. So, data
augmentation plays a vital role in graph contrastive learning, and data augmentation can be categorized into three
types (Zhao et al., 2022): random augmentation (Veličković
et al., 2018; Zhu et al., 2020), rule-based augmentation (Zhu
et al., 2021; Wei et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2022), and learningbased augmentation (Suresh et al., 2021; Jiang et al., 2019).
For instance, GRACE (Zhu et al., 2020) randomly masks
node attributes and edges in graph data to obtain augmented
graphs; GCA (Zhu et al., 2021) uses node degree to measure
its importance and mask those unimportant with higher probability; And AD-GCL (Suresh et al., 2021) uses a model to
learn the best augmentation and remove irrelevant information as much as possible. However, most data augmentation
algorithms are designed heuristically, and there is a lack of
theoretical analysis on how these methods will influence the
downstream performance.
Some researchers have explored the generalization ability
of contrastive learning (Arora et al., 2019; Wang & Isola,
2020; Huang et al., 2021). They propose that contrastive
learning works by gathering positive pairs and separating
negative samples uniformly. Wang et al. (2022b) argues that
perfect alignment and uniformity alone cannot guarantee
optimal performance. They propose that through stronger
augmentation, there will be support overlap between dif-

1
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University
of China, Beijing, China 2 Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data
Management and Analysis Methods, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Yong Liu <liuyonggsai@ruc.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

