Unveiling the Dynamics of Information Interplay in Supervised Learning

Kun Song * 1 Zhiquan Tan * 2 Bochao Zou 1 Huimin Ma † 1 Weiran Huang † 3 4

Abstract

1. Introduction
Supervised learning is a significant part of machine learning,
tracing its development back to the early days of artificial
intelligence. Leveraging ample annotated data from largescale datasets like ImageNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) and
COCO (Lin et al., 2014), supervised learning has achieved
outstanding performance in tasks such as image recognition (He et al., 2016; Girshick, 2015; Ronneberger et al.,
2015), speech recognition (Hinton et al., 2012; Chan et al.,
2016), and natural language processing (Vaswani et al.,
2017), thereby advancing the development of artificial intelligence. Concurrently, with its enhanced performance
in real-world applications, some interesting phenomena in
supervised learning, such as Neural Collapse (Papyan et al.,
2020), linear mode connectivity (Frankle et al., 2020), and
grokking (Power et al., 2022) have emerged. More and
more work is beginning to explore the reasons behind these
phenomena.

In this paper, we use matrix information theory
as an analytical tool to analyze the dynamics of
the information interplay between data representations and classification head vectors in the supervised learning process. Specifically, inspired
by the theory of Neural Collapse, we introduce
matrix mutual information ratio (MIR) and matrix entropy difference ratio (HDR) to assess the
interactions of data representation and class classification heads in supervised learning, and we
determine the theoretical optimal values for MIR
and HDR when Neural Collapse happens. Our
experiments show that MIR and HDR can effectively explain many phenomena occurring in neural networks, for example, the standard supervised
training dynamics, linear mode connectivity, and
the performance of label smoothing and pruning.
Additionally, we use MIR and HDR to gain insights into the dynamics of grokking, which is an
intriguing phenomenon observed in supervised
training, where the model demonstrates generalization capabilities long after it has learned to
fit the training data. Furthermore, we introduce
MIR and HDR as loss terms in supervised and
semi-supervised learning to optimize the information interactions among samples and classification
heads. The empirical results provide evidence of
the method’s effectiveness, demonstrating that the
utilization of MIR and HDR not only aids in comprehending the dynamics throughout the training
process but can also enhances the training procedure itself.

Neural Collapse (Papyan et al., 2020) is an interesting phenomenon observed during the training process of supervised
learning. In different stages of network training, features of
samples within the same class become more similar in the
feature space, meaning that intra-class differences decrease.
At the same time, feature vectors of different classes become
more distinct in feature space, leading to more significant
inter-class differences. In supervised learning classification
tasks, after prolonged training, a special alignment occurs,
this alignment is formed between the weights of the network’s final fully connected layer and the feature vectors of
the classes. This indicates that for each class, the centroid
of its feature vector almost coincides with the weight vector
of its corresponding classifier (classification head vector).
Existing work on the theory of Neural Collapse primarily
solely focuses on feature or classification head similarity,
with few studies exploring the information between features and class classification heads. We introduce matrix
information theory as an analytical tool, using similarity
matrices constructed from sample features and class classification heads to analyze the information dynamics along the
training process. According to Neural Collapse, for a welltrained model at its terminal phase, sample features and the
corresponding class classification heads align well. Thus, at
the stage of Neural Collapse, the similarity matrix of sample

*
Equal contribution 1 University of Science and Technology
Beijing 2 Department of Mathematical Sciences, Tsinghua University 3 MIFA Lab, Qing Yuan Research Institute, SEIEE, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University 4 Shanghai AI Laboratory. † Correspondence
to: Weiran Huang <weiran.huang@outlook.com>, Huimin Ma
<mhmpub@ustb.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

