Global Reinforcement Learning: Beyond Linear and Convex Rewards via
Submodular Semi-gradient Methods

Riccardo De Santi * Manish Prajapat * Andreas Krause

Abstract
In classic Reinforcement Learning (RL), the agent
maximizes an additive objective of the visited
states, e.g., a value function. Unfortunately, objectives of this type cannot model many real-world
applications such as experiment design, exploration, imitation learning, and risk-averse RL to
name a few. This is due to the fact that additive
objectives disregard interactions between states
that are crucial for certain tasks. To tackle this
problem, we introduce Global RL (GRL), where
rewards are globally defined over trajectories
instead of locally over states. Global rewards can
capture negative interactions among states, e.g.,
in exploration, via submodularity, positive interactions, e.g., synergetic effects, via supermodularity,
while mixed interactions via combinations of
them. By exploiting ideas from submodular optimization, we propose a novel algorithmic scheme
that converts any GRL problem to a sequence of
classic RL problems and solves it efficiently with
curvature-dependent approximation guarantees.
We also provide hardness of approximation results
and empirically demonstrate the effectiveness of
our method on several GRL instances.

Figure 1: The agent has visited trajectory τt and must select
the next state. On the left, the agent aims to estimate an
unknown state function f : re-visiting s2 leads to a negative
interaction since the information gain has diminishing
returns. On the right, the agent seeks a trajectory, i.e.,
ordered set of atoms, maximizing synergies seen as positive
interactions among certain combinations of atoms e.g.,
adding s3 to τt = {s1 , s2 } leads to a synergetic effect.

et al., 2019; Mutti et al., 2022b; Liu & Abbeel, 2021),
function-estimation or experimental design (Mutny et al.,
2023; Tarbouriech & Lazaric, 2019; Tarbouriech et al.,
2020), imitation learning or distribution matching (Abbeel
& Ng, 2004; Lee et al., 2019; Ghasemipour et al., 2020),
risk-averse RL (Garcıa & Fernández, 2015; Mutti et al.,
2022a), diverse skill discovery (Eysenbach et al., 2018;
Campos et al., 2020; He et al., 2022), and constrained
RL (Brantley et al., 2020; Qin et al., 2021). In these cases,
the interactions between states play a fundamental role in
determining the performance of a trajectory. As an example,
consider the case of experiment design over a Markov
chain (Mutny et al., 2023; Tarbouriech & Lazaric, 2019) in
Fig. 1 (left), where an agent aims to minimize uncertainty
about an unknown function of the states, by observing a
noisy sample of it when visiting a state. Intuitively, the new
information gained by observing the function value at a state
depends on how often that state has been previously visited:
the more it has been visited, the less new information is
gained. This phenomenon of negative interactions between

1. Introduction
Classic Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Puterman, 2014)
represents the value of a trajectory as a sum of local
rewards over its states(-actions). This fact allows us to
exploit Bellman’s optimality principle and therefore can
find optimal policies using efficient algorithms inspired
by dynamic programming (Bellman, 1966). Unfortunately,
additive objectives cannot properly capture a multitude
of real-world tasks including pure exploration (Hazan
*

Equal contribution. All authors are from ETH Zurich and are
affiliated with the ETH AI Center. Correspondence to: Riccardo
De Santi <rdesanti@ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

