A Fixed-Point Approach for Causal Generative Modeling

Meyer Scetbon 1 Joel Jennings 2 Agrin Hilmkil 1 Cheng Zhang Chao Ma 1

Abstract

In most ML settings, only observational data are available,
and as a result, the recovery of SCMs and their associated
DAGs from observations has become one of the most fundamental tasks in causal ML (Pearl, 2009). However, this
inverse problem suffers from several limitations that arise
mainly from its computational and modeling aspects, making it difficult to solve. Computationally, the combinatorial
nature of the DAG space makes DAG learning an NP-hard
problem (Chickering et al., 2004). Besides, an SCM relies
on functions satisfying a DAG structure to define its causal
mechanisms. Consequently, the modeling of these functions
depends on an unknown DAG making the SCM recovery an
ill-posed problem in general (Bongers et al., 2021).

We propose a novel formalism for describing
Structural Causal Models (SCMs) as fixed-point
problems on causally ordered variables, eliminating the need for Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAGs),
and establish the weakest known conditions for
their unique recovery given the topological ordering (TO). Based on this, we design a two-stage
causal generative model that first infers in a zeroshot manner a valid TO from observations, and
then learns the generative SCM on the ordered
variables. To infer TOs, we propose to amortize
the learning of TOs on synthetically generated
datasets by sequentially predicting the leaves of
graphs seen during training. To learn SCMs, we
design a transformer-based architecture that exploits a new attention mechanism enabling the
modeling of causal structures, and show that this
parameterization is consistent with our formalism.
Finally, we conduct an extensive evaluation of
each method individually, and show that when
combined, our model outperforms various baselines on generated out-of-distribution problems.

Despite these challenges, numerous approaches have been
proposed in the literature. Several works have studied the
DAG search problem (Maxwell Chickering & Heckerman,
1997; Zheng et al., 2018; Lachapelle et al., 2019; Charpentier et al., 2022; Kamkari et al., 2023), thus grappling with
its NP-hard complexity. New methods propose to bypass
this search by directly amortizing the inference of DAGs
from observations on generated datasets (Lorch et al., 2022;
Ke et al., 2022), but do not guarantee to predict DAGs.
Prior research has also explored modeling SCMs using deep
learning techniques (Kocaoglu et al., 2017; Pawlowski et al.,
2020; Xia et al., 2021), but assumes the knowledge of the
causal graph. More recently, causality research has led to
the emergence of autoregressive flows (Khemakhem et al.,
2021; Javaloy et al., 2023) to learn the generative processes
induced by SCMs using triangular monotonic increasing
(TMI) maps. However, these flows fail at modeling exactly
SCMs, leaving aside the underlying causal system.

1. Introduction
Recent machine learning (ML) works have witnessed a
flurry of activity around causal modeling (Peters et al., 2017).
SCMs and their associated DAGs provide a complete framework to describe the data generation process, and enable
proactive interventions in this process to generate the effects
on the data. Such unique properties offer a comprehensive understanding of the underlying generation process,
which have made them popular in various fields such as e.g.
economics (Zhang & Chan, 2006; Battocchi et al., 2021),
biology (Van Koten & Gray, 2006) genetics (Sachs et al.,
2005) or healthcare (Bica et al., 2019; Huang, 2021).

Our Contributions. In this work, we introduce a new
framework to learn SCMs from data without instantiating
DAGs. By formulating SCMs as fixed point problems on the
causally ordered variables, we design a specific attentionbased architecture enabling them to be parameterized and
learned from data given only the topological order (TO).
To recover TOs, we propose to amortize the learning of a
zero-shot TO inference method on generated datasets, thus
by-passing the NP-hard search over the permutations and
enabling their predictions at scale. When combined, these
two models provide a complete framework to learn SCMs
from observations. We summarize our contributions below.

Work done when Joel Jennings and Cheng Zhang were
1
affiliated with Microsoft Research.
Microsoft Research
2
Google DeepMind. Correspondence to: Meyer Scetbon <tmscetbon@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

