Video-LaVIT: Unified Video-Language Pre-training with Decoupled
Visual-Motional Tokenization
Yang Jin 1 Zhicheng Sun 1 Kun Xu 2 Kun Xu 2 Liwei Chen 2 Hao Jiang 1 Quzhe Huang 1 Chengru Song 2
Yuliang Liu 2 Di Zhang 2 Yang Song 2 Kun Gai 2 Yadong Mu 1

Abstract
In light of recent advances in multimodal Large
Language Models (LLMs), there is increasing attention to scaling them from image-text data to
more informative real-world videos. Compared to
static images, video poses unique challenges for
effective large-scale pre-training due to the modeling of its spatiotemporal dynamics. In this paper,
we address such limitations in video-language pretraining with an efficient video decomposition that
represents each video as keyframes and temporal
motions. These are then adapted to an LLM using well-designed tokenizers that discretize visual
and temporal information as a few tokens, thus
enabling unified generative pre-training of videos,
images, and text. At inference, the generated tokens from the LLM are carefully recovered to the
original continuous pixel space to create various
video content. Our proposed framework is both
capable of comprehending and generating image
and video content, as demonstrated by its competitive performance across 13 multimodal benchmarks in image and video understanding and generation. Our code and models are available at
https://video-lavit.github.io.

Efficient motion vectors (saving > 90% tokens)

Figure 1. The key observation in this work is: most video parts
have a high degree of temporal redundancy that may be described
by motion vectors. By exploiting these motion vectors, the video
can be efficiently tokenized for pre-training of multimodal LLMs.

hending and generating visual content (Sun et al., 2024; Jin
et al., 2024; Dong et al., 2024). Despite their success, these
multimodal LLMs (Alayrac et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023c)
predominantly concentrate on the image-text data, leaving
the adaptation for video modality less explored. In contrast
to static images, video serves as a dynamic media form that
is more in line with human visual perception. Learning
effectively from video is particularly essential for enhancing
machine intelligence to comprehend the real world.
To this end, several approaches have made attempts at harnessing the generative capabilities of LLMs for handling
video data. Inheriting the successful paradigm from the
image domain, they represent video as a sequence of visual
tokens that aligns with LLMs’ semantic space by utilizing a
pre-trained 2D image model (Li et al., 2023d; Zhang et al.,
2023) or a 3D video backbone (Kondratyuk et al., 2023).
Nevertheless, the existing designs are still not competent for
effectively encoding videos. Compared to images, videos
pose unique challenges associated with higher demands
for learning complex spatiotemporal clues, such as timevarying actions and scene changes. In this regard, encoding
individual video frames separately by the 2D visual encoder
falls short of capturing the temporal motion information,
which plays a vital role in identifying distinct behaviors
and events within the video content. Although the recent

1. Introduction
Recently, the significant breakthrough of Large Language
Models (LLMs) (Brown et al., 2020; Touvron et al., 2023a)
has brought a surge in building general-purpose multimodal
AI assistants (OpenAI, 2023b; Gemini Team, 2023) that
can follow both textual and visual instructions. Drawing
on the remarkable reasoning abilities of LLMs and knowledge in massive alignment corpus (e.g., image-text pairs),
they showcase the great potential of accurately compre1
Peking University, China 2 Kuaishou Technology, China. Correspondence to: Yadong Mu <myd@pku.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

