Variational Learning is Effective for Large Deep Networks

Yuesong Shen * 1 Nico Daheim * 2 Bai Cong 3 Peter Nickl 4 Gian Maria Marconi 4 Clement Bazan 3
Rio Yokota 3 Iryna Gurevych 2 Daniel Cremers 1 Mohammad Emtiyaz Khan 4 Thomas Möllenhoff 4

Abstract

to Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015). This is excluding methods
such as MC-dropout (Gal & Ghahramani, 2016), stochastic weight averaging (SWAG) (Maddox et al., 2019), and
Laplace (MacKay, 1992), which do not directly optimize
the variational objective, even though they have variational
interpretations. Ideally, we want a direct optimization of
the objective to match Adam’s accuracy without increasing
the cost, and also yield good weight-uncertainty to improve
calibration, model averaging, knowledge transfer, etc.

We give extensive empirical evidence against the
common belief that variational learning is ineffective for large neural networks. We show that
an optimizer called Improved Variational Online
Newton (IVON) consistently matches or outperforms Adam for training large networks such
as GPT-2 and ResNets from scratch. IVON’s
computational costs are nearly identical to Adam
but its predictive uncertainty is better. We show
several new use cases of IVON where we improve finetuning and model merging in Large
Language Models, accurately predict generalization error, and faithfully estimate sensitivity to
data. We find overwhelming evidence that variational learning is effective. Code is available at
https://github.com/team-approx-bayes/ivon.

In this paper, we present the Improved Variational Online
Newton (IVON) method, which adapts the method of Lin
et al. (2020) to large scale and obtains state-of-the-art accuracy and uncertainty at nearly identical cost as Adam. Fig. 1
shows some examples where, for training GPT-2 (773M
parameters) from scratch, IVON gives 0.4 reduction in validation perplexity over AdamW and, for ResNet-50 (25.6M
parameters) on ImageNet, it gives around 2% more accurate
predictions that are also better calibrated. For image classification, we never observe severe overfitting like AdamW
and consistently obtain better or comparable results to SGD.

1. Introduction
Variational learning can potentially improve many aspects
of deep learning, but there remain doubts about its effectiveness for large-scale problems. Popular strategies (Graves,
2011; Blundell et al., 2015) do not easily perform well,
even on moderately-sized problems, which has led some
to believe that it is impossible to get both good accuracy
and uncertainty (Trippe & Turner, 2017; Foong et al., 2020;
Coker et al., 2022). Variational methods generally have
higher costs or tricky implementations (Kingma et al., 2015;
Hernández-Lobato & Adams, 2015; Zhang et al., 2018;
Khan et al., 2018; Osawa et al., 2019), and they struggle to
keep up with the ever-increasing scale of deep learning.

We introduce practical tricks necessary to achieve good performance and present an Adam-like implementation (Alg. 1)
which uses a simplified Hessian-estimation scheme to both
adapt the learning rate and estimate weight-uncertainty. This
also makes IVON a unique second-order optimizer that consistently performs better than Adam at a similar cost. We
present extensive numerical experiments and new use cases
to demonstrate its effectiveness. We find that,
1. IVON gets better or comparable predictive uncertainty
to alternatives, such as, MC-dropout and SWAG.
2. It works well for finetuning LLMs and reduces the cost
of model-merging.
3. It can be used to faithfully predict generalization which
is useful for diagnostics and early stopping.
4. It is useful to understand sensitivity to data which is
often challenging at large-scale due to ill-conditioning.

Currently, no variational method can accurately train Large
Language Models (LLMs) from scratch at a cost, say, similar
*
Equal contribution 1 Technical University of Munich & Munich
Center for Machine Learning, Munich, Germany 2 UKP Lab, Technical University of Darmstadt & hessian.AI, Darmstadt, Germany
3
Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tokyo, Japan 4 RIKEN Center for
AI Project, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Thomas Möllenhoff
<thomas.moellenhoff@riken.jp>.

Overall, we find overwhelming evidence that variational
learning is not only effective but also useful for large deep
networks, especially LLMs. IVON is easily amenable to
flexible posterior forms (Lin et al., 2019), and we expect it to
help researchers further investigate the benefits of Bayesian
principles to improve deep learning.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

