DiffFPR: Diffusion Prior for Oversampled Fourier Phase Retrieval

Ji Li * 1 Chao Wang * 2

Abstract

illumination optics and the specimen. There are two components of the optical field: the magnitude and the phase.
Due to the limitation of the measurement instrument, only
the magnitude of the optical field can be recorded. Phase
retrieval means to reconstructing the unobserved phase information of the optical field. With the resolved optical
phase, the specimen structure can be resolved using the
back-propagation of the obtained full optical field.

This paper tackled the challenging Fourier phase
retrieval problem, the absolute uniqueness of
which does not hold. The existence of equivalent
solution (a.k.a. trivial solution ambiguity) hinders the successful recovery, especially for multichannel color image. The traditional iterative engine, such as the Relaxed Averaged Alternating
Reflections (RAAR), can be applied to reconstruct
the image channel-wisely. However, due to the
relative uniqueness of the solution, the restoration is not automatically aligned with the accurate
orientation for each channel, resulting in a reconstructed image that deviates significantly from the
true solution manifold. To address this issue, by
penalizing the mismatch of the image channels,
a diffusion model as the strong prior of the color
image is integrated into the iterative engine. The
combination of the traditional iterative engine and
the diffusion model provides an effective solution to the oversampled Fourier phase retrieval.
The formed algorithm, DiffFPR, is validated by
experiments. The code is available at https:
//github.com/Chilie/DiffFPR.

Due to the missing of phase information, it is impossible
to reconstruct the image without additional constraints. To
this end, the oversampling in measurement compensates
the missing information to some extent. It equals to warp
the image with zero-padding boundary. In this paper, we
focus on the three-channel color image x0 ∈ Rh×w×3 . To
facilitate the presentation, we define the related two operators: Zero-padding operator and its adjoint (effect-reverting)
operator. The zpadr2 : Rh×w×3 → Rrh×rw×3 denotes
padding the centered original image using zero at the boundary, and the revzpadr2 : Rrh×rw×3 → Rh×w×3 takes off
the added padding region. In the notations, the subscripts
denote the oversampling ratio, which is omitted if the oversampling ratio is predefined in the context. Then we applied a channel-wise two-dimensional Fourier transform to
the padded image zpadr2 (x0 ) to produce the measurement
y = |F(zpadr2 (x0 ))| ∈ Rrh×rw×3 . Here the F is the
standard normalized discrete Fourier transform.

1. Introduction

There have been a large body of works on the conditions
of the oversampling ratio to ensure the relative uniqueness
of the phase retrieval problem (Balan et al., 2006; Balan,
2015a;b; Hayes, 1982). The relative uniqueness means the
solution is unique up to trivial shifting, twin image with
rotation by 180◦ , and the minus image with multiplication
by −1. Though the solution ambiguity does not impact the
image contents, it plays a negative impact on the numerical
solution to phase retrieval.

The phase retrieval problem arises from a broad spectrum
of applications, including the astronomy (Gonsalves, 2014;
Fienup & Dainty, 1987), optics (Shechtman et al., 2015),
ptychography (Qian et al., 2014; Wen et al., 2012), as well
as the coherent diffraction imaging (CDI) (Candès et al.,
2015). For the CDI application, the specimen is imaged
using X-ray and the propagation of the X-ray is specified by
Fourier transform (Goodman, 2005), especially in the Fraunhofer regime (the “far field”). The specimen structure can be
explored from the optical field after the reaction between the

The translation and the minus image solution ambiguity can
be avoided by constraining the support and the nonnegativity of the solution. For gray-scale image, though phase
retrieval is nonconvex, there exists iterative engine to obtain
the solution up to trivial ambiguities. For one-channel grayscale image, the ambiguity is a negligible issue, however,
for three-channel color problem, the orientation ambiguity leads to erroneous reconstruction. See Figure 1 for the

*
Equal contribution 1 Academy for Multidisciplinary Studies, Capital Normal University, Beijing, China 2 University of
Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, US. Correspondence to: Ji
Li <matliji@163.com>, Chao Wang <wywwwnx@163.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

