Spike Distance Function as a Learning Objective for Spike Prediction

Kevin Doran 1 2 Marvin Seifert 1 Carola A. M. Yovanovich 1 Tom Baden 1 3

Abstract
Approaches to predicting neuronal spike responses commonly use a Poisson learning objective. This objective quantizes responses into spike
counts within a fixed summation interval, typically on the order of 10 to 100 milliseconds in duration; however, neuronal responses are often time
accurate down to a few milliseconds, and Poisson
models struggle to precisely model them at these
timescales. We propose the concept of a spike
distance function that maps points in time to the
temporal distance to the nearest spike. We show
that neural networks can be trained to approximate spike distance functions, and we present an
efficient algorithm for inferring spike trains from
the outputs of these models. Using recordings of
chicken and frog retinal ganglion cells responding
to visual stimuli, we compare the performance of
our approach to that of Poisson models trained
with various summation intervals. We show that
our approach outperforms the use of Poisson models at spike train inference.

Figure 1. Spike prediction task: predict future spikes given stimulus and spike history. For this work, stimulus history is a 1-second
snippet of a widefield stimulus at four wavebands (420 nm, 480 nm,
505 nm and 630 nm). The prediction duration is not fixed—several
durations are explored. Information about the stimulus after t = 0
is not available to the model, matching the task faced by retinal
prosthetic devices.

retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) in a healthy retina (Borda and
Ghezzi, 2022; Sahel et al., 2021).
A widely used approach to spike prediction is to train a
model to predict the number of spikes that will occur within
a fixed time interval. A probabilistic motivation is often
given by describing the neuron’s output as a Poisson process. In this setting, the model’s output is interpreted as a
firing rate and corresponds to the single parameter of the
Poisson process at a certain point in time. Training the
model amounts to maximizing the likelihood of this timevarying parameter with respect to the data.

1. Introduction

For the Poisson approach, the interval length over which
spikes are summed is a hyperparameter that impacts the
training and inference of a model. As will be described
in Section 3, the desire to reach millisecond resolution encourages shorter summation intervals; however, as the summation interval is reduced, training becomes more difficult,
and both the effects of binning and the shape of the Poisson
distribution can limit performance.

This paper proposes a new learning objective for the problem of spike prediction. Spike prediction is the task of
estimating the timing of future action potentials (spikes) of
a neuron; for example, given 1000 ms of stimulus and spike
activity, predict the next 80 ms of spike activity. The task is
illustrated in Figure 1.
The design of retinal prosthetics is an example where predicting spike sequences is important: patients suffering from
diseases such as retinitis pigmentosa can have their vision
partially restored through electrical or optogenetic stimulation that attempts to reproduce the spike sequences of

In this work, we propose a summation-free approach. Rather
than reduce a chunk of a spike train to a single number, we
choose a representation that preserves its details. Inspired
by the idea of a signed distance function used in geometric
modelling, we propose the idea of a spike distance function
that maps points in time to the temporal distance to the
nearest spike. We train neural networks to output this representation and use it to predict spike trains. A demonstration
of the spike distance approach (still imprecisely defined for
now) compared to the Poisson approach is shown in Figure
2. The process of predicting spikes is shown in Figure 3.

1
School of Life Sciences, University of Sussex, UK 2 School of
Engineering and Informatics, University of Sussex, UK 3 Institute
of Ophthalmic Research, University of Tübingen, Germany. Correspondence to: Kevin Doran <k.a.doran@sussex.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

