Accurate LoRA-Finetuning Quantization of LLMs via Information Retention

Haotong Qin * 1 Xudong Ma * 2 Xingyu Zheng 2 Xiaoyang Li 3 Yang Zhang 3 Shouda Liu 3 Jie Luo 2
Xianglong LiuB 2 Michele Magno 1

Abstract

et al., 2023a;b). LLMs can be adapted to various downstream real-world applications, paired with large-scale pretraining and finetuning for downstream tasks (Chang et al.,
2023; Devlin et al., 2018; Zhao et al., 2023a; Huang &
Chang, 2022; Brown et al., 2020). However, because of the
massive parameters and computation, the LLM has high or
even harsh resource requirements for deployment scenarios. The inference of LLMs is expensive and heavily relies
on high-performance devices, such as graphics processing
units (GPUs) (Ganesh et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2023; ChittyVenkata et al., 2023). Therefore, compression approaches of
LLMs are widely studied to allow their deployment on edge
devices. Quantization emerges as a promising approach to
compress LLMs by reducing bit-width but usually results in
significant degeneration in accuracy (Xiao et al., 2023; Lin
et al., 2023). For example, the 4-bit LLaMA-7B quantized
by GPTQ (Frantar et al., 2022) suffers a 1.5% drop of 5-shot
accuracy on MMLU benchmark (Hendrycks et al., 2020)
compared to its original counterpart (Liu et al., 2023a).

The LoRA-finetuning quantization of LLMs has
been extensively studied to obtain accurate yet
compact LLMs for deployment on resourceconstrained hardware. However, existing methods
cause the quantized LLM to severely degrade and
even fail to benefit from the finetuning of LoRA.
This paper proposes a novel IR-QLoRA for pushing quantized LLMs with LoRA to be highly accurate through information retention. The proposed
IR-QLoRA mainly relies on two technologies
derived from the perspective of unified information: (1) statistics-based Information Calibration
Quantization allows the quantized parameters of
LLM to retain original information accurately; (2)
finetuning-based Information Elastic Connection
makes LoRA utilizes elastic representation transformation with diverse information. Comprehensive experiments show that IR-QLoRA can significantly improve accuracy across LLaMA and
LLaMA2 families under 2-4 bit-widths, e.g., 4bit LLaMA-7B achieves 1.4% improvement on
MMLU compared with the state-of-the-art methods. The significant performance gain requires
only a tiny 0.31% additional time consumption,
revealing the satisfactory efficiency of our IRQLoRA. We highlight that IR-QLoRA enjoys excellent versatility, compatible with various frameworks (e.g., NormalFloat and Integer quantization) and brings general accuracy gains. The code
is available at https://github.com/htqin/ir-qlora.

LoRA-finetuning quantization has become a popular paradigm that combines the LLM quantization
with parameter-efficient finetuning of low-rank adaption
(LoRA) (Dettmers et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2023b). Methods
under this paradigm mainly consist of the following two
phases. The first one is the post-training quantization (PTQ)
of the LLM (Dettmers et al., 2021), obtaining quantizers by
resource-saving calibration. The latter one is finetuning the
LoRA (Hu et al., 2021), where the quantized LLM remains
fixed and LoRA is finetuned. LoRA-finetuning quantization
of LLMs is resource and time-saving compared to finetuning
of the whole LLM while pushing the quantized LLM to high
accuracy compared to performing PTQ solely (Dettmers
et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2023b; Liu et al., 2023b).

1. Introduction

However, despite several efforts made, existing LoRA finetuning quantization of LLMs is still far from the limits
regarding accuracy. We empirically observe that the prevention of further accurate quantization is mainly because the
information loss caused by LLM quantization is significant
and cannot be recovered effectively by LoRA. Especially
with ultra-low bit-widths (⩽ 3-bit) and large model scales
(⩾ 30B), the former results in the nonlinearly increased level
of information loss for each element, and the latter leads to
a significant increase of the total amount of information loss

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated strong
performance in natural language understanding (Touvron
*

Equal contribution 1 ETH Zürich 2 Beihang University
Bytedance AI Lab. Correspondence to: B Xianglong Liu <xlliu@buaa.edu.cn>.
3

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

