AegisFL: Efficient and Flexible Privacy-Preserving Byzantine-Robust Cross-silo
Federated Learning

Dong Chen 1 2 Hongyuan Qu 1 2 Guangwu Xu 1 2 3 4

1. Introduction

Abstract

Federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al., 2017) is an emerging machine learning paradigm that was proposed to solve
the data privacy problem when multiple clients jointly train
machine learning models. However, there are two fatal
shortcomings in traditional FL. First, a large number of studies (Nasr et al., 2019; Geiping et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2019;
Zhang et al., 2021) have shown that the server can launch
privacy attacks based on intermediate results uploaded by
clients, thereby recovering some sensitive information of
clients, which makes federated learning meaningless. Second, FL is vulnerable to poisoning attacks that some malicious clients may upload manipulated intermediate results
to the server (Fang et al., 2020; Shejwalkar & Houmansadr,
2021; Baruch et al., 2019; Bagdasaryan et al., 2020; Wang
et al., 2020). Even a single malformed intermediate result can significantly alter the final model in FL training
(Roy Chowdhury et al., 2022). As a result, the final model
will have poor performance or be left backdoors by malicious clients.

Privacy attacks and poisoning attacks are two
of the thorniest problems in federated learning
(FL). Homomorphic encryption (HE), which allows certain mathematical operations to be done
in the ciphertext state, provides a way to solve
these two problems simultaneously. However,
existing Paillier-based and CKKS-based privacypreserving byzantine-robust FL (PBFL) solutions
not only suffer from low efficiency but also expose the final model to the server. Additionally,
these methods are limited to one robust aggregation algorithm (AGR) and are therefore vulnerable
to AGR-tailored poisoning attacks. In this paper,
we present AegisFL, an efficient PBFL system
that provides the flexibility to change the AGR.
We first observe that the core of the existing advanced AGRs is to calculate the inner products,
L2 norms and mean values for vectors. Based
on this observation, we tailor a packing scheme
for PBFL, which fits perfectly with RLWE-based
fully homomorphic encryption. Under this packing scheme, the server only needs to perform one
ciphertext multiplication to construct any required
AGR, while the global model only belongs to honest clients. Finally, we conduct extensive experiments on different datasets and adversary settings, which also confirm the effectiveness and
efficiency of our scheme.

Unfortunately, mitigating both privacy attacks and poisoning attacks simultaneously is a very challenging problem: in
general, to defend against privacy attacks, clients’ intermediate results will be encrypted or masked, which makes the
intermediate results invisible to the server. To guard against
poisoning attacks, using AGR on the server is an effective
method because AGR can filter out abnormal intermediate
results. However, this method requires the server to access
the clients’ intermediate results and perform comprehensive
similarity measurements in plaintext. Therefore, they are
mutually orthogonal aspects.
Homomorphic encryption not only provides strong privacy
guarantees, but also allows certain mathematical operations
(such as addition and multiplication) to be performed directly on encrypted data without prior decryption. When
decrypted, the output is the same as that produced from
plaintext data. Therefore, some works, such as Paillierbased solutions (Liu et al., 2021; Ma et al., 2022; Lu et al.,
2023) and CKKS-based solutions (Miao et al., 2022; Rahulamathavan et al., 2023), explore using HE as a privacy
protection method to build privacy-preserving byzantinerobust FL (PBFL), which can simultaneously solve privacy

1
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Shandong University, Qingdao, China 2 Key Laboratory of Cryptologic Technology
and Information Security of Ministry of Education, Shandong University, Qingdao, China 3 Shandong Institute of Blockchain, Jinan,
China 4 Quan Cheng Laboratory, Jinan, China. Correspondence to:
Guangwu Xu <gxu4sdq@sdu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

