Provably Efficient Partially Observable Risk-sensitive
Reinforcement Learning with Hindsight Observation

Tonghe Zhang * 1 Yu Chen * 2 Longbo Huang 2

Abstract

tonomous driving (Huang et al., 2019), stock market prediction (Kabbani & Duman, 2022), and cybersecurity (Vassilev
et al., 2022). The Partially Observable Markov Decision
Process (POMDP) (Monahan, 1982) is widely employed as
the mathematical framework for these problems.

This work pioneers regret analysis of risksensitive reinforcement learning in partially observable environments with hindsight observation, addressing a gap in theoretical exploration.
We introduce a novel formulation that integrates
hindsight observations into a Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP) framework, where the goal is to optimize accumulated
reward under the entropic risk measure. We develop the first provably efficient RL algorithm tailored for this setting. We also prove by rigorous
analysis that
our algorithm achieves
 |γ|H
 polynomial
√
e
−1 2
2
regret Õ
KHS OA , which out|γ|H H
performs or matches existing upper bounds when
the model degenerates to risk-neutral or fully observable settings. We adopt the method of changeof-measure and develop a novel analytical tool of
beta vectors to streamline mathematical derivations. These techniques are of particular interest
to the theoretical study of reinforcement learning.

Empirical studies have been conducted on risk-sensitive
POMDPs to address the planning or learning problem in
various application scenarios (Skoglund, 2021; Choi et al.,
2021; Qiu et al., 2021; Shen et al., 2023). However, these
studies often lack a performance guarantee. On the other
hand, theoretical studies primarily focus on demonstrating the existence of an optimal policy (Di Masi & Sthttner, 1999) or addressing the planning problem with full
knowledge of the transition probabilities (James et al., 1994;
Bäauerle & Rieder, 2017), but have yet to develop the sample complexity analysis. Consequently, an open theoretical
question remains from prior research:
Can we devise a sample-efficient and theoretically
grounded risk-sensitive RL algorithm in partially observable environments?
Obtaining a conclusive answer to this question is challenging due to several technical obstacles. Firstly, the complex structure of the POMDP becomes even more intricate
when incorporating a non-linear risk measure, raising doubts
about whether mathematical analysis alone can effectively
simplify the problem. Secondly, partial observations pose
challenges in learning the model with limited sample complexity and designing the exploration bonus with incomplete
information.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a sequential decisionmaking problem in which an agent learns to maximize accumulated rewards through interactions with an unknown
environment (Sutton & Barto, 2018). In many practical
scenarios such as derivative hedging (Cao et al., 2020) and
actuarial science (Richman, 2021), decision-makers have
to consider the associated risks, leading to the study of
risk-sensitive RL (Fei et al., 2020).

In this work, we devise a novel algorithm that addresses
these problems in a POMDP model equipped with hindsight
observations. Due to the fact that reinforcement learning
in general POMDPs is intractable (Papadimitriou & Tsitsiklis, 1987; Jin et al., 2020), we involve hindsight observations(Lee et al., 2023) in the learning protocol, which
will be introduced in Section 3. We also excavate the dynamic programming structure implicit in the risk-sensitive
POMDP model and subsequently derive a fresh set of Bellman equations that matched our problem setting. Moreover,
we uncover a simple representation of the value functions
with explicit analytical forms, leading to the creation of a

It is also a common practice to make costly decisions based
on unreliable or incomplete information, such as in au*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Electronic Engineering,
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 2 Institute for Interdisciplinary
Information Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Longbo Huang <longbohuang@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

