GenCO: Generating Diverse Designs with Combinatorial Constraints

Aaron M. Ferber 1 2 Arman Zharmagambetov 3 Taoan Huang 1 Bistra Dilkina 1 Yuandong Tian 3

Abstract

AI-guided design in particular, the goal is to generate a diverse set of combinatorial solutions that are both feasible
and high quality with respect to a given nonlinear objective.
Diversity is often useful when dealing with uncertain metrics, diverse preferences, or for the sake of further manual
scrutiny. For example, in photonic device design, we want
to generate a variety of devices that meet foundry manufacturing constraints and optimize physics-related objectives
(Schubert et al., 2022). In the design of new molecules, we
want to generate a variety of chemically valid molecules
with specific properties (Pereira et al., 2021). In other scenarios, we would like to create a diverse set of designs so
that their solutions (not necessarily diverse given the design)
meet certain objectives. For example, in video game level
design, we may want to generate levels that are both realistic and valid/playable (Zhang et al., 2020). Here, “valid”
may refer to discrete characteristics of the level that must be
satisfied (e.g., a minimum number of enemies, a guaranteed
path between the level entrance and exit, etc.).

Deep generative models like GAN and VAE have
shown impressive results in generating unconstrained objects like images. However, many design settings arising in industrial design, material
science, computer graphics and more require that
the generated objects satisfy hard combinatorial
constraints or meet objectives in addition to modeling a data distribution. To address this, we propose GenCO, a generative framework that guarantees constraint satisfaction throughout training
by leveraging differentiable combinatorial solvers
to enforce feasibility. GenCO imposes the generative loss on provably feasible solutions rather than
intermediate soft solutions, meaning that the deep
generative network can focus on ensuring the generated objects match the data distribution without
having to also capture feasibility. This shift enables practitioners to enforce hard constraints on
the generated outputs during end-to-end training,
enabling assessments of their feasibility and introducing additional combinatorial loss components
to deep generative training. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of our approach on a variety of generative combinatorial tasks, including game level
generation, map creation for path planning, and
photonic device design, consistently demonstrating its capability to yield diverse, high-quality
solutions that verifiably adhere to user-specified
combinatorial properties.

Mathematically, we seek several solutions X := {xj } to
the following optimization problem:
X
min L(X ) + γ
D(xj )
s.t. xj ∈ Ω
(1)
X

j

where L is a group loss defined on a population of solutions
X (e.g., minimizing the Wasserstein distance to a dataset), D
is an individual loss measuring the quality of each solution
xj , γ is the weighing coefficient and Ω is the feasible set.
Eqn. 1 can be solved by direct optimization or learning
approaches that leverage solution datasets.
Several approaches can attempt to solve this problem. The
Lagrangian (Frangioni,
the problem
P 2005) can reformulate
P
as minX L(X ) + γ j D(xj ) + λ j distΩ (xj ), where
distΩ (xj ) measures the distance between xj and the feasible set Ω (distΩ (xj ) = 0 if xj ∈ Ω). However the final
solutions xj may not be feasible unless we use λ → +∞
which may lead to numerical instability. To reduce the
optimization cost, we want to learn a generative model
to directly generate xj , and avoid on-the-fly optimization.
However, standard methods like GAN (Goodfellow et al.,
2014) or VAE (Kingma & Welling, 2013) fail to generate
feasible and high quality solutions. One approach (Chao
et al., 2021) penalizes the generator based on constraint violation but is nontrivial to extend to more complex constraints,

1. Introduction
Generating diverse and realistic objects with combinatorial
properties is an important task with many applications. For
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA 2 Department
of Computer Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA 3 AI
at Meta (FAIR), Menlo Park, CA, USA. Correspondence to:
Aaron M. Ferber <aferber@usc.edu>, Yuandong Tian <yuandong@meta.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

