Connect Later: Improving Fine-tuning for Robustness with Targeted
Augmentations

Helen Qu 1 Sang Michael Xie 2

Abstract

(Quiñonero-Candela et al., 2009; Koh et al., 2021). We focus on unsupervised domain adaptation (Shimodaira, 2000;
Blitzer et al., 2006; Sugiyama et al., 2007), where we have
labeled data from a source domain and unlabeled data from
a target domain. We aim to learn a model that generalizes
well to these out-of-distribution (OOD) target domain inputs. A real-world example is wildlife identification, where
the task is to identify animal species from static camera
trap images. However, human labels are only available for
images from a small subset of these cameras, which may
not be representative of the habitats and characteristics of
unlabeled camera images.

Models trained on a labeled source domain often generalize poorly when deployed on an outof-distribution (OOD) target domain. In the
domain adaptation setting where unlabeled target data is available, self-supervised pretraining
(e.g., contrastive learning or masked autoencoding) is a promising method to mitigate this performance drop. Pretraining depends on generic
data augmentations (e.g., cropping or masking)
to learn representations that generalize across domains, which may not work for all distribution
shifts. In this paper, we show on real-world tasks
that standard fine-tuning after pretraining does
not consistently improve OOD error over simply training from scratch on labeled source data.
To better leverage pretraining for distribution
shifts, we propose the Connect Later framework,
which fine-tunes the model with targeted augmentations designed with knowledge of the shift.
Intuitively, pretraining learns good representations within the source and target domains, while
fine-tuning with targeted augmentations improves
generalization across domains. Connect Later
achieves state-of-the-art OOD accuracy while
maintaining comparable or better in-distribution
accuracy on 4 real-world tasks in wildlife identification (I W ILD C AM -WILDS), tumor detection (C AMELYON 17-WILDS), and astronomy
(A STRO C LASSIFICATION, R EDSHIFTS).

Pretraining on broad unlabeled data has shown promising results on improving OOD error in real-world problems (Caron et al., 2020; Shen et al., 2022; Radford et al.,
2021; Sagawa et al., 2022). In particular, contrastive
pretraining has been shown to learn representations that
transfer well across domains (Shen et al., 2022; HaoChen
et al., 2022). In contrast to conventional domain adaptation methods that focus on learning domain-invariant features (Ganin et al., 2016; Kang et al., 2019; Tzeng et al.,
2017; Saenko et al., 2010; Sun et al., 2016; Hoffman et al.,
2018), contrastive pretraining learns representations that
are not domain-invariant, but instead decompose the class
and domain information, facilitating transfer across domains (Shen et al., 2022). A favorable decomposition depends on the generic data augmentations used during contrastive pretraining to align representations across domains.
Intuitively, augmented (e.g. masked or cropped) source and
target inputs should be more likely to look similar if they
are from the same class (e.g., cropping out the face of a
lion in different habitats) than from different classes (e.g.,
no body parts of elephants and lions are alike). However,
these generic augmentations may not be suitable for all
distribution shifts.

1. Introduction
In the real world, machine learning models are often deployed on data that differ significantly from training data

In this paper, we find on real-world benchmarks that standard fine-tuning after contrastive pretraining is not always
effective for improving OOD error over purely supervised
learning from scratch with labeled source data (Section 3).
On the other hand, supervised learning with targeted augmentations (Gao et al., 2023) designed for the distribution
shift improves OOD error over the supervised learning base-

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Pennsylvania 2 Department of Computer Science, Stanford University. Correspondence to: Helen Qu <helenqu@sas.upenn.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

