Copula-Nested Spectral Kernel Network

Jinyue Tian 1 2 Hui Xue 1 2 Yanfang Xue 1 2 Pengfei Fang 1 2

Abstract

searchers have proposed several approaches to improve the
scalability of traditional kernels (Williams & Seeger, 2000;
Rahimi & Recht, 2007; Yang et al., 2014; Liu et al., 2021).
For instance, Random Fourier Features (RFF) (Rahimi &
Recht, 2007), as a widely adopted method, proposed an
explicit kernel mapping based on the spectral representation
of stationary kernels, which inspires many researchers to
delve deeper into the exploration of spectral kernels (LázaroGredilla et al., 2010; Wilson & Adams, 2013; Sinha &
Duchi, 2016). To further enhance the representation ability
of spectral kernels, some integrated them into the hierarchical architectures, resulting in spectral kernel networks
(SKNs) (Xue et al., 2019; Li et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2022),
which share the benefits of reduced computation cost along
with the improved capability of representation while maintaining solid theoretical foundations.

Spectral Kernel Networks (SKNs) emerge as a
promising approach in machine learning, melding solid theoretical foundations of spectral kernels with the representation power of hierarchical
architectures. At its core, the spectral density
function plays a pivotal role by revealing essential patterns in data distributions, thereby offering deep insights into the underlying framework
in real-world tasks. Nevertheless, prevailing designs of spectral density often overlook the intricate interactions within data structures. This phenomenon consequently neglects expanses of the
hypothesis space, thus curtailing the performance
of SKNs. This paper addresses the issues through
a novel approach, the Copula-Nested Spectral
Kernel Network (CokeNet). Concretely, we first
redefine the spectral density with the form of copulas to enhance the diversity of spectral densities.
Next, the specific expression of the copula module is designed to allow the excavation of complex dependence structures. Finally, the unified
kernel network is proposed by integrating the corresponding spectral kernel and the copula module.
Through rigorous theoretical analysis and experimental verification, CokeNet demonstrates superior performance and significant advancements
over SOTA algorithms in the field.

In the SKNs, the spectral density serves as a crucial determinant of their properties. It is refined through the backpropagation procedure of the SKN, encapsulating the intrinsic characteristics in the data. However, the selection and
formulation of spectral density remain underexplored. Previous works prefer to utilize the spectral density function of
traditional kernels (Rahimi & Recht, 2007; Xue et al., 2019)
or assume the spectral density to be a linear combination of
Gaussian probability density functions (Wilson & Adams,
2013; Samo & Roberts, 2015; Remes et al., 2017). The
former is more akin to approximating an existing kernel,
rather than creating a novel data-based kernel. The latter
fails to investigate complex architectures between variables,
such as the dependence structures. Both of these methods
limit the exploration of the hypothesis space. To adjust the
spectral densities, Avron et al. related the spectral density
to an appropriately defined ridge leverage function (Avron
et al., 2017), but the modified spectral density can only be
used in the 1-dimensional Gaussian kernel. Li et al. employed the empirical ridge leverage score distribution and
proposed an algorithm to approximate the distribution and
the leverage weights (Li et al., 2019). However, the distribution is not learnable and hence unable to dynamically
mine the structure in the data. Xue and Wu derived a priorposterior bridge to strengthen the uncertainty of spectral
density (Xue & Wu, 2020), but the bridge is manually chosen, reducing the flexibility in the parametric form of the
spectral density. The insufficient exploration of spectral den-

1. Introduction
Kernel methods are an essential class of machine learning
approaches (Shawe-Taylor & Cristianini, 2004). However,
with the ever-growing scale of datasets in the machine learning community, the computation cost of kernel methods
significantly increases. To overcome these limitations, re1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, 210096, China 2 Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its Interdisciplinary
Applications (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China.
Correspondence to: Hui Xue <hxue@seu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

