Prediction-powered Generalization of Causal Inferences

Ilker Demirel 1 2 Ahmed Alaa 3 Anthony Philippakis 2 David Sontag 1

Abstract

Dahabreh et al. (2019; 2020) develop methods that use
individual-level covariate, treatment, and outcome data from
a trial and only covariate information from the target population to estimate causal quantities in the latter (generalization). In this work, we show how combining trial data
with potentially biased observational data, e.g., found from
electronic health records, can power better generalization.

Causal inferences from a randomized controlled
trial (RCT) may not pertain to a target population where some effect modifiers have a different
distribution. Prior work studies generalizing the
results of a trial to a target population with no
outcome but covariate data available. We show
how the limited size of trials makes generalization
a statistically infeasible task, as it requires estimating complex nuisance functions. We develop
generalization algorithms that supplement the trial
data with a prediction model learned from an additional observational study (OS), without making
any assumptions on the OS. We theoretically and
empirically show that our methods facilitate better generalization when the OS is “high-quality”,
and remain robust when it is not, and e.g., have
unmeasured confounding.

Our Contributions We derive the generalization meansquared error when an outcome model learned from the trial
is used in the target sample to estimate an average causal
effect in the target population, and probe how it increases
when the trial is small and not representative of the target
population (Section 3). Drawing inspiration from recent
advances in using black-box models for valid statistical inference (Schuler et al., 2021; Angelopoulos et al., 2023),
we develop prediction-powered estimators that leverage additional observational data without any assumptions on it
and discuss when they lead to lower generalization error
(Section 4). We simulate over a thousand data-generating
processes and find that our estimators yield remarkable improvements when the observational data is high-quality and
maintain baseline performance when it is not (Section 5).

1. Introduction
Experimental data from randomized controlled trials (RCT)
is the gold standard for causal inference as various biases
are avoided by design (Imbens & Rubin, 2015; Hernan &
Robins, 2021). However, in addition to being time and costintensive, RCTs often exhibit limited external validity, and
their findings may not apply to a target population (Rothwell, 2005; Stuart et al., 2011). The generalizability of an
RCT is compromised when baseline factors that influence
prognosis (effect modifiers) have different distributions in
the trial and target populations (Dahabreh et al., 2019) (see
Figure 1). For instance, trials may consist of healthier individuals on average than routine clinical practice. Since the
overall health status likely affects the prognosis, it leads to
“confounding” bias between the population-level effects in
the trial and the target populations (Hernán et al., 2004).

Related Work There is growing interest in integrating
data from trials and observational studies (OS) (Bareinboim
& Pearl, 2016; Yang & Ding, 2019; NICE, 2022; Colnet
et al., 2024). Schuler et al. (2021); Liao et al. (2023) show
how adjustment by the predictions of a model learned from
an OS can increase power in analyzing a trial. Similarly,
Guo et al. (2021) investigate how coupling trial data and
with “control-variates” constructed in an OS may enable
smaller-variance estimation of the average treatment effect
(ATE) in the trial population. Hartman et al. (2015); Degtiar et al. (2023) study generalization to a target population
defined by the OS population or its union with the trial
population. Han et al. (2023) study ATE estimation in a target population by incorporating data from multiple source
populations, where the ATE is identifiable in all of the populations but different. Oberst et al. (2023) review methods
that combine ATE estimates from a trial and an OS to obtain
a better hybrid estimate (Rosenman et al., 2020; Cheng &
Cai, 2021; Yang et al., 2023). Kallus et al. (2018); Chen
et al. (2021); Hatt et al. (2022) consider the heterogeneity
in effects and focus on the conditional ATE (CATE) func-

1
MIT CSAIL 2 Eric and Wendy Schmidt Center, Broad Institute
of MIT and Harvard 3 Department of Computational Precision
Health, UC Berkeley and UCSF. Correspondence to: Ilker Demirel
<demirel@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

