Trustworthy Actionable Perturbations

Jesse Friedbaum 1 2 Sudarshan Adiga 2 Ravi Tandon 1 2

Abstract

is a similar input that results in a different classification.
Suppose a classifier is designed to determine whether a loan
application represents a good or bad credit risk. If the classifier determines a loan to be a bad credit risk, a counterfactual
would be a modified loan application that is classified as a
good credit risk, e.g. the individual in a loan application
is a bad credit risk, but an otherwise identical applicant
who is 5 years younger with a $500 higher monthly income
would be a good credit risk. Wachter et al. (2017) first suggested the use of Counterfactuals Explanations (CE) to help
understand classifier decision making. Subsequent works explored the use of counterfactuals to help individuals change
undesirable classifications (Ustun et al., 2019; Karimi et al.,
2021; Poyiadzi et al., 2020). Returning to the example of
an individual turned down for a loan, this type of counterfactual would not suggest an individual decrease their age
(clearly impossible), but rather make practical changes such
as pay off all credit card debt and request a 10% smaller
loan. These counterfactuals came to be known as Actionable Counterfactuals (AC) or Algorithmic Recourses (AR).
Although these counterfactuals change a classifier’s decision, it can not be assumed they will have the same affect
on the real world (Freiesleben, 2022), e.g. a change that
causes a classifier to determine someone is a good credit risk
may not increase the person’s odds of paying off the loan in
reality. König et al. (2023) point out that a counterfactual
could change a classifiers decision without changing the
real world if the modifications are not causally linked to the
output. For example, having a mailing address in an affluent
neighborhood may correlate to higher odds of paying off
a loan and changing the address could affect a classifiers
decision, but there is no causal link. Accordingly, telling an
applicant to change their mailing address to a P.O. box in a
wealthy neighborhood would not improve their chances of
paying off a loan. König et al. (2023) proposed a framework
to ensure modifications are causally linked to the output
called Improvement-Focused Causal Recourse (ICR).

Counterfactuals, or modified inputs that lead to
a different outcome, are an important tool for understanding the logic used by machine learning
classifiers and how to change an undesirable classification. Even if a counterfactual changes a classifier’s decision, however, it may not affect the
true underlying class probabilities, i.e. the counterfactual may act like an adversarial attack and
“fool” the classifier. We propose a new framework for creating modified inputs that change the
true underlying probabilities in a beneficial way
which we call Trustworthy Actionable Perturbations (TAP). This includes a novel verification procedure to ensure that TAP change the true class
probabilities instead of acting adversarially. Our
framework also includes new cost, reward, and
goal definitions that are better suited to effectuating change in the real world. We present PAClearnability results for our verification procedure
and theoretically analyze our new method for measuring reward. We also develop a methodology
for creating TAP and compare our results to those
achieved by previous counterfactual methods.

1. Introduction
As machine learning (ML) classifiers have experienced
widespread adoption in applications that have an out-sized
impact on individuals’ lives (such as credit lending (Leo
et al., 2019), college admissions (Martinez Neda et al., 2021)
and healthcare (Sauer et al., 2022)), the need to understand
classifiers’ decision making and how to avoid undesirable
classifications has become increasingly important. One of
the most important tools for filling this need is the counterfactual: a counterfactual for a given input and classifier

In this paper, we focus on tackling new challenges for this
problem, which have not been addressed in prior work.
Trustworthy Actionable Perturbations (TAP) focus on three
novel improvements for affecting real world outcomes.

1

Program in Applied Mathematics, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA. Correspondence to:
Jesse Friedbaum <friedbaum@math.arizona.edu>, Ravi Tandon
<tandonr@arizona.edu>.

Trustworthiness Against Adversarial Examples: Szegedy
et al. (2013) showed that ML classifiers are brittle and small
modifications to an input can cause misclassifications in oth-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

