BRAI N: Bayesian Reward-conditioned Amortized I Nference
for natural language generation from feedback

Gaurav Pandey 1 Yatin Nandwani 1 Tahira Naseem 1 Mayank Mishra 1 Guangxuan Xu 1 Dinesh Raghu 1
Sachindra Joshi 1 Asim Munawar 1 Ramón Fernandez Astudillo 1

Abstract

et al., 2023) and GPT-4 (OpenAI et al., 2023) among others.
This RL technique trains a separate Reward Model (RM) to
discriminate outputs based on human preferences. The RM
is then used to train a policy that maximizes the expected
reward while regularizing it to not diverge too much from
the SFT model.

Distribution matching methods for language
model alignment such as Generation with Distributional Control (GDC) and Distributional Policy Gradient (DPG) have not received the same
level of attention in reinforcement learning from
human feedback (RLHF) as contrastive methods
such as Sequence Likelihood Calibration (SLiC),
Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) and its
variants. We identify high variance of the gradient estimate as the primary reason for the lack
of success of these methods and propose a selfnormalized baseline to reduce the variance. We
further generalize the target distribution in DPG,
GDC and DPO by using Bayes’ rule to define the
reward-conditioned posterior. The resulting approach, referred to as BRAI N - Bayesian Rewardconditioned Amortized Inference acts as a bridge
between distribution matching methods and DPO
and significantly outperforms prior art in summarization and Antropic HH tasks.

Despite its clear success, PPO has lately been displaced
by offline contrastive techniques that are more scalable
and do not make full use of a separate RM. Techniques
like Likelihood Calibration (SLiC) (Zhao et al., 2023) or
Rank Responses to align Human Feedback (RRHF) (Yuan
et al., 2023) only keep ranking information from a RM. Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) (Rafailov et al., 2023),
which is currently the de-facto method used to align highperforming models such as Zephyr (Tunstall et al., 2023),
Mixtral (Jiang et al., 2024) or LLaMa-31 , trains the policy
directly on human preferences without the need of a separate
reward model2 .
Both PPO and DPO are derived from KL-controlled reward maximization (Jaques et al., 2017), which has a well
known closed form solution (Levine, 2018). This optimal
policy comes however in the form of an energy-based model
(EBM) with an intractable partition function. A set of less
well-known methods for RL in language models use distribution matching to align an SFT model to this EBM (Khalifa et al., 2020b; Parshakova et al., 2019; Korbak et al.,
2022). During the alignment of an SFT model via distribution matching, we need to sample from the target EBM.
However, sampling from the target EBM is challenging,
and hence distribution matching approaches sample from
a proposal distribution instead, and reweigh the samples
based on their importance weights. Despite the clear intuition behind distribution matching, these methods are not
used commonly for the task of reinforcement learning from
human feedback.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF)
has emerged as a pivotal technique to fine-tune Large Language Models (LLMs) into conversational agents that obey
pre-defined human preferences (Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai
et al., 2022; OpenAI et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023). This
process involves collecting a dataset of human preferences
and using it to align a Supervised Fine-Tuned (SFT) model
to human preferences.
Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) RLHF (Ziegler et al.,
2019), has been instrumental in the development of groundbreaking models such as GPT-3.5 (Ouyang et al., 2022; Ye

In this work, we address the primary reason for the
lack of success of distribution matching methods for
RLHF. Towards this end, we propose BRAI N- Bayesian

1

IBM Research AI. Correspondence to: Gaurav Pandey
<gpandey1@in.ibm.com>.

1

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

https://ai.meta.com/blog/meta-llama-3/
Arguably, the more performant versions of DPO still depend
on a RM for determining preference data (Liu et al., 2023).
2

1

