A Global Geometric Analysis of Maximal Coding Rate Reduction

Peng Wang 1 Huikang Liu 2 Druv Pai 3 Yaodong Yu 3 Zhihui Zhu 4 Qing Qu 1 Yi Ma 3 5

Abstract

a few. As argued by Bengio et al. (2013); Ma et al. (2022),
one major factor contributing to the success of deep learning
is the ability of deep networks to perform powerful nonlinear feature learning by converting the data distribution to a
compact and structured representation. This representation
greatly facilitates various downstream tasks, including classification (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020), segmentation (Kirillov
et al., 2023), and generation (Saharia et al., 2022).

2

The maximal coding rate reduction (MCR ) objective for learning structured and compact deep
representations is drawing increasing attention,
especially after its recent usage in the derivation
of fully explainable and highly effective deep network architectures. However, it lacks a complete
theoretical justification: only the properties of its
global optima are known, and its global landscape
has not been studied. In this work, we give a complete characterization of the properties of all its
local and global optima, as well as other types of
critical points. Specifically, we show that each
(local or global) maximizer of the MCR2 problem
corresponds to a low-dimensional, discriminative,
and diverse representation, and furthermore, each
critical point of the objective is either a local maximizer or a strict saddle point. Such a favorable
landscape makes MCR2 a natural choice of objective for learning diverse and discriminative representations via first-order optimization methods.
To validate our theoretical findings, we conduct
extensive experiments on both synthetic and real
data sets.

Based on the theory of data compression and optimal coding
(Ma et al., 2007), Chan et al. (2022); Yu et al. (2020) proposed a principled and unified framework for deep learning
to learn a compact and structured representation. Specifically, they proposed to maximize the difference between
the coding rate of all features and the sum of coding rates
of features in each class, which is referred to as maximal
coding rate reduction (MCR2 ). This problem is presented
in Problem (4) and visualized in Figure 1(a). Here, the coding rate measures the “compactness” of the features, which
is interpreted as the volume of a particular set spanned by
the learned features: a lower coding rate implies a more
compact feature set1 . Consequently, the MCR2 objective
aims to maximize the volume of the set of all features while
minimizing the volumes of the sets of features from each
class. Motivated by the structural similarities between deep
networks and unrolled optimization schemes for sparse coding (Gregor & LeCun, 2010; Monga et al., 2021), Chan et al.
(2022) constructed a new deep network based on an iterative
gradient descent scheme to maximize the MCR2 objective.2
Notably, each component of this deep network has precise
optimization and geometric interpretations. Moreover, it has
achieved strong empirical performance on various vision
and language tasks (Chu et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2023a).

1. Introduction
In the past decade, deep learning has exhibited remarkable
empirical success across a wide range of engineering and
scientific applications (LeCun et al., 2015), such as computer vision (He et al., 2016; Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014),
natural language processing (Sutskever et al., 2014; Vaswani
et al., 2017), and health care (Esteva et al., 2019), to name

Although the MCR2 -based approach to deep learning is conceptually “white-box” and has achieved remarkable empirical performance, its theoretical foundations have been relatively under-explored. In fact, the effective feature learning
mechanism and “white-box” network architecture design
based on MCR2 are direct consequences of these foundations, and understanding them will pave the way to improv-

1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor 2 Antai College of Economics and Management, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 3 Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of California, Berkeley 4 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Ohio State University, Columbus 5 Institute of Data Science, University of Hong Kong. Correspondence to: Peng Wang <peng8wang@gmail.com>, Yi Ma
<mayi@hku.hk>.

1

Please refer to Chan et al. (2022, Section 2.1) for more details
on measuring compactness of feature sets via coding rates.
2
When performing maximization, we actually mean that we use
gradient ascent. However, we write gradient descent to maintain
consistency with existing optimization literature.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

