Robust Data-driven Prescriptiveness Optimization

Mehran Poursoltani 1 Erick Delage 2 Angelos Georghiou 3

Abstract

programming (SP) problem is defined as
(SP ) x∗ ∈ arg min EF [h(x, ξ)],
x∈X

The abundance of data has led to the emergence of
a variety of optimization techniques that attempt
to leverage available side information to provide
more anticipative decisions. The wide range of
methods and contexts of application have motivated the design of a universal unitless measure
of performance known as the coefficient of prescriptiveness. This coefficient was designed to
quantify both the quality of contextual decisions
compared to a reference one and the prescriptive
power of side information. To identify policies
that maximize the former in a data-driven context,
this paper introduces a distributionally robust contextual optimization model where the coefficient
of prescriptiveness substitutes for the classical empirical risk minimization objective. We present
a bisection algorithm to solve this model, which
relies on solving a series of linear programs when
the distributional ambiguity set has an appropriate
nested form and polyhedral structure. Studying a
contextual shortest path problem, we evaluate the
robustness of the resulting policies against alternative methods when the out-of-sample dataset is
subject to varying amounts of distribution shift.

(1)

where X is a convex feasible set, h(x, ξ) is a cost function
that is assumed convex in x for all ξ, and ξ is assumed to
be drawn from the distribution F . The solution methods
for this problem mainly rely on either assuming a priori
distribution for F or exploiting a set of independent and
identically distributed observations. In the latter case, a
set of i.i.d observations of the random vector ξ denoted
by S := {ξi }N
i=1 can be used to formulate the following
sample average approximation problem:
N

(SAA) x∗ ∈ arg min
x∈X

1 X
h(x, ξi ),
N i=1

(2)

where we assume a uniform distribution over the observed
data. Recently, the availability of large datasets has played a
critical role in redirecting the optimization methods devised
for decision-making under uncertainty towards taking advantage of so-called “side information” or “covariates”. This
paradigm encourages decision-makers to benefit from the
available data beyond the desired random variables to make
more anticipative decisions. For instance, a portfolio manager who optimizes her investments in the stock market may
consider a variety of available micro and macroeconomic
indicators as side information to make more anticipative decisions (see Brandt et al. 2009 and Bazier-Matte & Delage
2020), while a traffic path planner can utilize side information like time of day, weather status and holiday/work day to
find the best route through the city (see Bertsimas & Kallus
2020). This gives rise to the following contextual stochastic
optimization (CSO) problem:

1. Introduction
Stochastic programming is perceived as one of the fundamental methods devised for decision-making under uncertainty (see Shapiro et al. 2021 and Birge & Louveaux 2011).
Given a cost function h(x, ξ) that depends on a decision
x ∈ Rnx and a random vector ξ ∈ Rnξ , the stochastic

(CSO) x∗ (ζ) ∈ arg min EF [h(x, ξ)|ζ],
x∈X

(3)

where ζ ∈ Rnζ denotes the given vector of “covariates”,
or so-called “features”. In this case, any observed random
vector ξi is accompanied by a vector of covariates ζi ∈ Rnζ .
The difficulty of this problem shows up when the conditional
probability distribution function Fξ|ζ is unknown, and only
a set of i.i.d observations T := {(ζi , ξi )}N
i=1 is available.
In this case, a data-driven variant of the CSO problem can
be written as

1
Desautels Faculty of Management, McGill University,
Montréal, Canada 2 GERAD & Department of Decision Sciences, HEC Montréal, Montréal, Canada 3 Department of
Business and Public Administration, University of Cyprus,
Nicosia, Cyprus. Correspondence to: Mehran Poursoltani
<mehran.poursoltani@mcgill.ca>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

x∗ (ζ) ∈ arg min EF̂ξ|ζ [h(x, ξ)],
x∈X

1

(4)

