MGit: A Model Versioning and Management System

Wei Hao * 1 2 Daniel Mendoza * 1 3 Rafael da Silva 4 Deepak Narayanan 1 5
Amar Phanishayee 4 Asaf Cidon 2 Junfeng Yang 2

Abstract

et al., 2016; Bommasani et al., 2021). For efficient execution on low-powered devices like mobile phones or embedded devices, full-precision models trained on datacenter
accelerators are often quantized, pruned, and distilled (Ba
& Caruana, 2014; Polino et al., 2018; Guo et al., 2021;
Hao et al., 2022). In regimes where new data is constantly
streaming in (e.g., in recommendation systems), models are
continuously trained (Baylor et al., 2019; Liu, 2017). In
complex deployments like self-driving cars, an individual
model might be composed of several related sub-models
built collaboratively (e.g., Tesla’s Autopilot software system (Karpathy, 2019) in 2019 had multiple components using the same shared backbone models to detect key visual
elements like traffic lights and human beings).

New ML models are often derived from existing
ones (e.g., through fine-tuning, quantization or
distillation), forming an ecosystem where models are related to each other and can share structure or even parameter values. Managing such
a large and evolving ecosystem of model derivatives is challenging. For instance, the overhead
of storing all such models is high, and models
may inherit bugs from related models, complicating error attribution and debugging. In this paper,
we propose a model versioning and management
system called MGit that makes it easier to store,
test, update, and collaborate on related models.
MGit introduces a lineage graph that records the
relationships between models, optimizations to
efficiently store model parameters, and abstractions over this lineage graph that facilitate model
testing, updating and collaboration. We find that
MGit works well in practice: MGit is able to reduce model storage footprint by up to 7×. Additionally, in a user study with 20 ML practitioners,
users complete a model updating task 3× faster
on average with MGit.

Unfortunately, no existing system allows for the easy management of these related (or derived) models. Existing widely-used frameworks like PyTorch (Paszke et al.,
2019), TensorFlow (Abadi et al., 2016) and Hugging Face
Transformers (Wolf et al., 2019) support the development
and management of single models at a time, but do not store
dependence information across different models.
In this paper, we show that this is an untapped opportunity.
Without automated lineage tracking, various tasks in the
model management life cycle are hard and inefficient:

1. Introduction

• Model storage and memory redundancy. Many
models share parameter values, or have minor deviations, leading to redundancy.
• Model debugging. It is hard to collectively debug
models that are themselves derived from other models. Does an undesired behavior originate in a given
model or in an upstream model?
• Model updating. It is hard to update related models
and keep them in sync. If a certain model is updated,
how should dependent models be updated?
• Model collaboration. It is hard for multiple users to
collaboratively develop models and determine if concurrent changes made to the model conflict.

ML models are deployed across a wide set of tasks, spanning different target hardware, data and label availability
regimes. In all of these disparate use cases, it has became
increasingly common for models to be generated from existing ones. For instance, when a large amount of supervised data might not be available for a particular task, pretrained models created by self-supervised pretraining on a
large unlabeled dataset can be fine-tuned on a smaller labeled dataset (Pratt, 1992; Torrey & Shavlik, 2010; Weiss
*

Equal contribution 1 Work done while authors were at
Microsoft Research 2 Columbia University 3 Stanford University 4 Microsoft Research 5 NVIDIA. Correspondence
to: Wei Hao, Daniel Mendoza <wh2473@columbia.edu,
dmendo@stanford.edu>.

To leverage the opportunity presented by lineage tracking,
we design and build a system called MGit. MGit makes the
following contributions.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

Lineage graph. MGit proposes a lineage graph data struc-

1

