Exploring the Enigma of Neural Dynamics Through A Scattering-Transform
Mixer Landscape for Riemannian Manifold

Tingting Dan 1 Ziquan Wei 1 2 Won Hwa Kim 3 Guorong Wu 1 2 4 5 6

Abstract

relationship between (static) brain structure and
(dynamic) function, challenging the prevailing notion in cognitive neuroscience by proposing that
neural activities are essentially excited by brainwide oscillation waves living on the geometry of
human connectomes, instead of being confined to
focal areas.

The human brain is a complex inter-wired system
that emerges spontaneous functional fluctuations.
In spite of tremendous success in the experimental
neuroscience field, a system-level understanding
of how brain anatomy supports various neural
activities remains elusive. Capitalizing on the
unprecedented amount of neuroimaging data, we
present a physics-informed deep model to uncover
the coupling mechanism between brain structure
and function through the lens of data geometry
that is rooted in the widespread wiring topology of
connections between distant brain regions. Since
deciphering the puzzle of self-organized patterns
in functional fluctuations is the gateway to understanding the emergence of cognition and behavior, we devise a geometric deep model to uncover
manifold mapping functions that characterize the
intrinsic feature representations of evolving functional fluctuations on the Riemannian manifold.
In lieu of learning unconstrained mapping functions, we introduce a set of graph-harmonic scattering transforms to impose the brain-wide geometry on top of manifold mapping functions,
which allows us to cast the manifold-based deep
learning into a reminiscent of MLP-Mixer architecture (in computer vision) for Riemannian manifold. As a proof-of-concept approach, we explore
a neural-manifold perspective to understand the

1. Introduction
Human brain is a complex system physically wired by massive bundles of nerve fibers (Bassett & Sporns, 2017). On
top of intertwined structural connectomes, ubiquitous neural
oscillations emerge remarkable functional fluctuations, synchronizing across large-scale neural circuits, that support
myriad high-level cognitive functions necessary for everyday living (Bressler & Menon, 2010). With the prevalence
of structural and functional neuroimaging technology (aka.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging, MRI) in many neuroscience
studies, the idea of understanding the mind forms an important concept that the dynamic nature of human brain cannot
be understood by thinking of the system as comprised of independent components (Terras, 2012). In this regard, there
is a critical need to establish a system-level understanding of
how the brain function emerges from anatomical structures
and how the self-organized system behavior of functional
fluctuations supports the cognitive states.
Like many dynamic systems in the universe, the evolving functional fluctuations manifest remarkable geometric patterns to the extent of self-organized spontaneous coactivation of neural activities. As shown in Fig. 1 (left), functional connectivity (FC), formed by the pairwise correlation
between two time courses of BOLD (blood-oxygen-leveldependent) signals (Bullmore & Sporns, 2009), exhibits
small world properties (Watts & Strogatz, 1998). From a
data science perspective, the FC matrix lives on the highdimensional Riemannian manifold of SPD (symmetric and
positive-definite) matrices. Due to many well-studied mathematical properties of SPD matrix, tremendous efforts have
been made to statistical modeling (You & Park, 2021), clustering (Qiu et al., 2015), and characterization of temporal
dynamics (Dan et al., 2022a) from the manifold instances

1 Department of Psychiatry, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, 27599, USA. 2 Department of Computer Science, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, NC, 27599, USA. 3 Computer Science and Engineering /
Graduate School of AI, POSTECH, Pohang, 37673, South Korea.
4 Department of Statistics and Operations Research (STOR), University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, 27599,
USA. 5 UNC NeuroScience Center, University of North Carolina
at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, 27599, USA. 6 Carolina Institute
for Developmental Disabilities, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, 27599, USA. Correspondence to:
Guorong Wu <grwu@med.unc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

