Transformers are SSMs: Generalized Models and Efficient Algorithms Through
Structured State Space Duality

Tri Dao * 1 Albert Gu * 2
algorithmic and systems perspective.
While Transformers have been the main architecture
Our main goal is to develop a rich body of theoretical connections
behind deep learning’s success in language modeling,
between structured SSMs and variants of attention. This will
state-space models (SSMs) such as Mamba have
allow us to transfer algorithmic and systems optimizations
recently been shown to match or outperform
originally developed for Transformers to SSMs, towards the goal
Transformers at small to medium scale. We show that
of building foundation models that perform better than Transthese families of models are actually quite closely
formers while scaling more efficiently in sequence length. A
related, and develop a rich framework of theoretical
milestone contribution in this direction was the Linear Attention
connections between SSMs and variants of attention,
(LA) framework (Katharopoulos et al., 2020), which derived
connected through various decompositions of a wella connection between autoregressive attention and linear RNNs
studied class of structured semiseparable matrices.
by showing the equivalence between “dual forms” of quadratic
Our state space duality (SSD) framework allows us
kernelized attention and a particular linear recurrence. This
to design a new architecture (Mamba-2) whose core
duality allows new capabilities such as the ability to have both
layer is an a refinement of Mamba’s selective SSM
efficient parallelizable training and efficient autoregressive inferthat is 2-8× faster, while continuing to be competitive
ence. In the same spirit, this paper provides multiple viewpoints
with Transformers on language modeling.
connecting linear-complexity SSMs with quadratic-complexity
forms to combine the strengths of SSMs and attention.1

Abstract

State Space Duality. Our framework connecting structured
SSMs and variants of attention, which we call structured
state space duality (SSD), is made through the abstractions of
structured matrices: matrices with subquadratic parameters and
multiplication complexity. We develop two broad frameworks for
representing sequence models, one as matrix transformations and
one as tensor contractions, which each reveal different perspectives of the duality. Our technical contributions include:

1 Introduction
Transformers, in particular decoder-only models (e.g.
GPT (Brown et al., 2020), Llama (Touvron et al., 2023)) which
process input sequences in a causal fashion, are one of the
main drivers of modern deep learning’s success. Numerous
approaches attempt to approximate the core attention layer to
address its efficiency issues (Tay et al., 2022), such as scaling
quadratically in sequence length during training and requiring
a cache of size linear in sequence length during autoregressive
generation. In parallel, a class of alternative sequence models,
structured state-space models (SSMs), have emerged with linear
scaling in sequence length during training and constant state size
during generation. They show strong performance on long-range
tasks (e.g. S4 (Gu et al., 2022a)) and recently matched or beat
Transformers on language modeling (e.g. Mamba (Gu & Dao,
2023)) at small to moderate scale. However, the development
of SSMs have appeared disjoint from the community’s collective
effort to improve Transformers, such as understanding them
theoretically as well as optimizing them on modern hardware.
As a result, it is more difficult to understand and experiment with
SSMs compared to Transformers, and it remains challenging
to train SSMs as efficiently as Transformers from both an
*

• We show an equivalence between state space models
and a well-studied family of structured matrices called
semiseparable matrices. This connection is at the heart our
framework, revealing new properties and algorithms for SSMs.
A central message of this paper is that different methods of
computing state space models can be reframed as various
matrix multiplication algorithms on structured matrices.
• We significantly improve the theory of linear attention (Katharopoulos et al., 2020). We first provide an incisive
proof of its recurrent form through the language of tensor
contractions, and then generalize it to a new family of
structured masked attention (SMA).
• We connect SSMs and SMA, showing that they have a large
intersection that are duals of each other, possessing both
SSM-like linear and attention-like quadratic forms.

1

Equal contribution Department of Computer Science, Princeton
University 2 Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence to: Tri Dao<tri@tridao.me>, Albert Gu
<agu@cs.cmu.edu>.

1
Technically speaking, these connections only relate to certain
flavors of attention; the title of this paper is an homage to Katharopoulos
et al. (2020) who first showed that “Transformers are RNNs”.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine Learning,
Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by the author(s).

1

