Optimal Acceleration for Minimax and Fixed-Point Problems is Not Unique

TaeHo Yoon 1 Jaeyeon Kim 1 Jaewook J. Suh 1 Ernest K. Ryu 2

Abstract

rate that exactly matches the known lower bound. The representative cases of our new accelerated algorithms are dual
algorithms of the prior anchor-based accelerated algorithms
in the sense of H-duality. The resulting new acceleration
mechanisms are materially different from the existing anchoring mechanism.

Recently, accelerated algorithms using the anchoring mechanism for minimax optimization and
fixed-point problems have been proposed, and
matching complexity lower bounds establish their
optimality. In this work, we present the surprising
observation that the optimal acceleration mechanism in minimax optimization and fixed-point
problems is not unique. Our new algorithms
achieve exactly the same worst-case convergence
rates as existing anchor-based methods while using materially different acceleration mechanisms.
Specifically, these new algorithms are dual to the
prior anchor-based accelerated methods in the
sense of H-duality. This finding opens a new avenue of research on accelerated algorithms since
we now have a family of methods that empirically exhibit varied characteristics while having
the same optimal worst-case guarantee.

These findings show that anchor-based acceleration is not
unique and sufficient as the mechanism of achieving the
exact optimal complexity and enable us to correctly reframe
the study of optimal acceleration as a study of a family of acceleration mechanisms rather than a singular one. This shift
in perspective will likely be critical in the future research
toward a more complete and fundamental understanding of
accelerations in fixed-point and minimax problems.
1.1. Preliminaries
We use standard notation for set-valued operators (Bauschke
& Combettes, 2017; Ryu & Yin, 2022). An operator
𝔸 : Rd ⇒ Rd is a set-valued function (so 𝔸(x) ⊆ Rd
for x ∈ Rd ). For simplicity, we write 𝔸x = 𝔸(x). The
graph of 𝔸 is defined and denoted as Gra 𝔸 = {(x, y) | x ∈
Rd , y ∈ 𝔸x}. The inverse of 𝔸 is defined by 𝔸−1 y =
{x ∈ Rd | y ∈ 𝔸x}. Scalar multiples and sums of operators
are defined in the Minkowski sense. If 𝕋x is a singleton
for all x ∈ Rd , we write 𝕋 : Rd → Rd and treat it as a
function. An operator 𝕋 : Rd → Rd is L-Lipschitz (L > 0)
if ∥𝕋x − 𝕋y∥ ≤ L ∥x − y∥ for all x, y ∈ Rd . We say 𝕋 is
nonexpansive if it is 1-Lipschitz.

1. Introduction
Accelerated algorithms using the so-called anchoring mechanism have been recently proposed for solving minimax
optimization and fixed-point problems. Furthermore, these
algorithms are optimal: for minimax problems, the gap between the upper and lower bounds is a constant factor of
16, and for fixed-point problems, there is no gap, not even
a constant factor. Therefore, anchoring was thought to be
“the” correct acceleration mechanism for these setups.

A function L : Rn × Rm → R is convex-concave if L(u, v)
is convex in u for all fixed v ∈ Rm and concave in v for
all fixed u ∈ Rn . If L(u⋆ , v) ≤ L(u⋆ , v⋆ ) ≤ L(u, v⋆ )
for all (u, v) ∈ Rn × Rm , then (u⋆ , v⋆ ) is a saddle point
of L. For L > 0, if L is differentiable and ∇L is LLipschitz on Rn × Rm , we say L is L-smooth. In this
case, we define the saddle operator of L by ∇± L(u, v) =
(∇u L(u, v), −∇v L(u, v)). In most of the cases, we use
the joint variable notation x = (u, v) and concisely write
∇± L(x) in place of ∇± L(u, v).

In this work, however, we present the surprising observation that the optimal acceleration mechanism in minimax
optimization and fixed-point problems is not unique. For
minimax optimization, we introduce a new algorithm with
the same worst-case rate as the best-known algorithm. For
fixed-point problems, we introduce a continuous family of
exact optimal algorithms, all achieving the same worst-case
1

Department of Mathematical Sciences, Seoul National University 2 Department of Mathematics, University of California, Los
Angeles. Correspondence to: Ernest Ryu <eryu@math.ucla.edu>.

1.2. Related work
Here, we quickly review the most closely related prior work
while deferring the more comprehensive literature survey to
Appendix A.

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

