Graph-based Forecasting with Missing Data
through Spatiotemporal Downsampling
Ivan Marisca 1 Cesare Alippi 1 2 Filippo Maria Bianchi 3 4

Abstract

Temporal Hierarchy
Spatial Hierarchy

Given a set of synchronous time series, each associated with a sensor-point in space and characterized by inter-series relationships, the problem of
spatiotemporal forecasting consists of predicting
future observations for each point. Spatiotemporal graph neural networks achieve striking results by representing the relationships across time
series as a graph. Nonetheless, most existing
methods rely on the often unrealistic assumption
that inputs are always available and fail to capture hidden spatiotemporal dynamics when part
of the data is missing. In this work, we tackle
this problem through hierarchical spatiotemporal
downsampling. The input time series are progressively coarsened over time and space, obtaining a
pool of representations that capture heterogeneous
temporal and spatial dynamics. Conditioned on
observations and missing data patterns, such representations are combined by an interpretable attention mechanism to generate the forecasts. Our
approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods on
synthetic and real-world benchmarks under different missing data distributions, particularly in the
presence of contiguous blocks of missing values.

Incomplete past observations

Attention
reweight

Predictions

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed framework. The hierarchical
design allows us to learn a pool of multi-scale spatiotemporal
representations. Conditioned on the data and the missing value
pattern, the attention mechanism dynamically combines representation from different scales to compute the predictions.

sensors track vehicles’ flow or speed. Usually, data are
sampled regularly over time and synchronously across the
sensors, which are often characterized by strong correlations
and dependencies between each other, i.e., across the spatial dimension. For this reason, a prominent deep learning
approach is to consider the time series and their relationships as graphs and to process them with architectures that
combine graph neural networks (GNNs) (Battaglia et al.,
2018; Bronstein et al., 2021) with sequence-processing operators (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997; Borovykh et al.,
2017). These architectures are known as spatiotemporal
graph neural networks (STGNNs) (Jin et al., 2023).

1. Introduction

A notable limit of most existing STGNNs is the assumption
that inputs are complete and regular sequences. However,
real-world SNs are prone to failures and faults, resulting
eventually in missing values in the collected time series.
When missing data occurs randomly and sporadically, the
localized processing imposed by the inductive biases in
STGNNs acts as an effective regularization, exploiting observations close in time and space to the missing one (Cini
et al., 2022). Challenges arise when data are missing in
larger and contiguous blocks, with gaps that occur in consecutive time steps and are spatially proximate. In SNs,
this might be due to a sensor failure lasting for multiple
time lags or problems affecting a whole portion of the network. In such scenarios, reaching valid observations that
may be significantly distant in time and space, yet relevant
for capturing the underlying dynamics, would require addi-

Time-series analysis and forecasting often deal with highdimensional data acquired by sensor networks (SNs), a
broad term for systems that collect (multivariate) measurements over time at different spatial locations. Examples
include systems monitoring air quality, where each sensor records air pollutants’ concentrations, or traffic, where
1
IDSIA USI-SUPSI, Università della Svizzera italiana
Politecnico di Milano 3 Dept. of Mathematics and Statistics, UiT the Arctic University of Norway 4 NORCE, Norwegian Research Centre AS. Correspondence to: Ivan
Marisca <ivan.marisca@usi.ch>, Filippo Maria Bianchi <filippo.m.bianchi@uit.no>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

