Measures of diversity and space-filling designs for categorical data

Cedric Malherbe 1 Emilio Domı́nguez-Sánchez Merwan Barlier Igor Colin 2 Haitham Bou-Ammar 3 4
Tom Diethe 1

Abstract

a rich training set that captures all the information spread out
across the space of possibilities (Pronzato & Müller, 2012).
When facing such problems, one can generally employ two
routes by either randomly subsampling the space or by using space-filling methods (Mead, 1990; Pronzato, 2008;
Joseph, 2016) such as quasi-Monte Carlo methods (Johnson
et al., 1990; Niederreiter, 1992; Sobol, 1967; Faure, 1982).
Nonetheless, it has long been known that random sampling
provides suboptimal results for these tasks (Mead, 1990)
and space-filling methods, on the other hand, rely on the
strong assumption that the data live in a continuous space.
Moreover, in many application domains, we often encounter
categorical data such as hyperparameters in deep architecture crafting, words in natural language, atoms in molecules
or job categories in demographic data that do not satisfy the
continuous assumption and thus create a gap between existing techniques and practical settings. Additionally, although
the diversity problem is rather fundamental, almost nothing
is known from a theoretical perspective as soon as the continuity assumption does not hold. In this paper, we propose
to address both these issues by providing new theoretical
insights and novel subset selection methods that are guaranteed to preserve diversity for categorical data. The main
difficulty of designing such methods stems from the fact
that, in categorical spaces, one can only rely on the minimal
information that two items are different from one another
without any possible ordering, which drastically limits the
possibility to adapt existing techniques that rely on ordering
the data space. In this paper, we propose to tackle these
challenges and show how to employ tools from both the
combinatorial and greedy optimization literature to develop
methods to generate diverse designs. More precisely, our
contribution can be summarized as follows:

Selecting a small subset of items that represent the
diversity of a larger population lies at the heart of
many data analysis and machine learning applications. However, when it comes to items described
by categorical features, the lack of natural ordering and the combinatorial nature of the search
space pose significant challenges to the current
selection techniques and make existing methods
ill-suited. In this paper, we propose to make a
step in that direction by proposing novel methods
to select subsets of diverse categorical data based
on the advances in combinatorial optimization.
First, we start to cast the subset selection problem through the lens of the optimization of three
diversity metrics. We then provide novel bounds
for this problem and present exact solvers that
unfortunately come with a high computational
cost. To overcome this bottleneck, we go on and
show how to employ tools from linear programming and submodular optimization by introducing
two computationally plausible methods that still
present approximation guarantees about the diversity metrics. Finally, a numerical assessment is
provided to illustrate the potential of the designs
with respect to state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
The diversity of data is essential in machine learning. Indeed, whenever it comes to applications where we wish to
display a limited number of items to a user (Lin & Bilmes,
2011; Malherbe & Scaman, 2022) or from collecting training examples for learning algorithms (Durakovic, 2017), it
is crucial to have a set of items as diverse as possible to either efficiently represents the diversity of the data or to have

1. we formulate the problem of optimal categorical designs by using three notions of diversity in categorical
spaces: the average covering, packing, and covering
radii (Section 2);

1
DS&AI, BioPharmaceuticals R&D, AstraZeneca, UK 2 LTCI,
Télécom Paris 3 University College London 4 Huawei Noah’s Ark
Lab. Correspondence to: <cedric.malherbe@astrazeneca.com,
haitham.bou-ammar@huawei.com>.

2. we provide theoretical results for the construction of
optimal categorical designs concerning diversity metrics (Proposition 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3) and novel exact
formulation of the problems using linear programming
(Proposition 3.4), which allows to generate exact designs for small spaces due to their computational cost;

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

