Differentially Private Sum-Product Networks

Xenia Heilmann 1 Mattia Cerrato 1 Ernst Althaus 1

Abstract

privacy definitions. DP provides strong anonymization guarantees, as it formalizes that randomized computations over
similar datasets have to yield similar outputs. Thus, in the
event that an adversary gains access to the outputs of a DP
algorithm, they cannot distinguish whether a specific datapoint is contained in the input. While DP is applicable
to many use cases, it does have one limitation: Each DP
model trained on the same data adds to the privacy costs
and decreases the privacy guarantees for the input dataset.
Therefore, training several different DP models for different tasks on the same data does not scale well in terms of
privacy.

Differentially private ML approaches seek to learn
models which may be publicly released while
guaranteeing that the input data is kept private.
One issue with this construction is that further
model releases based on the same training data
(e.g. for a new task) incur a further privacy budget
cost. Privacy-preserving synthetic data generation is one possible solution to this conundrum.
However, models trained on synthetic private data
struggle to approach the performance of private,
ad-hoc models. In this paper, we present a novel
method based on sum-product networks that is
able to perform both privacy-preserving classification and privacy-preserving data generation with a
single model. To the best of our knowledge, ours
is the first approach that provides both discriminative and generative capabilities to differentially
private ML. We show that our approach outperforms the state of the art in terms of stability (i.e.
number of training runs required for convergence)
and utility of the generated data.

The concept of generating synthetic private data has
emerged as a possible solution to this issue (Arnold & Neunhoeffer, 2020; Bowen & Snoke, 2019). If DP synthetic
data is generated, it is then possible to use it to train any
number of models, without incurring additional expenses of
the privacy budget (due to the Post-processing Theorem –
see Theorem 2.6). One issue with the current state-of-the-art
methodologies is the utility-privacy tradeoff. Simply put,
it is challenging to generate data that is at the same time
differentially private, highly representative of the original
and useful to train ML models (Tao et al., 2021). Models
trained on DP synthetic data will display lower utility (e.g.
accuracy) compared to DP implementations of ML models
that are trained on the original non-private data.

1. Introduction
In today’s data-driven world, a vast amount of data is collected and processed each day. Data collection is not without
risk, as it centralizes sensitive information of many individuals. The need for data protection is particularly present
when data is shared for commercial and scientific reasons,
or when models trained on these data are released to the
public.

In this paper we provide a method based on sum-product
networks (Poon & Domingos, 2011) that is able to both generate private synthetic data and perform classification in a
single training run. We refer to the methodology as differentially private sum-product networks (DPSPNs). These models, when trained for a classification task, may be also employed to generate DP synthetic data or perform marginal inference over the class labels, without any retraining or adaptation required. Our methodology relies on the flexibility
of sum-product networks (SPNs). SPNs are rooted acyclic
directed graphs representing multivariate probability distributions and their structure may in general be learned from
data. Our contribution is a differentially private method
to perform structure and parameter learning in SPNs. We
show that DPSPNs have several advantages compared to the
state-of-the-art methodologies in this space. In terms of stability, we show in Section 5.2 that our method needs a lower
number of training runs to converge to an useful model com-

One popular method for protecting sensitive information of
individuals is differential privacy (DP). It was introduced by
Dwork et al. (2014) and is a formally defined privacy requirement which is one of the most robust and widely accepted
1
Institute of Computer Science, Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, Saarstraße 21, Mainz 55122, RhinelandPalatinate, Germany. Correspondence to: Xenia Heilmann
<xenia.heilmann@uni-mainz.de>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

