BiSHop: Bi-Directional Cellular Learning for Tabular Data
with Generalized Sparse Modern Hopfield Model

Chenwei Xu * 1 Yu-Chao Huang * 2 Jerry Yao-Chieh Hu * 1 Weijian Li 1 Ammar Gilani 1 Hsi-Sheng Goan 2 3 4
Han Liu 1 5

1. Introduction

Abstract
We introduce the Bi-Directional Sparse Hopfield
Network (BiSHop), a novel end-to-end framework for tabular learning. BiSHop handles the
two major challenges of deep tabular learning:
non-rotationally invariant data structure and feature sparsity in tabular data. Our key motivation comes from the recently established connection between associative memory and attention mechanisms. Consequently, BiSHop uses
a dual-component approach, sequentially processing data both column-wise and row-wise
through two interconnected directional learning
modules. Computationally, these modules house
layers of generalized sparse modern Hopfield
layers, a sparse extension of the modern Hopfield model with learnable sparsity. Methodologically, BiSHop facilitates multi-scale representation learning, capturing both intra-feature and
inter-feature interactions, with adaptive sparsity
at each scale. Empirically, through experiments
on diverse real-world datasets, BiSHop surpasses
current SOTA methods with significantly fewer
HPO runs, marking it a robust solution for deep
tabular learning. The code is available on GitHub;
future updates are on arXiv.

The field of developing deep learning architectures for
tabular data has recently experienced rapid advancements
(Somepalli et al., 2022; Gorishniy et al., 2021; Arik and Pfister, 2021; Huang et al., 2020). The primary driving force
behind this trend is to overcome the limitations of the current dominant methods for tabular data: tree-based methods.
Although tree-based methods excel in tabular learning, they
cannot integrate with deep learning architectures. Therefore,
pursuing deep tabular learning is not just a matter of enhancing performance but is also crucial to bridging the existing
gap. Recent research has proposed new methodologies in
deep tabular learning. However, a recent tabular benchmark
study (Grinsztajn et al., 2022) reveals that tree-based methods still surpass deep learning models. This is due to two
main challenges in deep tabular learning, as highlighted by
Grinsztajn et al. (2022, Section 5.3 & 5.4):
(C1) Non-Rotationally Invariant Data Structure: The
non-rotationally invariant structure of tabular data
weakens the effectiveness of deep learning models
that have rotationally invariant learning procedures.
(C2) Feature Sparsity: Tabular datasets are generally
sparser than typical datasets used in deep learning,
which makes it challenging for deep learning models
to learn from uninformative features.
Inspired by the hierarchical and interconnected nature of
the human brain (Presigny and Fallani, 2022; Krotov, 2021),
we introduce the Bi-Directional Sparse Hopfield Network
(BiSHop), a Hopfield-based deep learning framework tailored for tabular data. To address the non-rotationally invariant data structure of tabular data (C1), our model employs
a dual-component design, named the Bi-directional Sparse
Hopfield Module (BiSHopModule). This design mirrors
the human brain’s memory mechanisms, where different regions work collaboratively to form and retrieve associative
memories. Our model uses bi-directional learning through
two separate Hopfield models, focusing on column-wise and
row-wise patterns separately. This approach incorporates
the tabular data’s inherent structure as an inductive bias.

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science,
Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA 2 Department
of Physics and Center for Theoretical Physics, National
Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan 3 Center for Quantum Science and Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei,
Taiwan 4 Physics Division, National Center for Theoretical
Sciences, Taipei, Taiwan 5 Department of Statistics and Data
Science, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA. Correspondence to: Chenwei Xu <cxu@northwestern.edu>,
Yu-Chao
Huang
<r11222015@ntu.edu.tw>,
Jerry
Yao-Chieh
Hu
<jhu@u.northwestern.edu>,
Weijian
Li
<weijianli@u.northwestern.edu>,
Ammar
Gilani
<ammargilani2024@u.northwestern.edu>,
Hsi-Sheng
Goan
<goan@phys.ntu.edu.tw>,
Han
Liu
<hanliu@northwestern.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

For tackling the features sparsity in tabular data (C2), we
utilize the generalized sparse modern Hopfield model (Wu
1

