Understanding Stochastic Natural Gradient Variational Inference

Kaiwen Wu 1 Jacob R. Gardner 1

Abstract

et al., 2014). Indeed, NGVI as well as its variants empirically outperforms gradient descent in many cases, and
thus enjoys applications in a wide range of probabilistic
models. Here, we name a few exmaples: latent Dirichlet
allocation topic models (Hoffman et al., 2013), Bayesian
neural networks (Khan et al., 2018; Osawa et al., 2019), and
large-scale Gaussian processes (Hensman et al., 2013; 2015;
Salimbeni et al., 2018).

Stochastic natural gradient variational inference
(NGVI) is a popular posterior inference method
with applications in various probabilistic models.
Despite its wide usage, little is known about the
non-asymptotic convergence rate in the stochastic
setting. We aim to lessen this gap and provide a
better understanding. For conjugate likelihoods,
we prove the first O( T1 ) non-asymptotic convergence rate of stochastic NGVI. The complexity is
no worse than stochastic gradient descent (a.k.a.
black-box variational inference) and the rate likely
has better constant dependency that leads to faster
convergence in practice. For non-conjugate likelihoods, we show that stochastic NGVI with the
canonical parameterization implicitly optimizes a
non-convex objective. Thus, a global convergence
rate of O( T1 ) is unlikely without some significant
new understanding of optimizing the ELBO using
natural gradients.

Despite its wide usage, a non-asymptotic convergence rate
of NGVI in the stochastic setting is absent, even for simple
conjugate likelihoods. A few convergence arguments exist
in the literature, but none of them applies to any practical
uses of NGVI. For example, Hoffman et al. (2013) have a
convergence argument 1 by assuming the Fisher information
matrix has eigenvalues bounded from below (by a positive
constant) throughout the natural gradient updates. Khan
et al. (2016) analyze a variant of NGVI based on Bregman
proximal gradient descent by assuming the (KL) divergence
is α-strongly convex, a condition that generally does not
hold (at least for the KL divergence). Besides, Khan et al.
(2016) did not obtain a complexity bound in the stochastic
setting—they only showed convergence to a region around
stationary points. Note that these assumptions do not hold in
the entire domain, provably. Even if they hold in a subset of
the domain, the constants in these assumptions are difficult
to estimate, and might even be arbitrarily bad as the posterior
distribution p(z | y) contracts.2

1. Introduction
Given a prior p(z) and a likelihood p(y | z), variational
inference (VI) approximates the posterior p(z | y) by optimizing the evidence lower bound (ELBO) in a family of
variational distributions (Blei et al., 2017). Natural gradient
variational inference (NGVI), in particular, optimizes the
ELBO by natural gradient descent (NGD) (Amari, 1998).
Different from (standard) gradient descent that follows the
steepest descent direction induced by the Euclidean distance, NGD follows the steepest descent direction induced
by the KL divergence (Honkela & Valpola, 2004; Hensman
et al., 2012; Hoffman et al., 2013). The folk wisdom is that
the KL divergence is a better “metric” to compare distributions and thus NGD is believed to be superior than gradient
descent, a.k.a. black-box variational inference (Ranganath

This work aims to lessen this gap and obtain a “clean” analysis, with minimal assumptions, that is applicable to some
practical uses of stochastic NGVI. For the sake of generality, existing analyses have to use assumptions that does
not hold in practice. Therefore, we pursue the opposite
direction of generality—the basic setting of conjugate likelihoods, for which we establish the first O( T1 ) non-asymptotic
convergence rate of stochastic natural gradient variational
inference. This rate has the same complexity as the convergence rate of stochastic projected (and proximal) gradient
descent recently studied by Domke (2020); Domke et al.
(2023); Kim et al. (2023). This, along with our experiments, implies that NGVI ultimately may share the same

1
Department of Computer and Information Science, University
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, United States. Correspondence to:
Kaiwen Wu <kaiwenwu@seas.upenn.edu>, Jacob R. Gardner
<jacobrg@seas.upenn.edu>.

1
Hoffman et al. (2013) did not give a convergence proof besides
a reference to Bottou (1998).
2
For instance, the Fisher information matrix gets increasingly
close to singular as the covariance of the posterior p(z | y) shrinks.

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

