Fast White-Box Adversarial Streaming Without a Random Oracle

Ying Feng 1 Aayush Jain 1 David P. Woodruff 1

Abstract

sources available to the algorithm. In the streaming model,
the input data is implicitly defined through a stream of data
elements that sequentially arrive one-by-one. One can also
delete a previous occurrence of an item. An algorithm makes
one pass over the stream and uses limited space to approximate a desired function of the input. In the formalization of
Alon, Matias, and Szegedy (Alon et al., 1996), the data is
represented as an underlying n-dimensional vector that is
initialized to 0n , and then undergoes a sequence of additive
updates to its coordinates. The algorithm aims to optimize
the space and time to process these updates, while being
able to respond to queries about this underlying vector.

Recently, the question of adversarially robust
streaming, where the stream is allowed to depend
on the randomness of the streaming algorithm,
has gained a lot of attention. In this work, we consider a strong white-box adversarial model (Ajtai
et al. PODS 2022), in which the adversary has
access to all past random coins and the parameters used by the streaming algorithm. We focus
on the sparse recovery problem and extend our
result to other tasks such as distinct element estimation and low-rank approximation of matrices
and tensors. The main drawback of previous work
is that it requires a random oracle, which is especially problematic in the streaming model since
the amount of randomness is counted in the space
complexity of a streaming algorithm. Also, the
previous work suffers from large update time. We
construct a near-optimal solution for the sparse recovery problem in white-box adversarial streams,
based on the subexponentially secure Learning
with Errors assumption. Importantly, our solution does not require a random oracle and has a
polylogarithmic per item processing time. We
also give results in a related white-box adversarially robust distributed model. Our constructions
are based on homomorphic encryption schemes
satisfying very mild structural properties that are
currently satisfied by most known schemes.

This model captures key resource requirements of algorithms for many practical settings such as Internet routers
and traffic logs (Lall et al., 2006; Zhao et al., 2005;
Sung et al., 2006; Venkataraman et al., 2005; Cormode
& Muthukrishnan, 2005; Cormode & Garofalakis, 2008),
databases (Selinger et al., 1979; Dasu et al., 2002; Flajolet
& Nigel Martin, 1985; Lightstone, 2018; Shukla et al., 1996;
Brown et al., 2005), sensor networks (Hu et al., 2022; Gaber,
2007), financial transaction data (Almeida et al., 2023), and
scientific data streams (Chandrasekaran et al., 2003; Szalay
et al., 2002). See (Muthukrishnan, 2005) for an overview of
streaming algorithms and their applications.
A large body of work on streaming algorithms has been
designed for oblivious streams, for which the sequence of
updates may be chosen adversarially, but it is chosen independently of the randomness of the streaming algorithm. Recently, there is a growing body of work on robust streaming
algorithms in the black-box adversarial model (Ben-Eliezer
& Yogev, 2020; Ben-Eliezer et al., 2021; Hassidim et al.,
2020; Woodruff & Zhou, 2021; Alon et al., 2021; Kaplan
et al., 2021; Braverman et al., 2021; Menuhin & Naor, 2021;
Attias et al., 2021; Ben-Eliezer et al., 2022; Chakrabarti
et al., 2022), in which the adversary can monitor the outputs of the streaming algorithm and choose future stream
updates based on these outputs. While useful in a number
of applications, there are other settings where the adversary
may also have access to the internal state of the algorithm,
and this necessitates looking at a stronger adversarial model
known as the white-box adversarial streaming model.

1. Introduction
The streaming model of computation has emerged as an
increasingly popular paradigm for the analysis of massive
datasets, where the overwhelming size of the data places
restrictions on the memory, computation time, and other re1

Department of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. Correspondence
to:
Ying Feng <yingfeng@andrew.cmu.edu>, Aayush
Jain <aayushja@andrew.cmu.edu>, David P. Woodruff
<dwoodruf@cs.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

