Reward Model Learning vs. Direct Policy Optimization:
A Comparative Analysis of Learning from Human Preferences

Andi Nika 1 Debmalya Mandal 2 Parameswaran Kamalaruban 3 Georgios Tzannetos 1
Goran Radanović 1 Adish Singla 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Learning from human preferences has grown more
prominent as we move closer to artificial general intelligence. One of the most effective ways to learn from
preferences is through reinforcement learning from human
feedback (RLHF), which involves a two-step process of
reward learning and regularized policy optimization. The
attractiveness of this paradigm lies in its ability to model
the reward function based solely on preference data. This
makes it highly applicable in numerous practical situations
where rewards are not given a priori or are challenging
to define accurately. Once the reward is modeled, RLHF
solves a regularized value function maximization problem
to obtain a fine-tuned policy. This paradigm has enjoyed
a lot of applications varying from game-playing (Christiano
et al., 2017; Warnell et al., 2018; Knox & Stone, 2008;
MacGlashan et al., 2017), robotics (Shin et al., 2023;
Brown et al., 2019), and training large language models
(LLMs) (Ziegler et al., 2019; Nakano et al., 2021; Wu et al.,
2021; Ouyang et al., 2022; Stiennon et al., 2020; Glaese
et al., 2022; Ramamurthy et al., 2023; Menick et al., 2022;
Ganguli et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022; Gao et al., 2023).

In this paper, we take a step towards a deeper understanding of learning from human preferences
by systematically comparing the paradigm of reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF)
with the recently proposed paradigm of direct preference optimization (DPO). We focus our attention on the class of loglinear policy parametrization and linear reward functions. In order to compare the two paradigms, we first derive minimax
statistical bounds on the suboptimality gap induced by both RLHF and DPO, assuming access
to an oracle that exactly solves the optimization
problems. We provide a detailed discussion on the
relative comparison between the two paradigms,
simultaneously taking into account the sample
size, policy and reward class dimensions, and the
regularization temperature. Moreover, we extend
our analysis to the approximate optimization setting and derive exponentially decaying convergence rates for both RLHF and DPO. Next, we
analyze the setting where the ground-truth reward
is not realizable and find that, while RLHF incurs a constant additional error, DPO retains its
asymptotically decaying gap by just tuning the
temperature accordingly. Finally, we extend our
comparison to the Markov decision process setting, where we generalize our results with exact
optimization. To the best of our knowledge, we
are the first to provide such a comparative analysis
for RLHF and DPO.

As an alternative to RLHF, Rafailov et al. (2023) have recently proposed direct preference optimization (DPO), an
RL-free paradigm to learning from preferences. DPO circumvents the reward modeling phase and directly optimizes
the policy parameters based on the preference data. In certain LLM instances, DPO seems to be empirically superior
to RLHF, due to its simple optimization framework.
That said, a statistical analysis of the differences between
these paradigms is lacking. The sample complexity of
RLHF in various settings has already been studied (Zhu
et al., 2023; Zhan et al., 2023; Xiong et al., 2023), and there
have been some initial attempts at theoretically understanding DPO and its variants (Azar et al., 2023). However, it is
unclear when one of the paradigms is better and when these
two paradigms are statistically comparable. Motivated by
this observation, we initiate a thorough discussion of the
theoretical comparison between RLHF and DPO. Specifically, the purpose of this paper is to address the following
research questions:

1
Max Planck Institute for Software Systems, Saarbrücken,
Germany 2 University of Warwick, Coventry, UK 3 Independent
Researcher, London, UK. Correspondence to: Andi Nika
<andinika@mpi-sws.org>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

