Enhancing Implicit Shape Generators Using Topological Regularizations

Liyan Chen 1 Yan Zhen 1 Yang Li 2 Lohit Anirudh Jagarapu 1 Haoxiang Li 3 Hao Kang 3 Gang Hua 3
Qixing Huang 1

Abstract

grids (Wu et al., 2016), implicit surfaces (Park et al., 2019;
Chen & Zhang, 2019), part assemblies (Li et al., 2017; Mo
et al., 2019), and parametric surfaces (Sinha et al., 2016).
Most of these approaches have focused on geometric details
or part structures by developing suitable network architectures. From a machine learning perspective, a common
theme among them is aligning the distribution of training
shapes and that of the synthetic shapes. However, in the
presence of limited training data, this approach easily leads
to various artifacts, many of which are topological, e.g.,
broken legs, unrealistic thin structures, and small holes.

A fundamental problem in learning 3D shapes
generative models is that when the generative
model is simply fitted to the training data, the
resulting synthetic 3D models can present various
artifacts. Many of these artifacts are topological
in nature, e.g., broken legs, unrealistic thin structures, and small holes. In this paper, we introduce
a principled approach that utilizes topological regularization losses to rectify topological artifacts.
The objectives are two-fold. The first is to align
the persistent diagram (PD) distribution of the
training shapes with that of synthetic shapes. The
second ensures that the PDs are smooth among adjacent synthetic shapes. We show how to achieve
these two objectives using two simple but effective formulations. Specifically, distribution alignment is achieved by learning a generative model
of PDs and aligning this PD generator with PDs
of synthetic shapes. Moreover, we enforce the
smoothness of the PDs using a smoothness loss on
the PD generator, which further improves the behavior of PD distribution alignment. Experimental results on ShapeNet show that our approach
leads to much better generalization behavior than
state-of-the-art implicit shape generators.

In this paper, we study the problem of enhancing the topological generalization of implicit 3D shape generative models.
We use the persistent diagram (PD) (Edelsbrunner & Harer,
2010), a popular topological attribute, to promote topological generalization. Our objectives are two-fold. The first
is to align the distribution of PDs of the training shapes
with that of the synthetic shapes. However, simply aligning
the distributions is insufficient as shuffling the PD targets
of synthetic shapes does not change the PD distribution.
We address this issue by using the second objective, which
promotes the smoothness of the PDs among neighboring
synthetic shapes.
A PD is a 2D point cloud where the coordinates of each point
correspond to the birth and death times of a topological feature in a topological filtration. Aligning PD distributions
is challenging, as 1) the mapping from an implicit surface
to its corresponding PD is complex, 2) the PD space is not
Euclidean, and PDs of a shape collection exhibit both discrete (i.e., the number of points in a PD) and continuous
variations (i.e., point locations), and 3) the PD distribution
of training shapes is discrete and that of the synthetic shapes
is continuous. 1) and 2) also exhibit when promoting PD
smoothness. We address 1)-3) by learning a PD generative
model, which turns the discrete PD distribution of training
shapes into a continuous distribution. This allows us to
develop a simple distribution alignment loss for synthetic
shapes, i.e., by matching the PD of a synthetic shape and the
corresponding output of the PD generative model. In addition, we enforce PD smoothness by imposing a smoothness
regularization on the PD generator.

1. Introduction
Learning generative models of 3D shapes is a fundamental
task in visual computing. During the last few years, we have
seen great success in 3D shape generative models under
various 3D representations such as point clouds (Achlioptas et al., 2018a), meshes (Wang et al., 2018), volumetric
1
Department of Computer Science, The University of Texas
at Austin, Austin TX 2 Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate
School, Info Building 1108A, Shenzhen, China 3 Wormpex AI
Research, 500 108th Ave NE, Ste 1740, Bellevue WA. Correspondence to: Liyan Chen <liyanc@cs.utexas.edu>, Qixing Huang
<huangqx@cs.utexas.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

We also introduce a novel network architecture for generat-

1

