Generalist Equivariant Transformer
Towards 3D Molecular Interaction Learning

Xiangzhe Kong 1 Wenbing Huang 2 3 Yang Liu 1 4

Abstract

and between non-bonded atoms, are crucial in the research
of chemistry, biochemistry and biophysics, and come as
foundation processes of various downstream applications,
including drug discovery, material design, etc (Sapoval
et al., 2022; Tran et al., 2023; Vamathevan et al., 2019).
There are different types of molecular interactions, and this
paper mainly focuses on the ones that exist in bimolecular complexes, consisting of proteins, small molecules or
RNA/DNAs. Specifically, to better capture their physical
effects, we study molecular interactions via 3D geometry
where atom coordinates are always provided.

Many processes in biology and drug discovery involve various 3D interactions between molecules,
such as protein and protein, protein and small
molecule, etc. Given that different molecules
are usually represented in different granularity,
existing methods usually encode each type of
molecules independently with different models,
leaving it defective to learn the various underlying interaction physics. In this paper, we first
propose to universally represent an arbitrary 3D
complex as a geometric graph of sets, shedding
light on encoding all types of molecules with one
model. We then propose a Generalist Equivariant Transformer (GET) to effectively capture both
domain-specific hierarchies and domain-agnostic
interaction physics. To be specific, GET consists of a bilevel attention module, a feed-forward
module and a layer normalization module, where
each module is E(3) equivariant and specialized
for handling sets of variable sizes. Notably, in
contrast to conventional pooling-based hierarchical models, our GET is able to retain finegrained information of all levels. Extensive experiments on the interactions between proteins,
small molecules and RNA/DNAs verify the effectiveness and generalization capability of our
proposed method across different domains.

Modeling molecular interaction relies heavily on appropriate representation of molecules. Recent studies apply
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) for this purpose (Gilmer
et al., 2017; Jin et al., 2018). This is motivated by the fact
that graphs naturally represent molecules, by considering
atoms as nodes and inter-atom interactions or bonds as edges.
When further encapsulating 3D atom coordinates, geometric
graphs (Gasteiger et al., 2020b; Schütt et al., 2017; Stärk
et al., 2022) are used in place of conventional graph modeling that solely encodes topology. To process geometric
graphs, equivariant GNNs, a new kind of GNNs that meet
E(3) equivariance regarding translation, rotation and reflection are proposed, which exhibit promising performance in
molecule interaction tasks (Kong et al., 2022b; Luo et al.,
2022; Townshend et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2022a).
Despite the encouraging progress, there still lacks a desirable and unified form of cross-domain molecular representation in molecular interaction. The molecules of different
domains like small molecules, proteins, and RNA/DNAs are
usually represented in different granularity, which consist
of atoms, residues, and nucleobases, respectively. Existing approaches typically design domain-specific representations and model each of the interacting instances independently (Somnath et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022a), which
are defective in learning the various underlying interaction
physics. Therefore, designing unified cross-domain molecular representation is demanded, which, however, is nontrivial. For one thing, directly applying unshared block-level
graphs, whose nodes correspond to domain-specific building
blocks, leads to limited transferability of the model from one
domain to another. For another, decomposing all molecules

1. Introduction
Molecular interactions (Tomasi & Persico, 1994), which
describe attractive or repulsive forces between molecules
1

Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, BNRist
Center, Tsinghua University 2 Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China 3 Beijing Key Laboratory
of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods 4 Institute for
AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University. Correspondence to: Wenbing Huang <hwenbing@126.com>, Yang Liu
<liuyang2011@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

