Fair Federated Learning via the Proportional Veto Core

Bhaskar Ray Chaudhury * 1 Aniket Murhekar * 1 Zhuowen Yuan * 1 Bo Li 2 Ruta Mehta 1 Ariel D. Procaccia 3

Abstract

is to prevent the final model from over-fitting to particular
agents at the expense of other agents.

Previous work on fairness in federated learning
introduced the notion of core stability, which provides utility-based fairness guarantees to any subset of participating agents. However, these guarantees require strong assumptions on agent utilities
that render them impractical. To address this shortcoming, we measure the quality of output models in terms of their ordinal rank instead of their
cardinal utility, and use this insight to adapt the
classical notion of proportional veto core (PVC)
from social choice theory to the federated learning setting. We prove that models that are PVCstable exist in very general learning paradigms,
even allowing non-convex model sets, as well as
non-convex and non-concave loss functions. We
also design Rank-Core-Fed, a distributed federated learning algorithm, to train a PVC-stable
model. Finally, we demonstrate that Rank-CoreFed outperforms baselines in terms of fairness on
different datasets.

A particularly compelling approach to fairness in FL was
introduced by Chaudhury et al. (2022).1 Their FL algorithm,
CoreFed, guarantees outcomes that are core stable; this
intuitively means that every possible coalition of agents
receives utility guarantees that are stronger the larger the
coalition is. In particular, core-stable outcomes are proportional — for each of the n agents, their utility for the output model is at least 1/n of their maximum utility for any
model — and Pareto optimal — it is impossible to improve
the utility of some agents without harming others. In addition, core-stable outcomes are robust to noisy outliers, as
the coalition of non-noisy agents, which consists of most
agents, has very strong guarantees.

1. Introduction

However, the guarantees provided by CoreFed rely on the
assumption that the utility functions of agents are concave.
In fact, as we show in Example 1, this is unavoidable: even
weaker guarantees that relax proportionality — specifically,
giving each participating agent any fraction of their best
possible utility — are unattainable for non-concave utilities.
This is a major obstacle to applying the approach for more
general machine learning models that are used in practice,
such as deep neural networks.

Federated learning (FL) provides an effective distributed
learning paradigm whereby a group of agents holding local
data samples can train a joint model without sharing their
private data. The paradigm has been widely used for different applications such as autonomous vehicles (Elbir et al.,
2020) and digital healthcare (Dayan et al., 2021; Xu et al.,
2021).

Our approach. To overcome this obstacle, we seek fairness
guarantees that are not functions of utilities, yet still reflect
the quality of the model for the agent. Our key insight is to
focus on the rank of models. Intuitively, we say that a model
θ has rank r ∈ [0, 1] for agent i if i weakly prefers (based
on utility) θ to an r-fraction of all possible models (so more
preferred models have higher rank).

Due to the heterogeneity in their data distributions, the benefit derived by the agents from the final model vary. Thus, a
fast-growing line of work (Mohri et al., 2019; Huang et al.,
2021; Li et al., 2020b; Zhang et al., 2023; Chaudhury et al.,
2022) focuses on good intent fairness in FL, where the goal

This idea of rank allows us to adapt a notion of core from
social choice theory that is tailored to ordinal preferences:
the proportional veto core (PVC). In our FL setting, we
say that a model θ is PVC-stable if the fraction of models
the coalition unanimously ranks higher than θ is at most
1 − |T |/n; informally, each coalition can veto a fraction of
models proportional to its size, hence the name of this notion.
The PVC provides “rankwise” analogues of the guarantees
given by the (“original”) core. In particular, setting T = {i}

1
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 2 University of
Chicago 3 Harvard University. Correspondence to: Bhaskar
Ray Chaudhary <braycha@illinois.edu>, Aniket Murhekar
<aniket2@illinois.edu>.

1

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

See Section 1.1 for a more detailed comparison of fair federated learning algorithms

1

