Provably Efficient Exploration in Quantum Reinforcement Learning with
Logarithmic Worst-Case Regret

Han Zhong * 1 Jiachen Hu * 2 Yecheng Xue 2 Tongyang Li 2 3 Liwei Wang 1 4

1. Introduction

Abstract

Reinforcement learning (RL) is ubiquitous with wide applications (Sutton & Barto, 2018). RL studies how agents
take actions in an environment with the goal of maximizing
cumulative reward. In light of this, a fundamental problem in RL is the balance between exploration (of uncharted
territory) and exploitation (of current knowledge). This is
typically characterized by the regret defined as the cumulative suboptimality of the policies executed by the algorithm.

While quantum reinforcement learning (RL) has
attracted a surge of attention recently, its theoretical understanding is limited. In particular,
it remains elusive how to design provably efficient quantum RL algorithms that can address the
exploration-exploitation trade-off. To this end,
we propose a novel UCRL-style algorithm that
takes advantage of quantum computing for tabular Markov decision processes (MDPs) with S
states, A actions, and horizon H, and establish an
O(poly(S, A, H, log T )) worst-case regret for it,
where T is the number of episodes. Furthermore,
we extend our results to quantum RL with linear function approximation, which is capable of
handling problems with large state spaces. Specifically, we develop a quantum algorithm based on
value target regression (VTR) for linear mixture
MDPs with d-dimensional linear representation
and prove that it enjoys O(poly(d, H, log T )) regret. Our algorithms are variants of UCRL/UCRLVTR algorithms in classical RL, which also leverage a novel combination of lazy updating mechanisms and quantum estimation√subroutines. This
is the key to breaking the Ω( T )-regret barrier
in classical RL. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first work studying the online exploration in quantum RL with provable logarithmic
worst-case regret.

One of the most notable models of RL is the Markov decision process (MDP). Among MDPs, a tabular MDP is
arguably the simplest model by storing all state and √
action
pairs in a table. Tabular MDPs have O(poly(S, A, H)· T )
regret (Jaksch et al., 2010; Azar et al., 2017), where S and
A are the number of states and actions, respectively, H is
the length of each episode, and T is the number of episodes.
However, in practice S and A can have formidable or even
infinite sizes. One typical solution is to employ linear function approximation. For a linear mixture MDP with a ddimensional linear representation for the transition
kernel,
√
the regret can be improved to O(poly(d, H) · T ) (Ayoub
et al., 2020; Cai et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2021).
Nevertheless, for MDPs in general including tabular MDPs
and linear
√ mixture MDPs, the fundamental difficulty lies in
the Ω( T ) lower bound on their regrets (Jaksch et al., 2010;
Jin et al., 2018; Zhou et al., 2021), and it solicits essentially
novel ideas to break this barrier. This gives rise to quantum
computing, which is known to achieve acceleration for some
relevant problems such as search (Grover, 1997), counting (Brassard et al., 2002; Nayak & Wu, 1999), mean estimation (Montanaro, 2015; Li & Wu, 2019; Hamoudi & Magniez, 2019; Hamoudi, 2021; Cornelissen et al., 2022), etc.

*
Equal contribution 1 Center for Data Science, Peking University 2 School of Computer Science, Peking University 3 Center
on Frontiers of Computing Studies, Peking University 4 National
Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, School of
Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University. Correspondence to: Han Zhong <hanzhong@stu.pku.edu.cn>,
Tongyang Li <tongyangli@pku.edu.cn>, Liwei Wang <wanglw@cis.pku.edu.cn>.

In this paper, we study quantum reinforcement learning (Jerbi et al., 2022; Meyer et al., 2022), a combination
of reinforcement learning and quantum computing, where
the agent interacts with the RL environment by accessing
quantum oracles. This is in great contrast to classical reinforcement learning, where the agent interacts with the
environment by sampling. The quantum oracles enable
us to estimate models or value functions more efficiently
than classical sampling-based algorithms, thus breaking the

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

