Two Tales of Single-Phase Contrastive Hebbian Learning

Rasmus Høier 1 Christopher Zach 1

Abstract

differences, referred to as NGRAD (Neural Gradient Representation by Activity Differences) approaches (Lillicrap
et al., 2020). However, a commonly overlooked issue in
NGRAD approaches is the requirement of applying infinitesimal perturbations (or nudging) to output neurons in order
to propagate error information through the network. This is
problematic as analog and biological neural networks are
inherently noisy, potentially causing the error signal to vanish if insufficient nudging is applied. In many local learning
methods the output units are positively nudged to reduce a
target loss, but utilizing additional negative nudging (output
units increase a target loss) can be beneficial to improve
accuracy (e.g. (Laborieux et al., 2021)).

The search for ”biologically plausible” learning
algorithms has converged on the idea of representing gradients as activity differences. However, most approaches require a high degree of
synchronization (distinct phases during learning)
and introduce substantial computational overhead,
which raises doubts regarding their biological
plausibility as well as their potential utility for
neuromorphic computing. Furthermore, they commonly rely on applying infinitesimal perturbations
(nudges) to output units, which is impractical in
noisy environments. Recently it has been shown
that by modelling artificial neurons as dyads with
two oppositely nudged compartments, it is possible for a fully local learning algorithm named
“dual propagation” to bridge the performance gap
to backpropagation, without requiring separate
learning phases or infinitesimal nudging. However, the algorithm has the drawback that its numerical stability relies on symmetric nudging,
which may be restrictive in biological and analog
implementations. In this work we first provide a
solid foundation for the objective underlying the
dual propagation method, which also reveals a
surpising connection with adversarial robustness.
Second, we demonstrate how dual propagation is
related to a particular adjoint state method, which
is stable regardless of asymmetric nudging.

The vanishing error signal problem is addressed by coupled
learning (Stern et al., 2021), which proposes to replace the
clamped output units of contrastive Hebbian learning with
a convex combination of the label and the free phase outputs. Unfortunately, coupled learning has been shown to
perform worse than equilibrium propagation on CIFAR10
and CIFAR100 (Scellier et al., 2023), and it does not necessarily approximate gradient descent on the output loss function (Stern et al., 2021). Holomorphic equilibrium propagation (Laborieux & Zenke, 2022; 2023) mitigates the need for
infinitesimal nudging required in standard equilibrium propagation (Scellier & Bengio, 2017) at the cost of introducing
complex-valued parameters. Whether this is a suitable approach for either biological or analog neural networks is
an open question. Dual propagation (Høier et al., 2023)
(DP), an algorithm similar in spirit to contrastive Hebbian
learning, equilibrium propagation and coupled learning, is
compatible with non-infinitesimal nudging by default. This
method infers two sets of oppositely nudged and mutually
tethered states simultaneously. However, utilization of symmetric nudging is a necessary condition for the convergence
of its inference step.

1. Introduction
Credit assignment using fully local alternatives to backpropagation is interesting both as potential models of biological learning as well as for their applicability for energy efficient analog neuromorphic computing (Kendall &
Kumar, 2020; Yi et al., 2022). A pervasive idea in this
field is the idea of representing error signals via activity

Contributions DP is compatible with strong feedback and
only requires a single inference phase, which are appealing
features with regards to biological plausibility and potential
applications to analog neuromorphic computing. However,
the lack of convergence guarantees in the case of asymmetric nudging is clearly unsettling as exact symmetry is hard
to realize outside of digital computers. Further,—unlike digital computers—neuromorphic, analog or otherwise highly

1

Department of Electrical Engineering, Chalmers University
of Technology, Sweden. Correspondence to: Rasmus Høier
<hier@chalmers.se>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

