Position: Video as the New Language for Real-World Decision Making

Sherry Yang 1 2 Jacob Walker 1 Jack Parker-Holder 1 Yilun Du 3 Jake Bruce 1 Andre Barreto 1
Pieter Abbeel 2 Dale Schuurmans 1

Abstract

Firstly, the quantity of publicly available text data is becoming a bottleneck to further scaling (Villalobos et al., 2022).
Secondly, and perhaps more importantly, natural language
alone might not be enough to describe all intelligent behavior (Searle, 1980; Dennett, 1993; Minsky, 1988) or capture
all information about the physical world we live in (e.g.,
imagine teaching someone how to tie a knot using words
only). While language is a powerful tool to describe higherlevel abstractions, it is not always sufficient to capture the
physical world in all its wealth of detail.
Thankfully, there are abundant video data on the internet
(e.g., over ten thousand years of consecutive video watching
from YouTube alone) encapsulating a wealth of information imbued with knowledge of the world. Nevertheless,
today’s machine learning models trained on internet text or
video data have demonstrated remarkably different capabilities. LLMs have advanced to tackling intricate tasks that
require sophisticated reasoning (Huang & Chang, 2022),
tool use (Mialon et al., 2023), and decision making (Yang
et al., 2023c). In contrast, video generation models have
been less explored, primarily focusing on creating entertainment videos for human consumption (Ho et al., 2022a;
Singer et al., 2022; Bar-Tal et al., 2024). Given the paradigm
shift unfolding in language modeling, it is important to
ask whether we can elevate video generation models to the
level of autonomous agents, simulation environments, and
computational engines similar to language models so that
applications requiring visual modalities such as robotics,
self-driving, and science can more directly benefit from
internet visual knowledge and pretrained video models.
In this paper, we take the position that video generation
will be to the physical world as language modeling is to the
digital world. To arrive at this position, we first identify
key components that have enabled language models to solve
many real-world tasks: (1) a unified representation (i.e.,
text) that can absorb broad information from the internet,
(2) a unified interface (i.e., text generation) through which
diverse tasks can be expressed as generative modeling, and
(3) language models’ ability to interact with external environments (e.g., humans, tools, and other models) by taking
actions and optimizing decisions based on external feedback
through techniques such as reinforcement learning from human feedback (Ouyang et al., 2022), planning (Huang et al.,
2022), search (Yao et al., 2023), and optimization (Rafailov

Both text and video data are abundant on the
internet and support large-scale self-supervised
learning through next token or frame prediction.
However, they have not been equally leveraged:
language models have had significant real-world
impact, whereas video generation has remained
largely limited to media entertainment. Yet video
data captures important information about the
physical world that is difficult to express in language. To address this gap, we discuss an underappreciated opportunity to extend video generation to solve tasks in the real world. We observe how, akin to language, video can serve as a
unified interface that can absorb internet knowledge and represent diverse tasks. Moreover, we
demonstrate how, like language models, video
generation can serve as planners, agents, compute
engines, and environment simulators through techniques such as in-context learning, planning and
reinforcement learning. We identify major impact
opportunities in domains such as robotics, selfdriving, and science, supported by recent work
that demonstrates how such advanced capabilities
in video generation are plausibly within reach.
Lastly, we identify key challenges in video generation that mitigate progress. Addressing these
challenges will enable video generation models
to demonstrate unique value alongside language
models in a wider array of AI applications.

1

Introduction

There has been tremendous progress in training large language models (LLMs) from internet text datasets in the past
few years (Team et al., 2023; Achiam et al., 2023). The
impressive performance of LLMs on a wide variety of tasks
makes it tempting to reduce the artificial intelligence agenda
to scaling up these systems. However, this is not sufficient.
1
Google DeepMind 2 UC Berkeley 3 MIT. Correspondence to:
Sherry Yang <sherryy@{google.com}{berkeley.edu}>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

