Limited Preference Aided Imitation Learning from Imperfect Demonstrations

Xingchen Cao 1 Fan-Ming Luo 1 Junyin Ye 1 Tian Xu 1 Zhilong Zhang 1 Yang Yu 1

Abstract

Nevertheless, the applicability of IL is primarily seen in
bio-mimetic tasks or those already resolved by humans, constrained by its dependency on optimal expert demonstrations.
This limitation becomes pronounced in scenarios involving
novel or highly specialized tasks, where obtaining optimal
demonstrations is either impractical or prohibitively expensive. Examples of such challenges include the control of
robots with highly versatile morphologies (Thor & Manoonpong, 2022) and the management of Tokamak fusion devices (Degrave et al., 2022). In these instances, reliance on
suboptimal demonstrations is often inevitable.

Imitation learning mimics high-quality policies
from expert data for sequential decision-making
tasks. However, its efficacy is hindered in scenarios where optimal demonstrations are unavailable,
and only imperfect demonstrations are present. To
address this issue, introducing additional limited
human preferences is a suitable approach as it can
be obtained in a human-friendly manner, offering
a promising way to learn the policy that exceeds
the performance of imperfect demonstrations. In
this paper, we propose a novel imitation learning (IL) algorithm, Preference Aided Imitation
Learning from imperfect demonstrations (PAIL).
Specifically, PAIL learns a preference reward by
querying experts for limited preferences from imperfect demonstrations. This serves two purposes
during training: 1) Reweighting imperfect demonstrations with the preference reward for higher
quality. 2) Selecting explored trajectories with
high cumulative preference rewards to augment
imperfect demonstrations. The dataset with continuously improving quality empowers the performance of PAIL to transcend the initial demonstrations. Comprehensive empirical results across a
synthetic task and two locomotion benchmarks
show that PAIL surpasses baselines by 73.2%
and breaks through the performance bottleneck of
imperfect demonstrations.

Traditional methods of learning from imperfections typically involve weighting the demonstrations with a discriminator, aiming to assign higher weights to better demonstrations (Wang et al., 2021a;b). The policy is then trained from
these reweighted demonstrations using weighted variants of
IL. Nevertheless, the policies learned by these methods are
constrained by the quality of the dataset, as they only imitate trajectories from imperfect demonstrations, preventing
them from achieving better performance beyond the demonstrations. To overcome these limitations, Wu et al. (2019)
and Brown et al. (2019a) proposed incorporating additional
information, such as rankings and confidence scores of the
demonstrations, enabling policies to reach or even surpass
the performance of the best demonstrations. Limited data
with scores over diverse tasks (Zhou et al., 2024) and an
extra misspecified simulator (Jiang et al., 2020) are also
considered helpful for policy learning. However, generating
such information demands significant human effort or poses
difficulties in providing precise and consistent confidence
scores (Sasaki & Yamashina, 2021). In contrast, preferencebased data, which only requires humans to make relative
judgments, emerges as a more cost-effective and humanfriendly approach and has demonstrated strong applicability
in real-world tasks (Lee et al., 2021a; OpenAI, 2023), offering a promising way to learn the policy that surpass the
performance of imperfect demonstrations.

1. Introduction
Imitation learning (IL) (Osa et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2023)
eliminates the need for manually crafting sophisticated reward functions by utilizing a handful of expert demonstrations, offering a significant advantage in a variety of realworld applications (Peng et al., 2020; Zhao et al., 2023).

In this paper, we propose to imitate policies from an unlabeled mixture of demonstrations with various qualities
while leveraging limited preference queries to learn policies
outperforming demonstrations with minimal human effort.
Our method, termed Preference Aided Imitation Learning
from imperfect demonstrations (PAIL), begins by utilizing
the Bradley-Terry model (Bradley & Terry, 1952) to learn a

1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China; School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China; Polixir Technologies, Nanjing,
Jiangsu, China. Correspondence to: Yang Yu <yuy@nju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

