Equivariant Graph Neural Operator for Modeling 3D Dynamics

Minkai Xu 1 * Jiaqi Han 1 * Aaron Lou 1 Jean Kossaifi 2 Arvind Ramanathan 3
Kamyar Azizzadenesheli 2 Jure Leskovec 1 Stefano Ermon 1 Anima Anandkumar 4

Abstract

1. Introduction
Modeling the dynamics of many body systems in Euclidean
space is an important problem in machine learning (ML) at
all scales (Tenenbaum et al., 2011; Battaglia et al., 2016),
ranging from interactions of atoms in a molecule or protein
to interactions of celestial bodies in the universe. Traditional methods tackle these physical dynamics by Newton’s
laws along with interactions calculated from physical rules,
e.g., Coulomb force for modeling systems with charged
particles (Kipf et al., 2018). Such calculations based on
physical rules typically are very computationally expensive and slow, and recently researchers are studying alternative ML approaches by learning neural networks (NNs)
to automatically capture the physical rules and model the
interactions in a data-driven fashion. Along this research
direction, considerable progress has been achieved in recent years by regarding objects as nodes and interactions
as edges and learning the spatial interactions via graphs
neural networks (GNNs) (Battaglia et al., 2016; Kipf et al.,
2018; Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2019; Martinkus et al., 2021;
Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2020; Pfaff et al., 2020).

Modeling the complex three-dimensional (3D)
dynamics of relational systems is an important
problem in the natural sciences, with applications
ranging from molecular simulations to particle
mechanics. Machine learning methods have
achieved good success by learning graph neural
networks to model spatial interactions. However,
these approaches do not faithfully capture
temporal correlations since they only model
next-step predictions. In this work, we propose
Equivariant Graph Neural Operator (EGNO),
a novel and principled method that directly
models dynamics as trajectories instead of just
next-step prediction. Different from existing
methods, EGNO explicitly learns the temporal
evolution of 3D dynamics where we formulate
the dynamics as a function over time and learn
neural operators to approximate it. To capture the
temporal correlations while keeping the intrinsic
SE(3)-equivariance, we develop equivariant
temporal convolutions parameterized in the
Fourier space and build EGNO by stacking the
Fourier layers over equivariant networks. EGNO
is the first operator learning framework that is
capable of modeling solution dynamics functions
over time while retaining 3D equivariance.
Comprehensive experiments in multiple domains,
including particle simulations, human motion
capture, and molecular dynamics, demonstrate
the significantly superior performance of EGNO
against existing methods, thanks to the equivariant temporal modeling. Our code is available at
https://github.com/MinkaiXu/egno.

Among the advancements, Equivariant GNN (EGNN) is a
state-of-the-art approach with impressive results in modeling physical dynamics in 3D Euclidean space (Thomas et al.,
2018; Satorras et al., 2021). EGNNs possess equivariance
to roto-translational transformations in the Euclidean space,
which has been demonstrated as a vital inductive bias to improve generalization (Köhler et al., 2019; Fuchs et al., 2020;
Han et al., 2022b; Xu et al., 2022). However, these methods
typically model the dynamics by only learning to predict the
next state given the current state, failing to faithfully capture
the temporal correlation along the trajectory (Song et al.,
2023; Song & Dhariwal, 2024). As a result, performance
is still often unsatisfactory without fully understanding the
dynamics as systems evolve through time.
Our contributions: In this paper, we propose Equivariant
Graph Neural Operator (EGNO), a novel and principled
method to overcome the above challenge by directly modeling the entire trajectory dynamics instead of just the next
time-step prediction. Different from existing approaches,
EGNO predicts dynamics as a temporal function that is not
limited to a fixed discretization. Our framework is inspired

*

Equal contribution . Work is partially done during Minkai’s
internship at NVIDIA. 1 Stanford University 2 NVIDIA 3 Argonne
National Laboratory 4 California Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Minkai Xu <minkai@cs.stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

