Contextual Feature Selection with Conditional Stochastic Gates
Ram Dyuthi Sristi 1 Ofir Lindenbaum 2 Shira Lifshitz 3 Maria Lavzin 3 Jackie Schiller 3 Gal Mishne 1
Hadas Benisty 3

Abstract

Feature selection simplifies models by removing nuisance
features and identifying informative features, ultimately
improving generalization (Li et al., 2017; Kumar & Minz,
2014; Islam et al., 2022; Everaert et al., 2022). Feature
selection can be broadly categorized into filter, wrapper,
and embedded methods.

Feature selection is a crucial tool in machine
learning and is widely applied across various
scientific disciplines. Traditional supervised
methods generally identify a universal set of
informative features for the entire population.
However, feature relevance often varies with
context, while the context itself may not directly
affect the outcome variable. Here, we propose
a novel architecture for contextual feature
selection where the subset of selected features
is conditioned on the value of context variables.
Our new approach, Conditional Stochastic Gates
(c-STG), models the importance of features using
conditional Bernoulli variables whose parameters
are predicted based on contextual variables. We
introduce a hypernetwork that maps context variables to feature selection parameters to learn the
context-dependent gates along with a prediction
model. We further present a theoretical analysis
of our model, indicating that it can improve
performance and flexibility over population-level
methods in complex feature selection settings. Finally, we conduct an extensive benchmark using
simulated and real-world datasets across multiple
domains demonstrating that c-STG can lead to
improved feature selection capabilities while enhancing prediction accuracy and interpretability.

Filter methods (Battiti, 1994; Peng et al., 2005; Estévez
et al., 2009; Song et al., 2007; 2012; Chen et al., 2017; Sristi
et al., 2022) use a predefined criterion, independent of the
predictive model, to rank and select features mostly based
on statistical measures such as correlation or mutual information (Lewis, 1992). Wrapper methods (Kohavi & John,
1997; Stein et al., 2005; Zhu et al., 2007; Reunanen, 2003;
Allen, 2013), on the other hand, use the predictive model itself as a criterion for feature selection. These methods select
subsets of features and evaluate the prediction quality based
only on those features to identify the subset with the best
performance. This can be prohibitively expensive for complex models. Embedded methods (Tibshirani, 1996; Hans,
2009; Li et al., 2011; 2006) incorporate feature selection into
the training process of the predictive model, for example,
regularization-based techniques like LASSO and its variants
(Daubechies et al., 2010; Bertsimas et al., 2017). Here we
present a novel embedded method to learn the prediction
model and informative features in an end-to-end fashion.

2

The methods above are global in the sense that they identify
a single set of informative features for the entire data
set. However, in certain cases, the importance of features
varies depending on contextual information, while the
context itself does not encode the outcome variable on its
own. For example, in healthcare, feature selection reveals
which explanatory features directly predict disease risk, but
feature relevance and importance can vary based on context,
such as age or gender. Thus, considering context adds
depth to medical analysis and offers clinicians valuable
insights. Similarly, product recommendation systems need
to tailor feature selection to the user’s location, time, and
device (Baltrunas & Ricci, 2009).

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Many feature selection methods fail to fully address the intricate relationship between features, context, and outcomes,
often neglecting contextual variables or merely concatenating them with explanatory features. This approach hinders
interpretability, as it does not clearly show the dependency

1. Introduction
Feature selection techniques are vital in Machine Learning
(ML) as they identify informative features from large sets
of observed variables. These techniques are increasingly
crucial across scientific domains due to the high dimensionality of collected data and complex prediction models.
1
University of California San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA
Bar-Ilan University , Ramat Gan, Israel 3 Technion - Israel Institute
of Technology, Haifa, Israel . Correspondence to: Ram Dyuthi
Sristi <rsristi@ucsd.edu>.

1

