Symmetric Matrix Completion with ReLU Sampling

Huikang Liu * 1 Peng Wang * 2 Longxiu Huang 3 Qing Qu 2 Laura Balzano 2

Abstract

positive semi-definite (PSD) low-rank MC has applications
in covariance matrix completion (Candes & Plan, 2010;
Hosseini & Sebt, 2017), Hankel matrix completion (Chen &
Chi, 2013; Usevich & Comon, 2016; Cai et al., 2023), and
Euclidean distance matrix completion (Laurent, 2001; AlHomidan & Wolkowicz, 2005; Dokmanic et al., 2015). An
extensive body of literature investigates the statistical and
optimization properties of the low-rank MC problem using
different approaches, such as nuclear-norm minimization
(Recht, 2011; Candes & Plan, 2010; Candes & Recht, 2012),
spectral method (Keshavan et al., 2010; Chatterjee, 2015),
and matrix factorization (Sun & Luo, 2016), among others.
To analyze the MC problem, most of these approaches rely
on the following assumptions: (1) the underlying matrix is
low-rank and incoherent, and (2) the entries are observed
independent of the matrix entries according to a probabilistic
mechanism, e.g., uniformly at random. Based on these
assumptions, it is possible to prove how many observed
entries are required so that the missing entries can be exactly
or approximately completed.

We study the problem of symmetric positive semidefinite low-rank matrix completion (MC) with
deterministic entry-dependent sampling. In particular, we consider rectified linear unit (ReLU) sampling, where only positive entries are observed, as
well as a generalization to threshold-based sampling. We first empirically demonstrate that the
landscape of this MC problem is not globally benign: Gradient descent (GD) with random initialization will generally converge to stationary
points that are not globally optimal. Nevertheless,
we prove that when the matrix factor with a small
rank satisfies mild assumptions, the nonconvex
objective function is geodesically strongly convex
on the quotient manifold in a neighborhood of a
planted low-rank matrix. Moreover, we show that
our assumptions are satisfied by a matrix factor
with i.i.d. Gaussian entries. Finally, we develop a
tailor-designed initialization for GD to solve our
studied formulation, which empirically always
achieves convergence to the global minima. We
also conduct extensive experiments and compare
MC methods, investigating convergence and completion performance with respect to initialization,
noise level, dimension, and rank.

The majority of existing work assumes that the entries are
observed uniformly at random, independent of the underlying matrix values. However, this assumption is strict and
often violated in practice. In real-world applications where
data are collected from measurements, such as distance matrices, missing entries tend to be those that are harder to
collect. When data are collected from participants, such as
online shopping or surveys, missing answers are typically
highly correlated with the question and the value of the true
answer. For example, surveys about sensitive topics will
have missing entries on any culturally or morally problematic answers. Moreover, online ratings tend to be skewed to
the high end; for example, most people do not read a book
or watch a movie that they might dislike. Even in sensor
systems, missing data are not likely to be independent and
completely random. Sensors may saturate at a certain value
or break down based on environmental conditions that also
affect the sensor value. In all these applications, the probability of missing entries in a matrix is dependent on the
underlying values, sometimes deterministically.

1. Introduction
Low-rank matrix completion (MC) refers to the task of
filling in the missing entries of a partially observed low-rank
matrix. It has found applications in diverse fields, such as
recommendation systems (Koren et al., 2009), sequential
bioinformatics (Zheng et al., 2013), and computer vision
(Ji et al., 2010), to name a few. In particular, symmetric
*
Equal contribution 1 Antai College of Economics and Management, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Michigan
3
Department of Computational Mathematics, Science and Engineering & Department of Mathematics, Michigan State University.
Correspondence to: Laura Balzano <girasole@umich.edu>.

Despite being highly relevant for applications, the problem
of recovering missing entries when the sampling mechanism
depends on the entries remains a challenging and relatively
under-explored area of research. Existing papers along these

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

