Run-Time Task Composition with Safety Semantics

Kevin Leahy * 1 Makai Mann * 2 Zachary Serlin 2

Abstract

primitives and composing them in a zero-shot manner to
perform more complex behaviors. Composing tasks in this
way ensures that if desired behavior is achieved at the level
of task primitives, then desired behavior will be achieved
when tasks are composed.

Compositionality is a critical aspect of scalable
system design. Here, we focus on Boolean composition of learned tasks as opposed to functional
or sequential composition. Existing Boolean composition for Reinforcement Learning focuses on
reaching a satisfying absorbing state in environments with discrete action spaces, but does not
support composable safety (i.e., avoidance) constraints. We provide three contributions: i) introduce two distinct notions of compositional safety
semantics; ii) show how to enforce either safety
semantics, prove correctness, and analyze the
trade-offs between the two safety notions; and
iii) extend Boolean composition from discrete
action spaces to continuous action spaces. We
demonstrate these techniques using modified versions of value iteration in a grid world, Deep QNetwork (DQN) in a grid world with image observations, and Twin Delayed DDPG (TD3) in
a continuous-observation and continuous-action
Bullet physics environment.

Prior work in composition has focused primarily on
reachability problems, in the form of stochastic shortest
paths (Nangue Tasse et al., 2020; 2022a;b). However, another important property is safety. That is, avoiding undesirable states on the way to reaching a final state. Here,
we present a method for composing simple policies to satisfy complex behaviors with no additional training that also
include zero-shot safety considerations. To illustrate this
distinction, we include the following motivating example.
Example 1. Consider an autonomous waste management
vehicle, which picks up from M residential or commercial
zones, and drops off at one of N processing plants with a
combination of capabilities drawn from trash, recycling, and
hazardous waste processing. If carrying hazardous waste,
the truck must avoid residential zones.
One approach is to train policies for each of the M pick up
areas, plus two policies for each of the N plants–one that
avoids residential zones and one that does not, resulting in
M + 2N policies. Our method instead trains a single policy
for each type of the five zone types: residential, commercial,
trash, recycling, and hazardous waste. We also add an additional policy for avoiding residential zones, resulting in six
total policies. These policies can be composed at runtime.
For example, a truck carrying both trash and recycle can
compose the trash and recycling policies to arrive at a processing plant that handles both. Furthermore, the residential
avoidance policy can be composed via conjunction when the
truck is carrying hazardous waste. Notice that residential
areas are sometimes goals and sometimes obstacles.

1. Introduction
Recent advances have established reinforcement learning
(RL) as a powerful tool for human-level performance in
games (Schrittwieser et al., 2020), robotics (Ibarz et al.,
2021), and other fields (Arulkumaran et al., 2017). However, there are still many technical hurdles to deploying these
algorithms in real-world scenarios. For many of these approaches, millions of samples are required before the desired
behavior is achieved. Additionally, there are concerns about
side effects, reward hacking, and transparency (Amodei
et al., 2016). Transfer learning (Taylor & Stone, 2009), and
in particular task composition (Nangue Tasse et al., 2020),
has emerged as a promising method for learning simple task

Safety-aware learning has become of great interest in recent
years for learning-based systems in safety-critical applications (e.g., autonomous driving). We combine components
from both the safety-aware learning and task composition
communities to create safety-aware task composition.

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Robotics Engineering,
Worcester Polytechnic Institute, Lexington, MA, USA 2 MIT Lincoln Laboratory, Lexington, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Kevin
Leahy <kleahy@wpi.edu>.

Contributions: Our main contribution is a method for generating and composing multiple safety-aware policies using
Q-learning approaches that can be combined at deployment
using the presented safety-aware Boolean task algebra for-

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

