Preference Optimization for Molecule Synthesis with Conditional Residual
Energy-based Models

Songtao Liu 1 Hanjun Dai 2 Yue Zhao 3 Peng Liu 1

Abstract

(1969) and further developed in Corey (1991), to derive
precursors from a product, which formalizes multi-step retrosynthetic planning. During each planning step, the onestep retrosynthesis model (Dai et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2020;
Chen & Jung, 2021) generates multiple reactant sets. The
search algorithm (Segler et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2020) then
chooses promising sets to further expand synthetic routes.
This process is repeated until all molecules at the leaf nodes
of the synthetic route1 are commercially available starting
materials.

Molecule synthesis through machine learning is
one of the fundamental problems in drug discovery. Current data-driven strategies employ onestep retrosynthesis models and search algorithms
to predict synthetic routes in a top-bottom manner.
Despite their effective performance, these strategies face limitations in the molecule synthetic
route generation due to a greedy selection of the
next molecule set without any lookahead. Furthermore, existing strategies cannot control the generation of synthetic routes based on possible criteria
such as material costs, yields, and step count. In
this work, we propose a general and principled
framework via conditional residual energy-based
models (EBMs), that focus on the quality of the
entire synthetic route based on the specific criteria.
By incorporating an additional energy-based function into our probabilistic model, our proposed
algorithm can enhance the quality of the most
probable synthetic routes (with higher probabilities) generated by various strategies in a plug-andplay fashion. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that our framework can consistently boost performance across various strategies and outperforms
previous state-of-the-art top-1 accuracy by a margin of 2.5%. Code is available at https://
github.com/SongtaoLiu0823/CREBM.

Retrosynthetic planning is still a very challenging problem, which requires us to consider the quality of synthetic
routes based on specific criteria. According to Chapter 8
in Hoffmann (2009), possible criteria for evaluating synthetic routes include: “1. the shortest route (time involved);
2. the cheapest route (cost of materials); 3. the novelty of
the route (patentability); 4. the greenest route (avoidance
of problematic waste)”. However, current evaluation metrics (Chen et al., 2020; Maziarz et al., 2023) often neglect
these criteria, primarily focusing on assessing a strategy’s
performance by the proportion of molecules for which the
shortest possible synthetic route, with all leaf nodes as starting materials, can be found within a specified number of iterations. Additionally, one of the most serious issues within
these metrics is their failure to verify whether the predicted
starting materials are actually capable of undergoing the
required reactions to synthesize the target molecule (Liu
et al., 2023b; Tripp et al., 2024). To tackle this challenge
and ensure that evaluation metrics more accurately evaluate
the model’s ability to predict feasible synthetic routes, Liu
et al. (2023b) has introduced the set-wise exact match of
predicted starting materials with those in reference synthetic
routes extracted from the reaction database (USPTO-full),
while retro-fallback (Tripp et al., 2024) evaluates the probability that at least one route can be executed in the wet lab.
These alternative metrics provide a more realistic reflection

1. Introduction
Machine learning for molecule synthesis is crucial for drug
discovery, as it ensures that the new molecule can be integrated into industrial-scale chemical manufacturing processes. Existing data-driven strategies employ retrosynthesis prediction, a concept introduced by Corey & Wipke

1

Note that the definition of a synthetic route in chemistry is
different from its counterpart in computer science. In organic
synthesis, the term “route” typically denotes an organic synthesis
flowchart in Figure 1. However, in graph theory, a route is defined
as a continuous sequence of edges in a graph that connects one
vertex to another. In this work, we follow the definition of route in
chemistry to avoid misunderstanding.

1

The Pennsylvania State University 2 Google DeepMind
3
University of Southern California. Correspondence to: Songtao Liu <skl5761@psu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

