Defining Neural Network Architecture through Polytope Structures of Datasets

Sangmin Lee 1 Abbas Mammadov 1 2 Jong Chul Ye 1 3

Abstract

However, a converse problem to address the influence of the
characteristics of training datasets necessary to attain the
UAP in neural networks has received relatively less attention.
For example, when analyzing the swiss roll dataset shown
in Figure 1(a), an important practical question emerges:
What are the effective depth and width required for the
complete classification of this dataset? Despite the practical
relevance of this inquiry in the context of training neural
networks, existing theoretical results only offer basic lower
bounds (minimum depth of 2 (Hornik, 1991) and a width
of max{dx + 1, dy } (Park et al., 2020)), which are often
impractical for real applications. While a range of empirical
evidence indicates that increasing the depth or width of
networks could lead to successful outcomes, there remains
an absence of theoretical assurances to foresee these results.

Current theoretical and empirical research in neural networks suggests that complex datasets require large network architectures for thorough
classification, yet the precise nature of this relationship remains unclear. This paper tackles
this issue by defining upper and lower bounds
for neural network widths, which are informed
by the polytope structure of the dataset in question. We also delve into the application of these
principles to simplicial complexes and specific
manifold shapes, explaining how the requirement
for network width varies in accordance with the
geometric complexity of the dataset. Moreover,
we develop an algorithm to investigate a converse
situation where the polytope structure of a dataset
can be inferred from its corresponding trained
neural networks. Through our algorithm, it is established that popular datasets such as MNIST,
Fashion-MNIST, and CIFAR10 can be efficiently
encapsulated using no more than two polytopes
with a small number of faces.

In this paper, we therefore tackle the challenge of identifying
the optimal neural network architecture for classifying a
given dataset. This task is approached through the lens of
the polytope structure of deep ReLU networks, a subject
that has garnered considerable attention in recent studies
(Black et al., 2022; Grigsby & Lindsey, 2022; Berzins, 2023;
Huchette et al., 2023). In fact, our primary theoretical goal
is to address the “multiple manifold problem,” introduced by
Buchanan et al. (2020): For given two disjoint topological
spaces X+ and X− , what is the optimal architecture for the
neural network N such that N (x) > 0 for all x ∈ X+ and
N (x) < 0 otherwise?

1. Introduction
To comprehend the remarkable performance of deep neural networks (DNNs), extensive research has delved into
their architectures and the universal approximation property
(UAP). The UAP of two-layer neural networks on compact sets was initially proven by Cybenko (1989), sparking
widespread exploration of the UAP in diverse settings for
DNNs. Studies have focused on determining the minimal
depths and widths of deep ReLU networks required for UAP
(Hornik, 1991; Park et al., 2020). These foundational results
contribute to unraveling the intricate relationship between
approximation power and neural network architectures.

By utilizing the geometric properties of DNNs, here we
provide a comprehensive answer to this question. Our approach involves determining both upper and lower bounds
for the depth and widths of networks required for dataset
classification, based on the polytope covering of the datasets.
Specifically, we explicitly construct a neural network with
practical applicability. For example, our discovery in Theorem 3.4 reveals that the swiss roll dataset in Figure 1(a) can
be efficiently classified using a three-layer ReLU network
with 24 neurons, as depicted in Figure 1(c).

1
Department of Mathematical Science, KAIST, Daejeon, Korea
School of Computing, KAIST, Daejeon, Korea 3 Kim Jaechul
Graduate School of AI, KAIST, Daejeon, Korea. Correspondence
to: Jong Chul Ye <jong.ye@kaist.ac.kr>.

Another important contribution of this paper is the investigation into the converse situation, demonstrating that trained
neural networks inherently capture the geometric properties of the dataset and enable the extraction of the dataset’s
polytope structure. As for demonstrating practical use, we
uncover and discuss simple geometric traits of real-world

2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

