Weakly-Supervised Residual Evidential Learning for
Multi-Instance Uncertainty Estimation

Pei Liu 1 Luping Ji 1

Abstract

quences in safety-critical scenarios, e.g., autonomous driving and medical diagnosis (Franchi et al., 2022; Linmans
et al., 2023), calling into question their real-world usability.
Thus, it is particularly important to provide an accurate confidence level for the prediction of neural networks (NNs)
through uncertainty estimation (UE) methods.

Uncertainty estimation (UE), as an effective
means to quantify predictive uncertainty, is crucial
for safe and reliable decision-making, especially
in high-risk scenarios. Existing UE schemes
usually assume that there are completely-labeled
samples to support fully-supervised learning. In
practice, however, many UE tasks often have no
sufficiently-labeled data to use, such as the Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) with only weak instance annotations. To bridge this gap, this paper,
for the first time, addresses the weakly-supervised
issue of Multi-Instance UE (MIUE) and proposes
a new baseline scheme, Multi-Instance Residual
Evidential Learning (MIREL). Particularly, at the
fine-grained instance UE with only weak supervision, we derive a multi-instance residual operator
through the Fundamental Theorem of Symmetric
Functions. On this operator derivation, we further
propose MIREL to jointly model the high-order
predictive distribution at bag and instance levels for MIUE. Extensive experiments empirically
demonstrate that our MIREL not only could often
make existing MIL networks perform better in
MIUE, but also could surpass representative UE
methods by large margins, especially in instancelevel UE tasks. Our source code is available at
https://github.com/liupei101/MIREL.

To accomplish accurate UE, epistemic (model) uncertainty
is considered generally (Postels et al., 2022; Mukhoti et al.,
2023). From a principled Bayesian perspective (Neal, 2012),
it is characterized by the distribution over model parameters
given training data D, i.e., p(ω|D). Due to its involvement,
a model parameter ω would be low in likelihood when it
is incompatible with D; as a result, less confidence would
be yielded for the new samples shifted in distribution, thus
alleviating overconfidence in prediction. However, most
current practices often assume that there are completelylabeled samples in D with which NNs can be trained to
support p(ω|D) (Mena et al., 2021).
In fact, there are many practical tasks involving weaklyannotated data, in which no complete label can be directly utilized for training. While such tasks remain underexplored in UE, a fundamental machine learning problem
we consider under this class is multiple instance learning (MIL) (Dietterich et al., 1997). As a typical task
of weakly-supervised learning, it is prominent in many
labeling-intensive applications, e.g., histopathology diagnosis (Ilse et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2024a), video anomaly
detection (Sultani et al., 2018; Zhong et al., 2019) and video
analysis (Babenko et al., 2010; Rizve et al., 2023), etc.
Specifically, in histopathology diagnosis an image usually
contains gigapixels, so it is often divided into thousands of
small patches for MIL, where multiple patches (instances)
are observed but only a general statement of their labels
is given. In this case, a diagnosis model has to learn from
weakly-annotated patches to make patch-level predictions.
UE is highly anticipated to provide accurate uncertainty
measures for these weakly-supervised predictions to make
final diagnostic decisions safer and more reliable.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models have shown impressive capability
and become ubiquitous in the last decade. However, they
often tend to produce overconfident predictions, even for
shifted or unseen samples (Nguyen et al., 2015; Kendall &
Gal, 2017). Such behaviour may lead to disastrous conse1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of
Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China.
Correspondence to: Luping Ji <jiluping@uestc.edu.cn>.

Generally, a sample given in MIL is described as a bag
X and its label is known, Y ∈ {0, 1}. In particular, X is
composed of multiple instances, i.e., X = {x1 , . . . , xK },
but instance labels {y1 , . . . , yK } are unknown and instead

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

