LLM Maybe LongLM: SelfExtend LLM Context Window Without Tuning

Hongye Jin 1 * Xiaotian Han 1 * Jingfeng Yang 2 Zhimeng Jiang 1 Zirui Liu 3 Chia-Yuan Chang 1
Huiyuan Chen 4 Xia Hu 3

Abstract

LLMs will be unpredictable and suffer from severe performance degradation. The perplexity (PPL) of the model will
explode with the long input sequences (Xiao et al., 2023;
Peng et al., 2023; Han et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023b).

It is well known that LLMs cannot generalize
well to long contexts whose lengths are larger
than the training sequence length. This poses
challenges when employing LLMs for processing long input sequences during inference. In
this work, we argue that LLMs themselves have
inherent capabilities to handle long contexts without fine-tuning. To achieve this goal, we propose SelfExtend to extend the context window
of LLMs by constructing bi-level attention information: the grouped attention and the neighbor
attention. The grouped attention captures the dependencies among tokens that are far apart, while
neighbor attention captures dependencies among
adjacent tokens within a specified range. The
two-level attentions are computed based on the
original model’s self-attention mechanism during inference. With minor code modification,
our SelfExtend can effortlessly extend existing
LLMs’ context window without any fine-tuning.
We conduct comprehensive experiments on multiple benchmarks and the results show that our
SelfExtend can effectively extend existing LLMs’
context window length. The code can be found at
https://github.com/datamllab/LongLM.

Recently, a variety of context window extension methods
have been developed to extend the context window of pretrained LLMs. A straightforward approach is to fine-tune
these models on enough extensive texts. Besides this, some
methods seek to extend context window length in more
efficient fine-tuning ways. Among these contemporary
methods, some notable techniques include ‘PI’ (Chen et al.,
2023b), ‘CLEX’ (Chen et al., 2023a) ‘Yarn’ (Peng et al.,
2023), ‘PoSE’ (Zhu et al., 2023), ‘LongLora’ (Chen et al.,
2023c), and ‘ABF’ (Xiong et al., 2023). These methods
aim to extend the content window based on the implicit
assumption that pretrained LLMs lack the ability to handle long content. However, these methods typically require
finetuning to achieve extension, which can be resource and
time-intensive given the quadratic complexity of Transformers. Additionally, high-quality long text data is scarce, hindering such fine-tuning approaches. Most real-world data
is short, and much long text lacks meaningful long-range
dependencies. With limited appropriate data, finetuning
risks degrading existing strong performance on shorter sequences from pretraining or overfitting models to the tuning
set. LLMs’ generalizability to broad tasks may be reduced.
Instead of extending the content window, in this paper, we
believe LLMs should have inherent capabilities to handle
long contexts. Our belief stems from the fact that when we,
as human beings, are children, we are taught how to read and
write using relatively short texts, such as articles spanning
several pages. We rarely use extremely long texts like entire
books or complete documents as learning materials. Yet,
we are still able to understand long texts effectively. With
this strong motivation, the poor performance of LLMs while
facing long text is not due to the lack of long context understanding capabilities. In our analysis, the key challenge preventing LLMs from effectively handling longer contexts is
the Out-of-Distribution (O.O.D) issues related to positional
encoding, which we call the positional O.O.D1 issue. This

1. Introduction
The context window length of most existing LLMs (Zhao
et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023) is limited since they are
trained with a fixed length of training sequences. It’s determined by the context window length during the pretraining
stage. Once the length of the input texts exceeds the pretraining context window during the inference, the behavior of
*

Equal contribution 1 Texas A&M University 2 Amazon, the
views expressed or the conclusions reached are his own and
do not represent the view of Amazon 3 Rice University 4 Case
Western Reserve University. Correspondence to: Hongye Jin
<jhy0410@tamu.edu>.

1

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Here, the position refers to relative position rather than absolute position. The relative position is m − n in RoPE, where
m and n are the absolute positions of two tokens. The positional

1

