Compressing Large Language Models by Joint Sparsification and Quantization

Jinyang Guo 1 2 Jianyu Wu 2 Zining Wang 1 Jiaheng Liu 1 Ge Yang 2 Yifu Ding 1 Ruihao Gong 3
Haotong Qin 4 Xianglong Liu 1 B

Abstract
Crash

Perplexity

In this paper, we introduce a novel model compression technique named Joint Sparsification and
Quantization (JSQ), explicitly tailored for large
language models (LLMs). Traditional methods
employ either sparsification or quantization individually to compress LLMs, leading to performance degradation at high compression ratios.
In contrast, our JSQ approach integrates sparsification and quantization cohesively. As sparsification tend to preserve outliers that is harmful to quantization, we introduce a novel sparsity metric to serves as a bridge between the
sparsification and quantization. Moreover, it is
proven outliers in LLMs have significant impact
but harmful to compression. Current solutions are
highly coupled with quantization process, which
is not helpful to sparsification. To this end, we
also introduce a search-based activation editor
to automatically eliminate relatively useless outliers. Comprehensive experiments across various
datasets and architectures affirm the efficacy of
our JSQ framework. Notably, our JSQ achieves
7.96× computation reduction without crashing
for the representative model LLaMA. This accomplishment stands in stark contrast to the limitations of most state-of-the-art LLM compression methods, which typically fail under such extreme compression ratios. Our code is released at
https://github.com/uanu2002/JSQ.

Usable
LLaMA-7B (14.64T)

Computation complexity (MACs)

Figure 1. Performance of compressed LLM under different computation complexities.

storage burden in real-world applications. To address this
issue, many model compression techniques are proposed to
compress LLMs, including sparsification, quantization, etc.
As LLM is much larger than previous state-of-the-art models, it requires larger compression ratio for practical usage.
However, current model compression methods specifically
designed for LLM only consider one specific technique
to compress the model, suffering from significant performance degradation when compression ratio becomes large.
For example, in Fig. 1, the state-of-the-art approach OmniQuant (Shao et al., 2023) crashes under low computation
complexities. So a new problem emerges: Is it possible to
maintain LLM performance under high compression ratio?
To answer this question, in this paper, we propose the Joint
Sparsification and Quantization (JSQ) framework to simultaneously consider the sparsification and quantization, which
is the first work to jointly utilize these two methods for
compressing LLM under high compression ratio.

1. Introduction
Although large language model (LLM) like LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023a) has achieved increasing attention because
of its strong intelligence, it brings a huge computation and

Simultaneously utilizing these two techniques is non-trivial
due to two significant issues. Firstly, sparsification and quantization are in contradiction with each other. Sparsification
tends to preserve parameters with large absolute values in
LLM (Han et al., 2015), while quantization prefers a small
range of parameter values (Wei et al., 2023). Consequently,
the preserved parameters in sparsification may degrade the

1
State Key Laboratory of Complex & Critical Software Environment, Beihang University 2 Institute of Artificial Intelligence,
Beihang University 3 SenseTime Research 4 ETH Zurich. Correspondence to: Xianglong Liu <xlliu@buaa.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

