S2 IP-LLM: Semantic Space Informed Prompt Learning with LLM for
Time Series Forecasting

Zijie Pan 1 Yushan Jiang 1 Sahil Garg 2 Anderson Schneider 2 Yuriy Nevmyvaka 2 Dongjin Song 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Over the past few years, pre-trained large language models (LLMs) such as GPT-4 (Achiam & et al., 2023) and
LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023b;c) not only achieved great
success across a diverse range of natural language processing (NLP) tasks, i.e., generate coherent and contextually
relevant text, answer questions, and translate sentences between multiple languages, but also exhibited tremendous
potential in tackling applications of more complex or structured domains, such as code generation, healthcare, finance,
and autonomous systems, etc (Singhal et al., 2022; Cui
et al., 2024; Li et al., 2023). As time series analysis is becoming increasingly important for strategic planning and operational efficiency in various real-world applications, e.g.,
energy load management, traffic forecasting, weather forecasting, health risk analysis, etc (Friedman, 1962; Courty &
Li, 1999; Böse et al., 2017; Gao et al., 2020; Li et al., 2022;
Liu et al., 2023a; Dimri et al., 2020), a natural question to
ask is whether we should train a general purpose foundation model from scratch, or fine-tune pre-trained LLMs to
perform time series forecasting?

Recently, there has been a growing interest in
leveraging pre-trained large language models
(LLMs) for various time series applications. However, the semantic space of LLMs, established
through the pre-training, is still underexplored
and may help yield more distinctive and informative representations to facilitate time series forecasting. To this end, we propose Semantic Space
Informed Prompt learning with LLM (S 2 IP-LLM)
to align the pre-trained semantic space with time
series embedding space and perform time series
forecasting based on learned prompts from the
joint space. We first design a tokenization module
tailored for cross-modality alignment, which explicitly concatenates patches of decomposed time
series components to create embeddings that effectively encode the temporal dynamics. Next, we
leverage the pre-trained word token embeddings
to derive semantic anchors and align selected anchors with time series embeddings by maximizing the cosine similarity in the joint space. This
way, S 2 IP-LLM can retrieve relevant semantic
anchors as prompts to provide strong indicators
(context) for time series that exhibit different temporal dynamics. With thorough empirical studies
on multiple benchmark datasets, we demonstrate
that the proposed S 2 IP-LLM can achieve superior forecasting performance over state-of-the-art
baselines. Furthermore, our ablation studies and
visualizations verify the necessity of prompt learning informed by semantic space.

Recently, significant efforts have been made to build foundation models for general-purpose time series analysis (Wu
et al., 2023; Garza & Mergenthaler-Canseco, 2023; Rasul
et al., 2023). TimesNet (Wu et al., 2023) uses TimesBlock
as a task-general backbone to capture multi-periodicity and
extract complex intraperiod- and interperiod-variations via
transformed 2D tensors. TimeGPT-1 describes a general
pre-trained model for time series forecasting (Garza &
Mergenthaler-Canseco, 2023). These approaches, however,
are hindered by two main challenges. First, time series data
can be acquired in various formats, such as univariate or multivariate, often in large volumes, and from different domains,
like healthcare, finance, traffic, environmental sciences, etc.
This escalates the complexity of model training and poses
challenges in handling different scenarios. Second, time
series data, in practice, often exhibit non-stationary characteristics, resulting in the underlying statistical properties,
such as means, variances, and auto-correlations shifting
during collection. This could also result in concept drift,
where the statistical properties of target variables change
over time. These realities present significant challenges for

1

School of Computing, University of Connecticut, Storrs,
USA 2 Department of Machine Learning Research, Morgan
Stanley, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Yuriy Nevmyvaka <yuriy.nevmyvaka@ morganstanley.com>, Dongjin Song
<dongjin.song@uconn.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

