Unleashing the Power of Meta-tuning for Few-shot Generalization
Through Sparse Interpolated Experts

Shengzhuang Chen 1 Jihoon Tack 2 Yunqiao Yang 1 Yee Whye Teh 3 Jonathan Richard Schwarz * 4 Ying Wei * 5

Avg OOD acc

Abstract

Avg ID acc

Recent successes suggest that parameter-efficient
fine-tuning of foundation models is becoming the
state-of-the-art method for transfer learning in
vision, gradually replacing the rich literature of
alternatives such as meta-learning. In trying to
harness the best of both worlds, meta-tuning introduces a subsequent optimization stage of foundation models but has so far only shown limited success and crucially tends to underperform on outof-distribution (OOD) tasks. In this paper, we introduce Sparse MetA-Tuning (SMAT), a method
inspired by sparse mixture-of-experts approaches
and trained to isolate subsets of pre-trained parameters automatically for meta-tuning on each task.
SMAT successfully overcomes OOD sensitivity
and delivers on the promise of enhancing the transfer abilities of vision foundation models beyond
parameter-efficient finetuning. We establish new
state-of-the-art results on a challenging combination of Meta-Dataset augmented with additional
OOD tasks in both zero-shot and gradient-based
adaptation settings. In addition, we provide a thorough analysis of the superiority of learned over
hand-designed sparsity patterns for sparse expert
methods and the pivotal importance of the sparsity level in balancing between in-distribution and
out-of-distribution generalization. Our code and
models are publicly available.

75
70
65
60
86
85
84
83

PMF
SMAT w/o dense teachers
SMAT (ours)

Target performance

0

10k

20k

25% speedup
43% speedup

30k

Training tasks

40k

50k

Figure 1. Average testing accuracy during meta-training for metatuning methods. SMAT yields better in-distribution (ID) and
out-of-distribution (OOD) results and shows an attractive learning speedup.

pre-trained models in established domains (e.g., vision or
language) becoming virtually indispensable and a vibrant
research landscape developing around the design and training of foundation models for new modalities and problems,
ranging from the life sciences (Lin et al., 2023) to spectral data (Hong et al., 2023), time series (Yeh et al., 2023),
graphs (Liu et al., 2023a) and combinations thereof in multimodal systems (Yu et al., 2023). Foundation models have
seemingly also signaled the convergence of decades of research on transfer learning (see Zhuang et al. (2020) for
a survey) to the simple yet powerful paradigm of full or
parameter-efficient fine-tuning (Perez et al., 2018; Hu et al.,
2021) of the best foundation model available. As with many
breakthroughs in science, this convergence runs contrary to
an attractive hypothesis: That the explicit formulation of
objectives, algorithms, and optimization procedures targeted
directly at downstream performance will result in the best
transfer learner (most directly advocated for in the learning
to learn, or meta-learning community (Thrun & Pratt, 2012;
Finn et al., 2017)). Instead, the field’s general belief has
shifted towards self-supervised objectives such as autoregressive losses (e.g. Mikolov et al., 2013) or contrastive
learning (e.g. Radford et al., 2021) with large models and
big data as the best strategy for generalist models with the

1. Introduction
The emergence of foundation models (Bommasani et al.,
2021) has marked a new chapter in machine learning, with
*
1
Equal contribution
City University of Hong Kong
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
3
University of Oxford 4 Harvard University 5 Nanyang Technological University. Correspondence to: Shengzhuang Chen
<szchen9-c@my.cityu.edu.hk>, Jonathan Richard Schwarz
<schwarzjn@gmail.com>, Ying Wei <ying.wei@ntu.edu.sg>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

