Provably Robust DPO: Aligning Language Models with Noisy Feedback

Sayak Ray Chowdhury * 1 Anush Kini * 1 Nagarajan Natarajan 1

Abstract

1. Introduction

Learning from preference-based feedback has recently gained traction as a promising approach
to align language models with human interests. While these aligned generative models have
demonstrated impressive capabilities across various tasks, their dependence on high-quality human preference data poses a bottleneck in practical applications. Specifically, noisy (incorrect
and ambiguous) preference pairs in the dataset
might restrict the language models from capturing human intent accurately. While practitioners
have recently proposed heuristics to mitigate the
effect of noisy preferences, a complete theoretical
understanding of their workings remain elusive.
In this work, we aim to bridge this gap by introducing a general framework for policy optimization in the presence of random preference flips.
We focus on the direct preference optimization
(DPO) algorithm in particular since it assumes
that preferences adhere to the Bradley-Terry-Luce
(BTL) model, raising concerns about the impact
of noisy data on the learned policy. We design
a novel loss function, which de-bias the effect
of noise on average, making a policy trained by
minimizing that loss robust to the noise. Under
log-linear parameterization of the policy class and
assuming good feature coverage of the SFT policy, we prove that the sub-optimality gap of the
proposed robust DPO (rDPO) policy compared
q to

Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF)
has proven highly effective in aligning Large Language
Models (LLMs) with human preferences (Christiano et al.,
2017; Stiennon et al., 2020; Ouyang et al., 2022). In the
RLHF pipeline(Kaufmann et al., 2023), an LLM is first pretrained using supervised fine tuning to obtain a reference
or SFT policy. A reward model is fit to a dataset of human
preferences in the form of a classifier between preferred and
rejected responses. Next, an LLM policy is trained using RL
algorithms such as proximal policy optimization (PPO) to
generate high-reward responses while minimizing a certain
notion of divergence from the SFT policy.
While RLHF produces models (e.g. GPT4, Llama, Mistral etc.) with impressive capabilities across diverse tasks
ranging from programming to creative writing, it introduces
notable complexities into the training process (Zheng et al.,
2023). It requires training two language models (one for reward and another for policy) and frequent sampling from the
policy in the course of training. This demands significant
compute and storage, often limiting the feasible size of a
model. To get around these issues, the direct preference optimisation (DPO) method (Rafailov et al. (2023)) optimizes
the language model policy directly from human preferences
without learning a reward model explicitly and avoiding
complexities of RL. Given a dataset of human preferences
over model responses, DPO defines a certain binary-cross
entropy loss, and implicitly optimizes the same objective as
RLHF in the form of KL-regularized reward maximization.
A crucial ingredient governing the success of both RLHF
and DPO is the quality of preference data. Gathering responses for a vast array of prompts is often inherently noisy
(e.g., ambiguous preferences), which could derail policy
training, with or without RL (Lambert et al., 2023; Bai et al.,
2022b). We find empirical evidence that these algorithms
are robust to noise in some scenarios (as also demonstrated
by Rafailov et al. (2023); Ouyang et al. (2022)), even though
they work under the assumption that the observed preferences adhere to an underlying sampling model (see Section
2). On the other hand, as we show via simple noise injection
mechanisms on real-world datasets in Section 6, the performance of DPO drops significantly when the noise rates
are high. We are not the first to identify or address this

1
d
the optimal policy is of the order O( 1−2ε
n ),
where ε < 1/2 is flip rate of labels, d is policy parameter dimension and n is size of dataset.
Our experiments on IMDb sentiment generation
and Anthropic’s helpful-harmless dataset shows
that rDPO is robust to noise in preference labels
compared to vanilla DPO and other heuristics proposed by practitioners.

*
Equal contribution 1 Microsoft Research, India. Correspondence to: Sayak Ray Chowdhury <t-sayakr@microsoft.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

