Enforcing Constraints in RNA Secondary Structure Predictions:
A Post-Processing Framework Based on the Assignment Problem

Geewon Suh * 1 2 Gyeongjo Hwang * 1 Seokjun Kang 1 Doojin Baek 3 Mingeun Kang 1 2

Abstract

part from a different strand. This fundamental principle of
base pairing gives rise to the double-stranded helical structure of DNAs (Watson & Crick, 1953). In contrast, within a
single-stranded RNA molecule, base pairing facilitates the
formation of intra-molecular hydrogen bonding, resulting in
complex folding patterns with various local structures (Kim
et al., 1974; Noller, 1984; Tinoco Jr & Bustamante, 1999).
Investigating these structures not only sheds light on the
principles governing RNA functions and mechanisms, but
also holds promise for advances in biotechnology.

RNA properties, such as function and stability, are
intricately tied to their two-dimensional conformations. This has spurred the development of computational models for predicting the RNA secondary
structures, leveraging dynamic programming or
machine learning (ML) techniques. These structures are governed by specific rules; for example, only Watson-Crick and Wobble pairs are allowed, and sequences must not form sharp bends.
Recent efforts introduced a systematic approach
to post-process the predictions made by ML algorithms, aiming to modify them to respect the
constraints. However, we still observe instances
violating the requirements, significantly reducing
biological relevance. To address this challenge,
we present a novel post-processing framework for
ML-based predictions on RNA secondary structures, inspired by the assignment problem in integer linear programming. Our algorithm offers a
theoretical guarantee, ensuring that the resulting
predictions adhere to the fundamental constraints
of RNAs. Empirical evidence supports the efficacy of our approach, demonstrating improved
predictive performance with no constraint violation, while requiring less running time.

Over the last few decades, numerous achievements have
been made in methodologies aimed at observing RNA secondary structures. Technologies such as X-ray crystallography, nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, and cryoelectron microscopy have been prominent strategies for visualizing molecular structures (Neidle & Sanderson, 2021).
While these can yield structures of high resolution, it is both
cost-prohibitive and labor-intensive to collect samples (Kappel et al., 2020). An alternative is probing-based methods
that give us enough number of samples, yet the quality of
the data is compromised (Spitale & Incarnato, 2022).
Independently, researchers have also developed computational algorithms to predict RNA secondary structures. In
the early 1980s, algorithms finding the most thermodynamically stable structure were proposed (Nussinov & Jacobson,
1980; Zuker & Stiegler, 1981). Since this problem is NPcomplete for a general class of RNA structures (Lyngsø &
Pedersen, 2000; Bonnet et al., 2017), they usually narrow the
optimization space and employ dynamic programming (DP)
to efficiently explore the reduced space. Later on, improvements have been made to achieve a better computational
complexity (Bringmann et al., 2016; Huang et al., 2019),
or to expand the search space including pseudoknottedstructures (Rivas & Eddy, 1998; Akutsu, 2000).

1. Introduction
A nucleotide serves as a building block for deoxyribonucleic
acids (DNAs) and ribonucleic acids (RNAs), comprising a
nitrogenous base, a pentose sugar, and a phosphate group.
Due to the presence of hydrogen donors and acceptors in
the nitrogenous base, a nucleotide from one DNA strand can
engage in inter-molecular hydrogen bonding with a counter-

Recently, machine learning (ML) models have been brought
into the spotlight with an accumulation of experimentally
validated samples (Sussman et al., 1998; Griffiths-Jones
et al., 2003; Andronescu et al., 2008). This data-driven strategy makes a model free from handcrafted rules, but their
outputs typically do not satisfy the constraints of the RNAs.
For example, RNAs usually permit only Watson-Crick and
Wobble pairs, and sharp bends are geometrically impossi-

*
Equal contribution 1 Spidercore Inc., Daejeon, South Korea
Department of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon, South
Korea 3 School of Computing, KAIST, Daejeon, South Korea. Correspondence to: Mingeun Kang <minkang@spidercore.io>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

