Memoria: Resolving Fateful Forgetting Problem through
Human-Inspired Memory Architecture

Sangjun Park 1 JinYeong Bak 1

Abstract

Introducing a dynamic memory capacity and employing
a policy that prioritizes crucial information for the future
can resolve the issue of fateful forgetting. However, realizing this requires addressing various derivative problems.
Firstly, it is necessary to distinguish which information is
considered important (Long-term Importance). Predicting
long-term importance at the initial acquisition is challenging, as the determination of whether it will be useful in the
future depends on future usage, making it difficult to foresee. Furthermore, since we cannot store infinite amounts of
information, forgetting is essential. This mechanism should
not merely erase old information, but rather selectively preserve and forget based on the long-term importance of the
information (Selective Preservation). Furthermore, while
recent memories inherently preserve a certain degree of
relevance to the context, long-term memories are not the
case. Because long-term memories are temporally distant
from the current situation, the content of the retrieved longterm memory should be relevant to the current situation.
Ultimately, it is crucial that old memories are selectively activated based on the current context (Cue-based Activation).
This issue encompasses the challenge of how to search associated memories in long-term storage (Memory Searching).

Making neural networks remember over the long
term has been a longstanding issue. Although several external memory techniques have been introduced, most focus on retaining recent information
in the short term. Regardless of its importance,
information tends to be fatefully forgotten over
time. We present Memoria, a memory system
for artificial neural networks, drawing inspiration
from humans and applying various neuroscientific
and psychological theories. The experimental results prove the effectiveness of Memoria in the
diverse tasks of sorting, language modeling, and
classification, surpassing conventional techniques.
Engram analysis reveals that Memoria exhibits
the primacy, recency, and temporal contiguity effects which are characteristics of human memory.

1. Introduction
Humans possess an incredible ability to retain memories
for long periods. Humans extract the gist from the flood
of data, retrieve relevant information, and gradually forget
useless and unemployed memories. Efforts to endow neural
networks with human-like long-term memory have been ongoing. Although Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) have
shown excellent performance in a variety of tasks (Devlin
et al., 2019; Radford et al., 2018; Brown et al., 2020; Lewis
et al., 2020a), they also struggle with long sequences due to
the nature of processing entire input tokens simultaneously.
To mitigate this limitation, external memory methodologies
have been studied. Nevertheless, unlike humans, most existing methods prioritize the preservation of new information
over old memories and operate with fixed capacities. Consequently, this inevitably leads to the removal or dilution of
old memories. We termed this problem Fateful Forgetting.

Fortunately, all these issues have been long-standing challenges faced by the memory system of living organisms.
Humans possess a highly sophisticated memory system that
not only retains recent information but also has the capability to remember important events throughout their lives
(Atkinson & Shiffrin, 1968; Craik & Lockhart, 1972; Nairne
& Pandeirada, 2008; Waugh & Norman, 1965; Brown, 1958;
Underwood & Postman, 1960). Recent advancements in
the fields of AI and neuroscience have brought attention to
the significance of interdisciplinary research between these
two domains (Hassabis et al., 2017; van de Ven et al., 2020).
Particularly, in the realm of memory systems, humans provide nearly ideal solutions, prompting endeavors to apply
the insights from human memory systems to artificial neural
networks (Banino et al., 2020; Kim et al., 2023). Following
this trend, we approach the issue of fateful forgetting by
integrating the neuroscientific evidence and the theoretical
models of human memory. Memoria provides an innovative solution to fateful forgetting, opening the pathway to
selective and permanent memorization for neural networks.

1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, South Korea. Correspondence
to: JinYeong Bak <jy.bak@skku.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

