Improving Instruction Following in Language Models
through Proxy-Based Uncertainty Estimation

JoonHo Lee * 1 Jae Oh Woo * 2 Juree Seok 1 Parisa Hassanzadeh 2 Wooseok Jang 1 JuYoun Son 1 Sima Didari 2
Baruch Gutow 2 Heng Hao 2 Hankyu Moon 2 Wenjun Hu 2 Yeong-Dae Kwon 1 Taehee Lee 1 Seungjai Min 2

Abstract
Assessing response quality to instructions in language models is vital but challenging due to the
complexity of human language across different
contexts. This complexity often results in ambiguous or inconsistent interpretations, making accurate assessment difficult. To address this issue, we
propose a novel Uncertainty-aware Reward Model
(URM) that introduces a robust uncertainty estimation for the quality of paired responses based
on Bayesian approximation. Trained with preference datasets, our uncertainty-enabled proxy not
only scores rewards for responses but also evaluates their inherent uncertainty. Empirical results
demonstrate significant benefits of incorporating
the proposed proxy into language model training.
Our method boosts the instruction following capability of language models by refining data curation
for training and improving policy optimization objectives, thereby surpassing existing methods by a
large margin on benchmarks such as Vicuna and
MT-bench. These findings highlight that our proposed approach substantially advances language
model training and paves a new way of harnessing uncertainty within language models. Code
is available at https://github.com/P-B-U/
proxy_based_uncertainty.

(a) Open-Orca-GPT4

(b) Databricks-Dolly

(c) Anthropic-Helpful
(d) OpenAI-Summarize
Figure 1. Uncertainty distributions evaluated using the proposed
URM (Uncertainty-aware Reward Model) for individual rewards
in the instruction tuning or SFT data (a, b) and reward gaps in the
preference data (c, d) are illustrated. These results show that even
for responses (or preferences) with an identical reward (or reward
gap), their uncertainty is distributed across a wide range.

tations (Wittgenstein, 1953). The response quality in conversations is often assessed by how well it follows implicit
rules inherent in the context. In language models (LMs),
enhancing their instruction-following capability is crucial
for reliable deployment since generating either unhelpful
responses or harmful content poses various risks.
In line with earlier studies (Leike et al., 2018; Ziegler et al.,
2020), Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback
(RLHF) has been proposed to enhance the instruction following of LMs (Ouyang et al., 2022; Glaese et al., 2022; Bai
et al., 2022b; Touvron et al., 2023). This approach involves
training proxy models, or reward models, using datasets
with human preference annotations for paired responses to
instructions. These proxy models generate reward scores
and play a crucial role in facilitating the subsequent policy
optimization framework through Reinforcement Learning
(RL) algorithms such as Actor-Critic (Mnih et al., 2016) or
PPO (Schulman et al., 2017). However, the assessment of
response quality can be diverse based on the background
of each annotator, which leads to ambiguity in its interpre-

1. Introduction
Language represents a complex form of human interaction.
Its meaning varies significantly across specific cultural and
social contexts and evolves over time with diverse interpre*
Equal contribution 1 Samsung SDS Technology Research,
Seoul, Korea 2 Samsung SDS America, San Jose, California, USA.
Correspondence to: JoonHo Lee <joonholee@samsung.com>,
Jae Oh Woo <jaeoh.woo@aya.yale.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

