Relaxed Quantile Regression: Prediction Intervals for Asymmetric Noise

Thomas Pouplin * 1 Alan Jeffares * 1 Nabeel Seedat 1 Mihaela van der Schaar 1

Abstract

shown this to be a challenging problem in practice (Guo
et al., 2017; Yao et al., 2019; Ayhan & Berens, 2022).
Therefore, significant efforts have been made to address
this task in order to contribute towards more reliable and
trustworthy models (see e.g. Gawlikowski et al. (2023)).
A significant aspect of this effort is developing regression methods that output predictive intervals rather than
point predictions. This has proven to be a crucial requirement in high-stakes applications including medical
decision-making (Begoli et al., 2019), autonomous driving (Su et al., 2023), and energy forecasting (Wang et al.,
2022).

Constructing valid prediction intervals rather
than point estimates is a well-established approach for uncertainty quantification in the regression setting. Models equipped with this capacity output an interval of values in which the
ground truth target will fall with some prespecified probability. This is an essential requirement
in many real-world applications where simple
point predictions’ inability to convey the magnitude and frequency of errors renders them insufficient for high-stakes decisions. Quantile regression is a leading approach for obtaining such intervals via the empirical estimation of quantiles
in the (non-parametric) distribution of outputs.
This method is simple, computationally inexpensive, interpretable, assumption-free, and effective. However, it does require that the specific
quantiles being learned are chosen a priori. This
results in (a) intervals that are arbitrarily symmetric around the median which is sub-optimal
for realistic skewed distributions, or (b) learning
an excessive number of intervals. In this work,
we propose Relaxed Quantile Regression (RQR),
a direct alternative to quantile regression based
interval construction that removes this arbitrary
constraint whilst maintaining its strengths. We
demonstrate that this added flexibility results in
intervals with an improvement in desirable qualities (e.g. mean width) whilst retaining the essential coverage guarantees of quantile regression.

Especially in the case of neural networks, quantile regression (Koenker & Bassett Jr, 1978) has emerged as a powerful method for obtaining such intervals. This approach
requires the model to output estimates of two quantiles
rather than a single point prediction, which is easily optimized in practice by a simple change in loss function.
These quantiles may then be used to construct an interval
(µ1 , µ2 ) within which the true label will lie with probability
α (a formal description of quantile regression is provided in
Section 2). Obtaining predictive intervals via quantile regression has earned substantial popularity in both research
and practice (Koenker & Hallock, 2001; Koenker, 2017; Yu
et al., 2003; Fitzenberger et al., 2001). This uptake can be
attributed to several factors, including (a) methodological
simplicity requiring minimal changes to the modeling procedure, (b) negligible increased computational cost (in contrast to e.g. ensemble methods (Lakshminarayanan et al.,
2017)), (c) a simple, easily interpreted characterization of
uncertainty (Savelli & Joslyn, 2013; Goodwin et al., 2010),
(d) lack of parametric assumptions on the data-generating
process, and (e) enduring empirical effectiveness (Chung
et al., 2021; Tagasovska & Lopez-Paz, 2019). Furthermore,
quantile regression methods can be wrapped in the conformal prediction procedure of Vovk et al. (2005) to additionally provide finite sample coverage guarantees, as demonstrated in Romano et al. (2019).

1. Introduction
Reliable uncertainty estimation is an essential requirement
for safely and robustly deploying neural networks in realworld applications (Amodei et al., 2016; Dietterich, 2017;
Kompa et al., 2021). However, research has consistently

This work primarily focuses on the standard task of outputting predictive intervals that obtain a prespecified level
of coverage (but the method could also be applied to the
related non-prespecified task e.g. Chung et al. (2021)).
This problem does not have a unique solution (consider
e.g. trivial solutions in which some percentage of predic-

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Applied Mathematics and
Theoretical Physics, University of Cambridge, UK. Correspondence to: Thomas Pouplin <tp531@cam.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

