Deep Networks Always Grok and Here is Why

Ahmed Imtiaz Humayun 1 Randall Balestriero 2 Richard Baraniuk 1

80

Abstract
Accuracy

Grokking, or delayed generalization, is a phenomenon where generalization in a deep neural
network (DNN) occurs long after achieving near
zero training error. Previous studies have reported
the occurrence of grokking in specific controlled
settings, such as DNNs initialized with largenorm parameters or transformers trained on algorithmic datasets. We demonstrate that grokking
is actually much more widespread and materializes in a wide range of practical settings, such as
training of a convolutional neural network (CNN)
on CIFAR10 or a Resnet on Imagenette. We introduce the new concept of delayed robustness,
whereby a DNN groks adversarial examples and
becomes robust, long after interpolation and/or
generalization. We develop an analytical explanation for the emergence of both delayed generalization and delayed robustness based on the
local complexity of a DNN’s input-output mapping. Our local complexity measures the density
of so-called “linear regions” (aka, spline partition regions) that tile the DNN input space and
serves as a utile progress measure for training.
We provide the first evidence that, for classification problems, the linear regions undergo a phase
transition during training whereafter they migrate
away from the training samples (making the DNN
mapping smoother there) and towards the decision boundary (making the DNN mapping less
smooth there). Grokking occurs post phase transition as a robust partition of the input space thanks
to the linearization of the DNN mapping around
the training points. Web: bit.ly/grok-adversarial.

60
40
20

clean test
Adv. = 0.06
Adv. = 0.10
Adv. = 0.13
Adv. = 0.16
Adv. = 0.20

Local Complexity

0
60
40
20
100

train

101

test

102

random

103

104

105

Optimization Steps
Figure 1. Deep Neural Networks grok robustness. When training
a ResNet18 on CIFAR10, without any controlled initialization
as in Liu et al. (2022), the network starts grokking adversarial
examples generated using Projected Gradient Descent (Madry
et al., 2017) after 104 optimization steps (top) and attains almost
equal robustness and generalization performance after 2 × 105
steps. We see that, prior to grokking, the network undergoes a
phase change during training in the local complexity, i.e., the local
density of spline partition regions in the input space (bottom).
After test accuracy converges, the network starts migrating its nonlinearities away from the data points and closer to the decision
boundary (see Figure 2), eventually reducing the complexity of
the learned function around the data points. This increase and
subsequent decrease in local non-linearity is a phenomenon visible
for a wide variety of networks and training settings (see Figure 6).
In this paper, we show that this particular training dynamic always
results in delayed generalization or robustness.

1. Introduction
Grokking is a surprising phenomenon related to representation learning in Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) whereby

DNNs may learn generalizing solutions to a task long after
interpolating the training dataset, i.e., reaching near zero
training error. It was first demonstrated by (Power et al.,
2022) on simple Transformer architectures performing modular addition or division. Subsequently, multiple studies
have reported instances of grokking for settings outside of
modular addition, e.g., DNNs initialized with large weight

1
Rice University 2 Brown University. Correspondence to:
Ahmed Imtiaz Humayun <imtiaz@rice.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

