OTMatch: Improving Semi-Supervised Learning with Optimal Transport

Zhiquan Tan 1 Kaipeng Zheng 2 Weiran Huang † 2 3

Abstract

with labeled samples for model training (Lee et al., 2013;
Tschannen et al., 2019; Berthelot et al., 2019b; Xie et al.,
2020; Sohn et al., 2020; Gong et al., 2021; Zhang et al.,
2021; Wang et al., 2022d), allowing the model to benefit from the potential knowledge contained in these unlabeled samples. Typically, pseudo-labels are derived from
the neural network’s confidence, and the cross-entropy loss
is used to align the prediction on the strongly augmented
image view with the generated pseudo-labels. Following
this paradigm, recent works have achieved state-of-the-art
performance (Zhang et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022d) in
semi-supervised learning. However, it has been demonstrated that the overconfidence of models can be observed
when assigning pseudo labels during training (Chen et al.,
2022). This means that the model could confidently assign
samples to incorrect categories, due to the limited labeled
samples in semi-supervised learning. Such unreliability in
confidence is particularly pronounced when dealing with extremely limited labeled samples. As a result, those misclassified samples can misguide the model’s learning process,
resulting in a decrease in performance.

Semi-supervised learning has made remarkable
strides by effectively utilizing a limited amount
of labeled data while capitalizing on the abundant
information present in unlabeled data. However,
current algorithms often prioritize aligning image predictions with specific classes generated
through self-training techniques, thereby neglecting the inherent relationships that exist within
these classes. In this paper, we present a new approach called OTMatch, which leverages semantic relationships among classes by employing an
optimal transport loss function to match distributions. We conduct experiments on many standard
vision and language datasets. The empirical results show improvements in our method above
baseline, this demonstrates the effectiveness and
superiority of our approach in harnessing semantic relationships to enhance learning performance
in a semi-supervised setting.

In this work, we propose a novel solution to alleviate the issue of overconfidence in the model in pseudo-labeling-based
methods by incorporating inter-class semantic relationships.
Particularly, we find that a key issue lies in simply employing the traditional cross-entropy loss to train the model with
the pseudo-labeled samples. In the cross-entropy loss, the
representation of a sample is aligned with a single category. However, when a sample is assigned an incorrect
pseudo-label, this leads the model to learn the representation in the wrong direction. To address this issue, for
pseudo-labeled samples, we propose to incorporate comprehensive inter-class relationships for regularization, instead
of a single-category target, to guide model training, hence
offering improved robustness. Particularly, we use optimal
transport to tackle this problem as the predicted probability
and pseudo labels are naturally two distributions that need
to be matched, and semantic information can be injected
into the cost matrix in optimal transport loss.

1. Introduction
Semi-supervised learning occupies a unique position at the
intersection of supervised learning and self-supervised learning paradigms (Tian et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020a). The
fundamental principle behind semi-supervised learning lies
in its ability to leverage the latent patterns and structures
of a substantial amount of unlabeled samples to collaborate
with conventional supervised learning on labeled samples.
It has demonstrated remarkable performance without the
need for extensive human efforts in data collection (Sohn
et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022d).
Pseudo-labeling-based methods have dominated the research in semi-supervised learning. It dynamically assigns
labels to unlabeled samples to prepare an extended dataset
1
Department of Mathematical Sciences, Tsinghua University
MIFA Lab, Qing Yuan Research Institute, SEIEE, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University 3 Shanghai AI Laboratory. † Correspondence to:
Weiran Huang <weiran.huang@outlook.com>.
2

The paper is organized in the following manner: We present
a new perspective on current semi-supervised learning methods that rely on pseudo-labeling. We view these methods
as aiming to align the semantic distribution captured by
the teacher and student models, motivated by (Shi et al.,

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

