DPOT: Auto-Regressive Denoising Operator Transformer
for Large-Scale PDE Pre-Training

Zhongkai Hao 1 2 Chang Su 1 Songming Liu 1 Julius Berner 3 Chengyang Ying 1 Hang Su 1
Anima Anandkumar 3 Jian Song 2 Jun Zhu 1 4

Abstract

Multiple PDE datsets

Pre-training has been investigated to improve the
efficiency and performance of training neural operators in data-scarce settings. However, it is
largely in its infancy due to the inherent complexity and diversity, such as long trajectories,
multiple scales and varying dimensions of partial
differential equations (PDEs) data. In this paper,
we present a new auto-regressive denoising pretraining strategy, which allows for more stable and
efficient pre-training on PDE data and generalizes
to various downstream tasks. Moreover, by designing a flexible and scalable model architecture
based on Fourier attention, we can easily scale up
the model for large-scale pre-training. We train
our PDE foundation model with up to 1B parameters on 10+ PDE datasets with more than 100k
trajectories. Extensive experiments show that we
achieve SOTA on these benchmarks and validate
the strong generalizability of our model to significantly enhance performance on diverse downstream PDE tasks like 3D data. Code is available
at https://github.com/thu-ml/DPOT.

Pre-training

PDE Foundation Model

Fine-tuning

Long trajectory

Downstream tasks

3D data High resolution Irregular mesh

Figure 1. An illustration of pre-training a PDE foundation model
using massive data from multiple PDE datasets. The pre-trained
model is then used for fine-tuning different downstream operator
learning tasks, which can be complex. (Best viewed in color)

izadenesheli et al., 2023) than traditional numerical solvers
and show great potential in applications such as weather
forecasting (Pathak et al., 2022), electromagnetism (Augenstein et al., 2023), fluid dynamics (Li et al., 2022b), and
structural optimization (Shukla et al., 2024). To improve
the performance on different operator learning tasks, much
effort has been devoted to designing effective model architectures like DeepONet (Lu et al., 2021), Fourier neural operator (FNO) (Li et al., 2020; 2022b) and transformers (Cao,
2021; Li et al., 2022a; Hao et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
Learning solution operators for Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) is a fundamental task in scientific machine
learning. It learns infinite-dimensional mappings from input to solution function spaces using parametrized PDE
datasets to generalize to unseen inputs (Zachmanoglou &
Thoe, 1986; Karniadakis et al., 2021; Li et al., 2020). Serving as surrogate models, neural operators can be more than
five orders of magnitude faster (Pathak et al., 2022; Azz-

A significant challenge for neural operators is their dependency on large datasets, typically obtained through costly
simulations or experiments, which can limit their application in data-scarce problems. For instance, for an airfoil
design problem, we usually need thousands of data samples to train a neural operator (Shukla et al., 2024), and
each might take hours to days to generate. Large-scale pretraining has proven to be an effective paradigm with strong
generalization ability to downstream tasks, in the data-rich

1
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Techn., Institute for AI, BNRist Center,
Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center, Tsinghua University 2 Dept. of
EE, Tsinghua University 3 Caltech 4 RealAI. Correspondence to:
Jun Zhu <dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

