Bootstrap AutoEncoders With Contrastive Paradigm
for Self-supervised Gaze Estimation

Yaoming Wang 1 Jin Li 1 Wenrui Dai 1 Bowen Shi 1 Xiaopeng Zhang 2 Chenglin Li 1 Hongkai Xiong 1
{wang yaoming, deserve lj, daiwenrui, sjtu shibowen,
lcl1985, xionghongkai}@sjtu.edu.cn; zxphistory@gmail.com

Abstract

Input Data
Full-face Images

Existing self-supervised methods for gaze estimation using the dominant streams of contrastive
and generative approaches are restricted to eye
images and could fail in general full-face settings. In this paper, we reveal that contrastive
methods are ineffective in data augmentation for
self-supervised full-face gaze estimation, while
generative methods are prone to trivial solutions
due to the absence of explicit regularization on semantic representations. To address this challenge,
we propose a novel approach called Bootstrap
auto-encoders with Contrastive paradigm (BeCa),
which combines the strengths of both generative
and contrastive methods. Specifically, we revisit
the Auto-Encoder used in generative approaches
and incorporate the contrastive paradigm to introduce explicit regularization on gaze representation. Furthermore, we design the InfoMSE loss
as an alternative to the vanilla MSE loss for AutoEncoder to mitigate the inconsistency between
reconstruction and representation learning. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed
approaches outperform state-of-the-art unsupervised gaze approaches on extensive datasets (including wild scenes) under both within-dataset
and cross-dataset protocols.

Encoder

Contrastive

InfoMSE

More than 15% Improvement
Wild-scene Application

Decoder

Predicted Gaze Direction

Few-shot Linear Probing

Decouple MSE and Gaze
No Extra Head Pose Model
End-to-end Training

Figure 1: Characteristics of BeCa and BeCa-InfoMSE.
We introduce contrastive regularization and Informative
Mean Square Error to self-supervised gaze estimation with
more than 15% performance improvement and well accommodation to wild datasets like Gaze360. BeCa is free from
additional head pose models and can be trained in an endto-end manner. BeCa-InfoMSE further enhances estimation
performance by decoupling the learned gaze representation
from the reconstruction quality.
tion (Hutchinson et al., 1989; Kim & Ramakrishna, 1999;
Surakka et al., 2004; Lei et al., 2023), autonomous vehicles (Martin et al., 2018; Gerber et al., 2020; Pal et al.,
2020; Fletcher & Zelinsky, 2009), and augmented and virtual reality (Patney et al., 2016; Burova et al., 2020; Konrad
et al., 2020; Shi et al., 2020; Liu & Qin, 2022; Chen et al.,
2022a). With the advent of deep learning, appearance-based
approaches (Cheng et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2015; Lu et al.,
2014; Liu et al., 2021; Cheng & Lu, 2023; Xu et al., 2023b),
regressing gaze direction with neural networks in a supervised manner, have become dominant in gaze estimation.

1. Introduction
Gaze estimation is a vital visual task that predicts the direction of a person’s gaze, a crucial non-verbal cue in
various applications, including human-computer interac-

Early appearance-based approaches focused on utilizing eye
images by assuming that the eye region contains the most
abundant gaze information. (Zhang et al., 2017b; Kellnhofer
et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020; Murthy & Biswas, 2021)
demonstrated that the facial region also contains valuable
gaze information and can be leveraged to enhance gaze
estimation. However, these appearance-based approaches
require large amounts of labeled data and are resourceintensive. To address this limitation, self-supervised gaze
estimation has emerged as a promising alternative.

1
School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China 2 Huawei
Inc, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to: Wenrui Dai <daiwenrui@sjtu.edu.cn>, Xiaopeng Zhang <zxphistory@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

