How Transformers Learn Causal Structure with Gradient Descent
Eshaan Nichani 1 Alex Damian 1 Jason D. Lee 1

Abstract

sequence mapping in which each token in the output is a
weighted linear combination of, i.e “attends to,” the other
tokens in the sequence. Prior work (Elhage et al., 2021) has
sought to understand which specific computational operations, or “circuits,” are implemented by self-attention layers
in trained transformers. However, the process by which such
circuits arise when transformers are trained from scratch via
gradient-based algorithms is still unknown.

The incredible success of transformers on sequence modeling tasks can be largely attributed
to the self-attention mechanism, which allows
information to be transferred between different
parts of a sequence. Self-attention allows transformers to encode causal structure which makes
them particularly suitable for sequence modeling. However, the process by which transformers learn such causal structure via gradient-based
training algorithms remains poorly understood.
To better understand this process, we introduce
an in-context learning task that requires learning
latent causal structure. We prove that gradient descent on a simplified two-layer transformer learns
to solve this task by encoding the latent causal
graph in the first attention layer. The key insight
of our proof is that the gradient of the attention
matrix encodes the mutual information between
tokens. As a consequence of the data processing inequality, the largest entries of this gradient
correspond to edges in the latent causal graph.
As a special case, when the sequences are generated from in-context Markov chains, we prove
that transformers learn an induction head (Olsson
et al., 2022). We confirm our theoretical findings
by showing that transformers trained on our incontext learning task are able to recover a wide
variety of causal structures.

One hallmark capability of transformers is in-context learning (Brown et al., 2020), which is the ability to learn from
information present in the input context without needing
to update the model parameters. For example, given a
prompt of input-output pairs, in-context learning is the
ability to predict the output corresponding to a new input. Prior work has shown that this in-context learning
ability relies on the existence of specific circuits called induction heads (Olsson et al., 2022). Given a prompt of
the form [· · · , A, B, · · · , A], an induction head copies the
token which follows the previous occurrence of A, in this
case being B. This can be implemented using two attention
layers: the first performs the operation of “copying” the previous token, while the second compares this previous token
to the last token of the context. By copying the previous
token, the first attention layer thus implicitly encodes the
causal structure of a Markov chain.
As another example, consider the setting of learning a function class in-context, introduced by Garg et al. (2022).
Each prompt sequence is formed by sampling a new
function f from some function class F, and generating
the prompt [x1 , f (x1 ), x2 , f (x2 ), . . . , xn , f (xn ), xtest ] for
i.i.d inputs x1 , . . . , xn , xtest . The model must learn to estimate f (xtest ) from the (xi , f (xi )) pairs given in-context.
This setting has proved a useful testbed to understand which
in-context learning algorithms can be implemented by transformers; see Section 1.2 for additional discussion. Such
prompts also possess special causal structure. Conditioned
on f , the 2k-th token in the prompt only depends on the
(2k − 1)-th token, and is independent of the rest of the sequence. The model must thus learn to associate each f (xk ),
at position 2k, with its corresponding xk , at position 2k − 1.
We view this instance as a problem with both a global causal
structure, which comes from pairing xk with f (xk ), and an
in-context transition which comes from the specific f ∈ F
sampled for the sequence.

1. Introduction
The transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017) has revolutionized the field of deep learning, and has led to stateof-the art performance on tasks spanning language modeling (Brown et al., 2020), computer vision (Dosovitskiy
et al., 2020), reinforcement learning (Chen et al., 2021),
and the sciences (Jumper et al., 2021). The basic primitive
of a transformer is a self-attention head, a sequence-to1
Princeton University. Correspondence to: Eshaan Nichani
<eshnich@princeton.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

