Position: The Causal Revolution Needs Scientific Pragmatism

Joshua R. Loftus 1

Abstract

dictive” as shorthand for “predictive models which are not
also causal.” If we think of modeling as a process of making
assumptions and drawing conclusions then causal models
make more assumptions than predictive models. These additional assumptions afford causal models additional conclusions, but also open them up to more criticism.

Causal models and methods have great promise,
but their progress has been stalled. Proposals
using causality get squeezed between two opposing worldviews. Scientific perfectionism–an insistence on only using “correct” models–slows the
adoption of causal methods in knowledge generating applications. Pushing in the opposite direction, the academic discipline of computer science
prefers algorithms with no or few assumptions,
and technologies based on automation and scalability are often selected for economic and business applications. We argue that these systemcentric inductive biases should be replaced with a
human-centric philosophy we refer to as scientific
pragmatism. The machine learning community
must strike the right balance to make space for
the causal revolution to prosper.

In the scenario of Figure 1, if we only judge a model based
on its predictions of some important variable Y then the
same model may work equally well regardless of the direction of causality. If we expect a model to also tell us what
happens when we intervene on variables, then these models
with equal predictive accuracy are no longer equivalent. We
become responsible to choose one of them.

1. Introduction

X

X

X

Y

Y

Y

Z

Figure 1. Structural causal models (SCMs) represented as directed
acyclic graphs (DAGs). Variables are the nodes of the graph and
causal effects are represented by arrows. An intervention is an
operation that modifies the graph in some way. Intervening on a
variable means we erase the arrows pointing into that variable, set
the value of that variable arbitrarily, and then propagate the new
value along directed pathways pointing out of that variable. On the
left, X is a cause of Y , so intervening on X will result in a change
in Y . In the other cases, intervening on X results in no change
in Y . It is possible that the accuracy of some function f (X) in
predicting Y is equal in all cases.

There is a causal revolution underway in empirical sciences.
From its century-old roots in controlled experiments, in recent decades it has made inroads in observational health and
social sciences. As a research topic among methodologists,
causal models have gained some popularity in economics,
computer science, and statistics, and may be spreading into
applications in other research fields and industries. However,
there is a risk that the causal revolution will stall, and that
humanity will miss out on the potential benefits of its success. To realize these benefits, we argue that a philosophy
of scientific pragmatism is necessary for the causal revolution to flourish. This philosophy views causal models
pragmatically as tools for hypothetical reasoning.

We can use causal models to answer important questions
that predictive models cannot illuminate. For example, if we
want to know how we might change Y , then the model on
the left of Figure 1 says we can intervene on X, the model
on the right says we can intervene on Z (and that X would
also change in that case), and the model in the middle says
we would have to intervene on Y directly (which changes
X as well).

For the sake of simplicity we discuss only two types of models: causal and predictive. Strictly speaking, causal models
are a subset of predictive models, so here we will use “pre1

Department of Statistics, London School of Economics, London, UK. Correspondence to: Joshua Loftus
<j.r.loftus@lse.ac.uk>.

The differences between these cases have important consequences when we apply models like these to reason about
the real world. Suppose that Y is some variable we would
like to change, but due to real world constraints we can only
intervene on X. We have data and sophisticated predictive

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

