Optimal Transport for Structure Learning Under Missing Data

Vy Vo 1 2 He Zhao 2 Trung Le 1 Edwin V. Bonilla 2 Dinh Phung 1 3

Abstract

et al., 2018; Yu et al., 2019; Glymour et al., 2019; Zheng
et al., 2020; Zhao et al., 2024; Bonilla et al., 2024). Whereas
existing structure learning algorithms mostly deal with complete data, practical real-world data are often messy, potentially with multiple missing values. Eliminating samples
affected by ‘missingness’ and solely analyzing the observed
cases is undesirable, since not only would it decrease the
sample size but also introduce bias to the estimations (Tu
et al., 2019; Mohan & Pearl, 2021). Another strategy is
to impute the missing values by, e.g., modeling the joint
data distribution. The key challenge of imputation lies in
effectively modeling this distribution when dealing with
a substantial number of missing values, which may arise
form different missing-data mechanisms (Little & Rubin,
2019). More importantly, as proposed by Mohan & Pearl
(2021), the missing process can also be modeled with causal
graphs and, without considering the underlying causes of
missingness, learning an imputation model from observed
data is prone to bias (Kyono et al., 2021). Thus, dealing
with missing values benefits substantially from having a
causal graph, which is unknown in practice and needed to
be learned from data, potentially in the presence of missing
values. Evidently, this poses a chicken-and-egg problem.

Causal discovery in the presence of missing data
introduces a chicken-and-egg dilemma. While
the goal is to recover the true causal structure,
robust imputation requires considering the dependencies or, preferably, causal relations among
variables. Merely filling in missing values with
existing imputation methods and subsequently applying structure learning on the complete data is
empirically shown to be sub-optimal. To address
this problem, we propose a score-based algorithm
for learning causal structures from missing data
based on optimal transport. This optimal transport
viewpoint diverges from existing score-based approaches that are dominantly based on expectation
maximization. We formulate structure learning
as a density fitting problem, where the goal is to
find the causal model that induces a distribution
of minimum Wasserstein distance with the observed data distribution. Our framework is shown
to recover the true causal graphs more effectively
than competing methods in most simulations and
real-data settings. Empirical evidence also shows
the superior scalability of our approach, along
with the flexibility to incorporate any off-the-shelf
causal discovery methods for complete data.

A straightforward approach to dealing with our problem is
to impute the missing values and subsequently apply any
existing causal discovery method. This is however not an
effective strategy. Figure 1 illustrates the quality of imputation (by Euclidean distance) in relation to causal discovery
performance (by F1 score) across different missing rates
and mechanisms. We study 3 popular imputation methods:
Mean imputation, Optimal Transport (OT) imputation (with
Sinkhorn divergence) (Muzellec et al., 2020), and Multivariate imputation with Bayes Ridge regression and Random
Forest regression (MissForest) (Van Buuren & Oudshoorn,
2000; Pedregosa et al., 2011). It is seen that better imputation does not necessarily lead to better causal discovery,
as shown more obviously at higher missing rates. In other
words, “good” imputation in terms of reconstruction does
not guarantee “good” imputation for causal discovery. It is
possible that the filled-in data distribution encodes a different set of independence constraints, resulting in a distribution compatible with a causal graph that is different from
the true one. The sub-optimality of such a naive approach
has also been reported in prior work (Kyono et al., 2021;

1. Introduction
Discovering causal relationships among different variables
holds great significance in many scientific disciplines (Sachs
et al., 2005; Richens et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020; Zhang
et al., 2013). The gold standard approach to this problem
is through randomized controlled experiments, which are
however often infeasible due to various ethical and practical
constraints. There have thus been ongoing efforts towards
causal discovery from observational data (Spirtes et al.,
2000; Chickering, 2002; Heckerman et al., 2006; Zheng
1

Monash University, Australia 2 CSIRO’s Data61, Australia 3 VinAI Research, Vietnam. Correspondence to: Vy Vo
<v.vo@monash.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

