Random features models: a way to study the success of naive imputation

Alexis Ayme 1 Claire Boyer 1 2 Aymeric Dieuleveut 3 Erwan Scornet 1

Abstract

et al. (2022). A common practice consists in imputing missing entries. The resulting complete dataset can then be
analyzed using any machine learning algorithm.

Constant (naive) imputation is still widely used in
practice as this is a first easy-to-use technique to
deal with missing data. Yet, this simple method
could be expected to induce a large bias for prediction purposes, as the imputed input may strongly
differ from the true underlying data. However, recent works suggest that this bias is low in the context of high-dimensional linear predictors when
data is supposed to be missing completely at
random (MCAR). This paper completes the picture for linear predictors by confirming the intuition that the bias is negligible and that surprisingly naive imputation also remains relevant in
very low dimension. To this aim, we consider a
unique underlying random features model, which
offers a rigorous framework for studying predictive performances, whilst the dimension of the
observed features varies. Building on these theoretical results, we establish finite-sample bounds
on stochastic gradient (SGD) predictors applied
to zero-imputed data, a strategy particularly well
suited for large-scale learning. If the MCAR assumption appears to be strong, we show that similar favorable behaviors occur for more complex
missing data scenarios.

While there exists a variety of imputation strategies (single, multiple, conditional, marginal imputation ; see, e.g.,
Bertsimas et al., 2018, for an overview), mean imputation is
definitely one of the most common practices. Such a procedure has been largely criticized in the past as (single) mean
imputation distorts data distributions by lowering variances,
which can lead to inconsistent parameter estimation. Indeed,
a large part of the literature on missing values focuses on
inference in parametric models, such as linear (Little, 1992;
Jones, 1996) or logistic models (Consentino & Claeskens,
2011; Jiang et al., 2020). From an empirical perspective,
benchmarks of imputation techniques (Woźnica & Biecek,
2020) indicate that simple imputation, such as the mean,
induces reasonable predictive performances, compared to
more complex imputation techniques such as MICE (PerezLebel et al., 2022).
On the contrary, a recent line of work (Josse et al., 2024)
aims at studying the predictive performances of impute-thenregress strategies that work by first imputing data (possibly
with a very simple procedure) and then fitting a learning
algorithm on the imputed dataset. Whereas mean imputation leads to inconsistent parameter estimation, Josse et al.
(2024) and Bertsimas et al. (2021) show that impute-thenregress procedures happen to be consistent if the learning
algorithm is universally consistent. Le Morvan et al. (2021)
generalize the consistency results of mean-imputation by
Josse et al. (2024); Bertsimas et al. (2021) and prove that
for any universally consistent regression model, almost all
single imputation strategies can lead to consistent predictors.
Therefore, the impact of a specific imputation strategy has
to be analyzed for specific regression models.

1. Introduction
Missing data appear in most real-world datasets as they arise
from merging different data sources, data collecting issues,
self-censorship in surveys, just to name a few. Specific
handling techniques are required, as most machine learning algorithms do not natively handle missing values, with
the notable exception of tree-based methods Stekhoven &
Bühlmann (2012); Chen & Guestrin (2016); Perez-Lebel

Without dispute, linear models are the most classic regression framework. However, their study becomes challenging
in presence of missing values as they can require to build
2d non-linear regression models (one for each missing data
pattern), where d is the number of input variables (Le Morvan et al., 2020; Ayme et al., 2022). In the context of linear
models with missing inputs, Le Morvan et al. (2020) establish finite-sample generalization bounds for zero-imputation,
showing that this strategy is generally inconsistent. How-

1

Sorbonne Université, CNRS, Laboratoire de Probabilités,
Statistique et Modélisation (LPSM), F-75005 Paris, France
2
Institut Universitaire de France (IUF) 3 CMAP, UMR7641, Ecole
Polytechnique, IP Paris, 91128 Palaiseau, France. Correspondence
to: Alexis Ayme <alexis.ayme@sorbonne-universite.fr>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

