Variational Partial Group Convolutions
for Input-Aware Partial Equivariance of Rotations and Color-Shifts

Hyunsu Kim 1 Yegon Kim 1 Hongseok Yang 2 Juho Lee 1 3

Abstract
Group Equivariant CNNs (G-CNNs) have shown
promising efficacy in various tasks, owing to their
ability to capture hierarchical features in an equivariant manner. However, their equivariance is
fixed to the symmetry of the whole group, limiting adaptability to diverse partial symmetries
in real-world datasets, such as limited rotation
symmetry of handwritten digit images and limited color-shift symmetry of flower images. Recent efforts address this limitation, one example
being Partial G-CNN which restricts the output
group space of convolution layers to break full
equivariance. However, such an approach still
fails to adjust equivariance levels across data. In
this paper, we propose a novel approach, Variational Partial G-CNN (VP G-CNN), to capture
varying levels of partial equivariance specific to
each data instance. VP G-CNN redesigns the
distribution of the output group elements to be
conditioned on input data, leveraging variational
inference to avoid overfitting. This enables the
model to adjust its equivariance levels according
to the needs of individual data points. Additionally, we address training instability inherent in
discrete group equivariance models by redesigning the reparametrizable distribution. We demonstrate the effectiveness of VP G-CNN on both toy
and real-world datasets, including MNIST67-180,
CIFAR10, ColorMNIST, and Flowers102. Our
results show robust performance, even in uncertainty metrics.

(a) MNIST

(b) Flowers102

Figure 1. Illustrative example of partial equivariance. (a) 180◦ rotation of 6 is regarded as 9 but 7 is not. (b) The color-shifted
image of Barberton Daisy looks similar to Osteospermum.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have demonstrated
remarkable success in numerous computer vision tasks, owing to their ability to capture hierarchical features in an
equivariant manner. Other approaches, such as Group Equivariant CNNs (G-CNNs) (Cohen & Welling, 2016; 2017;
Weiler & Cesa, 2019; Romero et al., 2022), extend equivariance to various symmetry groups, enhancing model robustness across different transformations. However, a limitation
arises from the rigidity of these models, as the choice of the
equivariance group is fixed a priori.

Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI, KAIST, Daejeon, South
Korea 2 School of Computing, KAIST, Daejeon, South Korea
3
AITRICS, Seoul, South Korea. Correspondence to: Hyunsu Kim
<kim.hyunsu@kaist.ac.kr>, Juho Lee <juholee@kaist.ac.kr>,
Hongseok Yang <hongseok.yang@kaist.ac.kr>.

In real-world scenarios, datasets often exhibit equivariance
to diverse types of transformations, and the nature of equivariance might not be the same across all data instances. For
example, in the classification of handwritten images like
MNIST, images of 6 or 9 may be described more naturally
by invariance to partial rotations between −90◦ and 90◦ ,
while a 180◦ rotation might distort the classification between 6 and 9, as shown in Fig. 1a. In contrast, the other
digits, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, may possess full equivariance to
rotation. The challenge then lies in developing a neural
network architecture that adapts the level of equivariance to
the specific needs of the data.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Existing efforts have addressed this issue, such as Partial
G-CNN (Romero & Lohit, 2022), which learns varying
levels of equivariance at different layers, or Relaxed G-CNN

1

1

