Hierarchical Integral Probability Metrics:
A distance on random probability measures with low sample complexity

Marta Catalano * 1 Hugo Lavenant * 2

Abstract

whose randomness is only due to the randomness of the data.
Standard examples include, e.g., empirical processes, histograms, bootstrapping, kernel density estimators, splines,
and wavelets (see, e.g, Wasserman (2006) and references
therein). In a Bayesian setting the distribution of the data
is treated as the unknown parameter, and thus modeled as
a random probability P̃ . The posterior is the distribution
of P̃ conditionally on the observed data, thus in principle
its randomness does not stem from the data but from the
uncertainty about the parameter. The most popular random
probability in Bayesian nonparametrics is the Dirichlet process (Ferguson, 1973), though many useful generalizations
are available in the literature, including species sampling
processes, normalized completely random measures, stickbreaking processes, and kernel mixtures (see, e.g, Ghosal &
van der Vaart (2017) and references therein).

Random probabilities are a key component to
many nonparametric methods in Statistics and
Machine Learning. To quantify comparisons
between different laws of random probabilities
several works are starting to use the elegant
Wasserstein over Wasserstein distance. In this
paper we prove that the infinite dimensionality of the space of probabilities drastically
deteriorates its sample complexity, which is
slower than any polynomial rate in the sample
size. We propose a new distance that preserves
many desirable properties of the former while
achieving a parametric rate of convergence.
In particular, our distance 1) metrizes weak
convergence; 2) can be estimated numerically
through samples with low complexity; 3) can
be bounded analytically from above and below.
The main ingredient are integral probability
metrics, which lead to the name hierarchical IPM.

Several interesting theoretical and applied findings in nonparametric inference may be framed as approximations of
some distribution of interest. These include approximation
to a ground truth, as in the study of consistency, to the
distribution of another population, as in two-sample tests,
to another posterior, as in the merging of opinions, or to
the exact but unattainable posterior, as in (Markov chain)
Monte-Carlo or other finite-dimensional approximations. In
most of these problems to quantify the quality of the approximation one needs a distance between laws of random
probabilities, a.k.a., probability distributions on spaces of
probability distributions. Such a distance should ideally
satisfy the following properties:
1. Metrization of weak convergence. Many of the most
common random probabilities, such as empirical processes and Dirichlet processes, are almost surely discrete and are typically mutually singular. Weak convergence provides meaningful comparisons between
distributions with different supports.

1. Introduction
In this work we discuss distances between laws of random
probabilities, that is, probability measures on spaces of probability measures. Our motivation comes from nonparametric
methods in Statistics and Machine Learning, often referred
to as distribution-free in that they do not rely on strong assumptions on the underlying distribution of the data. The
need for flexibility has inspired a wealth of both frequentist
and Bayesian nonparametric models, which often share the
use of random probability measures to make inference on
the distribution of the data. The randomness, however, is
of different nature. Frequentist methods build estimators
*

2. Numerical estimation through samples. Frequently
in applications the exact distribution of the random
probability is not known and thus the distance must
be approximated numerically through samples, with
both low sample complexity (the approximation error
as the sample size increases) and low computational
complexity (the speed of the algorithm as the sample
size increases).

1

Equal contribution
Luiss University, Rome, Italy
Bocconi University, Milan, Italy.
Correspondence to:
Marta Catalano <mcatalano@luiss.it>, Hugo Lavenant
<hugo.lavenant@unibocconi.it>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

