Fast Algorithms for Hypergraph PageRank with Applications to
Semi-Supervised Learning

Konstantinos Ameranis 1 Adela DePavia 2 Lorenzo Orecchia 1 Erasmo Tani 1

Abstract

tions (Zhou et al., 2003; Belkin and Niyogi, 2004), learning
Lipschitz functions (Kyng et al., 2015; Bungert et al., 2023)
and clustering, i.e., learning functions with small total variation (Jung et al., 2019; Trillos and Slepčev, 2016).

A fundamental approach to semi-supervised learning is
to leverage the structure of the sample space to diffuse
label information from annotated examples to unlabeled points. Traditional methods model the input data
points as a graph and rely on fast algorithms for solving
Laplacian systems of equations, such as those defining
PageRank. However, previous work has demonstrated
that graph-based models fail to capture higher-order
relations, such as group membership, which are better
modeled by hypergraphs. Unfortunately, the scalable
application of hypergraph models has been hampered
by the non-linearity of the hypergraph Laplacian. In
this paper, we present highly scalable algorithms for
hypergraph primitives, such as hypergraph PageRank
vectors and hypergraph Laplacian systems, over general families of hypergraphs. In addition to giving
strong theoretical guarantees, we empirically showcase
the speed of our algorithms on benchmark instances of
semi-supervised learning on categorical data. We exploit their generality to improve semi-supervised manifold clustering via hypergraph models. By providing
significant speed-ups on fundamental hypergraph tasks,
our algorithms enable the deployment of hypergraph
models on a massive scale.

If the structure of X can be encoded well by pairwise relationships, graph-based learning is the standard approach to
this problem. Examples include X as an embedded manifold, which can be approximated by a properly constructed
graph over a finite sample of points (Belkin and Niyogi,
2008; Calder and García Trillos, 2022), or a finite metric
space, i.e., a length-weighted undirected graph. In this setE
ting, given a weighted graph G = (V, E, w ∈ R+
), a set
Y ⊂ V of labelled vertices and their values y ∈ RV 1 , the
predictor x̂ is typically obtained by minimizing the regularized squared error
x̂ = arg min

x∈RV

1
1
· ∥x − y∥22 + · R(x),
2
λ

(1)

where R is a regularizer appropriately penalizing discontinuous predictors over G, and λ > 0 is an inverse regularization
parameter. The most common choice of regularizer R is the
Dirichlet energy EG : RV → R of G, which is the quadratic
form of the graph Laplacian operator LG :
EG (x) =

1. Introduction

1
2

X

wij (xi − xj )2 =

{i,j}∈E

1 T
x LG x.
2

This formulation appeals both because it captures a natural
notion of smoothness in terms of Fourier coefficients (Smola
and Kondor, 2003) and because the computation of x̂ reduces to the solution of the Laplacian system of linear equations (λ · I + LG )x̂ = λy, for which nearly-linear-time algorithms exist (Spielman and Teng, 2004; Gao et al., 2023).

Many semi-supervised learning problems require learning
an approximately continuous function f : X → R over a
structured set X , e.g., a network, embedded manifold or
metric space, based on observations of potentially noisy
function values f (x) + ϵ on a subset of labelled points
Y ⊂ X (van Engelen and Hoos, 2020). Examples of general problems in this family include learning smooth func-

If the Euclidean norm in the error term of Problem 1 is replaced with the norm ∥ · ∥D , where D is the diagonal matrix
of weighted degrees of G, we obtain the Laplacian system
(λ · D + LG )x̂ = λy. For λ = 2α/1−α, the solution of this
system is exactly a scaling of the personalized PageRank
vector pprα (y) with teleportation parameter α ∈ [0, 1] and
seed y ∈ RV (Fountoulakis et al., 2019). This vector plays
an important role in data mining applications, such as edge

1
Department of Computer Science, University of Chicago,
Chicago, USA 2 Computational and Applied Mathematics, University of Chicago, Chicago, USA. Correspondence to: Lorenzo
Orecchia <orecchia@uchicago.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

1

We assume yi = 0 for i ∈
/ Y.

