Leveraging VLM-Based Pipelines to Annotate 3D Objects

Rishabh Kabra 1 2 Loic Matthey 1 Alexander Lerchner 1 Niloy J. Mitra 2
https://leveraging-vlms-to-annotate-3d-objects.github.io

Abstract

information can be provided to improve inference. These
stages can be evaluated and optimized using sparse labeled
data. But to scale VLM pipeline assessment beyond validation accuracy, we also develop unsupervised metrics to
track hallucination and ablate visual reasoning.

Pretrained vision language models (VLMs)
present an opportunity to caption unlabeled 3D
objects at scale. The leading approach to summarize VLM descriptions from different views of
an object (Luo et al., 2023) relies on a language
model (GPT4) to produce the final output. This
text-based aggregation is susceptible to hallucinations as it merges potentially contradictory descriptions. We propose an alternative algorithm to
marginalize over factors such as the viewpoint that
affect the VLM’s response. Instead of merging
text-only responses, we utilize the VLM’s joint
image-text likelihoods. We show our probabilistic
aggregation is not only more reliable and efficient, but sets the SoTA on inferring object types
with respect to human-verified labels. The aggregated annotations are also useful for conditional
inference; they improve downstream predictions
(e.g., of object material) when the object’s type is
specified as an auxiliary text-based input. Such
auxiliary inputs allow ablating the contribution
of visual reasoning over visionless reasoning in
an unsupervised setting. With these supervised
and unsupervised evaluations, we show how a
VLM-based pipeline can be leveraged to produce
reliable annotations for 764K objects from the
Objaverse dataset.

Datasets of 3D objects (e.g., Objaverse from Deitke et al.
(2023)) provide a rich testing ground for such a pipeline. We
target the generation of useful text pairings for 764K object
assets. We look not only at captioning but also inferring
specific properties such as type, material, physical behavior,
affordances, or relations like containment between objects.
These property-specific, open-vocabulary annotations help
index the dataset on a set of conceptual axes (Fig 1).
To address the challenge of inspecting a 3D object using
2D views, we generate VLM responses with accompanying
image-text likelihoods. This facilitates a visually grounded
score-based aggregation (ScoreAgg) to determine the most
reliable responses across different object views. Our algorithm is novel, general, and can be applied to arbitrary
factors (besides viewpoint) varied across VLM queries. It
compares favorably with text-only summarization; the latter
requires additional computation, some instruction tuning,
yet tends to propagate contradictions (i.e., hallucinations).
We also explore conditional inference via prompt-chaining
(together with ScoreAgg) to boost the accuracy of VLM annotations. These methods help leverage off-the-shelf VLMs,
without retraining or task-specific in-context learning. As
ScoreAgg produces a probabilistic output, it also helps quantify the uncertainty across possible responses. The aggregation exhibits increasing accuracy as we sample more VLM
responses per probe or run more VLM probes, thus permitting flexible use of computation to improve reliability.
These capabilities could help optimize VLM pipelines more
broadly than our particular focus on annotating 3D objects.

1. Introduction
Numerous applications could benefit from a zero-shot VLM
pipeline to identify the type and nature of a 3D object from
views of it. We assess the design choices for such a pipeline:
(i) what images to use, (ii) what VLM, (iii) how to prompt
the VLM, (iv) how to process multi-view or multi-prompt
responses to produce an aggregate, and (v) what auxiliary

We organize the paper around the design choices we introduced for a zero-shot VLM annotation pipeline. Section 2
lays out some background and prior work. In Section 3, we
aim to summarize type annotations reliably under changes
in view or prompt. In Section 4, we assess the inference
of object material using a variety of VLMs and conditioning inputs. Both sections rely on human-verified labels as

1
Google DeepMind 2 University College London. Correspondence to: Rishabh Kabra <rkabra@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

