Biharmonic Distance of Graphs and its Higher-Order Variants: Theoretical
Properties with Applications to Centrality and Clustering

Mitchell Black 1 Lucy Lin 1 Weng-Keen Wong 1 Amir Nayyeri 1

Abstract
Effective resistance is a distance between vertices
of a graph that is both theoretically interesting
and useful in applications. We study a variant
of effective resistance called the biharmonic distance (Lipman et al., 2010). While the effective
resistance measures how well-connected two vertices are, we prove several theoretical results supporting the idea that the biharmonic distance measures how important an edge is to the global topology of the graph. Our theoretical results connect
the biharmonic distance to well-known measures
of connectivity of a graph like its total resistance
and sparsity. Based on these results, we introduce
two clustering algorithms using the biharmonic
distance. Finally, we introduce a further generalization of the biharmonic distance that we call the
k-harmonic distance. We empirically study the
utility of biharmonic and k-harmonic distance for
edge centrality and graph clustering.

Figure 1. The effective resistance vs. squared biharmonic distance
for edges in a tree. While the effective resistance is 1 on all
edges, the biharmonic distance is higher on edges closer to the
root, demonstrating that biharmonic distance is aware of the global
topology of a graph. See Appendix I for more examples.

is a distance measure defined
Rst = (1s − 1t )T L+ (1s − 1t )
where L+ is the pseudoinverse of the graph Laplacian and
1v is the indicator vector of a vertex v.

1. Introduction
Many areas of machine learning, such as clustering (Shi &
Malik, 2000), semi-supervised learning (Zhu et al., 2003)
and graph mining (Chakrabarti & Faloutsos, 2006), require
measuring the distance between two vertices in a graph.
Simple distance metrics like the shortest-path distance only
consider a single path between vertices but do not contain
any information about the global topology of the graph.
For many tasks, a better choice of a distance metric is one
that accounts for all paths connecting a pair of vertices,
thereby capturing aspects of the connectivity of the graph.
One commonly used distance metric with this property is
effective resistance (Kirchhoff, 1847).

While effective resistance was originally introduced by
Kirchhoff (1847) in the context of electrical networks, it
has since been discovered that by treating the mathematics
abstractly, effective resistance has many interesting theoretical properties and applications in graph theory. An intuitive
explanation of effective resistance is that
Effective resistance measure how well-connected a pair of
vertices s and t are.
because the more, and shorter, paths there are connecting
s and t, the lower the effective resistance between s and t.
Theoretical works on the effective resistance have reinforced
this intuition. For example, it has been shown that effective
resistance is proportional to the commute time of random
walks between two vertices (Chandra et al., 1996) and is
proportional to the probability an edge is in a random spanning tree (Kirchhoff, 1847). Beyond its theoretical appeal,
effective resistance is used in various applications, notably
in contexts requiring a measure of connectivity, such as

The effective resistance between vertices s and t in a graph
1

School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon, USA. Correspondence to:
Mitchell Black <blackmit@oregonstate.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

