Gradient Compressed Sensing: A Query-Efficient Gradient Estimator for
High-Dimensional Zeroth-Order Optimization

Ruizhong Qiu 1 Hanghang Tong 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

We study the problem of unconstrained optimization:

We study nonconvex zeroth-order optimization
(ZOO) in a high-dimensional space Rd for functions with approximately s-sparse gradients. To
reduce the dependence on the dimensionality d
in the query complexity, high-dimensional ZOO
methods seek to leverage gradient sparsity to
design gradient estimators.
 The previous best
d
method needs
O
s
log
queries per step to
s

achieve O T1 rate of convergence w.r.t. the number T of steps. In this paper, we propose Gradient
Compressed Sensing (GraCe), a query-efficient
and accurate estimator for sparse gradients that
uses only O s log log ds queries per step and still
achieves O T1 rate of convergence. To our best
knowledge, we are the first to achieve a doublelogarithmic dependence on d in the query complexity, and our proof uses weaker assumptions
than previous work. Our proposed GraCe generalizes the Indyk–Price–Woodruff (IPW) algorithm in compressed sensing from linear measurements to nonlinear functions. Furthermore,
since the IPW algorithm is purely theoretical
due to its impractically large constant, we improve the IPW algorithm via our dependent random partition technique together with our corresponding novel analysis and successfully reduce
the constant by a factor of nearly 4300. Our
GraCe is not only theoretically query-efficient
but also achieves strong empirical performance.
We benchmark our GraCe against 12 existing
ZOO methods with 10000-dimensional functions
and demonstrate that GraCe significantly outperforms existing methods. Our code is publicly
available at https://github.com/q-rz/
ICML24-GraCe.

min f (x),

x∈Rd

(1)

where f : Rd → R is a (possibly nonconvex) function over
a high-dimensional space Rd .
Gradient-free optimization (GFO), also known as black-box
optimization, was among the first schemes explored in the
history of optimization theory (Matyáš, 1965). In GFO, the
function f is unknown to the optimizer, and the optimizer
can obtain information about the function f only via queries
(i.e., function evaluations). The goal of GFO is to optimize
the function f using a minimal number of queries.
Zeroth-order optimization (ZOO), a paradigm of GFO, aims
to apply first-order optimization methods to GFO with gradients estimated from queries. Through a long history
of study, various full-gradient ZOO methods have been
proposed. Early full-gradient ZOO methods such as the
Kiefer–Wolfowitz method (Kiefer & Wolfowitz, 1952) use
dimension-wise finite difference to approximate gradients,
which suffers from an O(d) dependence in the query complexity. Later methods achieve O(1) queries per step via
stochastic gradient estimators such as Gaussian smoothing
(Nesterov & Spokoiny, 2015), but they suffer from a poly(d)
factor in their rates of convergence. Hence, their overall
query complexity still depends polynomially on d.
Meanwhile, the dimensionality d can be very large in modern real-world applications. For instance, a high-resolution
image can have millions of pixels. These real-world scenarios call for high-dimensional ZOO. High-dimensional
ZOO aims to develop gradient estimators with minimal dependence on the dimensionality d in the query complexity
under gradient sparsity assumptions (Wang et al., 2018; Cai
et al., 2022). In contrast to full-gradient ZOO, the research
on sparse-gradient ZOO is still in its infancy. Existing methods suffer from slow convergence and/or a suboptimal query
complexity. For example, Wang et al. (2018)
proposed a
√
2/3
LASSO-based method
that
uses
O(s
T
)
queries
per


2√
log d
1
e 5/12
step and has O s T 1/3
+O
rate
of
convergence
T
for stochastic convex ZOO. For nonconvex ZOO, the previous best method ZORO (Cai et al., 2022), which is based

1

Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois
Urbana–Champaign, USA. Correspondence to: Ruizhong Qiu
<rq5@illinois.edu>, Hanghang Tong <htong@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

