RAUCA: A Novel Physical Adversarial Attack on Vehicle Detectors
via Robust and Accurate Camouflage Generation

Jiawei Zhou 1 Linye Lyu 1 Daojing He 1 Yu Li 1

Abstract
Adversarial camouflage is a widely used physical
attack against vehicle detectors for its superiority
in multi-view attack performance. One promising approach involves using differentiable neural renderers to facilitate adversarial camouflage
optimization through gradient back-propagation.
However, existing methods often struggle to capture environmental characteristics during the rendering process or produce adversarial textures that
can precisely map to the target vehicle, resulting in suboptimal attack performance. Moreover,
these approaches neglect diverse weather conditions, reducing the efficacy of generated camouflage across varying weather scenarios. To tackle
these challenges, we propose a robust and accurate camouflage generation method, namely
RAUCA. The core of RAUCA is a novel neural rendering component, Neural Renderer Plus
(NRP), which can accurately project vehicle textures and render images with environmental characteristics such as lighting and weather. In addition, we integrate a multi-weather dataset for
camouflage generation, leveraging the NRP to enhance the attack robustness. Experimental results
on six popular object detectors show that RAUCA
consistently outperforms existing methods in both
simulation and real-world settings.

Figure 1. Comparison of different adversarial camouflage under
sunny (first row) and foggy (second row) environments, where
only our method succeeds in both cases. (a) A car with normal
texture; (b) DAS (Wang et al., 2021). (c) and (d) are top-performed
methods FCA (Wang et al., 2022) and ACTIVE (Suryanto et al.,
2023), respectively. (e) Our method RAUCA.

instance, in the task of vehicle detection, adversarial inputs
can deceive detection models, leading to incorrect detection
of the surrounding vehicles, which poses a severe threat to
the safety of autonomous vehicles.
Adversarial examples can be categorized into digital and
physical adversarial types. Digital adversarial examples involve introducing pixel-level perturbations to the model’s
digital input, while physical ones manipulate real-world
objects or surroundings, indirectly influencing the model
inputs (Chen et al., 2018; Sharif et al., 2016a; Mahendran
& Vedaldi, 2015). Physical adversarial examples are generally deemed more practical, as gaining direct access to
the model’s input often necessitates system authentication.
However, they are inherently more challenging as they must
prove effective in complex physical environments, including
various viewing perspectives, spatial distances, and lighting/weather conditions.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable
performance in many real-world applications such as face
recognition and autonomous vehicles (Krizhevsky et al.,
2012; Wang et al., 2023; Chai et al., 2021). However, DNNs
suffer from adversarial examples (Szegedy et al., 2014). For

This paper focuses on physical adversarial examples against
vehicle (e.g., car) detection models, given their wide adoption in autonomous driving scenarios where safety is of
great importance. To ensure the attack effectiveness across
various viewing angles, current methods prefer generating
adversarial camouflage capable of covering the entire surface of the vehicle (Wang et al., 2021; 2022; Suryanto et al.,
2022; 2023). Top-performing methods achieve this by leveraging a differential neural renderer. This renderer maps
the 3D vehicle and its texture to 2D images, establishing
a differentiable path between the 3D vehicle and the vehi-

1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute
of Technology, Shenzhen 518055, P.R. China. Correspondence to:
Yu Li <li.yu@hit.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

