FrameQuant: Flexible Low-Bit Quantization for Transformers

Harshavardhan Adepu 1 Zhanpeng Zeng 1 Li Zhang 2 Vikas Singh 1 2

Abstract

vision, and achieve state-of-the-art results on image classification (Zhai et al., 2022), object detection (Zhang et al.,
2022a), generation (Chang et al., 2022; Hudson & Zitnick,
2021) and segmentation (Cheng et al., 2022; Ranftl et al.,
2021). There is general agreement that scale provides remarkable new capabilities.

Transformers are the backbone of powerful foundation models for many Vision and Natural Language Processing tasks. But their compute and
memory/storage footprint is large, and so, serving such models is expensive often requiring
high-end hardware. To mitigate this difficulty,
Post-Training Quantization seeks to modify a pretrained model and quantize it to eight bits or lower,
significantly boosting compute/memory/latency
efficiency. Such models have been successfully
quantized to four bits with some performance loss.
In this work, we outline a simple scheme to quantize Transformer-based models to just two bits
(plus some overhead) with only a small drop in
accuracy. Key to our formulation is a concept
borrowed from Harmonic analysis called Fusion
Frames. Our main finding is that the quantization
must take place not in the original weight space,
but instead in the Fusion Frame representations.
If quantization is interpreted as the addition of
noise, our casting of the problem allows invoking
an extensive body of known consistent recovery
and noise robustness guarantees. Further, if desired, de-noising filters are known in closed form.
We show empirically, via a variety of experiments,
that (almost) two-bit quantization for Transformer
models promises sizable efficiency gains. The
code is available at https://github.com/
vsingh-group/FrameQuant

While large models offer strong performance improvements,
their deployment as a module within a product creates
unique challenges. For example, serving these models on expensive hardware can drastically increase data center costs.
Even loading these models on consumer-grade machines is
difficult, and the ability to handle heterogeneous resourceconstrained devices is almost infeasible. This has led to
various efficiency-focused strategies for model compression
including but not limited to distillation (Hinton et al., 2015;
Zhu et al., 2021), pruning (Chen & Zhao, 2019), sparsity
(Yu et al., 2012; Yun et al., 2020) and quantization (Han
et al., 2016; Banner et al., 2019). Among these methods,
Post-Training Quantization offers unique advantages in that
it does not change the model architecture or training scheme.
This paper presents a new Post-Training Quantization
scheme, FrameQuant, that offers much more flexibility to
strike a balance between reducing model size and preserving
model quality. Specifically, FrameQuant offers what may be
considered equivalent to using a fractional number of bits
for quantization, e.g., 2.1 or 2.2 bits: this is valuable because
for large Transformer-based models like GPT, model quality
deteriorates fast (Frantar et al., 2023) as we reduce bit width
in the low-bit quantization regime (e.g., 2-bit). Further, depending on the accuracy needs of the downstream task at
hand or a desire to control the worst-off error, more flexibility offers the user more control. Towards this goal, our
main idea is to compute a specific type of redundant/overcomplete representation of a pre-trained weight matrix and
quantize the matrix in that representation. We will see how
robustness to quantization error will follow naturally from
our choice of representation. The de-quantization step uses
a straightforward scheme to re-construct the full-precision
weights. We leverage a mature concept from Harmonic
analysis, Fusion Frames, as the foundation for our proposal.

1. Introduction
Transformer-based Large Language Models (LLMs) dominate the landscape for Natural Language Processing tasks
such as language translation and text summarization (Zhang
et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2022b).
Vision Transformers (VITs) adapt this idea for computer
1
University of Wisconsin-Madison 2 Google Research. Correspondence to: Harshavardhan Adepu <adepu@wisc.edu>.

Fusion Frames (Donoho et al., 1998; Christensen, 2018)
serve an important role in signal processing in analog-todigital conversion and signal transmission. Frames are guar-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

