ExCP: Extreme LLM Checkpoint Compression via Weight-Momentum Joint
Shrinking

Wenshuo Li 1 Xinghao Chen 1 Han Shu 1 2 Yehui Tang 1 Yunhe Wang 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Large Language Model (LLM) (Brown et al., 2020; Touvron et al., 2023; Wang et al.; Chowdhery et al., 2023; Team
et al., 2023) has attracted the attention of the vast majority
of academia and industry concentrated on Artificial Intelligence (AI). The current LLM can conduct daily conversations with humans, ask questions and answer questions,
help humans extract information from articles and charts,
and even complete professional-related tasks such as consultation and programming, which greatly improves the
efficiency of human-computer interaction. Thousands of
laboratories and companies are involved in the training of
the LLMs. Computing power and storage have become
key resources in the LLM era. Training an LLM requires
up to thousands of GPUs or computing cards like TPUs or
Ascends, and it is difficult to keep such a large computing
cluster running completely smoothly. At the same time, researchers are also faced with the need to interrupt training at
any time to adjust training data and hyperparameters. Sometimes it is even necessary to go back to earlier checkpoints
to solve problems introduced during training. Therefore,
frequent saving of checkpoints has become a must during
the whole training process.

Large language models (LLM) have recently attracted significant attention in the field of artificial intelligence. However, the training process
of these models poses significant challenges in
terms of computational and storage capacities,
thus compressing checkpoints has become an urgent problem. In this paper, we propose a novel
Extreme Checkpoint Compression (ExCP) framework, which significantly reduces the required
storage of training checkpoints while achieving
nearly lossless performance. We first calculate
the residuals of adjacent checkpoints to obtain
the essential but sparse information for higher
compression ratio. To further excavate the redundancy parameters in checkpoints, we then propose
a weight-momentum joint shrinking method to
utilize another important information during the
model optimization, i.e., momentum. In particular, we exploit the information of both model
and optimizer to discard as many parameters as
possible while preserving critical information to
ensure optimal performance. Furthermore, we utilize non-uniform quantization to further compress
the storage of checkpoints. We extensively evaluate our proposed ExCP framework on several
models ranging from 410M to 7B parameters and
demonstrate significant storage reduction while
maintaining strong performance. For instance, we
achieve approximately 70× compression for the
Pythia-410M model, with the final performance
being as accurate as the original model on various downstream tasks. Codes will be available at
https://github.com/Gaffey/ExCP.

Take the open source model Pythia (Biderman et al., 2023)
as an example, the checkpoint of the largest version Pythia12B model takes more than 24GB to save. Not to mention
the relevant momentum states of the optimizer. Adam optimizer requires twice the storage space of the weight. The
training process of Pythia-12B saves 154 checkpoints which
requires about 11TB storage, which would cost $5000 a
month on a general cloud server to store these checkpoints.
And this is just an entry-level scenario for large company.
Conservative estimates suggest that the largest models of
the most advanced LLMs, such as the GPT series and Gemini series, has the number of parameters on the order of
hundreds to thousands of billions. Some publicly available
data is shown Figure 1. Larger models also require more
checkpoints and longer training time. So the total cost of
storage for a cutting-edge LLM may grow to tens of millions
of dollars.

1
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 2 University of Science
and Technology of China.
Correspondence to: Xinghao Chen <xinghao.chen@huawei.com>, Yunhe Wang
<yunhe.wang@huawei.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

In view of the above problems, compressing model checkpoints has become a very urgent need. Model compression
1

