Distribution Alignment Optimization through Neural Collapse
for Long-tailed Classification

Jintong Gao 1 He Zhao 2 Dandan Guo 1 Hongyuan Zha 3

Abstract

(2023); Rangamani et al. (2023) show a well-trained neural
network with cross-entropy loss on a given balanced classification task usually exhibits the Neural Collapse (NC)
phenomenon, meaning that the last-layer features collapsing
into within-class means and the classifier weight vectors
converge to the simplex Equiangular Tight Frame (ETF)
geometric structure. However, on long-tailed datasets, a
model can hardly achieve NC if trained in the same way as
on balanced datasets (Fang et al., 2021; Thrampoulidis et al.,
2022). The mean feature vectors no longer form an ETF
structure with Cross-Entropy (CE) or Mean Squared Error
(MSE) losses (Hong & Ling, 2023; Dang et al., 2023) and an
unexpected phenomenon (Minority Collapse) (Fang et al.,
2021) occurs that the learned representations and the classifier weights of minority classes will converge to similar
directions in ETF. As NC indicates the characteristics that a
good classifier should have, it is a natural idea to “force” a
model on long-tailed datasets to satisfy NC so that it may
achieve better performance (Xie et al., 2023; Fang et al.,
2021; Hong & Ling, 2023). For example, Yang et al. (2022)
indicates that neural collapse optimally can be induced even
in imbalanced learning as long as the learnable classifier is
fixed as a random simplex ETF. Representation-Balanced
Learning Framework (Peifeng et al., 2023) also maintains
the geometric structure of ETF as the classifier but learns
orthogonal matrices in ETF for feature learning instead of
random directions. Different from them, Liu et al. (2023b)
additionally proposes two explicit regularization terms to
induce the NC phenomenon in imbalanced learning.

A well-trained deep neural network on balanced
datasets usually exhibits the Neural Collapse (NC)
phenomenon, which is an informative indicator of
the model achieving good performance. However,
NC is usually hard to be achieved for a model
trained on long-tailed datasets, leading to the deteriorated performance of test data. This work
aims to induce the NC phenomenon in imbalanced learning from the perspective of distribution matching. By enforcing the distribution of
last-layer representations to align the ideal distribution of the ETF structure, we develop a Distribution Alignment Optimization (DisA) loss, acting as a plug-and-play method can be combined
with most of the existing long-tailed methods, we
further instantiate it to the cases of fixing classifier and learning classifier. The extensive experiments show the effectiveness of DisA, providing
a promising solution to the imbalanced issue. Our
code is available at DisA.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks on balanced datasets have become
well-established with many techniques for solving various
tasks in several domains (Zeng et al., 2022; Hu et al., 2023;
Allingham et al., 2023). However, new challenges arise
when we venture into imbalanced/long-tailed datasets. In
long-tailed classification, for example, the majority classes
have a substantial number of samples while the minority
classes have fewer. Traditional classification methods without considering such class imbalance tend to overly focus
on the majority classes, resulting in insufficient learning for
the minority classes.

Leveraging the above observations of the NC phenomenon
and ETF structure, we aim to induce the NC phenomenon
in imbalanced learning from the perspective of distribution matching. In this work, we propose the Distribution
Alignment Optimization (DisA) method for imbalanced
classification based on Optimal Transport (OT) (Peyré &
Cuturi, 2019; Cuturi, 2013). Specifically, we first consider
the last-layer imbalanced representations as a discrete empirical distribution P . We then assume an ideal ETF structure,
which is naturally balanced for each class, presented as another discrete empirical distribution Q. According to Yang
et al. (2022) indicates that the features and classifier vectors
are aligned with the same simplex ETF, we can enforce the
distribution P over last-layer representations to be close to

Recently, studies in Papyana et al. (2020); Kothapalli et al.
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University 2 CSIRO’s
Data61 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen. Correspondence to: Dandan Guo <guodandan@jlu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

