Evaluation of LLMs on Syntax-Aware Code Fill-in-the-Middle Tasks

Linyuan Gong 1 Sida Wang 2 Mostafa Elhoushi 2 Alvin Cheung 1
the more common practice of modifying and expanding
existing code during development.

Abstract
We introduce Syntax-Aware Fill-in-the-Middle
(SAFIM), a new benchmark for evaluating Large
Language Models (LLMs) on the code Fill-inthe-Middle (FIM) task. This benchmark focuses
on syntax-aware completions of program structures such as code blocks and conditional expressions, and includes 17,720 examples from multiple programming languages, sourced from recent code submissions after April 2022 to minimize data contamination. SAFIM provides a
robust framework with various prompt designs
and novel syntax-aware post-processing techniques, facilitating accurate and fair comparisons across LLMs. Our comprehensive evaluation of 15 LLMs shows that FIM pretraining not only enhances FIM proficiency but also
improves Left-to-Right (L2R) inference using
LLMs. Our findings challenge conventional beliefs and suggest that pretraining methods and
data quality have more impact than model size.
SAFIM thus serves as a foundational platform
for future research in effective pretraining strategies for code LLMs. The evaluation toolkit
and dataset are available at https://github.
com/gonglinyuan/safim, and the leaderboard
is available at https://safimbenchmark.com.

Recognizing this gap, we introduce the Syntax-Aware Fillin-the-Middle (SAFIM) benchmark. SAFIM emphasizes
syntax-aware completion within code’s Abstract Syntax
Tree (AST), targeting algorithmic blocks, control-flow expressions, and API function calls, unlike existing Fillin-the Middle (FIM) benchmarks such as HumanEvalInfilling (Bavarian et al., 2022), which are based on filling randomly masked lines or character spans. SAFIM is
sourced from code on Codeforces and GitHub created after
April 2022, deliberately aiming to avoid overlap with mainstream open-source pretraining corpora like The Stack (Kocetkov et al., 2022). This approach reduces the risks of
data contamination caused by memoization of test cases,
thereby bolstering the credibility of our results. SAFIM,
with its 17,720 examples from 8,590 code files, not only
surpasses the scale of HumanEval-Infilling, which draws
from 164 short code files, but also expands the scope to
include multiple programming languages. SAFIM primarily
relies on execution-based evaluation, and uses syntactical
match evaluation only when execution is not feasible due to
external API calls.
Our comprehensive evaluation of 15 LLMs on SAFIM reveals its effectiveness in providing a fair comparison of models. We implement five distinct prompt designs to accommodate various model types and introduce a syntax-aware
truncation algorithm for post-processing the outputs. Our
approach unveils the true capabilities of non-FIM-trained
models, allowing for a fair comparison with FIM-trained
models.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in Large Language Models (LLMs) such
as GPT-3.5 (Ouyang et al., 2022), GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023),
and CodeLLaMa (Rozière et al., 2023) have revolutionized
coding-related tasks. However, existing benchmarks like
HumanEval (Chen et al., 2021a) and MBPP (Austin et al.,
2021) focus on generating standalone functions or single-file
code from natural language descriptions, and do not consider

Moreover, SAFIM sheds light on the strengths of various
pretraining paradigms and challenges some prevalent beliefs in the field. Specifically, our findings suggest that
FIM pretraining not only improves LLMs’ performance
in FIM inference but also enhances their performance in
classical Left-to-Right (L2R) inference scenarios. This
supports the growing trend of using FIM as the primary
pretraining objective in code LLM development. We also
observe that pretraining methods and data quality often outweigh the sheer model size—smaller models with sophisticated pretraining paradigms often outperform larger models.
This is particularly evident in task-specific performances on

1

Department of EECS, University of California at Berkeley,
Berkeley, California, USA 2 AI at Meta, USA. Correspondence to:
Linyuan Gong <gly@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

