Decomposing and Editing Predictions by Modeling Model Computation

Harshay Shah 1 Andrew Ilyas 1 Aleksander M ˛
adry 1

Abstract

ture (Hewitt & Liang, 2019). Finally, mechanistic interpretability analyses (Wang et al., 2022; Nanda et al., 2023)
uncover specific components that encode a model behavior of interest, e.g., “knowledge neurons” (Dai et al., 2021)
and “induction heads” (Olsson et al., 2022). Broadly, these
works leverage different tools to answer the question: How
do individual model components shape model behavior?

How does the internal computation of a machine learning model transform inputs into predictions? To tackle this question, we introduce a framework called component modeling
for decomposing a model prediction in terms of
its components—architectural “building blocks”
such as convolution filters or attention heads. We
focus on a special case of this framework, component attribution, where the goal is to estimate
the counterfactual impact of individual components on a given prediction. We then present
C OAR, a scalable algorithm for estimating component attributions, and demonstrate its effectiveness across models, datasets and modalities.
Finally, we show that C OAR directly enables effective model editing. Our code is available at
github.com/MadryLab/modelcomponents.

In this work, we propose a new (and complementary) approach to studying this question. Our point of start is to
rephrase the question, instead asking:
How do changes to model components collectively
change individual model predictions?
We turn this rephrased question into a concrete framework
called component modeling. In this framework, the goal is
to build an interpretable counterfactual estimator of how a
model’s output would change in response to interventions
made to its components. In the rest of the paper, we present
a general approach to building such estimators, which turn
out to be highly predictive in large-scale settings. Beyond
shedding light on how model components collectively contribute to a given prediction, these estimators enable effective model editing, allowing us to design targeted interventions that induce a desired change in model behavior.

1. Introduction
Despite their predictive power, machine learning models
remain black boxes. In particular, the internal computation
that these models perform to transform inputs into predictions makes it difficult to understand model behavior and,
as a result, detect failure modes prior to deployment (Beery
et al., 2018; Sheng et al., 2019; Geirhos et al., 2020).

Roadmap and contributions. The main contribution of
our work is a framework for decomposing model predictions in terms of model components, which we show has
direct applications to model editing. Figure 1 summarizes
these contributions. Specifically, in this paper we:

In response to this difficulty, a line of work in ML interpretability aims to shed light on model computation by analyzing model components—intuitively “grouped” model
parameters such as convolutional filters or attention heads.
For example, feature visualization methods (Simonyan
et al., 2013; Zeiler & Fergus, 2014; Ghiasi et al., 2022)
identify components in vision models that detect visual
concepts such as curves (Olah et al., 2020a) and objects
(Bau et al., 2020b). Representation-based probes (Alain &
Bengio, 2016) identify groups of components in language
models that encode sentiment (Radford et al., 2017), partof-speech tags (Blevins et al., 2018), and syntactic strucMIT. Correspondence to: Harshay Shah <harshay@mit.edu>.

1. Introduce the component modeling framework: We
formalize our goal of understanding how model components shape predictions through a framework called
component modeling (Definition 1). The objective is to
learn a counterfactual estimator, or component model,
that predicts the effect of ablating a subset of components on a model prediction (Equation 1). Intuitively,
this framework operationalizes the idea that if we can
“understand” how model components shape a prediction, we should be able to estimate how the prediction
would change if we were to ablate a set of components.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

2. Instantiate the framework via component attribution: We focus our attention on a special “linear” case
of component modeling called component attribution,

1

1

