Riemannian Preconditioned LoRA for Fine-Tuning Foundation Models

Fangzhao Zhang 1 Mert Pilanci 1

Abstract

solution while still delivering strong performance in downstream tasks. A widely-used PEFT method is Low Rank
Adaptation, also known as LoRA (Hu et al., 2021), which
proposes to add low-rank matrices to existing model weights
and only train these additive components. Simply speaking,
for a pretrained model weight matrix W of dimension m
by n, LoRA replaces W with W + BA where B, A are
trainable weight matrices of dimension m by r and r by n
for some small rank r. In the fine-tuning procedure, W is
frozen and we are only optimizing over A’s and B’s. Compared to full fine-tuning, LoRA introduces fewer trainable
parameters. Effectiveness of LoRA has been empirically
verified in different fields. Here we note that optimizing
LoRA parameters falls into optimizing over low-rank matrices which form a quotient manifold. This motivates the
idea of enhancing LoRA training via tools from the field of
Riemannian optimization.

Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) emerges as a
popular parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT)
method, which proposes to freeze pretrained
model weights and update an additive low-rank
trainable matrix. In this work, we study the enhancement of LoRA training by introducing an
r × r preconditioner in each gradient step where r
is the LoRA rank. We theoretically verify that the
proposed preconditioner stabilizes feature learning with LoRA under infinite-width NN setting.
Empirically, the implementation of this new preconditioner requires a small change to existing
optimizer code and creates virtually minuscule
storage and runtime overhead. Our experimental results with both large language models and
text-to-image diffusion models show that with this
new preconditioner, the convergence and reliability of SGD and AdamW can be significantly enhanced. Moreover, the training process becomes
much more robust to hyperparameter choices such
as learning rate. The new preconditioner can
be derived from a novel Riemannian metric in
low-rank matrix field. Code can be accessed
at https://github.com/pilancilab/
Riemannian_Preconditioned_LoRA.

Recent work such as LoRA+ (Hayou et al., 2024) has drawn
attention to the optimization paradigm of LoRA and reveals
that the learning rate of LoRA parameter B should be set
larger than that of A to achieve stable feature learning under the infinite-width NN setting, making the learning rate
tuning a joint hyperparameter search. More specifically, denote learning rates for A and B by ηA and ηB respectively,
LoRA+ proposes to use a heuristic ηB /ηA = 24 in practice
and tune only ηA . In this work, we propose an improvement
of LoRA training with the introduction of an r × r preconditioner in its optimization step, and we show that with this
simple preconditioner, LoRA learns stable features without
the need of setting different learning rates for A and B. As
an illustration, we propose modifying the gradient updates
for the LoRA parameters as follows

1. Introduction
With the expanding scale of neural network models in both
vision and language domains, training a neural network
from scratch to match the performance of existing large
models has become almost infeasible. As a result, finetuning has emerged as a prevalent approach for downstream
tasks. Traditional full parameter fine-tuning demands extensive storage, making it impractical for many applications. In contrast, recent advances in Parameter-Efficient
Fine-Tuning (PEFT) methods offer a more storage-efficient

At+1 = At − α(BtT Bt )−1 (∇At L),
Bt+1 = Bt − α(∇Bt L)(At ATt )−1 ,

(1)

where (At ATt )−1 and (BtT Bt )−1 are the preconditioners
we introduce and L is the training loss objective. This
scaled gradient method (scaled GD) can be derived from a
novel Riemannian metric studied in (Mishra et al., 2012)
which takes into consideration both the objective function
and constraints and has been shown to have better convergence rate for conventional low-rank matrix optimization
problems involving matrix sensing and robust PCA (Candes et al., 2009). Our work shows for the first time that

1
Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University.
Correspondence to: Fangzhao Zhang <zfzhao@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

