Various Lengths, Constant Speed: Efficient Language Modeling with Lightning
Attention
Zhen Qin 1 Weigao Sun 2 Dong Li 2 Xuyang Shen 2 Weixuan Sun 2 Yiran Zhong 2

Abstract

However, despite its promise, none of the current leading
large language models (Touvron et al., 2023a;b; Zeng et al.,
2022; Black et al., 2022; Almazrouei et al., 2023; Team
et al., 2023; Wang & Komatsuzaki, 2021; Baichuan, 2023;
Jiang et al., 2023) have adopted linear attention mechanisms.
There are two possible reasons for that: 1). Inferior performance: There is a notable performance gap between existing
linear attention-based models (Katharopoulos et al., 2020;
Qin et al., 2022b) and state-of-the-art softmax attentionbased models (Touvron et al., 2023a;b) in language modeling. 2). Slow training speed: Existing linear attention models frequently struggle with slow training speeds due to the
use of cumulative summation operations (cumsum) (Hua
et al., 2022). As a result, these models (Hua et al., 2022) often adopt conventional attention computation during practical use, losing the theoretical advantages of linear attention.

We present Lightning Attention, the first linear attention implementation that maintains a constant
training speed for various sequence lengths under
fixed memory consumption. Due to the issue with
cumulative summation operations (cumsum), previous linear attention implementations cannot
achieve their theoretical advantage in a casual
setting. However, this issue can be effectively
solved by utilizing different attention calculation
strategies to compute the different parts of attention. Specifically, we split the attention calculation into intra-blocks and inter-blocks and
use conventional attention computation for intrablocks and linear attention kernel tricks for interblocks. This eliminates the need for cumsum
in the linear attention calculation. Furthermore,
a tiling technique is adopted through both forward and backward procedures to take full advantage of the GPU hardware. To enhance accuracy while preserving efficacy, we introduce
TransNormerLLM (TNL), a new architecture that
is tailored to our lightning attention. We conduct
rigorous testing on standard and self-collected
datasets with varying model sizes and sequence
lengths. TNL is notably more efficient than other
language models. In addition, benchmark results indicate that TNL performs on par with
state-of-the-art LLMs utilizing conventional transformer structures. The source code is released at
github.com/OpenNLPLab/TransnormerLLM.

In this paper, we address the aforementioned issues of linear
attention and propose a new linear attention-based model
that outperforms softmax attention-based models in terms
of accuracy and efficiency in language modeling.
Training speed. We introduce Lightning Attention, the first
linear attention implementation that enables linear attention
to realize its theoretical computational benefits. To achieve
the linear computational complexities, the core idea is to
leverage the "kernel trick" to accelerate the attention matrix
computation, i.e., compute the product of keys and values
first to circumvent the n×n query-key matrix multiplication.
The slow operation cumsum is needed during the calculation in causal language modeling. To solve this dilemma,
we apply the concept of "divide and conquer" to perform
the calculation. Specifically, our attention calculation is
divided into intra-blocks and inter-blocks. The conventional
attention calculation is applied to intra-blocks, while the
"kernel trick" is utilized for inter-blocks. We also leverage
tiling techniques in both forward and backward processes to
maximize GPU hardware performance and tailor the technique used in FlashAttention (Dao et al., 2022a; Dao, 2023)
to our Lightning Attention to make it IO-friendly. As a
result, Lightning Attention maintains a constant training
speed with increasing sequence length under fixed memory
consumption, as shown in Fig. 1.

1. Introduction
Linear attention has emerged as a potentially viable alternative to conventional softmax attention over the last five
years (Bahdanau et al., 2016; de Brébisson & Vincent, 2016).
1
TapTap 2 OpenNLPLab, Shanghai AI Lab. Correspondence to:
Yiran Zhong <zhongyiran@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Accuracy. As the adage goes, a good horse often needs a
1

