Listening to the Noise: Blind Denoising with Gibbs Diffusion

David Heurtel-Depeiges 1 Charles C. Margossian 2 Ruben Ohana 2 Bruno Régaldo-Saint Blancard 2

Abstract

ϕ

In recent years, denoising problems have become
intertwined with the development of deep generative models. In particular, diffusion models
are trained like denoisers, and the distribution
they model coincide with denoising priors in the
Bayesian picture. However, denoising through
diffusion-based posterior sampling requires the
noise level and covariance to be known, preventing blind denoising. We overcome this limitation
by introducing Gibbs Diffusion (GDiff), a general methodology addressing posterior sampling
of both the signal and the noise parameters. Assuming arbitrary parametric Gaussian noise, we
develop a Gibbs algorithm that alternates sampling steps from a conditional diffusion model
trained to map the signal prior to the family of
noise distributions, and a Monte Carlo sampler to
infer the noise parameters. Our theoretical analysis highlights potential pitfalls, guides diagnostic
usage, and quantifies errors in the Gibbs stationary distribution caused by the diffusion model.
We showcase our method for 1) blind denoising
of natural images involving colored noises with
unknown amplitude and spectral index, and 2) a
cosmology problem, namely the analysis of cosmic microwave background data, where Bayesian
inference of “noise” parameters means constraining models of the evolution of the Universe.

ε
y
x

Figure 1. Graphical model: we observe y = x + ε and aim to
infer both x and ϕ in a Bayesian framework.

Zhang et al., 2017; 2022), by learning complex prior distributions of target signals implicitly. Denoisers were also
found to be powerful tools for generative modeling, as strikingly demonstrated by diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020;
Song et al., 2021; Saharia et al., 2022; Rombach et al., 2022).
Considerable effort has been devoted to recovering highly
accurate, noise-free versions of contaminated signals, often
at the expense of fully addressing the noise’s complexity.
In numerous practical scenarios, both in industry and scientific research, accurately characterizing the noise itself is of
paramount importance (e.g., medical imaging, astronomy,
speech recognition, financial market analysis). This paper
addresses the challenge of blind denoising, with the objective of simultaneously recovering both the signal and the
noise characteristics.
We formalize the problem as follows. We observe a signal
y ∈ Rd that is an additive mixture of an arbitrary signal x
and a Gaussian signal ε with covariance Σϕ ∈ Rd×d :
y = x + ε, with ε ∼ N (0, Σϕ ),

(1)

where ϕ ∈ RK is an unknown vector of parameters (see
Fig. 1 for a graphical model). The functional form of Σϕ
can be arbitrary, although computational constraints would
typically require that the number of parameters K remains
reasonable. For example, the vector ϕ would typically include a parameter σ > 0 controlling the overall noise amplitude, but could also encompass parameters describing
the local variations or spectral properties of the noise (cf
Sect. 3). We frame the problem in a Bayesian picture, where
prior information on x and ϕ is given, representing some
pre-existing knowledge or assumptions on the target data.
We will assume that the prior information over ϕ takes the
form of an analytical prior distribution p(ϕ). Crucially,
although the prior distribution p(x) on the signal x is typically analytically intractable, we assume access to a set of

1. Introduction
Denoising is an old problem in signal processing, which
has experienced significant advancements in the last decade,
propelled by the advent of deep learning (Tian et al., 2020;
Elad et al., 2023). Convolutional neural networks have led
to the emergence of state-of-the-art image denoisers (e.g.,
1
Ecole Polytechnique, Institut Polytechnique de Paris
Flatiron Institute. Correspondence to: David Heurtel-Depeiges
<david.heurtel-depeiges@polytechnique.edu>, Bruno RégaldoSaint Blancard <bregaldo@flatironinstitute.org>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

