What’s the score?
Automated Denoising Score Matching for Nonlinear Diffusions

Raghav Singhal * 1 Mark Goldstein * 1 Rajesh Ranganath 1 2

Abstract

ing the ISM objective requires computing the divergence
of the score model. Computing the divergence directly
is memory intensive, therefore, the stochastic Hutchinson
trace estimator (Hutchinson, 1989; Grathwohl et al., 2018)
is used for computational efficiency. However, the use of
the stochastic trace estimator leads to noisy gradients and
requires differentiation during the forward pass.

Reversing a diffusion process by learning its
score forms the heart of diffusion-based generative modeling and for estimating properties
of scientific systems. The diffusion processes
that are tractable center on linear processes with
a Gaussian stationary distribution, limiting the
kinds of models that can be built to those that target a Gaussian prior or more generally limits the
kinds of problems that can be generically solved
to those that have conditionally linear score functions. In this work, we introduce a family of
tractable denoising score matching objectives,
called local-DSM, built using local increments
of the diffusion process. We show how localDSM melded with Taylor expansions enables automated training and score estimation with nonlinear diffusion processes. To demonstrate these
ideas, we use automated-DSM to train generative models using non-Gaussian priors on challenging low dimensional distributions and the CI FAR 10 image dataset. Additionally, we use the
automated-DSM to learn the scores for nonlinear
processes studied in statistical physics.

An alternative to the ISM objective is the denoising score
matching (DSM) objective (Vincent, 2011; Song et al.,
2020a;b). The DSM objective has powered many of the improvements in diffusion-based generative models (DBGMs)
(Song et al., 2020b; Dockhorn et al., 2021; Singhal et al.,
2023). However, training with DSM requires the score of
the transition kernel q(yt | y0 ), which is typically not available for nonlinear processes. Neither ISM or DSM provide
a good option for training score models with generic, nonlinear noise or inference processes.
A natural question one can ask is why study nonlinear inference processes? At a high level more generic, easy-to-use
computation has a history of unlocking other techniques
(Baydin et al., 2018; Ranganath et al., 2014; 2016; Kucukelbir et al., 2017). Recent work introduces new choices
of inference processes for generative modeling, but the processes introduced are limited to linear ones with Gaussian stationary distributions (Dockhorn et al., 2021; Singhal
et al., 2023; Pandey & Mandt, 2023; Du et al., 2023). Automated training for nonlinear inference processes would
allow for rapid prototyping of non-Gaussian priors using
nonlinear Langevin processes (Pavliotis, 2016) and, more
generally, nonlinear drifts in the inference process.

1. Introduction
Modeling with diffusion processes has led to advances in
generative models (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Nichol &
Dhariwal, 2021; Nichol et al., 2021; Sasaki et al., 2021)
and in the computation of properties of scientific systems
through the estimation of the score of a diffusion (Boffi &
Vanden-Eijnden, 2023a;b; Huang & Wang, 2024).

Next, in several applications the inference process is given
to us. For many systems of interest in statistical physics
(Chandler, 1987; Spohn, 2012; Otsubo et al., 2022), finance (Kusuoka & Ninomiya, 2004), biology (Fleming,
1975), the evolution of the system is governed by highdimensional nonlinear diffusion processes. Several properties of these systems, such as the entropy production
rate (Otsubo et al., 2022), require access to the density
and are challenging to estimate from samples alone. Typical approaches for estimating the density, such as solving
the Fokker-Planck equation (Pavliotis, 2016) are infeasible
in high dimensions. Therefore, Boffi & Vanden-Eijnden

Score models can be trained for a generic diffusion process,
that may be nonlinear, using the the implicit score matching (ISM) objective (Huang et al., 2021; Song & Ermon,
2020; Boffi & Vanden-Eijnden, 2023b). However, estimat*
Equal contribution 1 Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University 2 Center for Data Science, New
York University. Correspondence to: Raghav Singhal <rsinghal@nyu.edu>, Mark Goldstein <goldstein@nyu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

