PEARL: Zero-shot Cross-task Preference Alignment and Robust Reward
Learning for Robotic Manipulation

Runze Liu 1 Yali Du 2 Fengshuo Bai 3 4 Jiafei Lyu 1 Xiu Li 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

In recent years, great achievements have been made in Reinforcement Learning, particularly in solving sequential
decision-making problems given a well-defined reward function (Mnih et al., 2013; Silver et al., 2016; Vinyals et al.,
2019; Berner et al., 2019; Bai et al., 2023). However, the
practical deployment of RL algorithms is often hindered
by the extensive effort and time required for reward engineering. Additionally, there are risks of reward hacking,
where RL agents exploit reward functions in unanticipated
ways, leading to unexpected and potentially unsafe outcomes. Moreover, the challenge of aligning RL agents with
human values, particularly sensorimotor skills as discussed
in this paper, through crafted reward functions remains substantial in real-world applications.

In preference-based Reinforcement Learning
(RL), obtaining a large number of preference labels are both time-consuming and costly. Furthermore, the queried human preferences cannot be
utilized for the new tasks. In this paper, we propose Zero-shot Cross-task Preference Alignment
and Robust Reward Learning (PEARL), which
learns policies from cross-task preference transfer
without any human labels of the target task. Our
contributions include two novel components that
facilitate the transfer and learning process. The
first is Cross-task Preference Alignment (CPA),
which transfers the preferences between tasks via
optimal transport. The key idea of CPA is to
use Gromov-Wasserstein distance to align the trajectories between tasks, and the solved optimal
transport matrix serves as the correspondence between trajectories. The target task preferences
are computed as the weighted sum of source
task preference labels with the correspondence
as weights. Moreover, to ensure robust learning
from these transferred labels, we introduce Robust
Reward Learning (RRL), which considers both reward mean and uncertainty by modeling rewards
as Gaussian distributions. Empirical results on
robotic manipulation tasks from Meta-World and
Robomimic demonstrate that our method is capable of transferring preference labels across tasks
accurately and then learns well-behaved policies.
Notably, our approach significantly exceeds existing methods when there are few human preferences. The code and videos of our method
are available at: https://sites.google.
com/view/pearl-preference.

As a promising alternative, preference-based RL (Christiano et al., 2017) introduces a paradigm different from
traditional RL by learning reward functions via human preferences between trajectories rather than manually designed
reward functions. By directly capturing human intentions,
preference-based RL has demonstrated an ability to teach
agents novel behaviors that align more closely with human
values. However, while the strides made in preference-based
RL are significant (Park et al., 2022; Liang et al., 2022; Liu
et al., 2022), current algorithms come with their own set of
challenges. First, they are heavily reliant on a vast number
of online queries to human experts for preference labels
for reward and policy learning. This dependency not only
increases the time and cost associated with training but also
results in data that cannot be recycled or repurposed for new
tasks. Each new task encountered demands its own set of
human preference labels, creating a cycle of labeling that is
both resource-intensive and inefficient. While Hejna III &
Sadigh (2023) leverage prior data to pre-train reward functions via meta-learning and adapts quickly with new task
preference data, the need for millions of pre-collected preference labels and further online queries makes this approach
impractical in many scenarios.

1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua
University 2 King’s College London 3 Beijing Institute for General
AI 4 Shanghai Jiao Tong University. Correspondence to: Yali Du
<yali.du@kcl.ac.uk>, Xiu Li <li.xiu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Recently, Gromov-Wasserstein (GW) distance (Mémoli,
2011) has shown effectiveness in a variety of structured
data matching problems, such as graphs (Xu et al., 2019)
and point clouds (Peyré et al., 2016). Gromov-Wasserstein

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

