Sparse Dimensionality Reduction Revisited

Mikael Møller Høgsgaard 1 Lior Kamma 2 Kasper Green Larsen 1 Jelani Nelson 3 Chris Schwiegelshohn 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Dimensionality reduction is a central technique for speeding
up algorithms for large scale data analysis and reducing
memory consumption for storage. A Euclidean-distancepreserving dimensionality reduction is, loosely speaking,
an embedding of a high-dimensional Euclidean space into
a space of low dimension, that approximately preserves
the Euclidean distance between every two points. One of
the cornerstone results is the Johnson-Lindenstrauss transform (Johnson & Lindenstrauss, 1984), stating that every
set of n points in a d-dimensional space can be embedded
into only m = O(ε−2 lg n) dimensions while preserving
all pairwise Euclidian distances between points to within a
factor (1 ± ε). The simplest (random) constructions of such
dimensionality reducing maps, known as the Distributional
Johnson-Lindenstrauss Lemma, samples a random m × d
matrix A with entries either i.i.d. N (0, 1) distributed or as
uniform Rademachers (−1 or 1 with probability 1/2 each).
For a set X ⊂ Rd of n points,√it then holds with probability
at least 1 − 1/n that L = A/ m satisfies

The sparse Johnson-Lindenstrauss transform is
one of the central techniques in dimensionality
reduction. It supports embedding a set of n points
in Rd into m = O(ε−2 lg n) dimensions while
preserving all pairwise distances to within 1 ± ε.
Each input point x is embedded to Ax, where A
is an m×d matrix having s non-zeros per column,
allowing for an embedding time of O(s∥x∥0 ).
Since the sparsity of A governs the embedding
time, much work has gone into improving the
sparsity s. The current state-of-the-art by Kane
and Nelson (2014) shows that s = O(ε−1 lg n)
suffices. This is almost matched by a lower
bound of s = Ω(ε−1 lg n/ lg(1/ε)) by Nelson
and Nguyen (2013) for d = Ω(n). Previous work
thus suggests that we have near-optimal embeddings. In this work, we revisit sparse embeddings
and present a sparser embedding for instances in
which d = no(1) , which in many applications
is realistic. Formally, our embedding achieves
s = O(ε−1 (lg n/ lg(1/ε) + lg2/3 n lg1/3 d)). We
also complement our analysis by strengthening
the lower bound of Nelson and Nguyen to hold
also when d ≪ n, thereby matching the first term
in our new sparsity upper bound. Finally, we
also improve the sparsity of the best oblivious
subspace embeddings for optimal embedding dimensionality.

∀x, y ∈ X : ∥Lx − Ly∥22 ∈ (1 ± ε)∥x − y∥22 .

(1)

We say that a matrix L satisfying (1) is an ε-JL matrix for
X. It is worth noting that some works require that an ε-JL
matrix satisfies (1) without the square on the Euclidian norm.
The two definitions are equivalent up to a constant factor
scaling in ε and we work with the former as it simplifies
calculations.
While the target dimension of m = O(ε−2 lg n) is known
to be optimal (Jayram & Woodruff, 2013; Larsen & Nelson, 2017), even when d = O(m), computing the embedding Lx of a point x using the construction above requires
Ω(md) = Ω(ε−2 d lg n) operations. In some applications,
this may constitute the computation bottleneck, hence much
work has gone into designing faster embedding algorithms.
These works may roughly be categorized by two approaches.
(1) Constructions that use structured embedding matrices
with fast matrix-vector multiplication algorithms; and (2)
constructions using sparse embedding matrices.

1
Computer Science Department, Aarhus University, Aarhus,
Denmark 2 School of Computer Science, Academic College of
Tel-Aviv Yaffo, Tel-Aviv, Israel 3 Department of EECS, UC
Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Mikael
Møller Høgsgaard <hogsgaard@cs.au.dk>, Lior Kamma <liorkm@mta.ac.il>, Kasper Green Larsen <larsen@cs.au.dk>,
Jelani Nelson <minilek@berkeley.edu>, Chris Schwiegelshohn
<schwiegelshohn@cs.au.dk>.

A classic example of the former approach is the FastJL
transform by Ailon and Chazelle (2009). Their construction
embeds a point x by computing the product P HDx, where
D is a diagonal matrix with random signs on the diagonal, H

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

