Explain Temporal Black-Box Models via Functional Decomposition

Linxiao Yang 1 Yunze Tong 1 2 Xinyue Gu 1 Liang Sun 1

Abstract

2023; Amann et al., 2020). Time series data, by virtue of its
omnipresence, capture the dynamic evolution of variables
across a spectrum of fields including economics (Kendall &
Hill, 1953), meteorology (Campbell & Diebold, 2005), and
public health (Zeger et al., 2006). However, the investigation
into explaining the predictions of time series models—a critical piece in the puzzle of model transparency—has not kept
pace with the demands of researchers and practitioners. The
ability to explain time series model predictions is crucial;
it not only demystifies the decision-making process (Koo
et al., 2016) but also instills trust and fosters practical insights for stakeholders (Ivaturi et al., 2021; Mobley, 2002;
Ismail Fawaz et al., 2019).

How to explain temporal models is a significant
challenge due to the inherent characteristics of
time series data, notably the strong temporal dependencies and interactions between observations.
Unlike ordinary tabular data, data at different time
steps in time series usually interact dynamically,
forming influential patterns that shape the model’s
predictions, rather than only acting in isolation.
Existing explanatory approaches for time series
often overlook these crucial temporal interactions
by treating time steps as separate entities, leading to a superficial understanding of model behavior. To address this challenge, we introduce
FDTempExplainer, an innovative model-agnostic
explanation method based on functional decomposition, tailored to unravel the complex interplay within black-box time series models. Our approach disentangles the individual contributions
from each time step, as well as the aggregated
influence of their interactions, in a rigorous framework. FDTempExplainer accurately measures the
strength of interactions, yielding insights that surpass those from baseline models. We demonstrate
the effectiveness of our approach in a wide range
of time series applications, including anomaly detection, classification, and forecasting, showing
its superior performance to the state-of-the-art
algorithms.

The unique characters of time series data pose distinct challenges when it comes to elucidating different model predictions. Firstly, the high degree of temporal dependency
(including the commonly used autocorrelation) inherent in
time series data complicates the task of identifying the influence of specific inputs on the model outputs. In particular,
many of existing explanatory methods (e.g., perturbationbased methods) rely on generating artificial samples for
explanation, which do not follow the underlying complex
temporal dependency relationship in the time series data,
leading to the out-of-distribution (OOD) problem. Secondly,
events occurring at a given time point can have enduring effects on subsequent observations, encapsulating phase shifts
that ripple through future data points. In fact, the information of a phase change at one time step is embedded in all
the following steps, and the resulting accumulation effect of
events make accurate explaining challenging. Thirdly, we
need to consider not only a single time point (e.g., points
corresponding to events), but also time series subsequence
in explanation. As opposed to the impact of isolated observations as events, some subsequence plays important role
in time series tasks. Take subsequence anomaly detection
as an example, anomalies are determined based on the collective behavior of a time series subsequence rather than a
singular time point (Boniol & Palpanas, 2020). Similarly,
in forecasting, successive observations often compose periodic motifs or exhibit slowly evolving trends that have a
profound influence on subsequent values within the series.

1. Introduction
Explanatory methods hold paramount significance across diverse realms of scientific research, where the need to understand the predictions of complex models is essential for both
validation and application (Tjoa & Guan, 2020; Yang et al.,
1

DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Linxiao Yang
<linxiao.ylx@alibaba-inc.com>, Liang Sun <liang.sun@alibabainc.com>.
2

Although various general explanatory methods, such as
LIME (Ribeiro et al., 2016), SHAP (Lundberg & Lee,
2017), integrated gradient (Sundararajan et al., 2017), and

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

