The Entropy Enigma: Success and Failure of Entropy Minimization

Ori Press 1 Ravid Shwartz-Ziv 2 Yann LeCun 2 3 Matthias Bethge 1

Abstract

Test Time Adaptation (TTA) method that can improve the
accuracy of a model on new datasets, without the need for
additional labeled training data. EM adapts classifiers by
iteratively increasing the probabilities assigned to the most
likely classes while diminishing those of the others, and is
an integral part of many recent TTA methods (Wang et al.,
2020; Mummadi et al., 2021; Rusak et al., 2022b; Goyal
et al., 2022; Niu et al., 2022; Cho et al., 2023; Niu et al.,
2023; Press et al., 2023; Döbler et al., 2024; Marsden et al.,
2024). In this paper, we analyze EM to understand how it
works, when and why it fails, and how to use it to predict
model accuracy.

Entropy minimization (EM) is frequently used
to increase the accuracy of classification models
when they’re faced with new data at test time.
EM is a self-supervised learning method that optimizes classifiers to assign even higher probabilities to their top predicted classes. In this paper, we analyze why EM works when adapting
a model for a few steps and why it eventually
fails after adapting for many steps. We show that,
at first, EM causes the model to embed test images close to training images, thereby increasing
model accuracy. After many steps of optimization, EM makes the model embed test images far
away from the embeddings of training images,
which results in a degradation of accuracy. Building upon our insights, we present a method for
solving a practical problem: estimating a model’s
accuracy on a given arbitrary dataset without having access to its labels. Our method estimates
accuracy by looking at how the embeddings of
input images change as the model is optimized to
minimize entropy. Experiments on 23 challenging
datasets show that our method sets the SoTA with
a mean absolute error of 5.75%, an improvement
of 29.62% over the previous SoTA on this task.
Our code is available at: https://github.
com/oripress/EntropyEnigma

The initial intuition behind using entropy minimization,
given by Wang et al. (2020) was based on the observation
that models tend to be more accurate on images for which
they make predictions with higher confidence. The logical extension of this observation was to encourage models
to bolster their confidence on such images. However, our
analysis reveals this intuition to be only partly true. Remarkably, even when we construct datasets by excluding samples
initially classified correctly — effectively creating datasets
with a 100% classification error rate at the start — entropy
minimization performance remains largely intact.
Our analysis uncovers that during entropy minimization,
embeddings of images from the input dataset tend to form
distinct clusters. The distances between samples within each
cluster diminish, creating more defined groupings, while
the centers of these clusters gradually move apart, a phenomenon akin to neural collapse (Papyan et al., 2020; Han
et al., 2021; Ben-Shaul et al., 2023). At first, embeddings
of the input images not only cluster, but also stay close to
the embeddings of original training images. Only after numerous optimization steps do these embeddings begin to
diverge, distancing themselves from the embeddings of the
clean training data (Fig. 1). We show this divergence to be
intricately tied to a reduction in the model’s accuracy.

1. Introduction
Practitioners commonly employ model adaptation strategies
to enhance classifier performance on real-world data, which
often differs significantly from training data. Unsupervised
losses play a crucial role in adapting models to images
corrupted by noise, such as snow or motion blur, or images
from domains not seen in training, such as paintings or
computer rendered images. Entropy minimization (EM) is a

Drawing from our insights, we present a method designed to
estimate the accuracy of a given model on any dataset, without labels. This task is notably difficult, because in some
cases in-distribution accuracy is tied to out-of-distribution
(OOD) accuracy (Miller et al., 2021), while in other cases it
is not (Teney et al., 2022). Our approach, termed Weighted
Flips (WF), works in conjunction with TTA methods as they

1

University of Tübingen, Tübingen AI Center, Germany
New York University 3 Meta AI, FAIR. Correspondence to:
<ori.press@bethgelab.org>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

