SleepFM: Multi-modal Representation Learning for Sleep Across Brain Activity,
ECG and Respiratory Signals

Rahul Thapa 1 Bryan He 2 Magnus Ruud Kjær 3 Hyatt Moore 4 Gauri Ganjoo 4 Emmanuel Mignot 4 5
James Zou 1 2 5

Abstract

diac health (Worley, 2018; Brink-Kjaer et al., 2022; Leary
et al., 2021). Polysomnography (PSG) is the current gold
standard for studying sleep by recording diverse physiological signals during sleep, including electroencephalogram
(EEG), electroocculograms (EOG), and electromyography
(EMG), electrocardiogram (ECG) and respiratory channels
(Kryger et al., 2010). EOG and EMG are often combined
with EEG recordings to better determine sleep stages, which
we refer to collectively as Brain Activity Signals (BAS).
These different data modalities offer complementary perspectives. BAS measures brain activity to categorize sleep
stages and diagnose sleep disorders. ECG captures heart
rhythms; changes in heart rate can indicate sleep disordered breathing events. Respiratory sensors directly quantify breathing patterns including sleep disordered breathing
(SDB). Together, these signals provide a comprehensive
assessment of sleep health.

Sleep is a complex physiological process evaluated through various modalities recording electrical brain, cardiac, and respiratory activities.
We curate a large polysomnography dataset from
over 14,000 participants comprising over 100,000
hours of multi-modal sleep recordings. Leveraging this extensive dataset, we developed SleepFM,
the first multi-modal foundation model for sleep
analysis. We show that a novel leave-one-out
approach for contrastive learning significantly improves downstream task performance compared
to representations from standard pairwise contrastive learning. A logistic regression model
trained on SleepFM’s learned embeddings outperforms an end-to-end trained convolutional neural network (CNN) on sleep stage classification
(macro AUROC 0.88 vs 0.72 and macro AUPRC
0.72 vs 0.48) and sleep disordered breathing detection (AUROC 0.85 vs 0.69 and AUPRC 0.77 vs
0.61). Notably, the learned embeddings achieve
48% top-1 average accuracy in retrieving modality clip pairs from 90,000 candidates. This work
demonstrates the value of holistic multi-modal
sleep modeling to fully capture the richness of
sleep recordings. SleepFM is open source and
available at https://github.com/rthapa84/sleepfmcodebase.

Traditionally, sleep data analysis involved manual visual
inspection, a labor-intensive and time-consuming process
prone to errors (Boashash & Ouelha, 2016; Hassan &
Bhuiyan, 2017). Recent advancements in supervised deep
learning have shown promise in automating sleep staging
and classification of disorders like SDB (Nassi et al., 2021;
Perslev et al., 2021; Stephansen et al., 2018). However,
most methods rely on labeled data from a narrow task. They
rarely leverage the full breadth of unlabeled physiological
dynamics within and across diverse PSG sensors.
In parallel, contrastive learning (CL) has emerged as a powerful technique in other domains to learn representations by
maximizing alignment between modalities (Radford et al.,
2021). However, joint integration of BAS, ECG, and respiratory signals from PSGs via multi-modal CL has been less
explored. Previous works have focused solely on ECG or
combined ECG with electronic health records (EHR), while
joint modeling of BAS, respiratory, and ECG signals has
been limited. Our work demonstrates a first attempt at developing a multi-modal CL approach for PSG analysis that
capitalizes on synergies between BAS, ECG, and respiratory
signals to learn enhanced physiological representations for
sleep analysis.

1. Introduction
Sleep monitoring is critical to evaluate sleep disorders but
also as a proxy to assess overall brain, pulmonary, and car1
Department of Biomedical Data Science, Stanford University 2 Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
3
Department of Health Technology, Technical University of Denmark 4 Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Stanford
University 5 Co-senior authors. Correspondence to: Rahul Thapa
<rthapa84@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Our Contribution We introduce SleepFM, a sleep founda1

