DRCT: Diffusion Reconstruction Contrastive Training towards Universal
Detection of Diffusion Generated Images

Baoying Chen * 1 Jishen Zeng * 1 Jianquan Yang 2 Rui Yang 1
SDv1.5

Abstract
Diffusion models have made significant strides
in visual content generation but also raised increasing demands on generated image detection.
Existing detection methods have achieved considerable progress, but they usually suffer a significant decline in accuracy when detecting images
generated by an unseen diffusion model. In this
paper, we seek to address the generalizability of
generated image detectors from the perspective
of hard sample classification. The basic idea is
that if a classifier can distinguish generated images that closely resemble real ones, then it can
also effectively detect less similar samples, potentially even those produced by a different diffusion model. Based on this idea, we propose
Diffusion Reconstruction Contrastive Learning
(DRCT), a universal framework to enhance the
generalizability of the existing detectors. DRCT
generates hard samples by high-quality diffusion
reconstruction and adopts contrastive training to
guide the learning of diffusion artifacts. In addition, we have built a million-scale dataset, DRCT2M, including 16 types diffusion models for the
evaluation of generalizability of detection methods. Extensive experimental results show that
detectors enhanced with DRCT achieve over a
10% accuracy improvement in cross-set tests. The
code, models, and dataset will soon be available
at https://github.com/beibuwandeluori/DRCT.

ADM

SDv1.4

CNNSpot (70.65)
GramNet (65.70)
F3Net (72.83)
UnivFD (67.73)
De-fake (64.03)
DIRE (51.86)
DRCT(ours) (87.95)

GLIDE

Wukong

Midjourney

BigGAN

VQDM

Figure 1. Generalization performance comparison between our proposed DRCT framework and six existing detection methods, including CNNSpot (Wang et al., 2019), F3Net (Qian et al., 2020),
UnivFD (Ojha et al., 2023), GramNet (Liu et al., 2020), Defake (Sha et al., 2023), DIRE (Wang et al., 2023). All detection
methods are trained on the same dataset consisting of generated
images by Stable Diffusion (SD) v1.4 and real images from the
MSCOCO dataset. The reported detection accuracies (ACC, %)
are evaluated on each of the eight subsets of the GenImage (Zhu
et al., 2023) dataset, and the averaged accuracy of each detection
method is also respectively reported in brackets at the legends
for convenient comparision. It shows that the proposed DRCT
framework outperforms the compared methods by a remarkable
margin of 15% or more.

1. Intorduction
In recent years, image generation technologies based on denoising diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020;
*

1

Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021; Rombach et al., 2021; Saharia
et al., 2022) have rapidly advanced, with new generative
models continually emerging. These technologies have provided efficient content editing and generation tools for applications such as digital creation, commercial advertising,
news publishing, and social entertainment. However, there
is also the risk of malicious misuse, such as fabricating fake
news, misleading public opinion, interfering with political

2

Equal contribution Alibaba Group School of Cyber Science and Technology, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to: Jianquan Yang
<yangjq65@mail.sysu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

