On the Nonlinearity of Layer Normalization

Yunhao Ni 1 Yuxin Guo 1 Junlong Jia 1 Lei Huang* 1

Abstract

basic layer in almost all the foundation models (Brown et al.,
2020; Alayrac et al., 2022; Kirillov et al., 2023).

Layer normalization (LN) is a ubiquitous technique in deep learning but our theoretical understanding to it remains elusive. This paper investigates a new theoretical direction for LN, regarding to its nonlinearity and representation capacity.
We investigate the representation capacity of a
network with layerwise composition of linear and
LN transformations, referred to as LN-Net. We
theoretically show that, given m samples with any
label assignment, an LN-Net with only 3 neurons
in each layer and O(m) LN layers can correctly
classify them. We further show the lower bound
of the VC dimension of an LN-Net. The nonlinearity of LN can be amplified by group partition,
which is also theoretically demonstrated with mild
assumption and empirically supported by our experiments. Based on our analyses, we consider
to design neural architecture by exploiting and
amplifying the nonlinearity of LN, and the effectiveness is supported by our experiments.

While LN is extensively used in practice, our theoretical
understanding to it remains elusive. One main theoretical
work for LN is its scale-invariant property, which is initially
discussed in (Ba et al., 2016) to illustrate its ability in stabilizing training and is further extended in (Hoffer et al., 2018;
Arora et al., 2019; Li & Arora, 2020) to consider its potential affects in optimization dynamics. Different from the
previous work focusing on theoretical analyses of LN from
the perspective of optimization, this paper investigates a new
theoretical direction for LN, regarding to its nonlinearity
and representation capacity.
We mathematically demonstrate that LN is a nonlinear transformation. We highlight that LN might be a nonlinear transformation by intuition, but there is no work, to our best
knowledge, demonstrating it. Our demonstration is based
on the defined lower bound named LSSR (Definition 2).
The LSSR will not be broken under any linear transformation by definition, but we show that a linear neural network
combined with LN can break the LSSR. Therefore, LN has
nonlinearity. We also show that an LN-Net, which is a layerwise composition of linear and LN transformations, has
nonlinearity.

1. Introduction
Layer normalization (LN) (Ba et al., 2016) is a ubiquitous
technique in deep learning, enabling varies neural networks
to train effectively. It was initially proposed to address
the train-inference inconsistency problem of Batch Normalization (BN) (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015) applied in the
recurrent neural networks for Natural Language Processing
(NLP) tasks. It then became the key component of Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) and its variants (Dai et al.,
2019; Xiong et al., 2020; Dosovitskiy et al., 2021), spreading from NLP (Radford et al., 2021; Devlin et al., 2019;
Raffel et al., 2020) to Computer Vision (CV) (Dosovitskiy
et al., 2021; Carion et al., 2020; Cheng et al., 2022) communities. LN has got its firm position (Huang et al., 2023)
in the evolution of neural architectures and is currently a

One interesting question is that how powerful the nonlinear
of an LN-Net is in theory. We theoretically show that, given
m samples with any label assignment, an LN-Net with only
3 neurons in each layer and O(m) LN layers can correctly
classify them. We further show the lower bound of the
VC dimension of an LN-Net. In particular, given an LNNet with width only 3 neurons in each layer and L LN
layers, its VC dimension is lower bounded by L + 2. These
results show that LN-Net has great representation capacity
in theory, implying the possibility that a network with linear
and LN layer only can work well in practice.
We further investigate how to amplify and exploit the nonlinearity of LN. We find that Group based LN (LN-G)—which
divides neurons of a layer into groups and perform LN in
each group in parallel—has stronger nonlinearity than the
naive LN countpart. This is also theoretically demonstrated
with mild assumption and empirically supported by our comprehensive experiments. We also consider practical scenario,
where we replace LN with LN-G on Transformer and ViT,

1

SKLCCSE, Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Lei Huang <huangleiAI@buaa.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

