Sampling in Unit Time with Kernel Fisher–Rao Flow

Aimee Maurais 1 Youssef Marzouk 1

Abstract

which to train the map, or access to gradients (including
scores) of π1 or π0 . The density ratio is available when the
(unnormalized) density of π1 is known and π0 is chosen to
be some “standard” reference (e.g., Gaussian). It is also
accessible in the Bayesian setting so long as the likelihood
function ℓ is known: therein π0 is the prior distribution of
some Rd -valued parameter X and π1 ∝ ℓ π0 is the posterior
distribution of X given Y = y ∗ , with ℓ(·) = πY |X (y ∗ |·).
The ratio in the Bayesian setting is ππ10 ∝ ℓ, but we will
use the term “likelihood” to refer to the ratio ππ10 outside of
the Bayesian setting as well. In applications of Bayesian
inference such as data assimilation (Reich & Cotter, 2015)
it is frequently the case that π0 is only known through samples; hence, while the target density π1 ∝ π0 ℓ cannot be
evaluated, the likelihood ℓ often can. Furthermore, in many
other scientific applications, π1 or ℓ may contain a complicated physical model whose gradients are inaccessible;
hence gradient-free sampling is a necessity.

We introduce a new mean-field ODE and corresponding interacting particle systems (IPS) for
sampling from an unnormalized target density.
The IPS are gradient-free, available in closed
form, and only require the ability to sample from a
reference density and compute the (unnormalized)
target-to-reference density ratio. The mean-field
ODE is obtained by solving a Poisson equation for
a velocity field that transports samples along the
geometric mixture of the two densities, π01−t π1t ,
which is the path of a particular Fisher–Rao gradient flow. We employ a RKHS ansatz for the
velocity field, which makes the Poisson equation
tractable and enables discretization of the resulting mean-field ODE over finite samples. The
mean-field ODE can be additionally be derived
from a discrete-time perspective as the limit of
successive linearizations of the Monge–Ampère
equations within a framework known as sampledriven optimal transport. We introduce a stochastic variant of our approach and demonstrate empirically that our IPS can produce high-quality samples from varied target distributions, outperforming comparable gradient-free particle systems and
competitive with gradient-based alternatives.

The canonical sampling approach employing the likelihood
is importance sampling (Owen, 2013), which transforms
an unweighted ensemble of samples of π0 into a weighted
ensemble, enabling the estimation of expectations under
π1 . Importance sampling is the foundation for sequential
Monte Carlo (SMC) methods (Del Moral et al., 2006), but is
frequently plagued by issues of weight degeneracy and ensemble collapse, necessitating large ensemble sizes (Snyder
et al., 2008) or interventions such as resampling (Künsch,
2005) and MCMC rejuvenation.

1. Introduction

Alternatively, many sampling approaches use dynamics to
define a transport incrementally, e.g., via the flow map induced by trajectories of an ODE or the stochastic mapping
induced by sample paths of an SDE. In either case, the
idea is to apply dynamics which will transform some initial state X0 ∼ π0 to a state XS ∼ πXS ≈ π1 for some
time S > 0. This approach underlies flow, diffusion, and
bridge techniques for generative modeling, e.g., Kuang &
Tabak (2019); Song et al. (2021); De Bortoli et al. (2021);
Liu et al. (2022); Lipman et al. (2023); Xu et al. (2023a);
Albergo et al. (2023), wherein samples from both π0 and π1
are almost always required for training (with Vargas et al.
(2023a); Heng et al. (2024) being recent exceptions). In the
setting where π1 is known only through its unnormalized
density, there are a number of dynamic sampling algorithms
which have their grounding as gradient flows of functionals

In this work we consider the problem of sampling via transport: given a target distribution π1 on Rd and a reference
distribution π0 on Rd from which we can sample, our
goal is to find T : Rd → Rd such that T♯ π0 = π1 , i.e.,
X0 ∼ π0 ⇒ T (X0 ) ∼ π1 . We assume that π0 and π1 both
admit densities and that we can evaluate the (unnormalized)
density ratio* ππ10 but that we do not have samples of π1 with
1

Center for Computational Science and Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Aimee Maurais <maurais@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
* For the remainder of this paper, the terms “density” and “density ratio” refer to unnormalized quantities unless otherwise stated.

1

