Causal Action Influence Aware Counterfactual Data Augmentation

Núria Armengol Urpí 1 2 Marco Bagatella 1 2 Marin Vlastelica 2 Georg Martius 3 2
Offline
Dataset

Abstract
Offline data are both valuable and practical
resources for teaching robots complex behaviors.
Ideally, learning agents should not be constrained
by the scarcity of available demonstrations, but
rather generalize beyond the training distribution.
However, the complexity of real-world scenarios
typically requires huge amounts of data to prevent
neural network policies from picking up on
spurious correlations and learning non-causal relationships. We propose CAIAC, a data augmentation method that can create feasible synthetic
transitions from a fixed dataset without having
access to online environment interactions. By utilizing principled methods for quantifying causal
influence, we are able to perform counterfactual
reasoning by swapping action-unaffected parts of
the state-space between independent trajectories
in the dataset. We empirically show that this leads
to a substantial increase in robustness of offline
learning algorithms against distributional shift.
Videos, code and data are available at https:
//sites.google.com/view/caiac.

Causal Action
Influence Aware
Data Augmentation

+

Augmented
Dataset

=

Figure 1: Overview of the proposed approach. Interactions
between the agent and entities in the world are sparse. We
use causal action influence (CAI), a local causal measure,
to determine action-independent entities and create counterfactual data by swapping states of these entities from
other observations in the dataset. Offline learning with these
augmentations leads to better generalization.
links (De Haan et al., 2019; Gupta et al., 2023). When
trying to reduce training loss, an agent can benefit from such
spurious correlations in the data and, therefore, they can
be inadvertently transferred to the mechanisms of learned
models (Gupta et al., 2023).

1. Introduction

Problematically, causally confused agents, are prone to
catastrophic failure even in mild cases of distributional
shift (De Haan et al., 2019), i.e. when the test distribution deviates from the training distribution. Subtle forms
of distributional shift are common when learning from realworld data: collected demonstrations can only encompass
a small fraction of the vast amount of possible configurations stemming from the inherent presence of many entities
in the real world (Battaglia et al., 2018). Hence, at test
times, agents are often queried on unfamiliar (i.e. out of
distribution) configurations.

Offline learning offers the opportunity of leveraging plentiful amounts of prerecorded data in situations where environment interaction is costly (Bahl et al., 2022; Brohan
et al., 2022; 2023; Vlastelica et al., 2023). However, one of
the fundamental challenges of such a framework is that of
causal confusion.
Causal confusion arises when a trained agent misinterprets
the underlying causal mechanics of the environment and,
hence, fails to distinguish spurious correlations from causal

To illustrate the problem, let us imagine that we have
demonstrations of a robot performing several kitchenrelated activities: opening a microwave, sliding cabinets
and turning on and off a light switch. However, the
demonstrations only show how to perform those activities
in this pre-specified order. Hence, following the example,
the sliding cabinet (Event Y) is only shown to be open
when the microwave (Event X) is open as well.

1

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland 2 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 3 Department of Computer Science, University of
Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. Correspondence to: Núria Armengol Urpí <nuriaa@ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

