Understanding the Training Speedup from Sampling with Approximate Losses

Rudrajit Das 1 Xi Chen 2 Bertram Ieong 2 Parikshit Bansal 1 Sujay Sanghavi 1 2

Abstract

at w with step-size/learning rate η is:
w+ = w − η∇f (w, x),

It is well known that selecting samples with large
losses/gradients can significantly reduce the number of training steps. However, the selection overhead is often too high to yield any meaningful
gains in terms of overall training time. In this
work, we focus on the greedy approach of selecting samples with large approximate losses instead
of exact losses in order to reduce the selection
overhead. For smooth convex losses, we show
that such a greedy strategy can converge to a constant factor of the minimum value of the average
loss in fewer iterations than the standard approach
of random selection. We also theoretically quantify the effect of the approximation level. We then
develop SIFT which uses early exiting to obtain
approximate losses with an intermediate layer’s
representations for sample selection. We evaluate
SIFT on the task of training a 110M parameter
12 layer BERT base model, and show significant
gains (in terms of training hours and number of
backpropagation steps) without any optimized implementation over vanilla training. For e.g., to
reach 64% validation accuracy, SIFT with exit at
the first layer takes ∼ 43 hours compared to ∼ 57
hours of vanilla training.

(1)

where the sample/example x is drawn from D. In practice,
the gradient over a single sample is replaced by the average
gradient over a mini-batch of samples; for our theoretical
results, we shall stick to batch-size = 1 (as in Equation (1)).
The choice of the sample x in Equation (1) significantly
impacts the speed of convergence. There is copious work on
selecting “important” samples for speeding up convergence.
In this paradigm, the seminal idea is that of importance
sampling which proposes to sample the examples such that
resulting stochastic gradient is unbiased while having the
minimum possible variance (Zhao & Zhang, 2015; Alain
et al., 2015; Needell et al., 2014). It turns out that the optimal solution is to sample the examples with probability
proportional to their per-sample gradient norms. While this
has a clean theoretical solution, it is completely infeasible
from the practical standpoint because of the high cost of
computing the per-sample gradient norms. To address this
shortcoming, several approximations to this exact solution
have been proposed; we discuss these and related ideas in
Section 2. In this space, one high-level idea is to use the
per-sample loss valueas a proxy to the per-sample gradient
norm, favoring samples with high losses for performing the
update (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2015; Shrivastava et al., 2016;
Katharopoulos & Fleuret, 2017; Kawaguchi & Lu, 2019;
Zhang et al., 2019). We discuss the important works based
on this idea in detail in Section 2. Since exact loss computation is itself expensive especially for large models, some
works rely on approximate loss values for sample selection;
for instance, using an auxiliary model to predict loss values
of the actual model being trained (Katharopoulos & Fleuret,
2017; Zhang et al., 2019). So in summary, several approximations to the core idea of exact importance sampling have
been proposed to make it practically usable.

1. Introduction
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) and its variants are the
algorithms of choice for solving large-scale optimization
problems that arise in training machine learning models.
These are problems of the form minw∈Rd F (w), where
F (.) is the expected population loss and w ∈ Rd is the
vector of model parameters. More specifically, if f (w, .)
is the per-sample loss and D is the data distribution, then
F (w) = Ex∼D [f (w, x)]. The standard SGD update rule

Despite the myriad sample selection approaches, there is a
paucity of theoretical results quantifying how much speedup we can obtain over random sampling and their limitations
– especially for approaches involving the use of approximate
quantities. In this work, we focus on the approach of choosing the sample with the highest loss for performing the
gradient-based update. More specifically, suppose we are
given R > 1 i.i.d. samples drawn from D and their ap-

1

UT Austin 2 Amazon. Correspondence to: Rudrajit Das
<rdas@utexas.edu>, Xi Chen <xichex@amazon.com>, Sujay
Sanghavi <sanghavi@mail.utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

