Prompt-based Visual Alignment for Zero-shot Policy Transfer

Haihan Gao 1 2 Rui Zhang 2 Qi Yi 1 Hantao Yao 3 Haochen Li 4 5 Jiaming Guo 2 Shaohui Peng 4
Yunkai Gao 1 2 QiCheng Wang 2 5 Xing Hu 2 6 Yuanbo Wen 2 Zihao Zhang 2 Zidong Du 2 6 Ling Li 4 5
Qi Guo 2 Yunji Chen 2 5

1. Introduction

Abstract
Overfitting in RL has become one of the main
obstacles to applications in reinforcement learning(RL). Existing methods do not provide explicit semantic constrain for the feature extractor, hindering the agent from learning a unified
cross-domain representation and resulting in performance degradation on unseen domains. Besides, abundant data from multiple domains are
needed. To address these issues, in this work, we
propose prompt-based visual alignment (PVA),
a robust framework to mitigate the detrimental
domain bias in the image for zero-shot policy
transfer. Inspired that Visual-Language Model
(VLM) can serve as a bridge to connect both text
space and image space, we leverage the semantic
information contained in a text sequence as an explicit constraint to train a visual aligner. Thus, the
visual aligner can map images from multiple domains to a unified domain and achieve good generalization performance. To better depict semantic
information, prompt tuning is applied to learn a
sequence of learnable tokens. With explicit constraints of semantic information, PVA can learn
unified cross-domain representation under limited access to cross-domain data and achieves
great zero-shot generalization ability in unseen
domains. We verify PVA on a vision-based autonomous driving task with CARLA simulator.
Experiments show that the agent generalizes well
on unseen domains under limited access to multidomain data.

ClearNoon

HardRainNoon

(a) LUSR

ClearSunset

WetCloudySunset

SoftRainSunset

(b) PVA

Figure 1: Input embedding distributions for the policy before (a) and after (b) domain alignment. Different colors represent different domains, where ClearNoon and HardRainNoon are applied in the training set. (a) Latent features
generated by LUSR demonstrate severe out-of-distribution
phenomena between seen and unseen domains (such as
ClearSunset). (b) our approach mitigates the domain bias
across various domains and well aligns the latent distributions between training and testing domains.
Reinforcement Learning(RL) has enabled remarkable success in many control tasks, such as robot manipulation,
video games, and autonomous driving. However, overfitting
in the training environment has become a prominent problem, where RL agents can not tolerate slight shifts between
train and test domains. Aside from this, interaction with test
environments can be costly. Both challenges make it essential to investigate a strategy to zero-shot transfer a policy
without access to data from test domains.
Many methods have been proposed to transfer a policy under shifts in observations. LUSR(Xing et al., 2021) and
DARLA(Higgins et al., 2017) train a transferable policy via
learning a generalizable representation from different states,
where variation-auto-encoder(Kingma & Welling, 2013) is
applied to map states from different domains into aligned
representations. Image-to-image translation model serves as
a map from one domain to another domain(Gamrian & Goldberg, 2019; Pan et al., 2017). Instead of transforming the
original observation space to another unified space, domain
randomization(Tobin et al., 2017) and data augmentation
technique(Kostrikov et al., 2020; Laskin et al., 2020b) are

1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 SKL of Processors, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS 3 Institute of
Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences 4 Institute of Software,
Chinese Academy of Sciences 5 University of Chinese Academy
of Sciences, China 6 Shanghai Innovation Center for Processor
Technologies. Correspondence to: Yunji Chen <cyj@ict.ac.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

