To Cool or not to Cool?
Temperature Network Meets Large Foundation Models via DRO

Zi-Hao Qiu 1 Siqi Guo 2 Mao Xu 1 Tuo Zhao 3 Lijun Zhang 1 4 Tianbao Yang 2
Table 1. Evaluations on Instrucation Following Capabilities using
AlpacaEval2 . TT stands for training time measured by GPU hours
on A100-80G GPUs. The evaluations of the TempNet-enabled
models were conducted in April, 2024 and the results of other
models are from Alpaca leaderboad in April, 2024. The win rate
measures the fraction of time the model’s output is preferred over
the GPT4_turbo’s outputs. Length controlled (LC) win-rates are a
debiased version of the win-rates that control for the length of the
outputs. More details for our training can be found in Section 6.4.

Abstract
The temperature parameter plays a profound role
during training and/or inference with large foundation models (LFMs) such as large language
models (LLMs) and CLIP models. Particularly,
it adjusts the logits in the softmax function in
LLMs, which is crucial for next token generation,
and it scales the similarities in the contrastive
loss for training CLIP models. A significant
question remains: “Is it viable to learn a neural network to predict a personalized temperature of any input data for enhancing LFMs?" In
this paper, we present a principled framework
for learning a small yet generalizable temperature prediction network (TempNet) to improve
LFMs. Our solution is composed of a novel learning framework with a robust loss underpinned by
constrained distributionally robust optimization
(DRO), and a properly designed TempNet with
theoretical inspiration. TempNet can be trained together with a large foundation model from scratch
or learned separately given a pretrained foundation model. It is not only useful for predicting
personalized temperature to promote the training
of LFMs but also generalizable and transferable
to new tasks. Our experiments on LLMs and
CLIP models demonstrate that TempNet greatly
improves the performance of existing solutions or
models, e.g. Table 1. The code to reproduce the
experimental results in this paper can be found at
https://github.com/zhqiu/TempNet.

Model

TT (h)

LC Win Rate

Win Rate

LLaMA2 7B (leaderboard)
LLaMA2 7B w/ TempNet

¯
1.42

5.35%
5.74%

4.96%
5.43%

LLaMA2 13B (leaderboard)
LLaMA2 13B w/ TempNet

¯
3.68

8.43%
8.58%

7.70%
7.73%

LLaMA2 70B (leaderboard)
LLaMA2 70B w/ TempNet

¯
11.4

14.69%
15.83%

13.89%
15.05%

1

Introduction

Originating from statistical mechanics (Jaynes, 1957), temperature scaling is widely applied in softmax-type functions
for training and/or inference with LFMs such as LLMs and
multi-modal CLIP models1 . In the deployment of LLMs for
generating responses to prompts, a temperature-scaled softmax function models the probability distribution across a
vocabulary of tokens. The CLIP model (Radford et al., 2021)
is trained by optimizing a temperature-scaled contrastive
loss (Oord et al., 2018) on immense scale image-text data,
which has been used in many downstream tasks.
Temperature scaling plays a critical role in softmax-type
functions, as increasing the temperature leads to more uniform probabilities, while decreasing it results in more concentrated probabilities. This has a notable impact in generative tasks using LLMs as varying the temperature parameter
in the softmax function affects the diversity of the generated
texts. For example, creative questions would benefit from
higher temperatures for diverse answers, while factual questions require lower temperatures for more homogeneous
responses avoiding hallucinations (Huang et al., 2023). In
training CLIP models, the temperature parameter in a contrastive loss controls the degree of penalization on negative
pairs, which also has a profound impact on the learned rep-

The work of Z.-H. Qiu was conducted when visiting T. Yang’s
Lab. 1 National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing, China 2 Computer Science and Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, USA 3 Computer
Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta,
USA 4 Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu), Guangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Lijun Zhang <zhanglj@lamda.nju.edu.cn>, Tianbao
Yang <tianbao-yang@tamu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1
2

1

A contrastive loss is also regarded as a softmax-type function.
https://tatsu-lab.github.io/alpaca_eval/

