On The Fairness Impacts of Hardware Selection in Machine Learning

Sree Harsha Nelaturu * 1 2 Nishaanth K Ravichandran * 1 Cuong Tran 3 4 Sara Hooker 5 Ferdinando Fioretto 4

Abstract

ware tooling on these critical aspects of model performance
(Hooker, 2020; Zhuang et al., 2022; Jean-Paul et al., 2019).

In the machine learning ecosystem hardware selection is often regarded as a mere utility, overshadowed by the spotlight on algorithms and
data. This is especially relevant in contexts like
machine learning as-a-service platforms, where
users often lack control over the hardware used
for model training and deployment. This paper
investigates the influence of hardware on the delicate balance between model performance and
fairness. We demonstrate that hardware choices
can exacerbate existing disparities, and attribute
these discrepancies to variations in gradient flows
and loss surfaces across different demographic
groups. Through both theoretical and empirical analysis, the paper not only identifies the underlying factors but also proposes an effective
strategy for mitigating hardware-induced performance imbalances.

This inquiry is especially pertinent as the ML hardware
landscape undergoes substantial diversification, from successive generations of GPUs to custom deep-learning accelerators like TPUs (Jouppi et al., 2017).
This is significant, as ML models are frequently trained on
ML services where there is limited choice in hardware, often geared towards increasingly specialized AI hardware,
encouraging the use of a narrow range of ML frameworks
(Mince et al., 2023). More importantly, recent studies have
indicated that models trained on different hardware can
exhibit varying levels of accuracy (Zhuang et al., 2022).
A potential explanation is that hardware-induced nuances,
such as precision discrepancies and threading behaviours,
may lead iterative optimizers to different local minima during training (Hooker, 2020).
This paper further shows that these hardware-induced variations can disproportionately affect different groups, leading to a “rich get richer, poor get poorer” dynamic. This
effect is depicted in Figure 1, which shows the variable impact of hardware changes on both a facial recognition task
accuracy (left) and on an image classification task (right)
across demographic groups or classes. Note that the only
variable factor in this study is the underlying GPU adopted
for training, while all other sources of software-related randomness are controlled. Remarkably, while the accuracy
rates for majority groups (illustrated with lighter colors) remain relatively stable across different hardware configurations, the rates for minority groups (darker colors) exhibit
considerable variability (left). This disparity also arises in
balanced datasets (right).

1. Introduction
The leap in capabilities of modern machine learning (ML)
models has been powered primarily by the availability of
large-scale datasets, gains in available compute, and the development of algorithms that can effectively use these resources (Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020). As MLbased systems become integral to decision-making processes that bear considerable social and economic consequences, questions about their ethical application inevitably surface. While an active area of research has been
devoted to understanding algorithmic choices and their implications on fairness (Hooker et al., 2020; Quan et al.,
2023; Caton & Haas, 2020) and robustness (Carlini & Wagner, 2017; Waqas et al., 2022) in neural networks, there has
been limited work to date concerning the influence of hard-

Building on these observations, this work leverages a theoretical framework aimed at quantifying hardware-induced
performance disparities and reveals, through an extensive
empirical validations, that hardware choices systematically
alter not just accuracy but also fairness. Our findings suggest that two key mechanisms contribute to these disparities: (1) variations in gradient flows across groups, and
(2) differences in local loss surfaces. Informally, the former affects local optimality for groups, while the latter pertains to model separability. We analyze these contributing
factors in detail, providing both theoretical and extensive

*

1
Equal contribution
Cohere For AI Community
3
Saarland University
Dyania Health 4 University of
Virginia 5 Cohere For AI. Correspondence to:
Sara
Hooker <sarahooker@cohere.com>, Ferdinando Fioretto
<fioretto@virginia.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

