Discovering Mixtures of Structural Causal Models from Time Series Data

Sumanth Varambally 1 Yi-An Ma 1 Rose Yu 2 1

Abstract
Discovering causal relationships from time series
data is significant in fields such as finance, climate
science, and neuroscience. However, contemporary techniques rely on the simplifying assumption that data originates from the same causal
model, while in practice, data is heterogeneous
and can stem from different causal models. In
this work, we relax this assumption and perform
causal discovery from time series data originating
from a mixture of causal models. We propose
a general variational inference-based framework
called MCD to infer the underlying causal models as well as the mixing probability of each sample. Our approach employs an end-to-end training process that maximizes an evidence-lower
bound for the data likelihood. We present two
variants: MCD-Linear for linear relationships and
independent noise, and MCD-Nonlinear for nonlinear causal relationships and history-dependent
noise. We demonstrate that our method surpasses
state-of-the-art benchmarks in causal discovery
tasks through extensive experimentation on synthetic and real-world datasets, particularly when
the data emanates from diverse underlying causal
graphs. Theoretically, we prove the identifiability of such a model under some mild assumptions. Implementation is available at https:
//github.com/Rose-STL-Lab/MCD.

Figure 1. MCD discovers multiple causal graphs from time-series
data by determining the mixture component membership for each
sample and inferring one graph per mixture component.

developed for causal discovery from time-series data based
on structural causal models (SCMs) (Hyvärinen et al., 2010;
Pamfil et al., 2020; Yao et al., 2022; Gong et al., 2022),
conditional independence tests (Malinsky & Spirtes, 2018;
Runge et al., 2019; Runge, 2020), as well as the weaker
notion of Granger causality (Granger, 1969; Khanna & Tan,
2020; Tank et al., 2021).
Unfortunately, the existing methods predominantly assume
that a single causal model applies to the entire data set.
In machine learning tasks, data are often multi-modal and
highly heterogeneous. For example, gene regulatory networks are particular to different cells at different developmental stages. But during experiments for cell lineage, one
can only track the RNA expression levels of different cells
with related but distinct gene regulatory networks, since
every measurement destroys the cell (Qiu et al., 2022). Similarly, stock market interactions can vary over different time
periods. Using a single causal model to explain the data
can result in oversimplification and an inability to capture
diverse causal mechanisms.

1. Introduction
Causal discovery extends and complements the scope of
prediction-focused machine learning with the notions of
controllability and counterfactual reasoning. It aims to infer
the underlying causal structure among observed variables
in the data (Spirtes et al., 2000). Many methods have been

The task of discovering mixtures of causal graphs from
data has received limited attention in the literature. Recent
work, such as Thiesson et al. (1998); Saeed et al. (2020);
Markham et al. (2022), have tackled the challenge of inferring causal models from mixture distributions. However,
these approaches primarily focus on independent data and
do not specifically address time series data. Löwe et al.
(2022) touched upon this problem by inferring a per-sample
summary graph in an amortized framework, but their ap-

1
Halıcıoğlu Data Science Institute, University of California, San
Diego, La Jolla, USA 2 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, USA. Correspondence to: Sumanth Varambally <svarambally@ucsd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

