Caduceus: Bi-Directional Equivariant Long-Range DNA Sequence Modeling

Yair Schiff 1 Chia-Hsiang Kao 1 Aaron Gokaslan 1 Tri Dao 2 Albert Gu 3 Volodymyr Kuleshov 1

Abstract

acids (Rao et al., 2020; Rives et al., 2021), and crafting new
molecules (Madani et al., 2023). As compute cost decreases,
sequence modeling is poised to further impact biology.

Large-scale sequence modeling has sparked rapid
advances that now extend into biology and genomics. However, modeling genomic sequences
introduces challenges such as the need to model
long-range token interactions, the effects of upstream and downstream regions of the genome,
and the reverse complementarity (RC) of DNA.
Here, we propose an architecture motivated by
these challenges that builds off the long-range
Mamba block, and extends it to a BiMamba component that supports bi-directionality, and to a
MambaDNA block that additionally supports RC
equivariance. We use MambaDNA as the basis of Caduceus, the first family of RC equivariant bi-directional long-range DNA language
models, and we introduce pre-training and finetuning strategies that yield Caduceus DNA foundation models. Caduceus outperforms previous
long-range models on downstream benchmarks;
on a challenging long-range variant effect prediction task, Caduceus exceeds the performance
of 10x larger models that do not leverage bidirectionality or equivariance. Code to reproduce
our experiments is available here.

Sequence models are also standard tools in genomics (Zhou
& Troyanskaya, 2015; Avsec et al., 2021). Unlike proteins,
genomes contain non-coding sequences, which often play
an important role in regulating cellular mechanisms, and can
thus potentially provide greater insights into cell biology.
Understanding non-coding sequences has been a key focus
of recent work, including efforts in applying large language
models (LMs) to genomes (Ji et al., 2021; Benegas et al.,
2023b; Dalla-Torre et al., 2023; Nguyen et al., 2023).
However, modeling DNA introduces challenges that are distinct from those posed by natural language or proteins. First,
cellular phenotypes are often impacted by base pairs both
upstream and downstream in the genome, which requires
sequence models to handle bi-directional context. Second,
DNA consists of two strands that are reverse complements
of each other and that carry the same information; modeling
this property can significantly improve performance (Zhou
et al., 2021; Mallet & Vert, 2021). Third, many genomics
tasks, such as predicting the effect of variants on gene expression, can entail long-range interactions, as nucleic acids
even up to 1 million base pairs away from a gene can have
significant regulatory effects (Furlong & Levine, 2018).
In this paper, we propose architectural components motivated by the above challenges. Our modules build off the
long-range Mamba block (Gu & Dao, 2023) and thus naturally handle long sequences of over hundreds of thousands
of nucleotides without the quadratic cost of attention-based
architectures (Vaswani et al., 2017). We extend Mamba to
BiMamba, a component that supports bi-directionality, and
to MambaDNA, which further adds reverse complement
(RC) equivariance. The MambaDNA block can be used as a
drop-in replacement in architectures for genome analysis in
both supervised and self-supervised contexts.

1. Introduction
Large-scale sequence models have sparked rapid progress
in machine learning, bringing about advances that extend
beyond natural language processing (NLP) (Achiam et al.,
2023; Team et al., 2023) into science, biology, and medicine.
In proteomics, these models have enabled predicting protein
structures from sequences (Jumper et al., 2021; Lin et al.,
2023), deciphering the functions and interactions of amino
1

Department of Computer Science, Cornell University, New
York, NY USA 2 Department of Computer Science, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ USA 3 School of Computer Science Carnegie
Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA USA. Correspondence to: Yair
Schiff <yzs2@cornell.edu.>.

We then use MambaDNA as the basis of Caduceus1 , a family of bidirectional long-range DNA sequence models that
is the first to support RC equivariant language modeling.
1

Caduceus ( ) is the staff carried by Hermes in Greek mythology that is adorned by two intertwined serpents. We choose this
name to evoke imagery of the double helix structure of DNA and
to symbolize bi-directionality using a Mamba sequence operator.

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

