A Nearly Optimal Single Loop Algorithm
for Stochastic Bilevel Optimization under Unbounded Smoothness

Xiaochuan Gong 1 Jie Hao 1 Mingrui Liu 1

1. Introduction

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of stochastic
bilevel optimization where the upper-level function is nonconvex with potentially unbounded
smoothness and the lower-level function is
strongly convex. This problem is motivated by
meta-learning applied to sequential data, such as
text classification using recurrent neural networks,
where the smoothness constant of the upper-level
loss function scales linearly with the gradient
norm and can be potentially unbounded. Existing algorithm crucially relies on the nested loop
design, which requires significant tuning efforts
and is not practical. In this paper, we address
this issue by proposing a Single Loop bIlevel oPtimizer (SLIP). The proposed algorithm first updates the lower-level variable by a few steps of
stochastic gradient descent, and then simultaneously updates the upper-level variable by normalized stochastic gradient descent with momentum
and the lower-level variable by stochastic gradient descent. Under standard assumptions, we
show that our algorithm finds an ϵ-stationary point
within e
O(1/ϵ4 )1 oracle calls of stochastic gradient or Hessian-vector product, both in expectation
and with high probability. This complexity result
is nearly optimal up to logarithmic factors without
mean-square smoothness of the stochastic gradient oracle. Our proof relies on (i) a refined characterization and control of the lower-level variable
and (ii) establishing a novel connection between
bilevel optimization and stochastic optimization
under distributional drift. Our experiments on various tasks show that our algorithm significantly
outperforms strong baselines in bilevel optimization. The code is available here.

There has been a surge in interest in bilevel optimization,
driven by its broad applications in machine learning. This
includes meta-learning (Franceschi et al., 2018; Rajeswaran
et al., 2019), hyperparameter optimization (Franceschi et al.,
2018; Feurer & Hutter, 2019), fair model training (Roh
et al., 2020), continual learning (Borsos et al., 2020; Hao
et al., 2023), and reinforcement learning (Konda & Tsitsiklis,
1999). The bilevel optimization has the following form:
min Φ(x) := f (x, y ∗ (x)), s.t., y ∗ (x) ∈ arg min g(x, y),

x∈Rdx

y∈Rdy

(1)
where f and g are upper-level and lower-level functions respectively. For example, in meta-learning (Finn et al., 2017;
Franceschi et al., 2018), the bilevel formulation is trying to
find a common representation such that it can quickly adapt
to different tasks by adjusting its task-specific head, where
x denotes the shared representation across different tasks, y
denotes the task-specific head. We consider the stochastic
optimization setting, where f (x, y) = Eξ∼Df [F (x, y; ξ)]
and g(x, y) = Eζ∼Dg [G(x, y; ζ)], where Df and Dg are
underlying data distributions for f and g respectively.
Most theoretical studies and algorithmic developments on
bilevel optimization typically assume that the upper-level
function is smooth and nonconvex (i.e., the gradient is
Lipschitz), and the lower-level function is strongly convex (Ghadimi & Wang, 2018; Hong et al., 2023; Grazzi
et al., 2022; Ji et al., 2021). However, recent work shows
that there is a class of neural networks whose smoothness
parameter is potentially unbounded (Zhang et al., 2020c;
Crawshaw et al., 2022), such as recurrent neural networks
(RNNs) (Elman, 1990), long-short-term memory networks
(LSTMs) (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) and transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017). Therefore, it is important to
design algorithms when the upper-level function has an unbounded smoothness parameter. Recently, (Hao et al., 2024)
designed an algorithm under this regime and proved its convergence to stationary points. However, the structure of their
algorithm is rather complex: it has a nested double loop to
update the lower-level variable, which requires significant
tuning efforts. It remains unclear how to design a provably
efficient single-loop algorithm under this setting.

1

Department of Computer Science, George Mason University,
USA. Correspondence to: Mingrui Liu <mingruil@gmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
e compresses logarithmic factors of 1/ϵ and 1/δ,
Here O(·)
where δ ∈ (0, 1) denotes the failure probability.

1

