Optimization without Retraction on the Random Generalized Stiefel Manifold

Simon Vary 1 2 Pierre Ablin 3 Bin Gao 4 P.-A. Absil 1

Abstract

formulated as the following optimization problem:
min

f (X) := E[fξ (X)], s. t. B = E[Bζ ],
(1)

StB (p, n) := X ∈ Rn×p | X ⊤ BX = Ip

X∈StB (p,n)

Optimization over the set of matrices X that satisfy X ⊤ BX = Ip , referred to as the generalized
Stiefel manifold, appears in many applications
involving sampled covariance matrices such as
the canonical correlation analysis (CCA), independent component analysis (ICA), and the generalized eigenvalue problem (GEVP). Solving these
problems is typically done by iterative methods
that require a fully formed B. We propose a cheap
stochastic iterative method that solves the optimization problem while having access only to a
random estimates of B. Our method does not enforce the constraint in every iteration; instead, it
produces iterations that converge to critical points
on the generalized Stiefel manifold defined in expectation. The method has lower per-iteration
cost, requires only matrix multiplications, and has
the same convergence rates as its Riemannian optimization counterparts that require the full matrix
B. Experiments demonstrate its effectiveness in
various machine learning applications involving
generalized orthogonality constraints, including
CCA, ICA, and the GEVP.

where the objective function f is the expectation of Lsmooth functions fξ , B ∈ Rn×n is a positive-definite matrix, and ξ, ζ are independent random variables. The individual random matrices Bζ are only assumed to be positive
semidefinite. The feasible set StB (p, n) ⊂ Rn×p defines
a smooth manifold referred to as the generalized Stiefel
manifold.
In the deterministic case, when we have access to the matrix B, the optimization problem can be solved by Riemannian techniques (Absil et al., 2008; Boumal, 2023). Riemannian methods produce a sequence of iterates belonging to
the set StB (p, n), often by repeatedly applying a retraction
that maps tangent vectors to points on the manifold. In
the case of StB (p, n), retractions require non-trivial linear
algebra operations such as eigenvalue or Cholesky decomposition. On the other hand, optimization on StB (p, n) also
lends itself to infeasible optimization methods, such as the
augmented Lagrangian method. Such methods are typically
employed in deterministic setting when the feasible set does
not have a convenient projection, e.g., it lacks a closed-form
expression or it requires solving an expensive optimization
problem (Bertsekas, 1982). Infeasible approaches produce
iterates that do not belong to the feasible set but converge
to it by solving a sequence of unconstrained optimization
problems. However, solving the optimization subproblems
in each iteration might be computationally expensive and
the methods are sensitive to the choice of hyper-parameters,
both in theory and in practice.

1. Introduction
Many problems in machine learning and engineering, including canonical correlation analysis (CCA) (Hotelling, 1936),
independent component analysis (ICA) (Comon, 1994), linear discriminant analysis (McLachlan, 1992), and the generalized eigenvalue problem (GEVP) (Saad, 2011), can be
1
ICTEAM Institute, UCLouvain, Louvain-la-neuve, Belgium 2 Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom 3 Apple Machine Learning Group, Paris,
France 4 Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Simon
Vary <simon.vary@stats.ox.ac.uk>.

In this paper, unlike in the aforementioned areas of study,
we consider the setting (1) where the feasible set itself is
stochastic, i.e., the matrix B is unknown and is an expectation of random estimates Bζ , for which neither Riemannian
methods nor infeasible optimization techniques are wellsuited. In particular, we are interested in the case where we
only have access to i.i.d. samples from ξ and ζ, and not to
the full function f and matrix B.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

We design an iterative landing method requiring only random estimates Bζ that provably converges to critical points
of (1) while performing only matrix multiplications. The
1

