Verification of Machine Unlearning is Fragile

Binchi Zhang 1 Zihan Chen 1 Cong Shen 1 Jundong Li 1

Abstract

poses a threat to user privacy and has resulted in severe data
breaches (Nguyen et al., 2022). Consequently, recent regulations and laws (GDPR, 2016; CCPA, 2018) have mandated
a novel form of request: the elimination of personal data
and its impact from a trained ML model, known as machine
unlearning (Cao & Yang, 2015) (MUL). In recent years, a
proliferation of MUL techniques has emerged, employing
various methods to remove certain training data (Nguyen
et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2023).

As privacy concerns escalate in the realm of machine learning, data owners now have the option
to utilize machine unlearning to remove their
data from machine learning models, following
recent legislation. To enhance transparency in machine unlearning and avoid potential dishonesty
by model providers, various verification strategies
have been proposed. These strategies enable data
owners to ascertain whether their target data has
been effectively unlearned from the model. However, our understanding of the safety issues of
machine unlearning verification remains nascent.
In this paper, we explore the novel research question of whether model providers can circumvent
verification strategies while retaining the information of data supposedly unlearned. Our investigation leads to a pessimistic answer: the verification of machine unlearning is fragile. Specifically, we categorize the current verification strategies regarding potential dishonesty among model
providers into two types. Subsequently, we introduce two novel adversarial unlearning processes
capable of circumventing both types. We validate the efficacy of our methods through theoretical analysis and empirical experiments using
real-world datasets. This study highlights the vulnerabilities and limitations in machine unlearning
verification, paving the way for further research
into the safety of machine unlearning.

Despite the success achieved, current MUL techniques are
still a black box for data owners, i.e., data owners cannot
monitor the unlearning process and ascertain whether their
data has been truly unlearned from the model (Eisenhofer
et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2023). For instance, many technology
companies, e.g., Google and Microsoft, provide machine
learning as a service (MLaaS). Under MLaaS, individual
data owners upload personal data to the server. The server
then trains an ML model using the collected dataset and
provides its predictive functionality as a service to the data
owners (Sommer et al., 2022). In particular, data owners
might want their data to be unlearned as long as this service
is no longer required. However, after sending an unlearning
request, data owners will not receive any proof that their
data was indeed unlearned. Without the ability to verify,
data owners have to trust the model provider blindly for
the efficacy and integrity of the unlearning process. On the
other hand, the model provider might deceive data owners
and pretend to have their data unlearned to avoid potential
deterioration of the model utility and extra computational
cost caused by unlearning (Eisenhofer et al., 2022). Other
than MLaaS, similar problems also exist in other domains
involving personal data, e.g., social media and financial systems. To address the above issue, recent studies have started
exploring the verification strategy for MUL techniques from
different aspects, e.g., injecting backdoor data into the training set or reproducing the unlearning operations. Regarding
the model provider’s potential dishonesty, a natural question
arises: are current MUL verification strategies ensured to be
safe? Specifically, we aim to study the following research
question:

1. Introduction
In the deep learning era, machine learning (ML) has grown
increasingly data-dependent. A significant volume of personal data has been utilized to train real-world ML systems. While the plentiful use of personal data has facilitated
the advancement of machine learning, it simultaneously
1
University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA. Correspondence to: Jundong Li <jundong@virginia.edu>.

Can model providers successfully circumvent current
verification strategies with dishonest unlearning?

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

To answer this question, we systematically investigate the
1

