I NFER C EPT: Efficient Intercept Support for
Augmented Large Language Model Inference

Reyna Abhyankar * 1 Zijian He * 1 Vikranth Srivatsa 1 Hao Zhang 1 Yiying Zhang 1

Abstract
Large language models are increasingly integrated with external environments, tools, and
agents like ChatGPT plugins to extend their capability beyond language-centric tasks. However, today’s LLM inference systems are designed for standalone LLMs. They treat each
external interaction as the end of LLM generation and form a new request when the interaction
finishes, causing unnecessary recomputation of
already computed contexts, which accounts for
37-40% of total model forwarding time. This
paper presents I NFER C EPT, the first LLM inference framework targeting augmented LLMs
and supporting the efficient interception of LLM
generation. I NFER C EPT minimizes the GPU resource waste caused by LLM interceptions and
dedicates saved memory for serving more requests. I NFER C EPT improves the overall serving
throughput by 1.6×-2× and completes 2× more
requests per second compared to the state-of-theart LLM inference systems.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) (Achiam et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023) have shown immense potential in various applications, such as natural language understanding
and content generation. Nonetheless, LLMs alone can only
generate text. To extend LLMs’ capabilities to handle more
diverse and open-ended tasks, a recent trend is to augment
LLMs with external tools (Mialon et al., 2023; Wang et al.,
2023; Qin et al., 2023) such as arithmetic calculation (Hao
et al., 2023) and ChatGPT plugins (OpenAI, 2023), nonLLM models like image generation (Betker et al., 2024),
*
Equal contribution 1 University of California, San Diego,
La Jolla, United States. Correspondence to: Reyna Abhyankar
<vabhyank@ucsd.edu>, Zijian He <zih015@ucsd.edu>, Yiying Zhang <yiying@ucsd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

and interaction with humans and other environments in
real-time, such as virtual environments (Shridhar et al.,
2021). Notably, Ng poses that “AI agent workflows will
drive massive AI progress in 2024” (Ng, 2024). More generally, we can view the use of tools and the interaction
with humans or other environments all as LLMs being augmented and intercepted by external entities.
Augmentations have unique properties that bring new problems to LLM inference systems. First, they intercept regular LLM decoding, i.e., when an external tool is called or
when waiting for human/environment responses, the normal decoding phase is paused and can only resume when
the interception finishes. Second, an interception’s time
varies drastically across augmentation types and requests.
For example, a calculator API finishes in less than 1 ms,
yet it may take humans more than 1 minute to digest and
type a subsequent chat prompt. This complicates request
scheduling. Third, unlike regular requests, the context (i.e.,
KV caches) cannot be used for a paused request during interceptions but will be needed upon the end of interceptions. It is unclear how to handle temporarily unused context. Adding to the complexity is the high variation in context length and interception time across requests.
Unfortunately, existing LLM inference systems (Kwon
et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023; Aminabadi
et al., 2022; NVIDIA, 2023; Agrawal et al., 2023) fall short
in serving augmented LLMs with interceptions. They typically interpret an interception as a termination signal –
they conclude the ongoing request when the interception
happens, discard its context, relegate the task to the augmenting entity, and subsequently re-initiate a new request
upon receiving the response from the entity. Consequently,
when a request frequently triggers interceptions, for each
interception, the initial prompt and all tokens generated before the interception are formed as a new request submitted
to the inference system, causing substantial recomputation
of keys and values (known as the KV cache) for all previously processed tokens. This recomputation wastes GPU
resources, which could instead serve new requests.
In contrast to the aforementioned interception handling approach (which we refer to as Discard), an alternative approach is to preserve a request’s context during the inter-

