MS3 D: A RG Flow-Based Regularization for GAN Training with Limited Data

Jian Wang 1 Xin Lan 1 Yuxin Tian 1 Jiancheng Lv 1
Training step: 1.2M, DΓ = 0.0825

Abstract
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) have
made impressive advances in image generation,
but they often require large-scale training data to
avoid degradation caused by discriminator overfitting. To tackle this issue, we investigate the challenge of training GANs with limited data, and propose a novel regularization method based on the
idea of renormalization group (RG) in physics.We
observe that in the limited data setting, the gradient pattern that the generator obtains from the
discriminator becomes more aggregated over time.
In RG context, this aggregated pattern exhibits a
high discrepancy from its coarse-grained versions,
which implies a high-capacity and sensitive system, prone to overfitting and collapse. To address
this problem, we introduce a multi-scale structural
self-dissimilarity (MS3 D) regularization, which
constrains the gradient field to have a consistent
pattern across different scales, thereby fostering
a more redundant and robust system. We show
that our method can effectively enhance the performance and stability of GANs under limited
data scenarios, and even allow them to generate
high-quality images with very few data.

Training step: 5M, DΓ = 0.0872

(a) RG flow: fine-grained → coarse-grained.
DΓ =0.0713

0.0658

0.0632

0.0623

0.0567

(b) Snapshots of food coloring diffusion in hot water over time.
Figure 1. Illustrative examples of renormalization group (RG) flow.
The aggregated pattern exhibits high multi-scale structural selfdissimilarity (MS3 D), denoted by DΓ .

Data augmentation, a standard solution to prevent overfitting in deep learning (Shorten & Khoshgoftaar, 2019), has
been widely applied to GAN training in limited data scenarios. Traditional (Zhao et al., 2020b; Tran et al., 2021) and
differentiable (Zhao et al., 2020a) data augmentation techniques for both real and generated images, as well as various
adaptive augmentation strategies (Karras et al., 2020a), have
shown good performance on several standard benchmarks.
However, the effectiveness of data augmentation heavily
depends on specific handcrafted types or a costly search process, which limits its generality (Zhao et al., 2020b; Karras
et al., 2020a). Additionally, data augmentation addresses
data deficiency by enhancing the quantity and diversity of
samples without providing a deeper understanding of the
internal dynamics of GANs.

1. Introduction
The challenge of training GANs with limited data has garnered increasing attention within the research community.
Numerous studies (Zhao et al., 2020a; Karras et al., 2020a;
Jiang et al., 2021; Tseng et al., 2021; Fang et al., 2022; Cui
et al., 2023) have reached a consensus: insufficient data often leads to overfitting in the discriminator. This overfitting
results in a lack of meaningful dynamic guidance for the
generator, ultimately causing its performance to degrade.

In this paper, we address the problem of GAN deterioration
from a novel perspective and introduce a model regularization method. Unlike most existing regularization techniques (Tseng et al., 2021; Cui et al., 2022; 2023) that focus
on improving the discriminator’s generalization across different data distributions to avoid overfitting, our approach
explores the intrinsic properties of neural networks to uncover potential clues. Specifically, we observe that in settings with limited data, the gradients provided by the discriminator, i.e., ∇x f (x; ϕ), gradually exhibit an aggregation pattern. This pattern indicates that the discriminator
concentrates its attention on a small portion of the input

1
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University and Engineering Research Center of Machine Learning and Industry Intelligence, Ministry of Education, Chengdu 610065, P.R. China.
Correspondence to: Jiancheng Lv <lvjiancheng@scu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

