Confronting Reward Overoptimization for Diffusion Models:
A Perspective of Inductive and Primacy Biases

Ziyi Zhang 1 2 Sen Zhang 3 Yibing Zhan 4 Yong Luo 1 2 Yonggang Wen 5 Dacheng Tao 5
𝒙𝒙𝑻𝑻

Abstract
Bridging the gap between diffusion models and
human preferences is crucial for their integration
into practical generative workflows. While optimizing downstream reward models has emerged
as a promising alignment strategy, concerns arise
regarding the risk of excessive optimization with
learned reward models, which potentially compromises ground-truth performance. In this work, we
confront the reward overoptimization problem in
diffusion model alignment through the lenses of
both inductive and primacy biases. We first identify a mismatch between current methods and the
temporal inductive bias inherent in the multi-step
denoising process of diffusion models, as a potential source of reward overoptimization. Then,
we surprisingly discover that dormant neurons in
our critic model act as a regularization against
reward overoptimization while active neurons reflect primacy bias. Motivated by these observations, we propose Temporal Diffusion Policy Optimization with critic active neuron Reset (TDPOR), a policy gradient algorithm that exploits the
temporal inductive bias of diffusion models and
mitigates the primacy bias stemming from active
neurons. Empirical results demonstrate the superior efficacy of our methods in mitigating reward
overoptimization. Code is avaliable at https:
//github.com/ZiyiZhang27/tdpo.

𝜽𝜽𝒐𝒐𝒐𝒐𝒐𝒐

𝒙𝒙𝑻𝑻−𝟏𝟏

···

𝒙𝒙𝒕𝒕

···

𝜽𝜽𝒐𝒐𝒐𝒐𝒐𝒐

𝒙𝒙𝒕𝒕−𝟏𝟏

···

𝒙𝒙𝟎𝟎

Reward Model
𝑹𝑹(𝒙𝒙𝟎𝟎 )

𝑹𝑹

(a) Sampling

···

epoch
(b) Training
Temporal Critic ( 𝝓𝝓 )
Update
𝜽𝜽, 𝝓𝝓

··· Update
𝜽𝜽, 𝝓𝝓

Reset
active

Update
timestep 𝜽𝜽, 𝝓𝝓

··· Update if epoch mod 𝑭𝑭 = 0 neurons
𝜽𝜽, 𝝓𝝓

TDPO-R

of 𝝓𝝓

Figure 1. TDPO-R first samples trajectories (xT , xT −1 , ..., x0 )
from the denoising process of a fixed diffusion model parameterized by θold for each epoch. At each timestep t, it performs a
one-step denoising using the current diffusion model parameterized by θ, estimates a temporal reward Tϕ (xt ) using a temporal
critic parameterized by ϕ, and updates the gradients for both θ and
ϕ according to the corresponding objective functions. Additionally,
TDPO-R resets active neurons of ϕ at the end of every F epochs.

particularly excelling in text-to-image generation (Rombach
et al., 2022). Traditional training methodologies for diffusion models predominantly adhere to a maximum likelihood
objective. However, such approaches may not inherently prioritize the optimization of downstream objectives, such as
image aesthetic quality (Schuhmann et al., 2022) or human
preferences (Xu et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023a). To align
pre-trained diffusion models with downstream objectives,
researchers have explored using learned or handcrafted reward functions to finetune these models. Typical solutions
along this research direction can be categorized into supervised learning (Lee et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023b; Dong
et al., 2023), reinforcement learning (RL) (Fan et al., 2023;
Black et al., 2024), and backpropagation through sampling
(Clark et al., 2024; Prabhudesai et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
Diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015) represent the
state-of-the-art in generative modeling for continuous data,

Despite the promise of reward-driven approaches, reward overoptimization remains a fundamental and underresearched challenge. This phenomenon, characterized by
overfitting learned or handcrafted reward models, stems
from the inherent limitations of these models in capturing
the full spectrum of human intent. In image generation,
reward overoptimization typically manifests as fidelity deterioration or continual degradation in cross-reward generalization against out-of-domain reward functions. Addi-

1

Institute of Artificial Intelligence, School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, China 2 Hubei Luojia Laboratory, Wuhan,
China 3 The University of Sydney, Australia 4 JD Explore Academy,
Beijing, China 5 Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
Correspondence to: Yong Luo <luoyong@whu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

