Guiding LLMs The Right Way: Fast, Non-Invasive Constrained Generation

Luca Beurer-Kellner 1 Marc Fischer 1 Martin Vechev 1
Prompt: A person encoded as JSON object:

Abstract

Unconstrained Decoding:

To ensure that text generated by large language
models (LLMs) is in an expected format, constrained decoding proposes to enforce strict formal language constraints during generation. However, as we show in this work, not only do such
methods incur performance overhead during generation, but many of them also significantly impair
task accuracy, if they do not correctly align the
underlying LLM sub-word vocabularies with external constraints. To address this, we present a
novel decoding algorithm, DOMINO, that can enforce constraints in a fully subword-aligned fashion, while leveraging pre-computation and speculative decoding to achieve virtually no overhead
and in some cases even almost 2× speedup over
unconstrained decoding – thereby outperforming
existing approaches by a wide margin. We release
DOMINO as open source on GitHub.

{ \n ↓
··· ·" name ": ·" John ·Do e ", \n
··· ·" age ": · 3 2 , \n
··· ·" gender ": ·" male ", . . .

Valid Tokens in Greedily Constrained JSON:
[·\n\t] (whitespace) " (quote) } (closing brace)
Greedy Constraining induces sub-optimal tokenization:
{ \n ↓
··· \t " name " \t : \t " John ·Do e " \n
\t , \t " age " \t : \t 3 5 \n
\t , \t " ·occupation " \t : \t " So ftware . . .

Figure 1. Greedy (overly-invasive) constraining of LLMs can distort tokenization, leading to different output than with unconstrained decoding, even in the case where unconstrained generation
would produce valid output for the same prompt. Gray boxes represent vocabulary tokens, orange hue is proportional to perplexity.

et al.). Constrained decoding provides numerous upsides.
For instance, it guarantees that generated output will always
adhere to the specified syntactic constraints, and reduces
the need for ad-hoc parsing, retrying and prompting on
top of LLMs. This facilitates the use of LLMs as part of
larger pipelines or very specific tasks, without the need for
fine-tuning or additional post-processing.

1. Introduction
The recent success of Large Language Models (LLMs)
(Brown et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021; OpenAI, 2023; Touvron et al., 2023a;b; Anil et al., 2023; Jiang et al., 2024) has
lead to the development of various methods that facilitate
constrained generation, a method that lets users tailor the
output of an LLM to a specific task or format.

Key Challenge: Token Misalignment Since LLM subword token do not align directly with most given syntactic
constraints, the key challenge in constrained decoding is to
interface the LLM vocabulary with a syntactic constraint
like all output should be valid JSON. We showcase this in
Fig. 1: While in an unconstrained setting, the LLM picks
·" as the fourth token during generation, naively restricting
the LLM to only immediatly valid JSON grammar terminals like just " or · , leads to the less optimal choice of \t
instead. By introducing such sub-optimal tokens, the distribution of a badly-constrained LLM can easily diverge from
the unconstrained case, leading to a significant decrease in
reasoning performance and therefore downstream accuracy.
Here, the naively constrained LLM produces various high
perplexity tokens, indicating that the model likely would not
have chosen them otherwise (highlighted in Fig. 1). This

Constrained Decoding To ensure that text generated by
an LLM adheres to syntactic constraints, these methods
restrict the decoding procedure of an LLM in a way that
only permits syntactically valid tokens at each sampling step.
Doing so, the generated text can be ensured to adhere to
constraints like high-level templates (Beurer-Kellner et al.,
2023; Lundberg et al.), regular expressions (Beurer-Kellner
et al., 2023; Lundberg et al.; Willard & Louf, 2023) or
context-free grammars (Willard & Louf, 2023; Lundberg
1

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Luca Beurer-Kellner <luca.beurerkellner@inf.ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

