Value-Evolutionary-Based Reinforcement Learning

Pengyi Li 1 Jianye Hao 1 Hongyao Tang 1 Yan Zheng 1 Fazl Barez 2 3 4

Abstract

ever, DRL has limitations, including poor exploration capability (Hao et al., 2023b; Liu et al., 2024b), convergence,
and susceptibility to suboptimal policies (Khadka & Tumer,
2018; Li et al., 2024). Moreover, it is highly reliant on the accuracy of the reward signal, low-quality rewards (e.g. sparse,
noisy, or deceptive) can drastically reduce performance (Li
et al., 2022). Evolutionary Algorithms (EAs) (Bäck &
Schwefel, 1993) can be used as an alternative to RL (Such
et al., 2017; Salimans et al., 2017) for gradient-free optimization. In contrast to RL, EAs maintain a population
instead of a single individual and introduce perturbations
to the individuals to produce offspring for better solutions.
EAs have shown to be more efficient for exploration, convergence, and robustness compared to RL (Li et al., 2024).
Despite these advantages, EAs suffer from low sample efficiency, often requiring several orders of magnitude more
samples than RL (Sigaud, 2022; Li et al., 2024).

Combining Evolutionary Algorithms (EAs) and
Reinforcement Learning (RL) for policy search
has been proven to improve RL performance.
However, previous works largely overlook valuebased RL in favor of merging EAs with
policy-based RL. This paper introduces ValueEvolutionary-Based Reinforcement Learning
(VEB-RL) that focuses on the integration of EAs
with value-based RL. The framework maintains a
population of value functions instead of policies
and leverages negative Temporal Difference error
as the fitness metric for evolution. The metric is
more sample-efficient for population evaluation
than cumulative rewards and is closely associated
with the accuracy of the value function approximation. Additionally, VEB-RL enables elites of
the population to interact with the environment to
offer high-quality samples for RL optimization,
whereas the RL value function participates in the
population’s evolution in each generation. Experiments on MinAtar and Atari demonstrate the
superiority of VEB-RL in significantly improving
DQN, Rainbow, and SPR. Our code is available
on https://github.com/yeshenpy/VEB-RL.

Many methods are proposed to combine EAs and RL to
leverage their complementary strengths for more efficient
policy search (Sigaud, 2022; Li et al., 2024). ERL (Khadka
& Tumer, 2018) combines Genetic Algorithm (GA) (Katoch
et al., 2021) with DDPG (Lillicrap et al., 2016). In ERL, EA
and RL are concurrently optimized. EA provides samples
generated during the population evaluation process to RL
for optimization, aiming to enhance sample efficiency. In
turn, RL injects the optimized RL policy into the population to participate in the evolutionary process. ERL defines
the fitness of policies in the population as the averaged cumulative reward for several episodes of interaction with
the environment, which subsequently became a commonly
adopted fitness metric for ERL-related works (Pourchot &
Sigaud, 2019; Bodnar et al., 2020; Marchesini et al., 2020;
Hao et al., 2023a). Despite the success of ERL and its extensions, previous methods for combining EAs with RL mainly
focus on policy-based RL, which employs policies to build
the population and ranks individuals based on cumulative
rewards obtained from interactions with the environment (Li
et al., 2024). However, the value-based RL and its properties
are often overlooked in the ERL field.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 1998) has
witnessed growing success in various practical tasks such
as game AI (Vinyals et al., 2019), robot control (Johannink
et al., 2019), and automatic driving (Zhou et al., 2010; Li
et al., 2015). The combination of RL and deep neural networks, known as Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL), has
been instrumental in achieving impressive results. Thanks
to the strong approximation capability of neural networks,
DRL can efficiently learn using gradient information. How1
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University,
China 2 Edinburgh Centre for Robotics 3 University of Oxford
4
Centre for the Study of Existential Risk, University of Cambridge
. Correspondence to: Jianye Hao <jianye.hao@tju.edu.cn>.

Applying existing frameworks to value-based RL faces two
problems: (i) Value-based algorithms optimize the value
function. It is feasible to directly view value functions as
policies for evolution through the cumulative rewards, but
this ignores the principle of value iteration (Sutton & Barto,

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

