Variance-Reduced Zeroth-Order Methods for Fine-Tuning Language Models

Tanmay Gautam* 1 Youngsuk Park† 2 Hao Zhou 3 Parameswaran Raman 2 Wooseok Ha 3

Abstract

natural language processing (NLP) (Solaiman et al., 2019;
OpenAI, 2023; Touvron et al., 2023).This development has
generated immense excitement within the research community and has propelled the advancement of the aforementioned models to the forefront of deep learning research.

Fine-tuning language models (LMs) has demonstrated success in a wide array of downstream
tasks. However, as LMs are scaled up, the memory requirements for backpropagation become
prohibitively high. Zeroth-order (ZO) optimization methods can leverage memory-efficient forward passes to estimate gradients. Recently,
MeZO, an adaptation of ZO-SGD, has been
shown to consistently outperform zero-shot and
in-context learning when combined with suitable
task prompts. In this work, we couple ZO methods with variance reduction techniques to enhance
stability and convergence for inference-based
LM fine-tuning. We introduce Memory-Efficient
Zeroth-Order Stochastic Variance-Reduced Gradient (MeZO-SVRG) and demonstrate its efficacy
across multiple LM fine-tuning tasks, eliminating
the reliance on task-specific prompts. Evaluated
across a range of both masked and autoregressive
LMs (up to 7B parameters) on benchmark downstream tasks, MeZO-SVRG outperforms MeZO
with up to 20% increase in test accuracies in both
full- and partial-parameter fine-tuning settings.
MeZO-SVRG benefits from reduced computation
time, often surpassing MeZO’s peak test accuracy
with a 2× reduction in GPU-hours. MeZO-SVRG
substantially decreases the memory requirement
(by at least 2× for autoregressive models), achieving greater memory savings as both the batch size
and context lengths increase, in comparison to
first-order methods.

Fine-tuning LMs has been the dominant strategy for adapting pre-trained models to specialized downstream tasks (Gururangan et al., 2020). Fine-tuning often relies on first-order
methods, such as stochastic gradient descent (SGD) (Robbins & Monro, 1951) or Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015). However, as LMs are scaled up, backpropagation (Rumelhart
et al., 1986) becomes prohibitive in terms of memory requirements. More concretely, Malladi et al. (2023) show
that fine-tuning an OPT-13B model with full-parameter or
parameter efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) using Adam requires
12× and 6× more memory than inference, respectively.
This is due to the need to cache activations during the forward pass as well as gradients and optimizer states during
the backward pass. This has given rise to memory-efficient
inference-based adaptation methods, including in-context
learning (ICL) and zeroth-order (ZO) optimization.
While ZO methods have been studied for decades (Spall,
1992; Ghadimi & Lan, 2013), it is only recently that these
have been applied to fine-tune LMs (Malladi et al., 2023). In
Malladi et al. (2023), authors propose the Memory-Efficient
Zeroth-Order Optimizer (MeZO) and demonstrate its superior performance against ICL with a memory footprint
equivalent to that of inference. By virtue of estimating gradients through loss computations, ZO methods are compatible
with settings where gradients are non-accessible or infeasible to compute, e.g. when considering non-differentiable
objectives or black-box access of LMs.

1. Introduction

However, ZO methods still face challenges in large-scale
settings. According to Malladi et al. (2023), MeZO requires
a high number of iterations to achieve a good fine-tuning
performance and works only in settings where the optimization trajectory is sufficiently well-behaved, i.e. when finetuning is coupled with appropriately crafted task prompts.
As such, we revisit ZO optimization under the standard
(non-prompted) fine-tuning setting. Through empirical stud-

In recent years, language models (LMs) have exhibited exceptional performance in a vast array of domains within
1
University of California, Berkeley, USA 2 Amazon AI Research & Education, Santa Clara, USA 3 Amazon AI Labs,
Santa Clara, USA. Correspondence to: Youngsuk Park† <pyoungsu@amazon.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

*

1

Work conducted during an internship at Amazon.

