Convex Relaxations of ReLU Neural Networks Approximate Global Optima in
Polynomial Time

Sungyoon Kim 1 Mert Pilanci 1

Abstract
In this paper, we study the optimality gap between two-layer ReLU networks regularized with
weight decay and their convex relaxations. We
show that when the training data is random, the
relative optimality gap between the original problem and
√ its relaxation can be bounded by a factor
of O( log n), where n is the number of training
samples. A simple application leads to a tractable
polynomial-time algorithm that is guaranteed to
solve the original non-convex problem up to a
logarithmic factor. Moreover, under mild assumptions, we show that local gradient methods converge to a point with low training loss with high
probability. Our result is an exponential improvement compared to existing results and sheds new
light on understanding why local gradient methods work well.

Figure 1. Convex relaxations of different widths. Here, we show
the optimal value of the relaxed problem for different numbers of
subsampled hyperplane arrangement patterns and regularization.
Note that n = 300, d = 10, hence there are ≈ 3010 variables in
the convex reformulation. However, using ≈ 30 neurons in the
relaxed problem optimizes the objective well.

1. Introduction
After the tremendous success of deep learning (LeCun et al.,
2015), data-driven approaches have become a prominent
trend in various areas of computer science. Perhaps a surprising fact is that despite the highly non-convex landscape
of deep learning models (Li et al., 2018), local gradient
methods such as stochastic gradient descent (SGD) (Bottou,
2010) or ADAM (Kingma & Ba, 2014) find nearly-global
minimizers of the network extremely well. This mystery has
gained wide attention in the learning theory community, and
many have worked on the problem of proving convergence
results of local methods under certain assumptions such
as the infinite-width limit (Jacot et al., 2018), heavy overparametrization (Du et al., 2019), (Arora et al., 2019),(Zou
et al., 2020), (Zou et al., 2018), and milder width assumptions (Ji & Telgarsky, 2019).

In contrast to the empirical success of local gradient methods, training a simple two-layer neural network with ReLU
activation is proven to be NP-Hard (Boob et al., 2022). The
sharp contrast between existing works on trainability guarantees and hardness results occurs as an increase in the
width m, though it may seem to make the problem harder,
actually makes it easier. Hence, it is a natural interest to
understand the critical width m∗ that guarantees polynomial
time algorithms where m ≥ m∗ , and the corresponding
algorithm.
Recently, it was shown that two-layer and deeper ReLU networks have exact convex reformulations (Pilanci & Ergen,
2020; Wang et al., 2022). However, the number of variables
in these convex problems can be exponentially large. For
a critical width m∗ ≤ n + 1, when m ≥ m∗ , we have
an algorithm that exactly solves the non-convex problem
with complexity polynomial in n (the number of data) and
exponential in r (the rank of the dataset). Such an algorithm
is given by considering the convex reformulation of the
original problem which has approximately (n/r)r variables
and solving the reformulated problem with standard interior-

1

Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University,
California, United States. Correspondence to: Sungyoon Kim
<sykim777@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

