Fair Classification with Partial Feedback:
An Exploration-Based Data Collection Approach

Vijay Keswani * 1 Anay Mehrotra * 2 L. Elisa Celis 2

Abstract

Of specific interest is the challenge of learning an accurate
classifier in the partial feedback setting where ground truth
labels are only observed for positively classified samples.
For instance, a bank observes whether an individual repays
a loan only after granting them a loan or a doctor only
observes the effect of a health intervention only if it is used.

In many predictive contexts (e.g., credit lending),
true outcomes are only observed for samples that
were positively classified in the past. These past
observations, in turn, form training datasets for
classifiers that make future predictions. However,
such training datasets lack information about the
outcomes of samples that were (incorrectly) negatively classified in the past and can lead to erroneous classifiers. We present an approach that
trains a classifier using available data and comes
with a family of exploration strategies to collect
outcome data about subpopulations that otherwise
would have been ignored. For any exploration
strategy, the approach comes with guarantees that
(1) all sub-populations are explored, (2) the fraction of false positives is bounded, and (3) the
trained classifier converges to a “desired” classifier. The right exploration strategy is contextdependent; it can be chosen to improve learning
guarantees and encode context-specific group fairness properties. Evaluation on real-world datasets
shows that this approach consistently boosts the
quality of collected outcome data and improves
the fraction of true positives for all groups, with
only a small reduction in predictive utility.

Classification models are trained using prior outcome labeled data, often under the assumption that future samples
follow the same distribution as the training data. However,
in partial feedback settings, the unavailability of outcomes
for unobserved samples can distort the data distribution. For
example, suppose at year j, a set of applicants Sj apply for
a loan. A classifier (trained on past data) assesses the default
risk of all applicants and accepts the applications Lj ⊂ Sj
and rejects Uj := Sj \ Lj . Following these decisions, the
true default outcomes are only observed for Lj , which is
then added to training data to learn future classifiers. However, since Lj can have a different distribution than Sj , the
training data composed of {Lj }j∈1,2,... can misrepresent
the population distribution and train erroneous classifiers.
Classification errors due to partial feedback are indeed quite
prevalent in practice, e.g., in lending (Pacchiano et al., 2021),
assessing bail decisions (Lakkaraju et al., 2017; Kleinberg
et al., 2018), and predictive policing (Ensign et al., 2018).
Issues arising from partial feedback are further compounded
when decision-making processes are biased and display disparate performance across protected attributes (e.g., gender
or race) (Mehrabi et al., 2021). Biases affect many applications where ML algorithms are currently employed, e.g. bail
decisions (Arnold et al., 2018), loan applications (Martinez
and Kirchner, 2021), and policing (Brantingham, 2017).
The impact of social biases can be significant in the partial
feedback setting: Revisiting the lending example, suppose a
classifier f is used to predict the default risk for applicants
Sj . Further, suppose that f assigns disparately higher default risk to individuals from group z1 compared to group z2 .
As a result, a relatively larger fraction of individuals from z2
will be assigned a loan, and since we only observe default
outcomes for positively classified samples, we will have
more information about the risk associated with individuals
from z2 than z1 . Future classifiers trained using this labeled
data will propagate, or even exacerbate, biases against z1 .

1. Introduction
Machine Learning (ML) classifiers are increasingly being
used to aid decision-making in high-stake contexts such as
credit lending, healthcare, and criminal justice. However,
their real-world deployment still faces several practical challenges, including selective availability of ground truth labels,
errors in collected data, and distribution shifts (Kleinberg
et al., 2018; Barocas et al., 2023; Sambasivan et al., 2021).
*

Equal contribution 1 Duke University 2 Yale University. Correspondence to: Vijay Keswani <vijay.keswani@duke.edu>, Anay
Mehrotra <anaymehrotra1@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

