Latent Noise Segmentation: How Neural Noise Leads to the Emergence of
Segmentation and Grouping

Ben Lonnqvist * 1 Zhengqing Wu * 1 Michael H. Herzog 1

Abstract

context, even when they deviate from stored templates
(Geirhos et al., 2019; Herzog et al., 2015; Holcombe & Cavanagh, 2001). For example, the black and white stripes
of a zebra are perceptually grouped together despite their
vastly different colors. Historically, perceptual grouping in
humans has been studied by the Gestaltists, who view the
Gestalt principles of grouping (such as grouping by proximity and continuity) as crucial computational principles.
This human capability to perform perceptual grouping is
in stark contrast to object recognition in Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), which have been shown to struggle with
both robustness (Geirhos et al., 2018; Madry et al., 2018;
Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2016) and grouping (Bowers et al.,
2022; Linsley et al., 2018; Doerig et al., 2020; Biscione &
Bowers, 2023). Understanding the underlying mechanisms
of perceptual grouping is critical for better modeling of human vision, and a more fundamental understanding of segmentation in general.

Humans are able to segment images effortlessly
without supervision using perceptual grouping.
Here, we propose a counter-intuitive computational approach to solving unsupervised perceptual grouping and segmentation: that they arise
because of neural noise, rather than in spite of
it. We (1) mathematically demonstrate that under
realistic assumptions, neural noise can be used to
separate objects from each other; (2) that adding
noise in a DNN enables the network to segment
images even though it was never trained on any
segmentation labels; and (3) that segmenting objects using noise results in segmentation performance that aligns with the perceptual grouping
phenomena observed in humans, and is sampleefficient. We introduce the Good Gestalt (GG)
datasets — six datasets designed to specifically
test perceptual grouping, and show that our DNN
models reproduce many important phenomena in
human perception, such as illusory contours, closure, continuity, proximity, and occlusion. Finally, we (4) show that our model improves performance on our GG datasets compared to other
tested unsupervised models by 24.9%. Together,
our results suggest a novel unsupervised segmentation method requiring few assumptions, a
new explanation for the formation of perceptual
grouping, and a novel potential benefit of neural
noise.

While incorporating explicit or implicit segmentation and
grouping mechanisms in DNNs has seen substantial rise in
interest in recent years (Greff et al., 2020; Hinton, 2023;
Linsley et al., 2018; Sabour et al., 2017), mainstream instance segmentation approaches often either train models
directly to segment using labeled samples (Ronneberger
et al., 2015; Long et al., 2015; Kirillov et al., 2023), or
inject a substantial number of biases into the model architecture (Hamilton et al., 2022; Engelcke et al., 2022; 2020a;
Wang et al., 2022). The current prevailing approach is the
implementation of object slots in the model architecture
(Locatello et al., 2020), which maintains information about
object instances in a separately maintained vector. Slotbased approaches are conceptually limited by the fact that
the number of slots is fixed in the model architecture and
cannot be adapted by learning, nor on an image-by-image
basis. An approach that attempts to remedy the problems
above was proposed by Löwe et al. (2022), who suggest a
neuroscience-inspired solution to object learning: the object identities are stored in phase values of complex variables, which mimics the temporal synchrony hypothesis of
brain function (Milner, 1974). While the approach can handle a variable number of objects, it is limited in the maximum number of objects it can represent (but see Stanić
et al. (2023)). To date, there is no unified and simple princi-

1. Introduction and Related Work
Humans perceptually group object parts in scenes (Wagemans et al., 2012a;b; Jäkel et al., 2016; Roelfsema, 2006),
which allows them to interpret and segment elements in
*

1
Equal contribution
École Polytechnique Fédérale de
Lausanne (EPFL). Correspondence to:
Ben Lonnqvist
<ben.lonnqvist@epfl.ch>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

