Efficient Value Iteration for s-rectangular Robust Markov Decision Processes

Navdeep Kumar 1 Kaixin Wang 1 Kfir Levy 1 Shie Mannor 1 2

Abstract

set is optimal. Hence, robust MDPs’ solutions are more
resilient in the face of model uncertainty (Hanasusanto &
Kuhn, 2013; Tamar et al., 2014; Iyengar, 2005). The study
of robust MDPs is further motivated by their potential to
yield superior generalization compared to non-robust solutions (Xu & Mannor, 2010; Zhao et al., 2019; Packer et al.,
2018).

We focus on s-rectangular robust Markov decision processes (MDPs), which capture interconnected uncertainties across different actions
within each state. This framework is more general
compared to sa-rectangular robust MDPs, where
uncertainties in each action are independent. However, the introduced interdependence significantly
amplifies the complexity of the problem. Existing
methods either have slow performance guarantees or are inapplicable to even moderately large
state spaces. In this work, we derive optimal robust Bellman operators in explicit forms. This
leads to robust value iteration methods with significantly faster time complexities than existing approaches, which can be used in large state spaces.
Further, our findings reveal that the optimal policies demonstrate a novel threshold behavior, selectively favoring a limited set of actions based on
their respective advantage functions. Additionally,
our study uncovers a noteworthy connection between the robustness of a policy and the variance
in its value function, highlighting that policies
with lower variance exhibit greater resilience.

Unfortunately, solving robust MDPs is a complex problem in general. Consequently, most existing solutions exist for a special class of uncertainty sets, which are sarectangular (Nilim & Ghaoui, 2005; Iyengar, 2005; Wang
& Zou, 2021; 2022). This setting models various problems,
where model uncertainty in one state-action is independent
from uncertainty in other state-actions. However, in many
cases, the model uncertainty in one action can be coupled
to the other actions in the same state, which are captured
by s-rectangular uncertainty sets (Wiesemann et al., 2013).
However, this coupling comes with additional complexities
and presents a great difficulty in obtaining the solutions,
and hence, only a handful of existing work exists on the
topic (Wiesemann et al., 2013; Ho et al., 2020; Derman
et al., 2021). Unfortunately, capturing the further coupling
in uncertainties across different states is proven to make the
problem strongly NP-hard (Wiesemann et al., 2013).
Related works. Most of the works in robust MDPs are
for sa-rectangular uncertainty sets (Iyengar, 2005; Nilim &
Ghaoui, 2005; Kaufman & Schaefer, 2013; Bagnell et al.,
2001; Hanasusanto & Kuhn, 2013; Abdullah et al., 2019).
Notably, for sa-rectangular R-contamination robust MDPs,
(Wang & Zou, 2021) derived robust Bellman operators,
which are equivalent to value-regularized-non-robust Bellman operators, enabling efficient robust value iteration.
Building upon this work, (Wang & Zou, 2022) derived a
robust policy gradient equivalent to a non-robust policy
gradient with regularizer and correction terms. Unfortunately, these methods cannot be naturally generalized to
s-rectangular robust MDPs.

1. Introduction
In Markov Decision Processes (MDPs), an agent interacts
with the environment and learns to behave optimally in it
(Sutton & Barto, 2018). However, the MDP solution can
be highly sensitive to even minor alterations in model parameters (Mannor et al., 2004). Consequently, caution is
warranted when applying MDP solutions in scenarios involving dynamic model changes or parameter uncertainties to
avoid catastrophic failures. On the other hand, robust MDPs
consider a possible set of environments (uncertainty sets)
instead of a single environment, and the goal is to obtain
a solution whose worst performance over the uncertainty

A naive LP (linear programming) can evaluate s-rectangular
optimal robust Bellman operators with uncertainty sets constrained by L1 norm, with time complexity O(S 5.5 A4.5 ),
where S, A is the cardinality of state space, and action space
respectively. This brute force method is prohibitively expensive and restrictive to only polyhedral uncertainty sets.

1
Technion, Haifa, Israel 2 Nvidia, Haifa, Israel. Correspondence
to: Navdeep Kumar <navdeepkumar@alum.iisc.ac.in>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

