Estimating Unknown Population Sizes Using the Hypergeometric Distribution

Liam Hodgson 1 2 Danilo Bzdok 1 2

Abstract

hypergeometric distribution becomes important for successful modelling when the selection of one element from the
distribution affects the probabilities of selecting subsequent
elements (i.e. the counts within as sample are not independent), and when the number of elements sampled is significant compared to the population size. The hypergeometric
distribution also enables the direct inference of category
counts, as opposed to category probabilities, which is often
of interest for downstream analyses and interpretability.

The multivariate hypergeometric distribution describes sampling without replacement from a discrete population of elements divided into multiple
categories. Addressing a gap in the literature, we
tackle the challenge of estimating discrete distributions when both the total population size and
the category sizes are unknown. Here, we propose a novel solution using the hypergeometric
likelihood to solve this estimation problem, even
in the presence of severe under-sampling. Our
approach accounts for a data generating process
where the ground-truth is a mixture of distributions conditional on a continuous latent variable,
as seen in collaborative filtering, using the variational autoencoder framework. Empirical data
simulation demonstrates that our method outperforms other likelihood functions used to model
count data, both in terms of accuracy of population size estimate and learning an informative
latent space. We showcase our method’s versatility through applications in NLP, by inferring
and estimating the complexity of latent vocabularies in reading passage excerpts, and in biology,
by accurately recovering the true number of gene
transcripts from sparse single-cell genomics data.

There are many settings where it is valuable to model count
data directly and to capture the dependence between category counts. For example, in the context of collaborative filtering, song or movie play counts (Van den Oord
et al., 2013) and shopping basket item counts (Faggioli
et al., 2020) can be thought of as being sampled from a
larger catalogue. Likewise, a text document can be viewed
as a bag-of-words that is sampled from a larger, underlying bag-of-words (Goldberg, 2022). In all of these cases
the assumption of sampling without replacement is justifiable because the magnitude of counts is relatively small,
and there is dependence between these counts. For example, watching a movie changes the probability of it being
watched a second time, adding an item to a virtual shopping
basket changes the probability of it being added again, and
selecting one word changes the probability of its synonyms
and related terms also appearing in a text.
This setting is even more common in biology due to the
experimental sampling methods used (DePatta Pillar, 1998).
In the field of single-cell genomics, the quantity of gene
transcript count data measured at the resolution of individual cells is accumulating at an exponential rate (Svensson
et al., 2018). As we show in Section 4.4, high-throughput experiments inherently sample without replacement, and with
careful interpretation this single-cell data promises to answer important questions in biology and health. In the field
of microbiome research, another potential application is the
estimation of microbial population sizes and subsequent differential abundance analysis (Morton et al., 2019a;b). Due
to the frequent occurrence of finite, discrete populations in
nature, there are many other natural phenomena that can be
modelled using the hypergeometric distribution (Holmes &
Huber, 2018).

1. Introduction
The classic Pólya urn model (Eggenberger & Pólya, 1923)
describes the process of randomly sampling from an urn
containing balls of various colors, and is used to illustrate
common discrete probability distributions that form the core
building block of many probabilistic machine learning models. When balls are sampled from the urn with replacement,
the distribution of counts of balls of each color is described
by the multinomial distribution, whereas the hypergeometric
distribution describes sampling without replacement. The
1

McGill University, Montréal, Canada 2 Mila - Québec Artificial Intelligence Institute. Correspondence to: Danilo Bzdok
<danilobzdok@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Furthermore, the aforementioned applications are typically

1

