Accelerating Transformer Pre-training with 2:4 Sparsity

Yuezhou Hu 1 Kang Zhao Weiyu Huang 1 Jianfei Chen 1 Jun Zhu 1

Abstract

zeros. Within a tensor core, a 2:4 sparse matrix multiplication (2:4-spMM) could be 2x faster than its dense equivalent
on NVIDIA Ampere architecture GPUs.

Training large transformers is slow, but recent
innovations on GPU architecture give us an advantage. NVIDIA Ampere GPUs can execute
a fine-grained 2:4 sparse matrix multiplication
twice as fast as its dense equivalent. In the light of
this property, we comprehensively investigate the
feasibility of accelerating feed-forward networks
(FFNs) of transformers in pre-training. First, we
define a “flip rate” to monitor the stability of a
2:4 training process. Utilizing this metric, we
propose three techniques to preserve accuracy:
to modify the sparse-refined straight-through estimator by applying the masked decay term on
gradients, to determine a feasible decay factor
in warm-up stage, and to enhance the model’s
quality by a dense fine-tuning procedure near the
end of pre-training. Besides, we devise two techniques to practically accelerate training: to calculate transposable 2:4 masks by convolution, and to
accelerate gated activation functions by reducing
GPU L2 cache miss. Experiments show that our
2:4 sparse training algorithm achieves similar convergence to dense training algorithms on several
transformer pre-training tasks, while actual acceleration can be observed on different shapes of
transformer block apparently. Our toolkit is available at https://github.com/huyz2023/
2by4-pretrain.

Some works use 2:4 sparsity for accelerating training
(Hubara et al., 2021; Lu et al., 2023; McDanel et al., 2022;
Chmiel et al., 2023). However, they mainly target on convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (Hubara et al., 2021;
McDanel et al., 2022), whose architecture, optimizer and
training procedure are different from transformers. Whether
these 2:4 sparse training methods are capable for transformers remains under-explored. In practice, we find two barriers: 1) Low accuracy. The hyperparameters in some
accuracy preserving techniques for transformers vary significantly from that for CNNs, which is ineffective if transplanted directly. Remarkably, simply halving the inner dimensionality of a feed-forward network can also reduce
the same amount of computational cost, but provides better performance than most of proposed 2:4 sparse training
methods. 2) Inefficiency. All previous works on 2:4 training
stay on simulation, and do not provide actual acceleration
results. Besides, they don’t focus on other key operations beyond matrix multiplication that affect the practical time cost,
such as overheads of pruning and activation functions. They
usually lead to substantial mismatches between simulation
and actual acceleration performance.
In this work, we aim to propose an end-to-end acceleration
method for pre-training transformers based on 2:4 sparsity.
Here are our major contributions:
• We propose three accuracy-preserving techniques (two
for masked decay and one for dense fine-tune) for 2:4
training. First, we propose to apply the masked decay on
gradients rather than on weight. Second, we show that
the feasible masked decay factor on transformers may
be very small (100x smaller than it has been reported
on CNNs) and devise a method to quickly determine an
available decay factor. Besides, our analysis demonstrates
that employing a dense fine-tuning stage at the end of pretraining, rather than at the beginning, can enhance the
quality of transformers.
• We analyze practical factors affecting the 2:4 training
speed of transformers, which is rarely considered by previous works. We identify two speed bottlenecks: pruning overhead and gated activation functions’ overhead.

1. Introduction
Pre-training large-scale transformers is hard, for its intensive
computation and time-consuming process (Anthony et al.,
2020). To accelerate training, sparsity-based methods have
recently emerged as a promising solution, and one of the
hardware-friendly sparse patterns is 2:4 sparsity. In a 2:4
sparse matrix, every four consecutive elements contain two
1

Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, BNRist Center,
Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center, THBI Lab, Tsinghua University.
Correspondence to: Jianfei Chen <jianfeic@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

