Learning Divergence Fields for Shift-Robust Graph Representations

Qitian Wu 1 Fan Nie 1 Chenxiao Yang 1 Junchi Yan 1

Abstract

Training Data

Real-world data generation often involves certain
geometries (e.g., graphs) that induce instancelevel interdependence. This characteristic makes
the generalization of learning models more difficult due to the intricate interdependent patterns that impact data-generative distributions
and can vary from training to testing. In this
work, we propose a geometric diffusion model
with learnable divergence fields for the challenging generalization problem with interdependent data. We generalize the diffusion equation with stochastic diffusivity at each time step,
which aims to capture the multi-faceted information flows among interdependent data. Furthermore, we derive a new learning objective
through causal inference, which can guide the
model to learn generalizable patterns of interdependence that are insensitive across domains. Regarding practical implementation, we introduce
three model instantiations that can be considered as the generalized versions of GCN, GAT,
and Transformers, respectively, which possess advanced robustness against distribution shifts. We
demonstrate their promising efficacy for out-ofdistribution generalization on diverse real-world
datasets. Source codes are available at https:
//github.com/fannie1208/GLIND.

Testing Data

Figure 1: The challenge of generalization with interdependent data involves distribution shifts regarding the underlying manifolds that define the proximity among data samples.
tures, where interdependence also exists but is not directly
observable from data. In both scenarios, due to the interdependence of data points, the commonly used i.i.d. assumption for modeling becomes invalid. Moreover, given
the dynamic environment where the model interacts in the
open-world setting, the training and testing data are often
generated from different distributions, necessitating generalization under distribution shifts (Mansour et al., 2009;
Blanchard et al., 2011; Muandet et al., 2013; Gong et al.,
2016; Arjovsky et al., 2019).
However, unlike standard learning settings (e.g., for image
and text data) where each data sample can be treated as
independent (Koh et al., 2021; Ye et al., 2021), the interdependence among data points (e.g., nodes in an observed
graph or other geometries with implicit structures) significantly increases the difficulty of generalization (Ma et al.,
2021; Wu et al., 2022; Zhao et al., 2020; Stadler et al., 2021).
Particularly, as illustrated in Fig. 1, since the training and
testing data lie on different underlying manifolds that induce
proximity among data points, the model solely optimized
on training data with specific geometry may not generalize
well to testing data generated from a different manifold. In
contrast, an ideal model should be able to capture the generalizable patterns of data interdependence that can transfer
across domains (or interchangeably, environment).

1. Introduction
Learning from data involving certain geometries is a fundamental challenge in machine learning (Tenenbaum et al.,
2000; Belkin & Niyogi, 2003; Belkin et al., 2006). One common scenario entails explicit graph structures, where the
observed edges create interdependence among data points;
another more challenging scenario involves implicit struc1
School of Artificial Intelligence & Department of Computer
Science and Engineering & MoE Lab of AI, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Junchi Yan
<yanjunchi@sjtu.edu.cn>.

While generalization across potentially different environments is desirable in practice, the challenge lies in how
to model the generalizable patterns of the interdependence
among data points, which can be abstract and convoluted
in nature. Given the data interdependence, the label of
each instance depends on both the instance itself and other

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

