Testing the Feasibility of Linear Programs with Bandit Feedback

Aditya Gangrade 1 2 Aditya Gopalan 3 Venkatesh Saligrama 1 Clayton Scott 2

Abstract

with rewards, one observes risk factors upon playing an
action. For instance, along with treatment efficacy, one may
measure kidney function scores using blood tests after a
treatment. The goal becomes to maximise mean reward
while ensuring that mean scores remain high (e.g. Nathan &
DCCT/EDIC Research Group, 2014).

While the recent literature has seen a surge in
the study of constrained bandit problems, all existing methods for these begin by assuming the
feasibility of the underlying problem. We initiate
the study of testing such feasibility assumptions,
and in particular address the problem in the linear bandit setting, thus characterising the costs
of feasibility testing for an unknown linear program using bandit feedback. Concretely, we test
if ∃x : Ax ≥ 0 for an unknown A ∈ Rm×d , by
playing a sequence of actions xt ∈ Rd , and observing Axt + noise in response. By identifying
the hypothesis as determining the sign of the value
of a minimax game, we construct a novel test
based on low-regret algorithms and a nonasymptotic law of iterated logarithms. We prove that this
test is reliable, and adapts to the ‘signal level,’ Γ,
of any instance, with mean sample costs scaling
e 2 /Γ2 ). We complement this by a minimax
as O(d
lower bound of Ω(d/Γ2 ) for sample costs of reliable tests, dominating prior asymptotic lower
bounds by capturing the dependence on d, and
thus elucidating a basic insight missing in the
extant literature on such problems.

Many methods have been proposed for such problems, both
in settings where constraints are enforced in aggregate, or in
each round (‘safe bandits’), see §1.1. However, every such
method begins by assuming that the underlying program is
feasible (or more; certain safe bandit methods require knowing a feasible ball). This is a significant assumption, since it
amounts to saying that despite the fact that the risk factors
are not well understood (hence the need for learning), it is
known that the action space is well founded, and contains
points that appropriately control the risk. This paper initiates the study of testing this assumption. The result of such
a test bears a strong utility towards such constrained settings:
if negative, it would inform practitioners of the inadequacy
of their design space, and spur necessary improvements,
while if positive, it would yield a cheap certificate to justify searching for optimal solutions within the space. The
main challenge lies in ensuring that the tests are reliable and
sample-efficient (since if testing took as many samples as
finding optima, the latter question would be moot).
Concretely, we work in the linear bandit setting, i.e., in
response to an action x ∈ X ⊂ Rd , we observe scores
S ∈ Rm such that E[S|x] = Ax, where A is latent, and
with the constraint structured as Ax ≥ α for a given tolerance vector α. We study the binary composite hypothesis
testing problem of determining if there exists an x : Ax ≥ α
or not, with the goal of designing a sequential test that
ensures that the probability of error is smaller than some
given δ. Such a test is carried out for some random time
τ, corresponding directly to the sample costs, which we
aim to minimise. Effectively we are testing if an unknown
linear program (LP) is feasible, and we may equivalently
phrase the problem as testing the sign of the minimax value
Γ := maxx∈X mini (Ax − α)i . Also note that by incorporating the objective as a constraint vector, and a proposed
optimal value as a constraint level, this test also corresponds
to solving the recognition (or decision) version of the underlying LP (e.g., Papadimitriou & Steiglitz, 1998, Ch. 15).

1. Introduction
While the theory of single-objective bandit programs is
well established, most practical situations of interest are
multiobjective in character, e.g., clinicians trialling new
treatments must balance the efficacy of the doses with the
extent of their side-effects, and crowdsourcers must balance
the speed of workers with the quality of their work. In
cognisance of this basic fact, the recent literature has turned
to the study of constrained bandit problems, wherein, along
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical Computer Engineering, Boston University 2 Department of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science, University of Michigan 3 Department of
Electrical Communication Engineering, Indian Institute of Science.
Correspondence to: Aditya Gangrade <gangrade@bu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

