Towards a Self-contained Data-driven Global Weather Forecasting Framework

Yi Xiao 1 2 Lei Bai 2 Wei Xue 1 3 Hao Chen 2 Kun Chen 2 4 Kang Chen 2 Tao Han 2 Wanli Ouyang 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Weather forecasting is the cornerstone of human society and
profoundly impacts all aspects of our daily lives and economic activities. Accurately predicting weather conditions
in advance is beneficial to various sectors, ranging from
agricultural planning to renewable energy generation and
disaster preparedness.

Data-driven weather forecasting models are advancing rapidly, yet they rely on initial states (i.e.,
analysis states) typically produced by traditional
data assimilation algorithms. Four-dimensional
variational assimilation (4DVar) is one of the most
widely adopted data assimilation algorithms in
numerical weather prediction centers; it is accurate but computationally expensive. In this paper, we aim to couple the AI forecasting model,
FengWu, with 4DVar to build a self-contained
data-driven global weather forecasting framework, FengWu-4DVar. To achieve this, we propose an AI-embedded 4DVar algorithm that includes three components: (1) a 4DVar objective
function embedded with the FengWu forecasting model and its error representation to enhance
efficiency and accuracy; (2) a spherical-harmonictransform-based (SHT-based) approximation strategy for capturing the horizontal correlation of
background error; and (3) an auto-differentiation
(AD) scheme for determining the optimal analysis fields. Experimental results show that under the ERA5 simulated observational data with
varying proportions and noise levels, FengWu4DVar can generate accurate analysis fields; remarkably, it has achieved stable self-contained
global weather forecasts for an entire year for
the first time, demonstrating its potential for realworld applications. Additionally, our framework
is approximately 100 times faster than the traditional 4DVar algorithm under similar experimental conditions, highlighting its significant computational efficiency.

Traditional numerical weather forecasting methods rely
on building partial differential equations based on physical rules and solving these equations for accurate predictions (Kalnay, 2003). However, it is difficult to accurately
resolve complex physical processes like clouds and convection, which makes medium-range forecasts less accurate (Hourdin et al., 2017; Donner et al., 2011). Moreover,
solving these equations is computationally expensive, leading to significant investment in supercomputers for weather
forecasting (Bauer et al., 2015). In the past few years, a
multitude of Artificial Intelligence (AI) weather forecasting models have emerged as a promising alternative, such
as FourCastNet (Pathak et al., 2022), Pangu Weather (Bi
et al., 2023), GraphCast (Lam et al., 2022), FengWu (Chen
et al., 2023a), FuXi (Chen et al., 2023b), etc. These datadriven models are informed by modern neural network
structures (Vaswani et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2021; Zhao
et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023), and their forecast accuracy rivals or even surpasses traditional methods like Integrated Forecasting System (IFS) developed by European
Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF).
Notably, they exhibit forecasting efficiency orders of magnitude higher than that of traditional algorithms.
Despite the potential success of AI forecasting models, most
previous works have overlooked a crucial component of
weather forecasting systems: data assimilation. Data assimilation is a statistical technique that combines observational
information with numerical models to achieve an optimal
estimate of the current state (also known as the analysis
state), which then serves as the initial value for predicting
future states. In previous studies, the establishment of initial states is usually achieved by assimilating the forecast
fields of physics-based forecasting models, as shown in
Figure 1(a). However, these initial states often face issues
such as inconsistency with AI forecasting models and high
computational complexity, which hinder the accuracy and

1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China 2 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai, China 3 Qinghai University and Intelligent
Computing and Application Laboratory of Qinghai Province,
China 4 School of Information Science and Technology, Fudan
University, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Wei Xue
<xuewei@tsinghua.edu.cn>, Lei Bai <baisanshi@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

