On the Consistency of Kernel Methods with Dependent Observations

Pierre-François Massiani 1 Sebastian Trimpe 1 Friedrich Solowjow 1

Abstract

issue; see (Mnih et al., 2013). In contrast, kernel methods
such as support vector machines (SVMs), Gaussian processes, or conditional kernel mean embeddings (CKMEs)
seem unaffected by dependencies in the training data and
often perform well despite the absence (or limited amount)
of theoretical justification; see (Buisson-Fenet et al., 2020;
von Rohr et al., 2021) for examples.

The consistency of a learning method is usually
established under the assumption that the observations are a realization of an independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) or mixing process. Yet,
kernel methods such as support vector machines
(SVMs), Gaussian processes, or conditional kernel mean embeddings (CKMEs) all give excellent
performance under sampling schemes that are obviously non-i.i.d., such as when data comes from
a dynamical system. We propose the new notion of empirical weak convergence (EWC) as a
general assumption explaining such phenomena
for kernel methods. It assumes the existence of
a random asymptotic data distribution and is a
strict weakening of previous assumptions in the
field. Our main results then establish consistency
of SVMs, kernel mean embeddings, and general
Hilbert-space valued empirical expectations with
EWC data. Our analysis holds for both finiteand infinite-dimensional outputs, as we extend
classical results of statistical learning to the latter
case. In particular, it is also applicable to CKMEs.
Overall, our results open new classes of processes
to statistical learning and can serve as a foundation for a theory of learning beyond i.i.d. and
mixing.

A common such case is that of learning on a Markov chain,
where data is neither independent (previous states influence those that follow) nor identically distributed (transition
probabilities may differ in different states). The standard
assumption to get consistency under such sampling is mixing (Steinwart & Christmann, 2009). It replaces independence with decaying correlations between samples as their
temporal distance increases. There is a vast literature showing consistency under mixing; examples are (Steinwart et al.,
2009; Steinwart & Christmann, 2009; Irle, 1997).
A possible explanation for the popularity of the mixing assumption is that it allows dependencies while retaining a
central concept of statistical learning: there exists an asymptotic distribution describing future samples. Learning is
then formalized as minimizing the risk of those future samples. There are currently two main approaches to generalizing statistical learning to non-mixing data: assuming
the existence of an asymptotic distribution to define the
risk (Steinwart et al., 2009), or defining a non-asymptotic notion of risk (Simchowitz et al., 2018; Ziemann & Tu, 2022).
We focus on the first approach, as it leverages more standard
tools whereas the alternatives impose additional conditions
on the data-generating process. Central to this approach is
examining whether the empirical measure has a limit instead
of imposing stronger conditions enforcing the existence of
this limit and convergence thereto with certain speed — e.g.,
i.i.d. This pertains to whether a form of the law of large
numbers for events (LLNE) holds. While Steinwart et al.
(2009) provide first results on learning in this context, their
analysis still excludes simple, non-pathological processes
such as Example 3.8 below. This shows the necessity for a
theory of consistency under assumptions weaker than i.i.d.
or mixing.

1. Introduction
A learning method is consistent when the learned function
is optimal in a certain sense in the infinite-sample limit, and
the most common assumption to prove consistency is that
training data comes from an independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) process. That assumption is often blatantly
violated, however, leading to drops in performance for many
learning algorithms. For instance, replay buffers were introduced in deep reinforcement learning to mitigate this
1

Institute for Data Science in Mechanical Engineering, RWTH
Aachen University, Aachen, Germany. Correspondence to: PierreFrançois Massiani <massiani@dsme.rwth-aachen.de>.

We propose empirically weakly converging (EWC)1 pro-

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1
In what follows, we use the abbreviation EWC indistinctly for
the noun “empirical weak convergence” and the adjective “empiri-

1

