Optimistic Multi-Agent Policy Gradient

Wenshuai Zhao 1 Yi Zhao 1 Zhiyuan Li 2 Juho Kannala 3 4 Joni Pajarinen 1

Abstract

their individual policies based on data generated by other
agents’ policies which have not converged yet. This phenomenon is called relative overgeneralization (Wiegand,
2004) (RO) and has been widely studied in tabular matrix
games (Claus & Boutilier, 1998; Lauer & Riedmiller, 2000;
Panait et al., 2006) but remains an open problem in stateof-the-art MARL methods (De Witt et al., 2020; Yu et al.,
2022; Kuba et al., 2022).

Relative overgeneralization (RO) occurs in cooperative multi-agent learning tasks when agents
converge towards a suboptimal joint policy due
to overfitting to suboptimal behaviors of other
agents. No methods have been proposed for
addressing RO in multi-agent policy gradient
(MAPG) methods although these methods produce state-of-the-art results. To address this gap,
we propose a general, yet simple, framework to
enable optimistic updates in MAPG methods that
alleviate the RO problem. Our approach involves
clipping the advantage to eliminate negative values, thereby facilitating optimistic updates in
MAPG. The optimism prevents individual agents
from quickly converging to a local optimum. Additionally, we provide a formal analysis to show
that the proposed method retains optimality at a
fixed point. In extensive evaluations on a diverse
set of tasks including the Multi-agent MuJoCo
and Overcooked benchmarks, our method outperforms strong baselines on 13 out of 19 tested tasks
and matches the performance on the rest.

The cause for RO can be understood intuitively. In a cooperative multi-agent system, the common reward derives from
the joint actions. From the perspective of a single agent, an
optimal individual action may still incur low joint reward
due to non-cooperative behaviors of other agents. This is
common in cooperative tasks when iteratively optimizing
individual policies, especially at the beginning of training
since individual agents have not learned to act properly to
cooperate with others. It is particularly challenging in tasks
with a large penalty for incorrect joint actions, such as the
pitfalls in the climbing matrix game in Figure 1 leading
often to agents that prefer a suboptimal joint policy.
Existing techniques to overcome the pathology share
the idea of applying optimistic updating in Q-learning
with different strategies to control the degree of optimism (Lauer & Riedmiller, 2000) such as in hysteretic Qlearning (Matignon et al., 2007) or in lenient agents (Panait
et al., 2006). However, these methods are designed based on
Q-learning and only tested on matrix games (Matignon et al.,
2012) with tabular Q representation. Although optimism
successfully helps overcome RO problem and converges to
global optima in tabular tasks, it could amplify the overestimation problem when combined with DQN (Van Hasselt
et al., 2016) with function approximation (Omidshafiei et al.,
2017; Palmer et al., 2018; Rashid et al., 2020a), as verified in
our experiments. On the other hand, recent multi-agent policy gradient (MAPG) methods have achieved state-of-the-art
performance on popular MARL benchmarks (De Witt et al.,
2020; Yu et al., 2022; Sun et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023)
but still suffer from the RO problem, converging to a low
value local optimum in simple matrix games. The above
drawbacks motivate this work to investigate whether optimism can be applied to MAPG methods and whether it can
boost performance further by mitigating the RO problem.

1. Introduction
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) is a promising approach for many cooperative multi-agent decision
making applications, such as those found in robotics and
wireless networking (Busoniu et al., 2008). However, despite recent success on increasingly complex tasks (Vinyals
et al., 2019; Yu et al., 2022), these methods can still fail
on simple two-player matrix games as shown in Figure 1.
The underlying problem is that in cooperative tasks, agents
may converge to a suboptimal joint policy when updating
1
Department of Electrical Engineering and Automation, Aalto
University, Finland 2 School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China,
China 3 Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, Finland 4 University of Oulu, Finland. Correspondence to: Wenshuai
Zhao <wenshuai.zhao@aalto.fi>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Our contribution is threefold: (1) To our knowledge, we are

1

