Auto-Linear Phenomenon in Subsurface Imaging

Yinan Feng 1 Yinpeng Chen 2 Peng Jin 3 Shihang Feng 4 Youzuo Lin 5

Abstract
Seismic Data
𝑝 𝑥, 𝑡
x

Subsurface imaging involves solving full waveform inversion (FWI) to predict geophysical properties from measurements. This problem can be
reframed as an image-to-image translation, with
the usual approach being to train an encoderdecoder network using paired data from two domains: geophysical property and measurement.
A recent seminal work (InvLINT) demonstrates
there is only a linear mapping between the latent
spaces of the two domains, and the decoder requires paired data for training.

Velocity map
𝑐 𝑥, 𝑧
x
ℰ

𝒟
z

t
a. InversionNet: Jointly Trained Method
Seismic Data
𝑝 𝑥, 𝑡
x
Sine
Kernels
t

Velocity map
𝑐 𝑥, 𝑧
x
z
Gaussian
Kernels

b. InvLINT: Decouple Trained Method
Seismic Data
𝑝 𝑥, 𝑡
x

This paper extends this direction by demonstrating that only linear mapping necessitates paired
data, while both the encoder and decoder can be
learned from their respective domains through
self-supervised learning. This unveils an intriguing phenomenon (named Auto-Linear) where the
self-learned features of two separate domains are
automatically linearly correlated. Compared with
existing methods, our Auto-Linear has four advantages: (a) solving both forward and inverse
modeling simultaneously, (b) applicable to different subsurface imaging tasks and achieving
markedly better results than previous methods,
(c)enhanced performance, especially in scenarios
with limited paired data and in the presence of
noisy data, and (d) strong generalization ability
of the trained encoder and decoder.

𝒟

Linear
Regression

ℰ𝑠

Velocity map
𝑐 𝑥, 𝑧
x

Inverse Process

t

Linear

Autoencoder

Forward Process

𝒟𝑉
z
Autoencoder
ℰ𝑉

𝒟𝑠

c. Auto-Linear: Domain-Independent Self-Supervised Method

Figure 1: Overview of the jointly trained encoder-decoder
(top), InvLINT (middle), and Auto-Linear (bottom). The
orange color indicates that components need to be trained
with paired data. Auto-Linear decouples both the encoder
and decoder and self-supervised trains them separately in
their own domains. Linear converters are learned to connect
the frozen, pre-trained encoders and decoders.
ductivity), supporting important applications such as energy
exploration, carbon capture, and earthquake early warning
systems. In this field, the full waveform inversion (FWI)
is a well-known method to infer subsurface velocity maps
from the seismic data. Concurrently, the forward process
involves computing the pressure wavefield using these velocity maps. Specifically, seismic data are obtained via
seismic surveys which employ receivers to record reflected
and refracted seismic waves generated by controlled sources.
Each receiver records a 1D time series signal, and the signals
recorded by all the receivers form the seismic data. They
are mathematically connected by an acoustic wave equation
as:

1. Introduction
Subsurface imaging is crucial for revealing subsurface layering and geophysical properties (such as velocity and con1

Department of Computer Science, The University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill,USA 2 Google Research, USA 3 College
of Information Sciences and Technology, The Pennsylvania State
University, USA 4 Earth and Environmental Sciences Division, Los
Alamos National Laboratory,USA 5 School of Data Science and
Society, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,USA.
Correspondence to: Youzuo Lin <yzlin@unc.edu>.

∇2 p(x, z, t) −

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

∂2

c2 (x, z) ∂t2

p(x, z, t) = s(x, z, t),

(1)

where p(x, z, t) represents the seismic data and c(x, z) is
the velocity map. s(x, z, t) is the source term. x is the hor1

