A3S: A General Active Clustering Method with Pairwise Constraints

Xun Deng 1 2 Junlong Liu 2 Han Zhong 3 Fuli Feng 1 Chen Shen 2 Xiangnan He 1 Jieping Ye 2 Zheng Wang 2

Abstract

computations, rendering them less adaptable to strange or
expanding data environments (See Section 2.3.3). This context highlights the growing importance of human-computer
collaborative active clustering approaches.

Active clustering aims to boost the clustering performance by integrating human-annotated pairwise constraints through strategic querying. Conventional approaches with semi-supervised clustering schemes encounter high query costs when
applied to large datasets with numerous classes.
To address these limitations, we propose a novel
Adaptive Active Aggregation and Splitting (A3S)
framework, falling within the cluster-adjustment
scheme in active clustering. A3S features strategic active clustering adjustment on the initial cluster result, which is obtained by an adaptive clustering algorithm. In particular, our cluster adjustment is inspired by the quantitative analysis of
Normalized mutual information gain under the
information theory framework and can provably
improve the clustering quality. The proposed
A3S framework significantly elevates the performance and scalability of active clustering. In
extensive experiments across diverse real-world
datasets, A3S achieves desired results with significantly fewer human queries compared with
existing methods.

Active clustering refers to a paradigm that actively selects
side information (Anand et al., 2014), in the form of pairwise constraints, to maximally improve the clustering performance. Extensive work (González-Almagro et al., 2023) has
explored the combination of the strategic selection of pairwise constraints and semi-supervised clustering (SSC) (Basu
et al., 2002), and attains much lower query complexity compared to its semi-supervised counterpart (Bilenko et al.,
2004). Despite the practicality, current active clustering
methods often suffer from high computational and query
costs when the number of classes is large.
SSC-based active clustering methods primarily assess the
uncertainty of all pairwise constraints, and iteratively choose
the most uncertain ones for expert queries. This manner,
while systematic, faces notable challenges: it potentially
relies on the assumption that a small set of initial pairwise
constraints will rapidly cover most real classes. This assumption becomes increasingly unreliable in scenarios with
large sample numbers N and class numbers K. Therefore, some active clustering methods (Van Craenendonck
et al., 2017; Shi et al., 2020) shift from SSC to a clusteradjustment scheme. This scheme involves over-clustering
data into k clusters via a specific clustering method (where
k is greater than K), and subsequently aggregates the resulting small clusters into larger ones based on pairwise
constraints. However, it requires a proper cluster number
k as an input parameter, which is hard to determine in real
applications. Moreover, the human query may be misleading when the selected samples are outliers, as they do not
represent the majority sample of a cluster.

1. Introduction
In the realm of data science, clustering algorithms have
emerged as a cornerstone technology within the domain of
unsupervised learning (Khanum et al., 2015; Celebi & Aydin, 2016). By automatically grouping similar data objects
based on inherent structures and patterns within datasets,
clustering provides an efficacious means to condense and
structure complex information and is widely applied in image classification (Caron et al., 2020), social network analysis (He et al., 2022), etc. However, conventional clustering
techniques often rely on static parameter settings and one-off

This work aims to overcome the drawbacks of existing
cluster adjustment schemes. We first present a theoretical
result that identifies conditions where aggregating two
clusters does not reduce the normalized mutual information
(NMI) between the resulting clustering and the real
clustering. Here, NMI measures the overlap between
two clustering results, with larger values indicating better
performance (see Definition 2.3). In addition, to guide
active human queries, we quantify the impact of merging

1
University of Science and Technology of China
Alibaba Group 3 Peking University.
Correspondence to:
Zheng Wang <wz388779@alibaba-inc.com>, Fuli Feng
<fulifeng93@gmail.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

