PolySketchFormer: Fast Transformers via Sketching Polynomial Kernels

Praneeth Kacham * 1 2 Vahab Mirrokni * 1 Peilin Zhong * 1

Abstract

Train Step latency per token
2.5

The quadratic time and memory complexity inherent to self-attention mechanisms, with respect to
sequence length, presents a critical computational
bottleneck in the training and deployment of largescale Transformer-based language models. Recent theoretical results indicate the intractability
of sub-quadratic softmax attention approximation
under reasonable complexity assumptions. This
paper addresses this challenge by first demonstrating that polynomial attention with high degree
can effectively replace softmax without sacrificing model quality. Next, we develop polynomial
sketching techniques from numerical linear algebra to achieve linear-time polynomial attention
with approximation guarantees. Crucially, our approach achieves this speedup without requiring
the sparsification of attention matrices. We also
present a block-based algorithm to apply causal
masking efficiently. Combining these techniques,
we provide PolySketchFormer, a practical lineartime Transformer architecture for language modeling that offers provable guarantees. We validate PolySketchFormer empirically by training
language models capable of handling long contexts. These experiments utilize both synthetic
and real-world datasets (PG19, Wikipedia and C4)
on Google Cloud TPUs. For context lengths of
32k and GPT-2 style models, our model achieves
2x speedup in training compared to FlashAttention of the fastest configuration, with no observed
degradation in quality across our experiments.1

*

1

2.0

µs/token

Vanilla Softmax
1.5

Polysketch

1.0

FlashAttention
(Block = 256)

0.5

FlashAttention
(Block = 512)

0.0
5000

10000

15000

20000

25000

30000

Context Length

Figure 1. Train step latency per token in µs/token of GPT-2 small
style models with softmax attention (FlashAttention) v.s. ours.
Each model is trained with 1M tokens batches. Vanilla softmax
attention goes out-of-memory (OOM) for context lengths > 8k.

1. Introduction
Transformer-based models (Vaswani et al., 2017) are stateof-the-art for many natural language tasks, leading to breakthroughs in machine translation, language understanding
(Devlin et al., 2019), and language modeling (Brown et al.,
2020; Chowdhery et al., 2023; OpenAI, 2023; Anil et al.,
2023). However, the quadratic time and space complexity of the attention mechanism limits scalability for long
context lengths. Numerous “efficient transformers” have
been proposed to address this issue (Wang et al., 2020;
Katharopoulos et al., 2020; Choromanski et al., 2020; Han
et al., 2023). These variants approximate2 the standard attention mechanism. A survey by Tay et al. (2022) provides
a broad overview of these techniques. While many efficient
transformer constructions achieve linear theoretical training complexity, the survey observes that practical training
speedups are often less significant, with potential losses in
model quality. This explains the continued dominance of
vanilla transformers.
In this work, we focus on improving training latency for
transformer models in decoding-only tasks, specifically language modeling trained via next-word prediction. We will
first briefly discuss existing approaches to make training of
transformer models faster and then place our contributions
in context.

2

Equal contribution
Google Research
Carnegie
Mellon
University.
Correspondence
to:
Praneeth
Kacham <pkacham@google.com>, Vahab Mirrokni <mirrokni@google.com>, Peilin Zhong <peilinz@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
Our implementation is available at https://github.
com/google-research/google-research/tree/master/
polysketchformer

Memory efficient and I/O aware approach. Recent work
2

“Approximation” is used informally here, since some “efficient transformers” deviate significantly from the vanilla model.

1

