Tackling Prevalent Conditions in Unsupervised Combinatorial Optimization:
Cardinality, Minimum, Covering, and More

Fanchen Bu 1 2 Hyeonsoo Jo 3 Soo Yong Lee 3 Sungsoo Ahn 4 5 Kijung Shin 3 1

Abstract

entiable optimization (e.g., gradient descent), and applying
them to CO is non-trivial. In their pioneering work, Karalias
& Loukas (2020) adapted the probabilistic method (Erdős
& Spencer, 1974; Alon & Spencer, 2016) to incorporate discrete CO problems into differentiable optimization. Specifically, they proposed to evaluate CO objectives on a distribution of discrete choices (i.e., in a probabilistic manner),
allowing for the differentiable optimization-based ML techniques to be applied to CO problems. This ignited the line of
research on unsupervised (i.e., not supervised by solutions)
learning for combinatorial optimization (UL4CO).

Combinatorial optimization (CO) is naturally discrete, making machine learning based on differentiable optimization inapplicable. Karalias &
Loukas (2020) adapted the probabilistic method
to incorporate CO into differentiable optimization.
Their work ignited the research on unsupervised
learning for CO, composed of two main components: probabilistic objectives and derandomization. However, each component confronts unique
challenges. First, deriving objectives under various conditions (e.g., cardinality constraints and
minimum) is nontrivial. Second, the derandomization process is underexplored, and the existing
derandomization methods are either random sampling or naive rounding. In this work, we aim to
tackle prevalent (i.e., commonly involved) conditions in unsupervised CO. First, we concretize the
targets for objective construction and derandomization with theoretical justification. Then, for
various conditions commonly involved in different CO problems, we derive nontrivial objectives
and derandomization to meet the targets. Finally,
we apply the derivations to various CO problems.
Via extensive experiments on synthetic and realworld graphs, we validate the correctness of our
derivations and show our empirical superiority
w.r.t. both optimization quality and speed.

There are two components in UL4CO: (1) construction of
probabilistic objectives and (2) derandomization to obtain
the final discrete solutions. However, the prior works on
UL4CO share multiple limitations. First, although some
desirable properties of probabilistic objectives (e.g., desirable objectives should be differentiable and align well with
the original discrete objectives) have been proposed, how
to derive objectives satisfying such properties is still unclear. At the same time, the derandomization process is
underexplored, without many practical techniques or theoretical discussions. Specifically, the existing derandomization methods are either random sampling or naive rounding.
Random sampling, by its nature, may cost us a large number
of samplings (and good luck) to have good results. For naive
rounding, the performance may highly depend on the order
of rounding and end up with mediocre solutions. They only
guarantee, at best, derandomized solutions are no worse
than the given continuous solutions w.r.t. the corresponding
probabilistic objectives. However, how to obtain stronger
guarantees in an efficient way has been an open problem.

1. Introduction
Combinatorial optimization (CO) problems are discrete by
their nature. Machine learning methods are based on differ-

Motivated by the limitations, in this work, we focus on objectives and constraints that have not been systematically
handled within the UL4CO framework and are commonly
involved in various CO problems. We study and propose
UC OM 2 (Usupervised Combinatorial Optimization Under
Commonly-involved Conditions). Specifically, our contributions are four-fold.

1
School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon, Republic
of Korea 2 AI4CO Open-Source Community 3 Kim Jaechul Graduate School of Artificial Intelligence, KAIST, Seoul, Republic
of Korea 4 Graduate School of Artificial Intelligence, POSTECH,
Pohang, Republic of Korea 5 Department of Computer Science
and Engineering, Pohang, Republic of Korea. Correspondence to:
Kijung Shin <kijungs@kaist.ac.kr>.

• We concretize the targets for objective construction
and derandomization with theoretical justification
(Sec. 3). We theoretically show that probabilistic objectives that can be rephrased as an expectation are desirable,

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

