CodeIt: Self-Improving Language Models with Prioritized Hindsight Replay

Natasha Butt 1 2 Blazej Manczak 2 Auke Wiggers 2
Corrado Rainone 2 David W. Zhang 2 Michaël Defferrard 2 Taco Cohen 2 3

Abstract
Large language models are increasingly solving tasks that are commonly believed to require
human-level reasoning ability. However, these
models still perform very poorly on benchmarks
of general intelligence such as the Abstraction
and Reasoning Corpus (ARC). In this paper, we
approach ARC as a programming-by-examples
problem, and introduce a novel and scalable
method for language model self-improvement
called Code Iteration (CodeIt). Our method iterates between 1) program sampling and hindsight
relabeling, and 2) learning from prioritized experience replay. By relabeling the goal of an episode
(i.e., the target program output given input) to
the realized output produced by the sampled program, our method effectively deals with the extreme sparsity of rewards in program synthesis.
Applying CodeIt to the ARC dataset, we demonstrate that prioritized hindsight replay, along
with pre-training and data-augmentation, leads
to successful inter-task generalization. CodeIt
is the first neuro-symbolic approach that scales
to the full ARC evaluation dataset. Our method
solves 15% of ARC evaluation tasks, achieving state-of-the-art performance and outperforming existing neural and symbolic baselines. Our
code is available at https://github.com/
Qualcomm-AI-research/codeit.

Figure 1. An overview of Code Iteration. In the sampling stage,
programs ρ are sampled from the policy Qθ conditioned on inputoutput pairs. The program may not produce target output O∗ given
I, so we use hindsight relabeling: we execute the program, and add
the program ρ, inputs I, and realized outputs O to the buffer. In
the learning stage, we train the policy on samples from the buffer.

ing benchmark because it contains few-shot example tasks
that assume access to the four innate core knowledge systems: objects, actions, number, and space (Spelke & Kinzler,
2007). It was designed to require no knowledge outside of
these priors, and so the massive memorization capability of
pre-trained language models is of limited use for this problem. Humans are able to solve 80% of (a random subset of)
ARC tasks in user studies (Johnson et al., 2021), whereas
state-of-the-art neural approaches based on GPT-4 solve
only 12% of evaluation tasks (Gendron et al., 2023).
Each ARC task consists of a number of demonstration examples, each consisting of an input and output grid, and one or
more test inputs for which the corresponding output must be
predicted (see Figure 2). Effective agents use abstractions
related to the four core knowledge systems, generalize from
demonstration to test examples, and generalize between
tasks. For example, an agent may infer that adjacent cells
(space) of the same color value (number) form an object.
An agent may also infer that multiple objects sometimes
attract or repel (action). Using these abstractions to reason
about the value of the test output, an agent may generalize
from the demonstration examples to the test example.

1. Introduction
The Abstraction and Reasoning Corpus (ARC) is a general artificial intelligence benchmark targeted at both humans and AI systems (Chollet, 2019). ARC is a challeng1

University of Amsterdam 2 Qualcomm AI Research. Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies,
Inc. 3 Work was completed while an employee at Qualcomm Technologies Netherlands B.V.. Correspondence to: Natasha Butt
<n.e.butt@uva.nl>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Existing approaches to ARC can be classified as either neu1

