Premise Order Matters in Reasoning with Large Language Models

Xinyun Chen * 1 Ryan A. Chi * 1 2 Xuezhi Wang 1 Denny Zhou 1

Abstract

et al., 2023; Hagendorff et al., 2023; Jones & Steinhardt,
2022; McCoy et al., 2023). For example, Berglund et al.
(2023) revealed the Reversal Curse; i.e., LLMs trained on
“A is B” tend to fail to infer that “B is A.” Distractibility is
another failure mode (Shi et al., 2023; Jones & Steinhardt,
2022), in which LLM performance drastically decreases
when irrelevant context is included in the task description.

Large language models (LLMs) have accomplished remarkable reasoning performance in various domains. However, in the domain of reasoning tasks, we discover a frailty: LLMs are
surprisingly brittle to the ordering of the premises,
despite the fact that such ordering does not alter
the underlying task. In particular, we observe
that LLMs achieve the best performance when the
premise order aligns with the context required in
intermediate reasoning steps. For example, in deductive reasoning tasks, presenting the premises
in the same order as the ground-truth proof in the
prompt (as opposed to random ordering) drastically increases the model’s accuracy. We first
examine the effect of premise ordering on deductive reasoning on a variety of LLMs, and our
evaluation shows that even if the model performance is decent on the optimal order, permuting
the premise order can cause a performance drop of
over 30%. In addition, we release the benchmark
R-GSM, based on GSM8K, to examine the ordering effect for mathematical problem-solving, and
we again observe a significant drop in accuracy,
relative to the original GSM8K benchmark.

In this work, we investigate the effect that premise order
has on LLM reasoning. Specifically, in deductive reasoning,
changing the order of premises alone does not change the
conclusion. Consider the following illustrative example:
1. If A then B.
2. If B then C.
3. A is True.
We can derive that C is True regardless of the order of these
3 premises. While some studies show that humans have a
preference on the premise order to facilitate their reasoning (Dekeyser et al., 2000; Girotto et al., 1997), the premise
order does not drastically affect human performance, especially for problems that only involve modus ponens (if P
then Q; P ; therefore Q), which are relatively straightforward for humans.
In contrast to humans, we observe that for LLMs, the
premise order has a significant impact on reasoning performance. In particular, LLMs reach the best performance
when the premises are arranged in the same order as they
appear in the ground-truth proof. Taking the illustrative
problem above as an example, we observe two phenomena:

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive performance across a variety of reasoning tasks (Wei
et al., 2022; Cobbe et al., 2021; Hendrycks et al., 2021;
Chen et al., 2021; Austin et al., 2021). In particular, recent
state-of-the-art LLMs have reached or even surpassed human performance on multiple reasoning benchmarks, including STEM problem-solving and code generation (Bubeck
et al., 2023; Gemini, 2023; Li et al., 2022). However, recent works show that LLMs exhibit failure modes that align
with human-like cognitive biases (Berglund et al., 2023; Shi
*

1

1. Presenting “If A then B” before “If B then C” in the
prompt generally achieves a higher accuracy compared
to the reverse order.
2. The performance gap is more significant when the
number of premises increases.
Intuitively, such a preference on the premise order aligns
with human preference (Dekeyser et al., 2000) because in
the preferred order, each derivation step can be done on-thefly while looking at premises one by one, without needing
to look back and forth across all premises at each step.

2

Equal contribution Google DeepMind Stanford University.
Correspondence to: Xinyun Chen <xinyunchen@google.com>,
Ryan A. Chi <ryanchi@cs.stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

We conduct a systematic study on the premise order effect
using a variety of LLMs, including GPT-4-turbo, GPT-3.51

