What is Dataset Distillation Learning?

William Yang 1 Ye Zhu 1 Zhiwei Deng 2 Olga Russakovsky 1

Abstract
Dataset distillation has emerged as a strategy
to overcome the hurdles associated with large
datasets by learning a compact set of synthetic
data that retains essential information from the
original dataset. While distilled data can be used
to train high performing models, little is understood about how the information is stored. In this
study, we posit and answer three questions about
the behavior, representativeness, and point-wise
information content of distilled data. We reveal
distilled data cannot serve as a substitute for real
data during training outside the standard evaluation setting for dataset distillation. Additionally,
the distillation process retains high task performance by compressing information related to the
early training dynamics of real models. Finally,
we provide an framework for interpreting distilled
data and reveal that individual distilled data points
contain meaningful semantic information. This
investigation sheds light on the intricate nature of
distilled data, providing a better understanding on
how they can be effectively utilized.

Figure 1. Real vs. distilled data. Real images of airplane, car,
and truck from CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009) are shown
on left and highly salient distilled images of the same classes are
shown on the right. While distilled images can be used to train
high-accuracy classifier, why this is possible and what do they
represent remains unclear.

The crux of the problem lies in the ability to scale-down
a large dataset without losing any essential information.
Classical data compression algorithms attempt this by selecting the representative images in the training data (Guo
et al., 2022). However, such algorithms are limited by the
finite number of data points that are present in the training
dataset, which can be very restrictive in its representation.
Dataset distillation overcomes this limitation by learning a
small, information-dense dataset that can serve as a substitute for the original dataset (Wang et al., 2018; Sachdeva &
McAuley, 2023).

1. Introduction
The past decade in machine learning research has been
marked with incredible breakthroughs in leveraging overparameterized models. As a consequence, the landscape
of machine learning research has been increasingly dominated by massive datasets. The growing size of training
datasets presents a new challenge on the infrastructure required to store and train on such data. Large-scale data not
only strains existing compute infrastructure with increased
training times, but also limits its accessibility to researchers
with sufficient compute infrastructure. Therefore, there is a
crucial need for scaling down large-scale datasets.

Learning a synthetic dataset can be a double-edged sword:
on one hand, dataset distillation synthesizes a small, information dense dataset that outperforms classical data compression techniques (Sachdeva & McAuley, 2023), but on
the other hand, the distilled data does not look like real data
(Figure 1) and can behave differently than real data (Zhong
& Liu, 2023). Therefore, it is very important to identify
when and why distilled data fails to be an effective drop-in
replacements for real data.

1
Department of Computer Science, Princeton University,
Princeton NJ, United States 2 Google Research, Mountain
View CA, United States. Correspondence to: William Yang
<williamyang@cs.princeton.edu>.

Current literature on dataset distillation analysis is very
sparse. (Vicol et al., 2022) studies the implicit bias between
warm start vs. cold start of the bilevel optimization under
the meta-model matching dataset distillation approaches.
(Schirrmeister et al., 2022) shows that dataset distillation
methods can be regularized towards a simpler dataset using

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

