FedBPT: Efficient Federated Black-box Prompt Tuning
for Large Language Models

Jingwei Sun 1 Ziyue Xu 2 Hongxu Yin 2 Dong Yang 2 Daguang Xu 2 Yudong Liu 1 Zhixu Du 1 Yiran Chen 1
Holger R. Roth 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

Large language models (LLM) have shown increasing power
on various NLP tasks (Devlin et al., 2018; Raffel et al., 2020;
Brown et al., 2020; Fedus et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2021;
Zeng et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2021; Qiu et al., 2020). Typically,
these models are trained on a diverse range of text from books,
articles, and websites to gain a broad understanding of human
language and are known as the pre-trained language models
(PLMs). However, task-specific data is often required to
adapt PLMs to perform specific tasks or be more accurate in
real-world scenarios. This fine-tuning process relies heavily
on user-generated data on devices, providing a wealth of
contextual insights and nuanced use cases that reflect actual
human interaction and needs. In practice, it is challenging
to use these devices and data securely. Data needs to be collected and stored for training, but exchanging and storing
sensitive data carries security risks and privacy concerns. To
overcome the issue of data isolation, federated learning (FL)
can be applied to enable numerous devices to collaboratively
finetune PLMs over decentralized data while preserving data
privacy (McMahan et al., 2017; Sun et al., 2020).

Pre-trained language models (PLM) have revolutionized the NLP landscape, achieving stellar
performances across diverse tasks. These models,
while benefiting from vast training data, often require fine-tuning on specific data to cater to distinct
downstream tasks. However, this data adaptation
process has inherent security and privacy concerns,
primarily when leveraging user-generated, deviceresiding data. Federated learning (FL) provides a
solution, allowing collaborative model fine-tuning
without centralized data collection. However,
applying FL to finetune PLMs is hampered by
challenges, including restricted model parameter
access due to the high encapsulation, high computational requirements, and communication overheads. This paper introduces Federated Black-box
Prompt Tuning (FedBPT), a framework designed
to address these challenges. FedBPT allows the
clients to treat the model as a black-box inference
API. By focusing on training optimal prompts
and utilizing gradient-free optimization methods,
FedBPT reduces the number of exchanged
variables, boosts communication efficiency, and
minimizes computational cost and memory consumption. Experiments highlight the framework’s
ability to drastically cut communication and
memory costs while maintaining competitive performance. Ultimately, FedBPT presents a promising solution for efficient, privacy-preserving
fine-tuning of PLM in the age of large language
models. Our code is available in NVIDIA FLARE.

Although fine-tuning PLMs through FL presents promising opportunities, three challenges constrain their real-world
application on edge devices. Especially for LLMs, these challenges include (1) limited access to the model parameters due
to the high encapsulation, (2) computational and memory
costs for local clients, and (3) communication overhead in the
FL system. In the real world, mobile frameworks like TensorFlow Lite, PyTorch Mobile, and Apple CoreML, deep learning models are usually integrated or ‘encapsulated’ within
a mobile application. This encapsulation involves converting
the model into a binary format that is optimized for efficient
mobile inference, and the direct manipulation of model parameters after conversion is typically restricted. Such a high
encapsulation is also preferred by the model developers to ensure that the model is used as intended and protects its intellectual property, and it also means that end-users or third-party
developers have limited ability to alter or inspect the model.
Additionally, even if the clients could access the model parameters, it is impractical for devices with limited resources (Wen
et al., 2013; Alyamkin et al., 2019) to conduct local PLM

1

Department of Electrical Computer Engineering, Duke University, Durham, USA 2 NVIDIA, Santa Clara, USA. Correspondence
to: J. S. <jingwei.sun@duke.edu>, H. R. <hroth@nvidia.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

