Position:
Relational Deep Learning - Graph Representation
Learning on Relational Databases

Matthias Fey * 1 Weihua Hu * 1 Kexin Huang * 2 Jan Eric Lenssen * 1 3 Rishabh Ranjan * 2 Joshua Robinson * 2
Rex Ying 4 Jiaxuan You 5 Jure Leskovec 2 1

Abstract

and managed using powerful query languages such as SQL
(Codd, 1970; Chamberlin & Boyce, 1974). For this reason, they lie at the foundation of today’s large information
systems, including e-commerce, social media, banking systems, healthcare, manufacturing, and open-source scientific
repositories (Johnson et al., 2016; PubMed, 1996).

Much of the world’s most valued data is stored in
relational databases and data warehouses, where
the data is organized into tables connected by
primary-foreign key relations. However, building machine learning models using this data is
both challenging and time consuming because no
ML algorithm can directly learn from multiple
connected tables. Current approaches can only
learn from a single table, so data must first be
manually joined and aggregated into this format,
the laborious process known as feature engineering. This position paper introduces Relational
Deep Learning (RDL), a blueprint for end-to-end
learning on relational databases. The key is to
represent relational databases as temporal, heterogeneous graphs, with a node for each row in each
table, and edges specified by primary-foreign key
links. Graph Neural Networks then learn representations that leverage all input data, without any
manual feature engineering. We also introduce
R EL B ENCH, and benchmark and testing suite,
demonstrating strong initial results. Overall, we
define a new research area that generalizes graph
machine learning and broadens its applicability.

Many predictive problems over relational databases have
significant implications for human decision making. A
hospital wants to predict the risk of discharging a patient;
an e-commerce company wishes to forecast future sales
of each of their products; a telecommunications provider
wants to predict which customers will churn; and a music
streaming platform must decide which songs to recommend
to a user. Behind each of these tasks is a rich relational
schema, and many machine learning models are built using
this data (Kaggle, 2022).
However, existing learning paradigms, notably tabular learning, cannot directly learn across multiple tables. Instead, a
manual feature engineering step is first taken, where domain
knowledge is used to manually join and aggregate tables
into a single table format, where each column represents
a different feature. To illustrate this, consider a simple ecommerce schema (Fig. 1) of three tables: C USTOMERS,
T RANSACTIONS and P RODUCTS, where C USTOMERS and
P RODUCTS are linked to T RANSACTIONS, and the task is to
predict if a customer is going to complete any transactions
in the next k days. In this case, a data scientist would aggregate information from the T RANSACTIONS table to make
new features for the C USTOMERS table such as: “number of
purchases of a given customer in the last 30 days”, “number
of purchases in the last 14 days”, “number of purchases on
a Sunday”, “number of purchases on a Monday”, and so on.
The new features for each customer are stored in a single
table, ready for tabular machine learning.

1. Introduction
The information age is driven by data stored in ever-growing
relational databases and data warehouses that have come to
underpin nearly all technology stacks. Relational databases
store information in multiple tables, with entities/rows in
different tables connected using primary and foreign keys
*
Equal contribution 1 Kumo.AI 2 Stanford University 3 Max
Planck Institute for Informatics 4 Yale University 5 University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Correspondence to: Jure Leskovec
<jure@cs.stanford.edu>.

There are many issues with with the above approach: (1)
it is a manual, slow and labor intensive process; (2) feature choices are likely highly-suboptimal; (3) only a small
fraction of the overall space of possible features can be
manually explored; (4) flattening data into a single table

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

