LoCoCo: Dropping In Convolutions for Long Context Compression

Ruisi Cai 1 Yuandong Tian 2 Zhangyang Wang 1 Beidi Chen 2 3

Abstract

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) (Radford et al., 2018;
2019; Brown et al., 2020) excel across a variety of linguistic tasks, including text generation (Goyal & Durrett,
2020; Yuan et al., 2022), program synthesis (Chen et al.,
2021; Li et al., 2022), question answering (Kamalloo et al.,
2023), and mathematical problem-solving (Lewkowycz
et al., 2022). These tasks typically involve processing extensive sequences, often requiring the analysis of thousands
of tokens to derive outcomes based on comprehensive contextual information. For example, the task of summarizing
extensive government reports, as seen in the GovReport
section of SCROLLS (Shaham et al., 2022), demands that
LLMs efficiently sift through and distill key information
from vast textual data, highlighting the need for models
capable of handling long token sequences effectively.

This paper tackles the memory hurdle of of processing long context sequences in Large Language Models (LLMs), by presenting a novel
approach, Dropping In Convolutions for Long
Context Compression (LoCoCo). LoCoCo employs only a fixed-size Key-Value (KV) cache,
and can enhance efficiency in both inference and
fine-tuning stages. Diverging from prior methods
that selectively drop KV pairs based on heuristics,
LoCoCo leverages a data-driven adaptive fusion
technique, blending previous KV pairs with incoming tokens to minimize the loss of contextual
information and ensure accurate attention modeling. This token integration is achieved through
injecting one-dimensional convolutional kernels
that dynamically calculate mixing weights for
each KV cache slot. Designed for broad compatibility with existing LLM frameworks, LoCoCo allows for straightforward “drop-in” integration without needing architectural modifications, while incurring minimal tuning overhead.
Experiments demonstrate that LoCoCo maintains
consistently outstanding performance across various context lengths and can achieve a high context
compression rate during both inference and finetuning phases. During inference, we successfully
compressed up to 3482 tokens into a 128-size KV
cache, while retaining comparable performance
to the full sequence - an accuracy improvement of
up to 0.2791 compared to baselines at the same
cache size. During post-training tuning, we also
effectively extended the context length from 4K to
32K using a KV cache of fixed size 512, achieving performance similar to fine-tuning with entire sequences. Codes are available at: https:
//github.com/VITA-Group/LoCoCo.

Yet, transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) struggle to process
extensive token sequences due to their quadratic memory
demands, which exceed the capacity of contemporary hardware. Attention computations are performed in blocks (Dai
et al., 2019), with key and value states cached for subsequent encoding or decoding steps to mitigate this. However,
this approach results in a Key-Value (KV) cache size that increases linearly with context length, quickly depleting GPU
memory (Zhang et al., 2023b). Recently, StreamingLLM
(Xiao et al., 2023) attempted to reduce KV cache size by limiting each token’s receptive field and incorporating ”attention sinks”. Concurrently, H2 O (Zhang et al., 2023b) prunes
tokens based on lower accumulated attention scores to stabilize KV cache size. Despite these efforts, both methods
fail to leverage full-sequence information and adequately
extend the context window. StreamingLLM’s exclusion of
all tokens in the context middle could significantly impair
the model’s ability to utilize the full long context (even
completely ignore), known as “lost in the middle” (Liu
et al., 2023), while H2 O struggles to extrapolate to longer
sequences than the training context length (Han et al., 2023).
Enhancing the context length in LLMs also necessitates increasing the block size during fine-tuning (Press et al., 2021;
Chen et al., 2023a), introducing a significant memory challenge. While attention approximation methods like (Choromanski et al., 2020; Kitaev et al., 2020; Xiong et al., 2021)
reduce training expenses, they do not alleviate memory de-

1

University of Texas at Austin 2 Meta AI (FAIR)
3
Carnegie Mellon University.
Correspondence to: Ruisi
Cai <ruisi.cai@utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

