What needs to go right for an induction head?
A mechanistic study of in-context learning circuits and their formation

Aaditya K. Singh 1 Ted Moskovitz 1 Felix Hill 2 Stephanie C. Y. Chan * 2 Andrew M. Saxe * 1

Abstract

ity to perform in-context learning (ICL), adapting to new
inputs and tasks at test time. Given the increasing prevalence of LLMs, safety researchers have sought to understand
the mechanisms underlying important phenomena like ICL.
One approach in the service of this goal is mechanistic interpretability: reverse engineering the computations performed
by a model. Olsson et al. (2022) identified the induction
circuit, which may be responsible for many of transformers’
ICL abilities.

In-context learning is a powerful emergent ability
in transformer models. Prior work in mechanistic interpretability has identified a circuit element
that may be critical for in-context learning – the
induction head (IH), which performs a match-andcopy operation. During training of large transformers on natural language data, IHs emerge
around the same time as a notable phase change
in the loss. Despite the robust evidence for IHs
and this interesting coincidence with the phase
change, relatively little is known about the diversity and emergence dynamics of IHs. Why is there
more than one IH, and how are they dependent on
each other? Why do IHs appear all of a sudden,
and what are the subcircuits that enable them to
emerge? We answer these questions by studying
IH emergence dynamics in a controlled setting by
training on synthetic data. In doing so, we develop
and share a novel optogenetics-inspired causal
framework for modifying activations throughout
training. Using this framework, we delineate the
diverse and additive nature of IHs. By clamping
subsets of activations throughout training, we then
identify three underlying subcircuits that interact
to drive IH formation, yielding the phase change.
Furthermore, these subcircuits shed light on datadependent properties of formation, such as phase
change timing, already showing the promise of
this more in-depth understanding of subcircuits
that need to “go right” for an induction head.

An induction circuit is a two-layer circuit (Figure 1a) comprised of a “previous token head” in an earlier layer, followed by the eponymous “induction head”. Previous token
heads are attention heads responsible for attending to the
previous token and copying it into the attending token’s
residual stream.1 Induction heads then perform a matchand-copy operation, looking for a match between a query
derived from the current token and key derived from the output of the previous token head. Critically, induction circuits
typically emerge in a sharp phase change in the loss (e.g.,
Figure 3), which is often believed to be due to the interaction between two heads in different layers (Nanda, 2022).
Presumably, neither the previous token nor the induction
head are useful on their own for minimizing the loss.
Recent empirical work on ICL in transformers has introduced more nuances (Min et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2023b),
with Singh et al. (2023) even finding that ICL can be a transient phenomenon that disappears with overtraining. These
results establish a need to more thoroughly understand induction circuits, especially the dynamics of formation during
training. Reddy (2023) begins to address this question using
progress measures, which track correlational relationships
between intermediate activations during training. We instead use a causal approach, termed clamping, which allows
us to directly determine the circuits and dynamics that are
causally affecting formation. Through these experiments,
we bring to light a new set of mechanisms governing learning dynamics.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) trained on internet scale
corpora (Brown et al., 2020) showcase a remarkable abil*

Equal contribution 1 Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit,
University College London 2 Google DeepMind. Correspondence
to: Aaditya K. Singh <aaditya.singh.21@ucl.ac.uk>.

1
The residual stream was a term introduced by Elhage et al.
(2021) and refers to the embeddings after each layer that further
layers “read” input from. Layers can be viewed as reading from
and writing back into this stream. The term “stream” is meant to
emphasize the residual skip connections.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

