Unifying Bayesian Flow Networks and Diffusion Models through
Stochastic Differential Equations

Kaiwen Xue * 1 Yuhao Zhou * 2 Shen Nie 1 Xu Min 3
Xiaolu Zhang 3 Jun Zhou 3 Chongxuan Li 1

Abstract

et al., 2023) and natural language processing (Brown et al.,
2020; OpenAI, 2023). The fundamental challenge in DGMs
is to represent a flexible probability distribution that facilitates effective parameter learning and efficient inference
simultaneously, greatly depending on the data (or modality).

Bayesian flow networks (BFNs) iteratively refine
the parameters, instead of the samples in diffusion models (DMs), of distributions at various
noise levels through Bayesian inference. Owing
to its differentiable nature, BFNs are promising
in modeling both continuous and discrete data,
while simultaneously maintaining fast sampling
capabilities. This paper aims to understand and
enhance BFNs by connecting them with DMs
through stochastic differential equations (SDEs).
We identify the linear SDEs corresponding to
the noise-addition processes in BFNs, demonstrate that BFN’s regression losses are aligned
with denoise score matching, and validate the
sampler in BFN as a first-order solver for the
respective reverse-time SDE. Based on these findings and existing recipes of fast sampling in DMs,
we propose specialized solvers for BFNs that
markedly surpass the original BFN sampler in
terms of sample quality with a limited number
of function evaluations (e.g., 10) on both image and text datasets. Notably, our best sampler achieves an increase in speed of 5 ∼ 20
times for free. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/ML-GSAI/BFN-Solver.

Autoregressive models (ARMs) (OpenAI, 2023), for example, excel in modeling sequential and discrete data (e.g.,
text) but face limitations in the inference speed, which is
proportional to the number of variables. Diffusion models (DMs) (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020;
Song et al., 2021), on the other hand, better balance generation quality and efficiency with a coarse-to-fine approach.
Although considered state-of-the-art in image generation,
DMs encounter challenges in handling discrete variables,
where score matching algorithms (Hyvärinen, 2005; Vincent, 2011) do not directly apply.
A new class of generative models, Bayesian Flow Networks
(BFNs) (Graves et al., 2023), has been developed recently to
overcome these challenges. While inspired by DMs, BFNs
distinguish themselves by focusing on iteratively refining
the parameters (instead of the samples) of a distribution set
at different noise levels through Bayesian inference (see
Sec. 3 for more details). This strategy enables BFNs to
facilitate fast sampling and maintain a continuous nature,
even when processing discrete data. With carefully designed
regression losses, BFNs have shown considerable promise
in both image and language modeling. Notably, BFN is
primarily developed based on a message-sending process
with minimum communication length, and the exact relation
between BFNs and DMs remains unclear.

1. Introduction
Deep generative models (DGMs) are effective in capturing complex data distributions and producing realistic samples, substantially influencing fields such as computer vision (Rombach et al., 2022; Ramesh et al., 2022; Podell

As summarized in Table 1, this paper primarily contributes
by unifying BFNs and DMs through stochastic differential equations (SDEs), a pivotal step in understanding their
relationship and enhancing BFNs. Initially, by slightly truncating the time, we identify linear SDEs corresponding to
the noise-adding processes in BFN on both continuous (see
Sec. 4) and discrete data (see Sec. 5) and derive the reversetime SDEs for sampling. Note that the SDEs for discrete
data operate on a set of latent variables, which the original
BFN formulation marginalizes out, rather than distribution
parameters. Furthermore, we demonstrate that, especially

*

Equal contribution 1 Gaoling School of AI, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China 2 Department of Computer Science
and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 3 Ant Group,
Hangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Chongxuan Li <chongxuanli@ruc.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

