AI Control: Improving Safety Despite Intentional Subversion

Ryan Greenblatt 1 Buck Shlegeris 1 Kshitij Sachan 2 Fabien Roger 1

Abstract

2023).

As large language models (LLMs) become more
powerful and are deployed more autonomously,
it will be increasingly important to prevent them
from causing harmful outcomes. To do so, safety
measures either aim at making LLMs try to avoid
harmful outcomes or aim at preventing LLMs
from causing harmful outcomes, even if they try
to cause them. In this paper, we focus on this
second layer of defense. We develop and evaluate
pipelines of safety techniques (protocols) that try
to ensure safety despite intentional subversion an approach we call AI control. We investigate a
setting in which we want to solve a sequence of
programming problems without ever submitting
subtly wrong code, using access to a powerful but
untrusted model (in our case, GPT-4), access to
a less powerful trusted model (in our case, GPT3.5), and limited access to high-quality trusted
labor. We investigate a range of protocols and
red-team them by exploring strategies that the
untrusted model could use to subvert them. We
find that using the trusted model to edit untrustedmodel code or using the untrusted model as a
monitor substantially improves on simple baselines.

In the future, when LLMs are more powerful and deployed
more autonomously, they will increasingly have the opportunity and ability to take actions that might have significant
bad outcomes. And so, the safety measures in the pipelines
around these models will become increasingly important
(Sharkey et al., 2024).
One concern is that LLMs might attempt to bypass safety
measures. Intentional subversion of safety measures could
occur if LLMs start pursuing objectives that don’t align with
their intended goals (Ngo et al., 2022; Carlsmith, 2023), if
their training data is poisoned by attackers (Li et al., 2022;
Carlini et al., 2023), or if the AI developers failed to foresee
other forms of unfortunate generalizations. Furthermore,
such subversion could remain present and hidden despite
harmlessness fine-tuning (Hubinger et al., 2024). In this
paper, we describe safety techniques that try to ensure safety
against models intentionally subverting safety measures, and
evaluate them with red teaming. We call this approach AI
control.
We expect that AI labs will use future potentially untrusted
AIs in combination with human labor and weaker models.
AI developers may be confident that some weaker models
are not subverting safety measures, e.g. because weaker
models may have been deployed and stress-tested for a
long time or because weaker models aren’t capable enough
to coherently pursue a hidden goal. Therefore, we assume
access to a powerful untrusted model, a less powerful trusted
model, and limited access to high-quality labor. Our main
question is whether these resources are enough to prevent a
more powerful model from subverting safety measures.

1. Introduction
As LLMs have advanced in capabilities, researchers have
devised increasingly sophisticated methods to ensure that
products powered by LLMs avoid undesired behaviors. For
example, the core of Bing Chat is a fine-tuned GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023a) that generates responses, but there are several
other steps in its pipeline, such as blurring all faces in the images and replacing harmful model-generated answers with a
generic message saying that the model can’t help (Microsoft,

To help answer this question, we introduce the APPS backdooring setting, where the goal is to solve programming
problems without ever submitting a solution with a backdoor. A blue team (which is standing in for the developers
of an AI system) proposes a protocol for solving these problems using calls to an untrusted model, a less powerful
trusted model (GPT-3.5), and limited calls to high-quality
labor. In response to each protocol, a red team designs a
pipeline around GPT-4, which will be used to simulate an
untrusted model trying to subvert safety measures. The red
team wins if the blue team ever submits a solution containing a backdoor. We call this methodology for estimating the

1

Redwood Research 2 Anthropic, work done at Redwood Research. Author contributions are listed in Appendix A. Correspondence to: Ryan Greenblatt <ryan@rdwrs.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

