A Theory of Fault-Tolerant Learning

Changlong Wu 1 Yifan Wang 1 Ananth Grama 1

Abstract

that are resilient to hardware faults is a critical component
of such systems.

Developing machine learning models that account
for potential faults encountered in real-world environments presents a fundamental challenge for
mission-critical applications. In this paper, we
introduce a novel theoretical framework grounded
in learning theory for dealing with faults. In
particular, we propose a framework called faulttolerant PAC learning, aimed at identifying the
most fault-tolerant models from a given hypothesis class (such as neural networks). We show that
if faults occur randomly, fault-tolerant learning is
equivalent to regular PAC learning. However, for
adversarial faults, we show that the sample complexity of fault-tolerant PAC learning can grow
linearly w.r.t. the number of perturbing functions
induced by the faults, even for a hypothesis class
with VC-dimension 1. We then provide a matching upper bound by restricting the number of perturbing functions. Finally, we show that the linear
dependency on the number of perturbing functions can be substantially improved for deletion
faults in neural networks. Our work provides a
powerful formal framework and avenues for a
number of future investigations on the precise
characterization of fault-tolerant learning.

Experimental results on fault tolerance highlight the fragility
of modern machine learning systems to even minor faults.
For example, recent work (Nguyen et al., 2023) shows that
stuck-at faults (Phatak & Koren, 1995; Syed et al., 2023)
in only a few critical intermediate outputs can significantly
reduce the accuracy of deep neural networks like ResNet18, rendering them ineffective. Adversarial faults in the
form of bit-flip attacks (BFA) (Rakin et al., 2019) that alter
small fractions of the weights can massively impact performance. These results underscore concerns relating to fault
tolerance issues in machine learning systems operating in
mission-critical settings. Due to the diversity of experimental settings, there has been a lack of theoretical formulations,
models, and associated analyses that can inform practical
solutions.
This paper introduces a novel theoretical framework for analyzing fault tolerance, proposing rigorous analytical tools to
guide the development of reliable models in diverse faulty
environments. Formally, let X be a set of features and Y be
the set of outcomes. A model is a function hw : X → Y
indexed by w. This could be, for instance, a function represented by a neural network with parameters (i.e., weights)
w. For any function hw , we associate a set of functions
U(hw ) ⊂ Y X , which includes all possible perturbed functions when a fault occurs during the execution of hw . For
any given (x, y) and a loss function ℓ : Y × Y → R≥0 , we
define the adversarial faulty-loss as:

1. Introduction
Learning reliable and trustworthy models is an important
challenge in contemporary machine learning. Missioncritical applications like autonomous vehicles (Ma et al.,
2020; Hengstler et al., 2016), spacecraft (Izzo et al., 2019;
Tipaldi et al., 2020), learning-enabled industrial control
systems (Al Shahrani et al., 2022; Kershaw et al., 2021),
and those operating in extreme environments (Verma et al.,
2023; Khan, 2020; Lu, 2023), demand high performance,
reliability, and graceful degradation. Constructing models

ℓU (hw ; x, y) =

sup

ℓ(h(x), y).

h∈U (hw )

Note that the adversarial faulty loss measures the worst loss
incurred by executing hw on x when a fault occurs. Similarly, for any given distribution p over U(hw ), we define the
random fault-loss as ℓU (hw ; x, y) = Eh∼p [ℓ(h(x), y)]. Let
D be a distribution over X × Y and H = {hw : w ∈ W} be
a class of models. Our goal is to learn a model ĥ ∈ H that
achieves the minimal faulty-regret on D under fault-type U:

1
Center for Science of Information, Department of Computer
Science, Purdue University, West Lafayette, USA. Correspondence
to: Changlong Wu <wuchangl@hawaii.edu>.

h
i
Regn (ĥ) = E(x,y)∼D ℓU (ĥ; x, y)

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

− inf E(x,y)∼D [ℓU (hw ; x, y)]
hw ∈H

(1)
1

