A Graph is Worth K Words: Euclideanizing Graph using Pure Transformer

Zhangyang Gao * 1 2 Daize Dong * 1 Cheng Tan 1 2 Jun Xia 1 2 Bozhen Hu 1 2 Stan Z. Li † 1

Abstract

Non-Euclidean nature of graphs has inspired sophisticated
model designs, including graph neural networks (Kipf &
Welling, 2016a; Veličković et al., 2017) and graph transformers (Ying et al., 2021; Min et al., 2022). These models
excel in encoding graph structures through attention maps.
However, the structural encoding strategies limit the usage of auto-regressive mechanism, thereby hindering pure
transformer from revolutionizing graph fields, akin to the
success of Vision Transformers (ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al.,
2020) in computer vision. We employ pure transformer for
graph modeling and address the following open questions:
(1) How to eliminate the Non-Euclidean nature to facilitate
graph representation? (2) How to generate Non-Euclidean
graphs from Euclidean representations? (3) Could the combination of graph representation and generation framework
benefits from self-supervised pretraining?

Can we model Non-Euclidean graphs as pure language or even Euclidean vectors while retaining
their inherent information? The Non-Euclidean
property have posed a long term challenge in
graph modeling. Despite recent graph neural
networks and graph transformers efforts encoding graphs as Euclidean vectors, recovering the
original graph from vectors remains a challenge.
In this paper, we introduce GraphsGPT, featuring an Graph2Seq encoder that transforms NonEuclidean graphs into learnable Graph Words in
the Euclidean space, along with a GraphGPT decoder that reconstructs the original graph from
Graph Words to ensure information equivalence.
We pretrain GraphsGPT on 100M molecules and
yield some interesting findings: (1) The pretrained Graph2Seq excels in graph representation
learning, achieving state-of-the-art results on 8/9
graph classification and regression tasks. (2) The
pretrained GraphGPT serves as a strong graph
generator, demonstrated by its strong ability to
perform both few-shot and conditional graph generation. (3) Graph2Seq+GraphGPT enables effective graph mixup in the Euclidean space, overcoming previously known Non-Euclidean challenges. (4) The edge-centric pretraining framework GraphsGPT demonstrates its efficacy in
graph domain tasks, excelling in both representation and generation. Code is available at GitHub.

We present Graph2Seq, a pure transformer encoder designed
to compress the Non-Euclidean graph into a sequence of
learnable tokens called Graph Words in a Euclidean form,
where all nodes and edges serve as the inputs and undergo an
initial transformation to form Graph Words. Different from
graph transformers (Ying et al., 2021), our approach doesn’t
necessitate explicit encoding of the adjacency matrix and
edge features in the attention map. Unlike TokenGT (Kim
et al., 2022), we introduce a Codebook featuring learnable
vectors for graph position encoding, leading to improved
training stability and accelerated convergence. In addition,
we employ a random shuffle of the position Codebook, implicitly augmenting different input orders for the same graph,
and offering each position vector the same opportunity of
optimization to generalize to larger graphs.

1. Introduction

We introduce GraphGPT, a groundbreaking GPT-style transformer model for graph generation. To recover the NonEuclidean graph structure, we propose an edge-centric generation strategy that utilizes block-wise causal attention to
sequentially generate the graph. Contrary to previous methods (Hu et al., 2020a; Shi et al., 2019; Peng et al., 2022) that
generate nodes before predicting edges, the edge-centric
technique jointly generates edges and their corresponding
endpoint nodes, greatly simplifying the generative space. To
align graph generation with language generation, we implement auto-regressive generation using block-wise causal attention, which enables the effective translation of Euclidean
representations into Non-Euclidean graph structures.

Graphs, inherent to Non-Euclidean data, are extensively
applied in scientific fields such as molecular design, social
network analysis, recommendation systems, and meshed 3D
surfaces (Shakibajahromi et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2020a;
Huang et al., 2022; Tan et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023a; Liu
et al., 2023a; Xia et al., 2022b;b; Gao et al., 2022). The
*

Equal contribution 1 Westlake University, Hangzhou, China
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Stan
Z. Li <Stan.ZQ.Li@westlake.edu.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

