Few-Shot Character Understanding in Movies
as an Assessment to Meta-Learning of Theory-of-Mind

Mo Yu * 1 Qiujing Wang * 2 Shunchi Zhang * 2 Yisi Sang 3 Kangsheng Pu 3
Zekai Wei 3 Han Wang 1 Liyan Xu 1 Jing Li 4 Yue Yu 5 Jie Zhou 1

Abstract

teractions, humans need to understand other people’s mental
states, such as intentions and beliefs, with small amounts
of information and to predict their next moves (Perner &
Wimmer, 1985; Keysar et al., 2000). Such ability is known
as theory-of-mind (ToM) (Premack & Woodruff, 1978).

When reading a story, humans can quickly understand new fictional characters with a few observations, mainly by drawing analogies to fictional and real people they already know. This
reflects the few-shot and meta-learning essence
of humans’ inference of characters’ mental states,
i.e., theory-of-mind (ToM), which is largely ignored in existing research. We fill this gap with
a novel NLP dataset in a realistic narrative understanding scenario, T O M- IN -AMC. Our dataset
consists of ∼1,000 parsed movie scripts, each corresponding to a few-shot character understanding
task that requires models to mimic humans’ ability of fast digesting characters with a few starting
scenes in a new movie. We further propose a
novel ToM prompting approach designed to explicitly assess the influence of multiple ToM dimensions. It surpasses existing baseline models,
underscoring the significance of modeling multiple ToM dimensions for our task. Our extensive
human study verifies that humans are capable of
solving our problem by inferring characters’ mental states based on their previously seen movies.
In comparison, all the AI systems lag >20% behind humans, highlighting a notable limitation in
existing approaches’ ToM capabilities. Code and
data are available at https://github.com/
ShunchiZhang/ToM-in-AMC.

In AI research, there is also a growing interest in giving machines such theory-of-mind (Nematzadeh et al., 2018; Yuan
et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2021), mostly in synthetic settings.
The accomplishments of these efforts have encouraged a
shift in the study of ToM from synthetic environments to
real-life scenarios for potential future applications. However, creating such evaluation benchmarks is challenging
since it would be impossible to imitate human actions that
take into account a variety of real-world elements. The
NLP community hence resorts to fictional characters in stories as a delegate. Characters play a central role in stories
— while reading stories, humans build mental models for
characters to understand their goals, emotions, personalities,
future behaviors, etc. (Gernsbacher et al., 1998). Therefore, understanding characters in stories serves naturally as
a proxy for assessing the machine’s ToM ability. Benchmarks with different task formats have been established,
including personality classification (Flekova & Gurevych,
2015), personalized dialogue generation (Li et al., 2020),
and anonymous speaker guessing (Sang et al., 2022b).
All existing assessments model a character with a large
amount of behavioral data and dialogues. In contrast, humans can usually understand new people with “few-shot”
observations. Instead of making judgments after accumulating observations over an extended period, when we meet
strangers or read new fictional characters, we make primitive judgments based on the limited information currently
available and dynamically change our impressions over time
as we take in new information.

1. Introduction
Humans are social animals who engage in a high frequency
of social activities every day. To achieve efficient social in-

Humans have this ability because of their prior experience of
meeting different people and reading stories about various
characters throughout their lifetime (Rowe et al., 2008; Jahan et al., 2021), as well as employing basic cognitive functions such as association (Ma et al., 2011). More broadly,
this relates to the brain’s abilities for analogy and categorization regarding individuals (Hofstadter & Sander, 2013).

*

Equal contribution 1 Pattern Recognition Center, WeChat AI
Xi’an Jiaotong University 3 Syracuse University 4 New Jersey Institute of Technology 5 Lehigh University. Correspondence to: Mo
Yu <moyumyu@global.tencent.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

