Learning High-Order Relationships of Brain Regions

Weikang Qiu 1 Huangrui Chu 1 Selena Wang 1 Haolan Zuo 1 Xiaoxiao Li 2 3 Yize Zhao 1 Rex Ying 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Discovering relations among brain regions toward a specific phenotypic outcome from fMRI signals has been a
crucial area in neuroimaging research. Reliable and informative relations help neuroscientists and clinical professionals to better understand brain functions, and thus
improve clinical diagnosis and treatments (Kucian et al.,
2008; 2006; Li et al., 2015b;a; Satterthwaite et al., 2015;
Wang et al., 2016). However, despite the clear multiplexity
of the brain’s involvement in cognition (Logue & Gould,
2014; Barrasso-Catanzaro & Eslinger, 2016; Knauff & Wolf,
2010; Reineberg et al., 2022), current imaging biomarker detection methods (Shen et al., 2017; Gao et al., 2019; Li et al.,
2021) focus only on the contributing roles of the pairwise
connectivity edges. In contrast, most brain functions involve
distributed patterns of interactions among multiple regions
(Semedo et al., 2019). For instance, executive planning
requires the appropriate communication of signals across
many distinct cortical areas (Logue & Gould, 2014). These
high-order relationships, cannot always be decomposed into
pairwise ones (Battiston et al., 2020; 2021; Bick et al., 2023),
thus allowing them to capture information beyond the reach
of pairwise ones (Do et al., 2020). Consequently, relying
solely on pairwise connectivity, without accounting for the
brain’s complex high-order structure, may result in inconsistent findings and low predictive performance across studies.
Although recently there have been a few works (Zu et al.,
2016; Xiao et al., 2019; Li et al., 2022) working on discovering the high-order relationships of brain regions, they
are unable to effectively extract meaningful patterns. This
is because these methods usually first identify some candidates of high-order relationships and then perform feature
selection. The candidates are obtained by enumerating only
a small portion of all possible relations, or by clustering
methods that are unrelated to the target. As a result, most
informative high-order relations are likely excluded at the
first stage. This inspires us to solve the problem in an endto-end manner through a more expressive model and a more
appropriate objective.

Discovering reliable and informative relationships among brain regions from functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) signals is
essential in phenotypic predictions. Most of the
current methods fail to accurately characterize
those interactions because they only focus on
pairwise connections and overlook the high-order
relationships of brain regions. We propose
that these high-order relationships should be
maximally informative and minimally redundant
(MIMR). However, identifying such high-order
relationships is challenging and under-explored
due to the exponential search space and the
absence of a tractable objective. In response
to this gap, we propose a novel method named
H Y BR I D which aims to extract MIMR highorder relationships from fMRI data. H Y BR I D
employs a C ONSTRUCTOR to identify hyperedge
structures, and a W EIGHTER to compute a weight
for each hyperedge, which avoids searching
in exponential space. H Y BR I D achieves the
MIMR objective through an innovative information bottleneck framework named multi-head
drop-bottleneck with theoretical guarantees.
Our comprehensive experiments demonstrate
the effectiveness of our model. Our model
outperforms the state-of-the-art predictive model
by an average of 11.2%, regarding the quality
of hyperedges measured by CPM, a standard
protocol for studying brain connections. Source
code is available at https://github.com/
Graph-and-Geometric-Learning/
HyBRiD.

1

Yale University, New Haven, USA 2 University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, Canada 3 Vector Institute, Toronto, Canada.
Correspondence to: Rex Ying <rex.ying@yale.edu>.

In this paper, we aim to identify high-order relationships
that are informative towards a phenotypic outcome, such
as a cognition score. However, unlike pairwise relations,
the number of possible high-order relations is exponential.
To identify the most informative ones from the exponential

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

