On Learning Deep O(n)-Equivariant Hyperspheres

Pavlo Melnyk 1 Michael Felsberg 1 Mårten Wadenbäck 1 Andreas Robinson 1 Cuong Le 1

Abstract

transformation groups. Similarly, geometric deep learning (GDL) as introduced by Bronstein et al. (2017; 2021)
constitutes a unifying framework for various neural architectures. This framework is built from the first principles
of geometry—symmetry and scale separation—and enables
tractable learning in high dimensions.

In this paper, we utilize hyperspheres and regular n-simplexes and propose an approach to
learning deep features equivariant under the
transformations of nD reflections and rotations,
encompassed by the powerful group of O(n).
Namely, we propose O(n)-equivariant neurons
with spherical decision surfaces that generalize to any dimension n, which we call Deep
Equivariant Hyperspheres. We demonstrate how to combine them in a network that
directly operates on the basis of the input points
and propose an invariant operator based on the
relation between two points and a sphere, which
as we show, turns out to be a Gram matrix. Using
synthetic and real-world data in nD, we experimentally verify our theoretical contributions and
find that our approach is superior to the competing methods for O(n)-equivariant benchmark
datasets (classification and regression), demonstrating a favorable speed/performance trade-off.
The code is available on GitHub.

Symmetries play a vital role in preserving structural information of geometric data and allow models to adjust to
different geometric transformations. This flexibility ensures
that models remain robust and accurate, even when the input data undergo various changes. In this context, spheres
exhibit a maximal set of symmetries compared to other
geometric entities in Euclidean space.
The orthogonal group O(n) fully encapsulates the symmetry
of an nD sphere, including both rotational and reflection
symmetries. Integrating these symmetries into a model as
an inductive bias is often a crucial requirement for problems in natural sciences and the respective applications, e.g.,
molecular analysis, protein design and assessment, or catalyst design (Rupp et al., 2012; Ramakrishnan et al., 2014;
Townshend et al., 2021; Jing et al., 2021; Lan et al., 2022).
In this paper, we consider data that live in Euclidean space
(such as point clouds) and undergo rotations and reflections, i.e., transformations of the O(n)-group. Enriching
the theory of steerable 3D spherical neurons (Melnyk et al.,
2022), we present a method for learning O(n)-equivariant
deep features using regular n-simplexes2 and nD spheres,
which we call Deep Equivariant Hyperspheres
(see Figure 1). The name also captures the fact that the
vertices of a regular n-simplex lie on an nD sphere, and that
our results enable combining equivariant hyperspheres in
multiple layers, thereby enabling deep propagation.

1. Introduction
Spheres1 serve as a foundational concept in Euclidean
space while simultaneously embodying the essence of nonEuclidean geometry through their intrinsic curvature and
non-linear nature. This motivated their usage as decision
surfaces encompassed by spherical neurons (Perwass et al.,
2003; Melnyk et al., 2021).
Felix Klein’s Erlangen program of 1872 (Hilbert & CohnVossen, 1952) introduced a methodology to unify nonEuclidean geometries, emphasizing the importance of studying geometries through their invariance properties under

Our main contributions are summarized as follows:
• We propose O(n)-equivariant spherical neurons, called
Deep Equivariant Hyperspheres, readily
generalizing to any dimension (see Section 4).

1

Computer Vision Laboratory, Department of Electrical Engineering, Linköping University, Sweden. Correspondence to:
Michael Felsberg <michael.felsberg@liu.se>.

• We define and analyze generalized concepts for a network composed of the proposed neurons, including the
invariant operator modeling the relation between two
points and a sphere (21).

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
By sphere, we generally refer to an nD sphere or a hypersphere; e.g., a circle is thus a 2D sphere.

2
We use the fact that a regular n-simplex contains n+1 equidistant vertices in nD.

1

