Sample Average Approximation for Conditional Stochastic Optimization with
Dependent Data

Yafei Wang 1 Bo Pan 1 Mei Li 2 Jianya Lu 3 Lingcheng Kong 4 Bei Jiang 1 Linglong Kong 1

Abstract

(CSO) (Hu et al., 2020a;b; Wu et al., 2023), in the form of,


F ? := minEξ fξ Eη|ξ [gη (x, ξ)] ,
x∈X


(1)
?
x := arg minEξ fξ Eη|ξ [gη (x, ξ)] ,

Conditional Stochastic Optimization (CSO) is a
powerful modelling paradigm for optimization under uncertainty. The existing literature on CSO
is mainly based on the independence assumption
of data, which shows that the solution of CSO
is asymptotically consistent and enjoys a finite
sample guarantee. The independence assumption,
however, does not typically hold in many important applications with dependence patterns, such
as time series analysis, operational control, and
reinforcement learning. In this paper, we aim
to fill this gap and consider a Sample Average
Approximation (SAA) for CSO with dependent
data. Leveraging covariance inequalities and independent block sampling technique, we provide
theoretical guarantees of SAA for CSO with dependent data. In particular, we show that SAA for
CSO retains asymptotic consistency and a finite
sample guarantee under mild conditions. In addition, we establish the sample complexity O(d/ε4 )
of SAA for CSO, which is shown to be of the same
order as independent cases. Through experiments
on several applications, we verify the theoretical
results and demonstrate that dependence does not
degrade the performance of the SAA approach in
real data applications.

x∈X

where X ∈ Rd is the set of decision variables, fξ (·) : Rm →
R is a loss function depending on the random vector ξ
and gη (·, ξ) : Rd → Rm is a vector-valued loss function
depending on both random vectors ξ ∈ Ξ and η ∈ H.
Throughout, we only assume that we have samples from the
distribution P(ξ) and the conditional distribution P(η | ξ).
The goal of the problem (1) is to find an optimal solution
of decision x ∈ X that minimizes a given composition
expected loss, where the inner expectation with respect to
(w.r.t.) to an underlying population distribution η given ξ,
P(η | ξ), and the outer expectation is w.r.t. the distribution
P(ξ). Here we define F ? and x? as the optimal value and
solution for the problem (1), respectively.
CSO is a powerful modelling paradigm that is widely used in
a variety of applications, such as meta-learning in deep networks (Finn et al., 2017), optimal control in reinforcement
learning (Dai et al., 2017; Hambly et al., 2021), policy estimation in linear quadratic adaptive control (Wang & Janson,
2021), instrumental variable regression in causal inference
(Hu et al., 2020b; Goda & Kitade, 2023). It can be regarded
as an intermediate class of optimization between classical
Stochastic Optimization (SO) (Fouskakis & Draper, 2002)
and Multistage Stochastic Optimization (MSO) (Zhang &
Xiao, 2021). Specifically, CSO is much more general than
SO and includes the classical SO as a special case when
gη (·) is an identity function. In addition, it can model and
account for dynamic randomness and involves conditional
construction, while SO works with the cumulative distribution functions. CSO is also less complicated than MSO
which aims at a static choice, especially when it comes to
calculation and uncertainty quantification.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we study a specific class of stochastic optimization problems, called Conditional Stochastic Optimization
1

Department of Mathematical and Statistical Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada 2 Academy of Mathematics and
Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
School of Mathematics, Statistics and Actuarial Science, University of Essex, Colchester, UK 4 Department of Mathematics and
Statistics, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Linglong Kong <lkong@ualberta.ca>.

A variety of optimization methods in solving problem (1)
have been studied in the existing literature. However, the
construction of optimal solutions in large-scale, data-driven
settings remains a major challenge. In particular, since
the true distributions P(ξ) and P(η | ξ) in problem (1) are
unknown in most cases of practical interest, it could be

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

