An Improved Finite-time Analysis of Temporal Difference
Learning with Deep Neural Networks

Zhifa Ke 1 Zaiwen Wen 2 Junyu Zhang 3

Abstract

For large-scale reinforcement learning (RL) problems, appropriate parameterization of the Q function is crucial for
better scalability of the TD algorithms. Common examples
include linear (Tesauro et al., 1995), general smooth nonlinear (Maei et al., 2009), and neural network (Mnih et al.,
2013) function approximations. However, it is well known
that the naive extension of TD learning and Q-learning algorithms can diverge under the general function approximation Tsitsiklis & Van Roy (1996). To encourage convergence, numerous variants of TD and Q-learning have been
proposed, including Least-squares TD (LSTD) (Bradtke &
Barto, 1996; Boyan, 2002) and gradient TD (GTD) (Sutton
et al., 2009a;b), to name a few.

Temporal difference (TD) learning algorithms
with neural network function parameterization
have well-established empirical success in many
practical large-scale reinforcement learning tasks.
However, theoretical understanding of these algorithms remains challenging due to the nonlinearity of the action-value approximation. In this
paper, we develop an improved non-asymptotic
analysis of the neural TD method with a general
L-layer neural network. New proof techniques
are developed and an improved new Õ(ϵ−1 ) sample complexity is derived. To our best knowledge, this is the first finite-time analysis of neural
TD that achieves an Õ(ϵ−1 ) complexity under
the Markovian sampling, as opposed to the best
known Õ(ϵ−2 ) complexity in the existing literature.

The applications of neural network function approximation
have witnessed huge empirical success in many real-world
tasks, including Deep Q-network (DQN) algorithms (Mnih
et al., 2013; Van Hasselt et al., 2016), policy improvement
method (Sutton et al., 1999), trust region policy optimization (Schulman et al., 2015) and the actor-critic algorithms
(Konda & Tsitsiklis, 1999; Lillicrap et al., 2015; Fujimoto
et al., 2018), etc. However, due to the analysis difficulties
brought by the function approximation, a significant gap
exists between the empirical success and the theoretical
understanding of these algorithms. Hence analyzing the
convergence and sample complexity of TD learning and
Q-learning under various Q function parameterizations has
always been an active topic in the RL community during the
past decades.

1. Introduction
The temporal difference (TD) learning method, firstly designed for policy evaluation (Sutton, 1988), is a fundamental
building block of many popular Reinforcement Learning
(RL) algorithms. In standard TD learning algorithms for
tabular MDP, based on the Bellman operator, the agent iteratively obtains a state-action-reward-transition tuple and then
updates the Q values by a weighted average of the current
value and the TD target. Once the algorithm converges, the
Q function is considered to be the final return obtained by
executing the target policy given some initial action-state
pair.

Early works focus on the asymptotic convergence of the algorithms with tabular or linear function approximation. For
the tabular (stochastic) TD or Q learning method, Jaakkola
et al. (1993) established the asymptotic convergence for
the first time. Later on, the asymptotic convergence of
algorithms with linear function approximation has been extensively discussed using ODE-based methods, see e.g. Tsitsiklis & Van Roy (1996); Perkins & Pendrith (2002); Borkar
(2009). Meanwhile, in contrast to the convergent results
for RL algorithms under the tabular or linear settings, TD
with nonlinear function approximation is known to diverge
in general Tsitsiklis & Van Roy (1996); Brandfonbrener &
Bruna (2019). To overcome this issue, Maei et al. (2009)
proposed to optimize the Mean Squared Projected Bellman

1
Center for Data Science, Peking University, China. 2 Beijing International Center for Mathematical Research, Center for Machine
Learning Research and Changsha Institute for Computing and Digital Economy, Beijing, China 3 Department of Industrial Systems Engineering and Management, National University of Singapore, Singapore. Correspondence to: Zhifa Ke <kezhifa@stu.pku.edu.cn>,
Zaiwen Wen <wenzw@pku.edu.cn>, Junyu Zhang <junyuz@nus.edu.sg>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

