Self-Alignment of Large Language Models via Monopolylogue-based
Social Scene Simulation
Xianghe Pang * 1 3 Shuo Tang * 1 3 Rui Ye * 1 3 Yuxin Xiong 1 Bolun Zhang 1 Yanfeng Wang 2 1 Siheng Chen 1 2 3

Abstract

2024; Kang et al., 2023; Hazell, 2023), preventing various
unpredictable negative consequences that could stem from
their misuse (Anwar et al., 2024; Yi et al., 2024; Barrett
et al., 2023). In response to this, a wide range of industrial
companies and academic institutions are dedicating significant efforts to expedite research focused on value alignment
in LLMs (Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022b).

Aligning large language models (LLMs) with human values is imperative to mitigate potential adverse effects resulting from their misuse. Drawing
from the sociological insight that acknowledging
all parties’ concerns is a key factor in shaping
human values, this paper proposes a novel direction to align LLMs by themselves: social scene
simulation. To achieve this, we present MATRIX,
a novel social scene simulator that emulates realistic scenes around a user’s input query, enabling
the LLM to take social consequences into account before responding. MATRIX serves as a
virtual rehearsal space, akin to a Monopolylogue,
where the LLM performs diverse roles related to
the query and practice by itself. To inject this
alignment, we fine-tune the LLM with MATRIXsimulated data, ensuring adherence to human values without compromising inference speed. We
theoretically show that the LLM with MATRIX
outperforms Constitutional AI under mild assumptions. Finally, extensive experiments validate that
our method outperforms over 10 baselines across
4 benchmarks. As evidenced by 875 user ratings,
our tuned 13B-size LLM exceeds GPT-4 in aligning with human values. See our project page at
https://shuotang123.github.io/MATRIX.

Presently, methods for aligning LLMs typically depend
on external supervision, either from humans or other
LLMs (Ouyang et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2023). As one of
the most representative approaches, reinforcement learning
from human feedback (RLHF) (OpenAI, 2023; Touvron
et al., 2023) relies on massive human-annotated preference
data and a two-stage training process (i.e., reward model
and LLM training). This requires a significant investment
in both human labor and computational resources. For example, OpenAI spent over 6 months employing RLHF to
enhance GPT-4’s alignment and safety before its public release (OpenAI, 2023). Some other methods could work
without human supervision; however, they typically necessitate oversight from more advanced LLMs (Xu et al., 2024;
Liu et al., 2024). This reliance, particularly on paid commercial APIs, can lead to substantial costs. Additionally,
such an approach inherently limits the potential for reaching
the capabilities of superhuman models (Burns et al., 2023).
Without relying on extensive external resources, a new
paradigm emerges where LLMs can achieve value alignment by themselves, termed self-alignment (Sun et al., 2023;
Li et al., 2024). Current methods typically rely on humandefined rules to promote appropriate responses. For example, (Askell et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2024; Sun et al., 2024)
design tailored prompts to direct LLMs towards being harmless; (Sun et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2024) focus on in-context
learning, providing some examples that are aligned with social norms; and (Bai et al., 2022b) applies self-critique and
revision guided by constitutional rules. However, all these
methods are notably constrained by rigid, pre-determined
human rules, which lack the necessary flexibility to adapt to
the diverse and complex nature of real-world user instructions. This limitation hinders the universal applicability of
such rule-based alignment methods in all scenarios.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the meteoric rise in success
of large language models (LLMs) (OpenAI, 2023; Touvron
et al., 2023). As these highly capable large language models
grow increasingly powerful, it is imperative for humanity to
ensure they are aligned with human values (Bengio et al.,
*

Equal contribution 1 Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China 2 Shanghai AI
Laboratory, Shanghai, China 3 Multi-Agent Governance & Intelligence Crew (MAGIC), Shanghai, China. Correspondence to:
Siheng Chen <sihengc@sjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

In this paper, we explore a brand-new direction to achieve
1

