Unveiling the Cycloid Trajectory of EM Iterations in Mixed Linear Regression

Zhankun Luo 1 Abolfazl Hashemi 1

Abstract

address the challenges arising from data with corruptions,
missing values, and latent variables (Beale & Little, 1975).
In this paper, we focus on the symmetrical two-component
mixed linear regression (2MLR) that can be expressed as
follows:
y = (−1)z+1 ⟨θ∗ , x⟩ + ε,
(1)

We study the trajectory of iterations and the convergence rates of the Expectation-Maximization
(EM) algorithm for two-component Mixed Linear Regression (2MLR). The fundamental goal
of MLR is to learn the regression models from
unlabeled observations. The EM algorithm finds
extensive applications in solving the mixture of
linear regressions. Recent results have established the super-linear convergence of EM for
2MLR in the noiseless and high SNR settings
under some assumptions and its global convergence rate with random initialization has been affirmed. However, the exponent of convergence
has not been theoretically estimated and the geometric properties of the trajectory of EM iterations are not well-understood. In this paper,
first, using Bessel functions we provide explicit
closed-form expressions for the EM updates under all SNR regimes. Then, in the noiseless setting, we completely characterize the behavior of
EM iterations by deriving a recurrence relation at
the population level and notably show that all the
iterations lie on a certain cycloid. Based on this
new trajectory-based analysis, we exhibit the theoretical estimate for the exponent of super-linear
convergence and further improve the statistical
error bound at the finite-sample level. Our analysis provides a new framework for studying the
behavior of EM for Mixed Linear Regression.

where ε is the addictive noise, s = (x, y) ∈ Rd × R
is a pair of the covariate and response random variable,
z ∈ {1, 2} ∼ CAT (π ∗ ) represents the latent variable,
namely the label of data, and θ∗ , π ∗ are the true values for
the regression parameters and the mixing weights, respectively.
Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) provides a systematic framework to study such models. However, computing the Maximum Likelihood Estimate (MLE) for highdimensional data is intractable due to its non-convexity and
numerous spurious local maxima. Various approaches have
been proposed to handle this intractable problem. Tipping & Bishop (1999) adopted PCA by connecting the inherent geometric property and probabilistic interpretation
with Gaussian covariates and errors. Kong et al. (2020a;b)
employed a meta-learning approach to learn the parameters of MLR with small batches. Shen & Sanghavi (2019)
proposed an iterative variant of the least trimmed squares
to handle MLR with corruptions. Another competitor is
the moment-based method, in conjunction with the gradient descent algorithm (Li & Liang, 2018). Moreover,
the Expectation Maximization (EM) method stands out for
its computational efficiency and ease of practical implementation. In the context of (1), EM estimates the regression parameters and the mixing weights from observations. It operates in two steps: E-step computes the expected log-likelihood using the current parameter estimate;
M-step updates the parameters to maximize the expected
log-likelihood compute in the E-step. These steps serve to
maximize the lower bound on the MLE objective iteratively
until convergence.

1. Introduction
A mixture model of parameterized distributions, such as the
Mixture of Linear Regression (MLR) and Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM), is remarkably powerful for modeling
intricate relationships in practice. It is highly suitable to

Dempster et al. (1977) presented the modern EM algorithm
and demonstrated its likelihood to be monotonically increasing with EM updates. Theoretically, Wu (1983) established the global convergence of a unimodal likelihood
under some regularity conditions. Empirically, EM showed
success in the MLR problem (De Veaux, 1989; Jordan &
Jacobs, 1994; Jordan & Xu, 1995). Additionally, Wedel &

1
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, IN, USA. Correspondence to: Zhankun
Luo <luo333@purdue.edu>, Abolfazl Hashemi <abolfazl@purdue.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

