Stochastic Bandits with ReLU Neural Networks
Kan Xu 1 Hamsa Bastani 2 Surbhi Goel 2 Osbert Bastani 2

Abstract

low regret, the decision-maker must maintain small decision
error uniformly across all actions xt over time to ensure that
it generalizes to new, actively selected actions.

We study the stochastic bandit problem with
ReLU
√ neural network structure. We show that
a Õ( T ) regret guarantee is achievable by considering bandits with one-layer ReLU neural networks; to the best of our knowledge, our work is
the first to achieve such a guarantee. In this specific setting, we propose an OFU-ReLU algorithm
that can achieve this upper bound. The algorithm
first explores randomly until it reaches a linear
regime, and then implements a UCB-type linear
bandit algorithm to balance exploration and exploitation. Our key insight is that we can exploit
the piecewise linear structure of ReLU activations
and convert the problem into a linear bandit in
a transformed feature space, once we learn the
parameters of ReLU relatively accurately during
the exploration stage. To remove dependence on
model parameters, we design an OFU-ReLU+ algorithm based on a batching strategy, which can
provide the same theoretical guarantee.1

With the success of bandits in practice, there has been a
great deal of recent interest in understanding the theoretical properties of bandit algorithms. For linear models, i.e.,
the expected reward fΘ∗ is linear in xt , bandit algorithms
have adapted techniques from statistics to address this challenge (Dani et al., 2008; Rusmevichientong & Tsitsiklis,
2010; Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011). Particularly, linear bandit algorithms build on linear regression, which provides
parameter estimation bounds of the form ∥θ̂ − θ∗ ∥2 ≤ ϵ;
then, we obtain uniform generalization bounds of the form
|fθ̂ (x) − fθ∗ (x)| ≤ Lϵ, ∀x ∈ X , where L is a Lipschitz
constant for fθ . By adapting these techniques, √
linear bandit algorithms can achieve minimax rates of Õ( T ) (Dani
et al., 2008; Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011) in terms of regret.
However, the linear assumption oftentimes do not hold for
complicated tasks (Valko et al., 2013), and has recently motivated the study of nonlinear contextual bandits, especially
building upon neural networks with ReLU activations (see,
e.g., Zhou et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2020;
Kassraie & Krause, 2022).

1. Introduction

One of the key questions is what kinds of guarantees can
be provided in such settings when the underlying true reward model has ReLU structures. The current existing literature of bandits based on ReLU neural networks mainly
base their analyses on the theory of neural tangent kernel
(NTK) (Jacot et al., 2018). Zhou et al. (2020); Gu et al.
(2024) leverage NTK and upper
√ confidence bound (UCB)
techniques to achieve a Õ(γT T ) regret bound, where γT
is the effective dimension or maximum information gain
and is assumed to be T -independent in these literature.
This assumption is strong because it intuitively assumes
the function is linear on a low-dimensional subspace (more
precisely, it says that the eigenvalues of the empirical covariance matrix in the kernel space vanish quickly, so the
covariates “approximately” lie in a low-dimensional subspace); thus, it effectively converts the problem to linear
bandit problem in a high-dimensional subspace. Indeed,
for ReLU neural networks on a d-dimensional domain (i.e.,
x ∈ Rd ), (Kassraie & Krause, 2022) shows a best upper
d−1
bound for the information gain known as γT = Õ(T d ),
even for a one-layer neural network. Consequently, the re-

The stochastic contextual bandit problem has been widely
studied in the literature (Bubeck et al., 2012; Lattimore &
Szepesvári, 2020), with broad applications in healthcare
(Bastani & Bayati, 2020), personalized recommendation (Li
et al., 2010), etc. The problem is important since real-world
decision-makers oftentimes adaptively gather information
about their environment to learn. Formally, the bandit algorithm actively selects a sequence of actions {xt }t∈[T ] with
xt ∈ X over some horizon T ∈ N, and observes stochastic
rewards yt = fΘ∗ (xt ) + ξt , where fΘ∗ is the true reward
function (represented by a model with parameters Θ∗ ), and
ξt is random noise. Thus, to achieve good performance or
1

Arizona State University, Arizona, USA 2 University of
Pennsylvania, Pennsylvania, USA. Correspondence to: Kan Xu
<kanxu1@asu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
Source code is available at https://github.com/
kanxu526/ReLUBandit.

1

