Uncertainty for Active Learning on Graphs

Dominik Fuchsgruber * 1 2 Tom Wollschläger * 1 2 Bertrand Charpentier 1 Antonio Oroz 1
Stephan Günnemann 1 2

Abstract

Uncertainty Sampling (US) methods (Beluch et al., 2018;
Joshi et al., 2009) rely on uncertainty estimates to measure
the informativeness of labeling each data point. Intuitively,
areas where a learner lacks knowledge are assigned high
uncertainty. Moreover, methods should distinguish the
(irreducible) aleatoric uncertainty and the (reducible)
epistemic uncertainty which the total uncertainty about a
prediction is composed of (Kiureghian & Ditlevsen, 2009;
Kendall & Gal, 2017). This disentanglement is particularly
important for AL: The learner might not benefit much
from labeling instances with high irreducible uncertainty
while acquiring knowledge about data points for which
uncertainty stems from reducible sources can be highly
informative. This suggests epistemic uncertainty as a
sensible acquisition function (Nguyen et al., 2022).

Uncertainty Sampling is an Active Learning strategy that aims to improve the data efficiency of
machine learning models by iteratively acquiring
labels of data points with the highest uncertainty.
While it has proven effective for independent data
its applicability to graphs remains under-explored.
We propose the first extensive study of Uncertainty Sampling for node classification: (1) We
benchmark Uncertainty Sampling beyond predictive uncertainty and highlight a significant performance gap to other Active Learning strategies. (2)
We develop ground-truth Bayesian uncertainty estimates in terms of the data generating process and
prove their effectiveness in guiding Uncertainty
Sampling toward optimal queries. We confirm our
results on synthetic data and design an approximate approach that consistently outperforms other
uncertainty estimators on real datasets. (3) Based
on this analysis, we relate pitfalls in modeling
uncertainty to existing methods. Our analysis enables and informs the development of principled
uncertainty estimation on graphs.

For independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) data, US
methods for AL—in particular US methods disentangling
aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty—have demonstrated
high data efficiency in benchmarks (Joshi et al., 2009; Gal
et al., 2017; Beluch et al., 2018; Kirsch et al., 2019; Nguyen
et al., 2022; Schmidt & Günnemann, 2023). Existing
efforts in AL for interdependent data like graphs neglect the
compositional nature of uncertainty (Zhu et al., 2003; Jun
& Nowak, 2016; Regol et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2021; Zhang
et al., 2022c) and limit themselves to a singular measure of
total uncertainty. This leaves it unclear (i) to which extent
uncertainty estimators can effectively inform US for graph
data, and (ii) whether disentangling aleatoric and epistemic
uncertainty has similar benefits to AL as in i.i.d. settings.
The complex nature of graph data makes investigating
US methods for AL particularly challenging. Uncertainty
estimates should not only capture information about node
features independently but also model information about
their relationships (Stadler et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
Applications in machine learning are often limited by
their data efficiency. This encompasses effort spent on
experimental design (Sverchkov & Craven, 2017) or the
cost of training on large datasets (Cui et al., 2022). To
remedy these problems, Active Learning (AL) allows
the learner to query an oracle (e.g. users, machines, or
experiments) to label specific data points considered
informative, thus saving labeling labor and training effort
that would have been spent on uninformative labeled data.

In this work, we examine US for node classification problems. We critically evaluate and benchmark state-of-the-art
uncertainty estimators against traditional AL strategies and
find that US (as well as many other approaches) fall short
of surpassing random sampling. Motivated by the effectiveness of US for i.i.d. data, we formally approach the question
of whether US methods for graphs align well with the AL
objective at all. We derive novel ground-truth uncertainty
measures from the underlying data-generating process and

*

Equal contribution 1 School of Computation, Information and
Technology, Technical University of Munich, Germany 2 Munich
Data Science Institute, Germany. Correspondence to: Dominik Fuchsgruber <d.fuchsgruber@tum.de>, Tom Wollschläger
<tom.wollschlaeger@tum.de>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

