PASOA- PArticle baSed Bayesian Optimal Adaptive design

Jacopo Iollo 1 2 3 Christophe Heinkelé 3 Pierre Alliez 2 Florence Forbes 1

Abstract

increasing importance in numerous scientific and industrial
applications, see e.g. (Ryan et al., 2016; Rainforth et al.,
2024). Quality can be defined from numerous view points,
allocating resources for information gathering, improving
precision and/or prediction or reducing experimental costs.
In this work, we assume that the desired designs are
continuous parameters ξ ∈ E that maximize information
on some parameters of interest θ ∈ Θ ⊂ Rm . In Bayesian
Optimal Experimental Design (BOED), a Bayesian model
is specified over θ (Chaloner & Verdinelli, 1995; Sebastiani
& Wynn, 2000; Amzal et al., 2006; Ryan et al., 2016;
Rainforth et al., 2024). The criterion defining the optimality
of a design may then depend on the application (Ryan
et al., 2016; Kleinegesse & Gutmann, 2021) but the most
used of them is the expected information gain (EIG). It
targets designs that most reduce the entropy of the posterior
distribution over θ, or equivalently that maximize the
Kullback-Leibler divergence between the posterior and the
prior, and this in expectation over all possible experimental
outcomes, see eq. (1,2). The Bayesian formulation is
particularly convenient in sequential contexts, where we
wish to exploit the results of previous experiments to guide
the design of future ones. Unfortunately, computing and
optimizing the EIG sequentially requires sampling from an
evolving sequence of intractable posterior distributions. We
propose to use a sequential Monte-Carlo (SMC) approach
for an efficient sequential sampling (Del Moral et al., 2006;
Doucet & Lee, 2018; Naesseth et al., 2019; Chopin &
Papaspiliopoulos, 2020; Dai et al., 2022) and in the spirit
of some original and recent approaches (Huan & Marzouk,
2014; Kleinegesse & Gutmann, 2021; Foster et al., 2019;
2020; 2021; Blau et al., 2022), we adopt a stochastic
optimization approach to optimize the EIG. The originality
of our approach is to use SMC in conjunction with stochastic
optimization to efficiently sample the relevant quantities
and estimate the required noisy gradients. However, naive
SMC is potentially problematic. In sequential EIG-based
optimization, larger gains are obtained for larger distances
between successive posterior distributions, which is a
particularly bad scenario for SMC performance. A solution
is to consider distribution tempering or annealing (Neal,
2001; Del Moral et al., 2006), which creates a path of
intermediate closer distributions for a more accurate SMC
sampling (Figures 1 and 2). We name our approach PASOA,
for Particle baSed Bayesian Optimal Adaptive design, where

We propose a new procedure named PASOA,
for Bayesian experimental design, that performs
sequential design optimization by simultaneously
providing accurate estimates of successive
posterior distributions for parameter inference.
The sequential design process is carried out via a
contrastive estimation principle, using stochastic
optimization and Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC)
samplers to maximise the Expected Information
Gain (EIG). As larger information gains are
obtained for larger distances between successive
posterior distributions, this EIG objective may
worsen classical SMC performance. To handle
this issue, tempering is proposed to have both
a large information gain and an accurate SMC
sampling, that we show is crucial for performance.
This novel combination of stochastic optimization
and tempered SMC allows to jointly handle
design optimization and parameter inference.
We provide a proof that the obtained optimal
design estimators benefit from some consistency
property. Numerical experiments confirm the
potential of the approach, which outperforms
other recent existing procedures.

1. Introduction
A design refers to some experimental conditions required
to perform an experiment and get observations from the
phenomenon under study. Assuming that such a design
is characterized by some parameters denoted by ξ, simple
examples of ξ are coordinates in a 2D space or a frequency
at which we wish to measure a quantity of interest. The
overall goal of experimental design can be summarized
as the acquisition of good quality data, which is of
1

Université Grenoble Alpes, Inria,
CNRS, GINP, France 2 Université Côte d’Azur, Inria, France
3
Cerema, Endsum-Strasbourg, France.
Correspondence
to: Jacopo Iollo <jacopo.iollo@inria.fr>, Florence Forbes
<florence.forbes@inria.fr>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

