Near-Linear Time Approximation Algorithms for k-means with Outliers

Junyu Huang 1 2 Qilong Feng 1 2 Ziyun Huang 3 Jinhui Xu 4 Jianxin Wang 1 2 5

Abstract

1. Introduction
Clustering is a fundamental unsupervised learning problem
that has been extensively studied over the past decades.
Among various mathematical characterizations, the k-means
clustering is one of the most popular formulations, with
numerous applications in decision-making and data analysis.
However, a recurring problem for the k-means clustering is
how to handle the data noise. This issue arises because the
performance of the k-means clustering is well known to be
highly sensitive to outliers, as pointed out in the literature
(Deshpande et al., 2020; Gupta et al., 2017; Im et al., 2020).
Charikar et al. (Charikar et al., 2001) formulated the kmeans with outliers problem, in which a number z of data
points can be discarded as outliers when minimizing the
clustering cost of the given instances.

The k-means with outliers problem is one of the
most extensively studied clustering problems in
the field of machine learning, where the goal is
to discard up to z outliers and identify a minimum k-means clustering on the remaining data
points. Most previous results for this problem
have running time dependent on the aspect ratio ∆ (the ratio between the maximum and the
minimum pairwise distances) to achieve fast approximations. To address the issue of aspect ratio dependency on the running time, we propose
sampling-based algorithms with almost linear running time in the data size, where a crucial component of our approach is an algorithm called
Fast-Sampling. Fast-Sampling algorithm can find
inliers that well approximate the optimal clustering centers without relying on a guess for the optimal clustering costs, where a 4-approximate solulog n
tion can be obtained in time O( ndk log
) with
2
k
O(  ) centers opened and (1 + )z outliers discarded. To reduce the number of centers opened,
we propose a center reduction algorithm, where
an O( 1 )-approximate solution can be obtained in
log n
time O( ndk log
+ dpoly(k, 1 ) log(n∆)) with
2
(1 + )z outliers discarded and exactly k centers
opened. Empirical experiments suggest that our
proposed sampling-based algorithms outperform
state-of-the-art algorithms for the k-means with
outliers problem.

The k-means with outliers. Given a dataset X ⊂ Rd of
size n, a number of clusters k, and a number of outliers z, the
goal of the problem is to find a set C ⊂ Rd of k centers and
partition X into Xin and Xout such that |Xin | ≥ n − z, and
the clustering cost of Xin with respect to C is minimized.
The k-means with outliers problem is much more challenging than the standard k-means problem due to the additional
task of identifying z outliers. The only two constant approximation schemes are based on complex linear programming
rounding techniques with high-order polynomial running
time (Chen, 2008; Krishnaswamy et al., 2018), which are
difficult to implement in practice. Furthermore, as pointed
out in the literature (Grunau & Rozhoň, 2022), any constant
approximate solution with exactly z outliers discarded requires a running time of Ω(z 2 ). In the case when there is
heavy noise in the datasets, i.e., z = Ω(n), the running time
becomes quadratic, which may limit the scalability of the
algorithms for handling large-scale datasets.

1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Central
South University, Changsha 410083, China 2 Xiangjiang Laboratory, Changsha 410205, China 3 Department of Computer
Science and Software Engineering, Penn State Erie, The
Behrend College 4 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, State University of New York at Buffalo, NY, USA
5
The Hunan Provincial Key Lab of Bioinformatics, Central
South University, Changsha 410083, China. Correspondence
to: Qilong Feng <csufeng@mail.csu.edu.cn>, Jianxin Wang
<jxwang@mail.csu.edu.cn>.

On the practical side, developing simple and fast approximation schemes for the k-means with outliers problem has attracted much attention in recent years. By relaxing the number of outliers discarded or the number of centers opened,
there is a line of research aiming at designing fast and practical algorithms with good theoretical guarantees. Charikar
et al. (Charikar et al., 2001) presented a polynomial-time
O(1/)-approximation algorithm using a reduction-based
method, where (1 + )z outliers are discarded to guarantee
the approximation loss. Gupta et al. (Gupta et al., 2017)

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

