Equilibrium of Data Markets with Externality

Safwan Hossain 1 Yiling Chen 1

Abstract

proposed here for two-sided markets are usually auctionbased, and require buyers to report their valuations for data
sources (Agarwal et al., 2019; 2020). These requirements
are challenging, if not impossible, to achieve in practice due
to the peculiar characteristics of data products. Buyers are
generally free to purchase from any combination of data
sources, and it is impractical to elicit accurate valuations
in this combinatorially large space. More importantly, a
data source’s value to a buyer largely arises from how it
can improve model performance, a metric the buyer herself
may not know before making purchases and evaluating the
results. Thus, she acts in the market with only partial or
incomplete information. It is hence not surprising that most
real-world data market platforms, such as Snowflake Data
Marketplace1 and AWS Data Exchange2 , take a very simple
format: sellers use some pricing mechanism to set a price for
each dataset, and buyers can freely choose which datasets to
purchase, with platforms charging a simple transaction fee.
While sellers can change prices over time to reflect market
changes, the granularity of this is quite coarse, and prices
stay stable or fixed for some time. The simplicity of fixedprice data markets is not just a huge operational advantage
but also arguably necessary in light of the challenges data
products pose. Such markets are the focus of our paper.

We model real-world data markets, where sellers post fixed prices and buyers are free to purchase from any set of sellers, as a simultaneous
game. A key component here is the negative externality buyers induce on one another due to data
purchases. Starting with a simple setting where
buyers know their valuations a priori, we characterize both the existence and welfare properties
of the pure Nash equilibrium in the presence of
such externality. While the outcomes are bleak
without any intervention, mirroring the limitations
of current data markets, we prove that for a standard class of externality functions, platforms intervening through a transaction cost can lead to a
pure equilibrium with strong welfare guarantees.
We next consider a more realistic setting where
buyers learn their valuations over time through
market interactions. Our intervention is feasible
here as well, and we consider learning algorithms
to achieve low regret concerning both individual
and cumulative utility metrics. Lastly, we analyze
the promises of this intervention under a much
richer externality model.

An important component of modeling data markets is accounting for the (usually negative) externality one buyer’s
purchase decision has on another. In a competitive setting,
a buyer’s value for data is predicated on the relative advantage it provides, with respect to their peers. Equivalently,
the value of data can depend on what others have access
to. While externality is not unique to data and is present
for other products as well, it is especially prominent in data
markets due to another salient feature: data can be replicated
at a mass scale with zero marginal cost and sold to multiple
buyers, a phenomenon that exacerbates any externality data
products induce. Replication need not even be exact: sellers
can offer different versions of the same dataset by injecting
noise or by interleaving it with something innocuous (Pei,
2020). Accordingly, real-world data markets usually give
no guarantee of unique ownership. Data externality is thus
a persistent phenomenon, and by linking one buyer’s utility
to another’s decisions, it turns the buyer interactions into

1. Introduction
Data plays a central role in machine learning, and demand
for it has grown substantially due to the increasing value
it provides. It has thus become the subject of trading, and
understanding markets for data (or more generally, information) has gained traction in research communities in recent
years (Bergemann et al., 2018; Babaioff et al., 2012; Bergemann & Bonatti, 2019; Mehta et al., 2019; Agarwal et al.,
2019; 2020). Such works have largely focused on determining the “right” price for data so that it is allocated to those
who value it most (Bergemann & Bonatti, 2019; Mehta
et al., 2019; Agarwal et al., 2019; 2020). The mechanisms
1
Harvard University, Cambridge, USA. Correspondence to:
Safwan Hossain <shossain@g.harvard.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1
2

1

https://www.snowflake.com/
https://docs.aws.amazon.com/data-exchange/index.html

