Challenges and Considerations in the Evaluation of Bayesian Causal Discovery

Amir Mohammad Karimi Mamaghan 1 Panagiotis Tigas 2 Karl Henrik Johansson 1 3 Yarin Gal 2
Yashas Annadani * 4 5 Stefan Bauer * 4 5

1. Introduction

Abstract

Much of the pursuit in acquiring scientific knowledge involves inferring causal relationships within a system of interest and the laws that govern those relationships. Applications in biology, like inferring a gene network and their
regulatory mechanisms from gene expression data (TejadaLapuerta et al., 2023; Dibaeinia & Sinha, 2020) and proteinsignaling networks with single-cell data (Sachs et al., 2005),
necessitates a mechanistic understanding of the data generation process. Estimating the causal model in such applications from data, called causal discovery, is an important
problem in empirical sciences (Spirtes et al., 2000).

Representing uncertainty in causal discovery is
a crucial component for experimental design, and
more broadly, for safe and reliable causal decision
making. Bayesian Causal Discovery (BCD)
offers a principled approach to encapsulating
this uncertainty. Unlike non-Bayesian causal
discovery, which relies on a single estimated
causal graph and model parameters for assessment, evaluating BCD presents challenges due to
the nature of its inferred quantity – the posterior
distribution. As a result, the research community
has proposed various metrics to assess the quality
of the approximate posterior. However, there
is, to date, no consensus on the most suitable
metric(s) for evaluation. In this work, we reexamine this question by dissecting various metrics
and understanding their limitations. Through
extensive empirical evaluation, we find that many
existing metrics fail to exhibit a strong correlation
with the quality of approximation to the true
posterior, especially in scenarios with low sample
sizes where BCD is most desirable. We highlight
the suitability (or lack thereof) of these metrics
under two distinct factors: the identifiability of
the underlying causal model and the quantity of
available data. Both factors affect the entropy
of the true posterior, indicating that the current
metrics are less fitting in settings of higher
entropy. Our findings underline the importance
of a more nuanced evaluation of new methods by
taking into account the nature of the true posterior,
as well as guide and motivate the development
of new evaluation procedures for this challenge.

A typical scientific discovery loop for causal understanding
involves a scientist first coming up with causal hypotheses
based on prior knowledge, and refining these hypotheses
based on new evidence obtained through observation and
experimentation. In science, a key requirement in light
of limited data is that all the plausible hypotheses that explain the data have to be considered before devising an efficient experimentation protocol, as opposed to a single most
likely one (Lindley, 1956; Chaloner & Verdinelli, 1995).
Bayesian Causal Discovery (BCD) is an elegant framework
that fulfills this requirement by quantifying the epistemic
uncertainty of the underlying causal model through the
Bayesian posterior, which provides a degree of belief of
every causal hypothesis proportional to its ability to explain
the data (Heckerman et al., 2006; Friedman & Koller, 2003;
Chickering et al., 2013). The quantified epistemic uncertainty can be then used to design informative experiments/
interventions to perform (Tong & Koller, 2001; Tigas et al.,
2022; Sussex et al., 2022; Lyle et al., 2023) or to estimate
causal effects of variables with Bayesian model averaging (Geffner et al., 2022; Emezue et al., 2023).
One of the common frameworks for dealing with questions
related to cause and effect is the Structural Causal Model
(SCM) with an associated graph indicating the causal relationships between variables (Pearl, 2009; Peters et al., 2017).
Under this framework, BCD aims to infer the Bayesian
posterior over the graph and the parameters of the SCM.
This is a hard problem due to the combinatorial nature of
graphs, which renders the posterior intractable for more
than 6 variables. Recently, various approximate inference

*
Equal contribution 1 KTH Royal Institute of Technology
OATML, University of Oxford 3 Digital Futures 4 Helmholtz AI
5
TU Munich. Correspondence to: Amir Mohammad Karimi Mamaghan <amkm@kth.se>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

