Boosting Offline Optimizers with Surrogate Sensitivity

Manh Cuong Dao 1 Phi Le Nguyen 1 Thao Nguyen Truong 2 Trong Nghia Hoang 3

Abstract

to predict properties of unseen material candidates without
running actual experiments. This is achieved via (1) fitting a
parameterized model on such past data relating the material
input with its output properties; and (2) finding an input
optimizer with respect to the learned parameterization.

Offline optimization is an important task in numerous material engineering domains where online
experimentation to collect data is too expensive
and needs to be replaced by an in silico maximization of a surrogate of the black-box function.
Although such a surrogate can be learned from
offline data, its prediction might not be reliable
outside the offline data regime, which happens
when the surrogate has narrow prediction margin
and is (therefore) sensitive to small perturbations
of its parameterization. This raises the following questions: (1) how to regulate the sensitivity
of a surrogate model; and (2) whether conditioning an offline optimizer with such less sensitive
surrogate will lead to better optimization performance. To address these questions, we develop
an optimizable sensitivity measurement for the
surrogate model, which then inspires a sensitivityinformed regularizer that is applicable to a wide
range of offline optimizers. This development is
both orthogonal and synergistic to prior research
on offline optimization, which is demonstrated in
our extensive experiment benchmark.

Naively, such in silico approach would trivialize the optimal design problem into a vanilla application of gradient
ascent and supervised learning. However, in practice, the
prediction of such vanilla surrogate might not be reliable
outside the offline data regime (Fannjiang & Listgarten,
2020). Often, its prediction can become highly erratic at
out-of-distribution data regimes, misguiding the optimization process toward sub-optimal candidates. This happens
when the surrogate has narrow prediction margin at those
out-of-distribution input regimes where a small perturbation
to the model weights might cause a significant change in its
prediction. This is potentially due to the fact that without
relevant data, the training process does not have any mechanisms to recognize and avoid moving toward such sensitive
model candidates.
To date, while most existing approaches addressing this
problem have proposed numerous strategies to avoid making such spurious predictions during extrapolation (due to
high model sensitivity), their conditioning techniques were
not built on a direct characterization of sensitivity. For example, Fu & Levine (2021); Kumar & Levine (2020); Trabucco
et al. (2021; 2022) and Yu et al. (2021) reduce their surrogate estimations at out-of-distribution inputs, while Brookes
et al. (2019) and Fannjiang & Listgarten (2020) condition
on domain-specific properties under which sampled inputs
will have high performance. Intuitively, model sensitivity
could be reduced where the conditioning happens, which
is however either surrogate- or search-specific. As a result,
the conditioning is localized depending on how these outof-distribution inputs and domain-specific properties are
specified. It therefore remains unclear what impact such
localized conditioning has on the overall model sensitivity. More importantly, it is also unclear whether in such
approaches, the surrogate is well-conditioned at the regions
where the search might visit. Otherwise, it would be less
effective if the surrogate is only well-conditioned in regions
where the search rarely visits. In this view, the core issue
here is the lack of a model-agnostic characterization of sensitivity, which does not depend on the specifics of either

1. Introduction
Finding material designs that maximize a set of desirable
properties is a fundamental task in material engineering.
Historically, these design problems were frequently tackled
through online experimentation, which can be exceedingly
labor-intensive, time-consuming, and often impractical. To
avoid such expenses, offline optimization (Brookes et al.,
2019; Trabucco et al., 2021; 2022) has emerged as a computational alternative that leverages past experiment results
1
School of Information and Communications Technology,
Hanoi University of Science and Technology, Hanoi, Vietnam
2
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology,
Tokyo, Japan 3 School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Washington State University, Washington, USA. Correspondence to: Trong Nghia Hoang <trongnghia.hoang@wsu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

