OptiMUS: Scalable Optimization Modeling
with (MI)LP Solvers and Large Language Models

Ali AhmadiTeshnizi 1 Wenzhi Gao 2 Madeleine Udell 1 2

Abstract

ing energy costs in smart grids, improving supply chains,
and increasing profits in algorithmic trading (Singh, 2012;
Antoniou & Lu, 2007). Major advances in optimization
algorithms over the last several decades have led to reliable and efficient optimization methods for a wide variety of structured optimization problems, including linear
programming (LP) and mixed-integer linear programming
(MILP), among many others. Unfortunately, optimization
modeling, transforming a business problem into a mathematical optimization problem, still requires expert knowledge. According to a recent survey, 81% of Gurobi’s commercial solver users have advanced degrees, with 49 % of
them holding a degree in operations research (Gurobi Optimization, 2023). This expertise gap prevents many organizations from using optimization, even when it could
significantly improve their operations. Examples include
inventory management in supermarkets, patient operations
in hospitals, transportation policies in small municipalities, energy management in local solar farms, and operations in small businesses or NGOs (Saghafian et al., 2015;
Aastrup & Kotzab, 2010; Yao et al., 2020; Shakoor et al.,
2016). Automating optimization modeling would allow
sectors that cannot afford to have access to optimization experts to improve efficiency using optimization techniques.
Large language models (LLMs) offer a promising way to
make optimization more accessible. LLMs have demonstrated the ability to understand, generate, and interpret
natural language for many tasks. In the optimization domain, LLMs can make it easier to formulate problems and
obtain solutions, making expert-level optimization more
accessible (Ramamonjison et al, 2023) However, several
challenges remain before LLMs can reliably model reallife optimization problems:

Optimization problems are pervasive in sectors
from manufacturing and distribution to healthcare. However, most such problems are still
solved heuristically by hand rather than optimally by state-of-the-art solvers because the expertise required to formulate and solve these
problems limits the widespread adoption of optimization tools and techniques. This paper introduces OptiMUS, a Large Language Model
(LLM)-based agent designed to formulate and
solve (mixed integer) linear programming problems from their natural language descriptions.
OptiMUS can develop mathematical models,
write and debug solver code, evaluate the generated solutions, and improve its model and code
based on these evaluations. OptiMUS utilizes
a modular structure to process problems, allowing it to handle problems with long descriptions and complex data without long prompts.
Experiments demonstrate that OptiMUS outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods on
easy datasets by more than 20% and on hard
datasets (including a new dataset, NLP4LP, released with this paper that features long and complex problems) by more than 30%. The implementation and the datasets are available at
https://github.com/teshnizi/OptiMUS.

1. Introduction
Optimization problems are common in many fields such
as operations, economics, engineering, and computer science. Important applications of optimization include reduc-

• Ambiguous Terms: An optimization problem can be
described in many ways. For example, a user might use
different terms (e.g. vehicle vs. car vs. truck vs. carrier),
notations (e.g. price and capacity vs. p and c vs. x and
y), or omit common-sense assumptions (e.g. capacity of
a vehicle is non-negative, number of employees is an integer, etc.). Moreover, defining the right variables can
be a challenge. For instance, information flow through
a network requires a different set of variables than phys-

1
Department of Management Science and Engineering, Stanford University, CA, USA 2 Institute for Computational and Mathematical Engineering, Stanford University, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Ali AhmadiTeshnizi <teshnizi@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

