Uniformly Stable Algorithms for Adversarial Training and Beyond

Jiancong Xiao * 1 Jiawei Zhang * 2 Zhi-Quan Luo 3 Asuman Ozdaglar 2

Abstract

from overfitting issues (Zhang et al., 2021). However, in the
setting of adversarial training, this ability disappears, and
overfitting becomes one of the most critical issues. Specifically, in a regular setting of SGD-based adversarial training shown in Figure 1, the robust test accuracy (orange
line) starts to decrease after a particular epoch, while the
robust training accuracy (blue line) continues to increase.
This phenomenon is referred to as robust overfitting (Rice
et al., 2020). It can be observed in experiments on common
datasets such as SVHN, CIFAR-10/100.

In adversarial machine learning, neural networks
suffer from a significant issue known as robust
overfitting, where the robust test accuracy decreases over epochs (Rice et al., 2020). Recent
research conducted by Xing et al. (2021); Xiao
et al. (2022b) has focused on studying the uniform stability of adversarial training. Their investigations revealed that SGD-based adversarial training fails to exhibit uniform stability, and
the derived stability bounds align with the observed phenomenon of robust overfitting in experiments. This finding motivates us to develop
uniformly stable algorithms specifically tailored
for adversarial training. To this aim, we introduce Moreau envelope-A (ME-A), a variant of
the Moreau Envelope-type algorithm. We employ
a Moreau envelope function to reframe the original problem as a min-min problem, separating
the non-strong convexity and non-smoothness of
the adversarial loss. Then, this approach alternates between solving the inner and outer minimization problems to achieve uniform stability
without incurring additional computational overhead. In practical scenarios, we demonstrate the
efficacy of ME-A in mitigating the issue of robust
overfitting. Beyond its application in adversarial
training, this represents a fundamental result in
uniform stability analysis, as ME-A is the first
algorithm to exhibit uniform stability for weaklyconvex, non-smooth problems.

Robust accuracy, cifar10
Training_Robust_Acc_SGD
Test_Robust_Acc_SGD
Training_Robust_Acc_ME-SGD
Test_Robust_Acc_ME-SGD

0.8

Robust Accuracy

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0

25

50

75

100
Epochs

125

150

175

200

Figure 1. Demonstration of the occurrence of robust overfitting
(orange line) and the mitigation of robust overfitting achieved by
ME-A (red line).

Recent research has utilized uniform stability, a generalization measure in learning theory, to investigate this phenomenon (Xing et al., 2021; Xiao et al., 2022b). They have
suggested that the non-smoothness of the adversarial loss
may contribute to the issue of robust overfitting. Informally,
uniform stability is the gap between the output parameters
w of running an algorithm on two datasets S and S ′ that
differ in at most one sample, denoted as ∥w(S) − w(S ′ )∥.
In uniform stability analysis, assuming the standard training
loss is non-convex and smooth, a well-known result given
by (Hardt et al., 2016) is that applying stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) to the standard loss yields uniform stability
in O(T q /n), where T represents the number of iterations,
n is the number of samples, and 0 < q < 1. However,
the adversarial loss is non-smooth, even if we assume the
standard loss is smooth. Consequently, the uniform stability
bounds include an additional term in O(T q ϵ) (Xiao et al.,

1. Introduction
One of the interesting abilities of deep neural networks
(DNNs) (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) is that they rarely suffer
*

Equal contribution 1 University of Pennsylvania, PA, USA;
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, MA, USA; 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to: Jiancong Xiao <jcxiao@upenn.edu>, Jiawei Zhang
<jwzhang@mit.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

