Learning Mixtures of Gaussian Processes through Random Projection

Emmanuel Akeweje 1 Mimi Zhang 1 2

Abstract

approach that performs cluster analysis before parameter estimation, and once the hidden cluster labels are revealed, the
problem of learning the mixture of GPs reduces to learning
each GP component independently.

We propose an ensemble clustering framework
to uncover latent cluster labels in functional data
generated from a Gaussian process mixture. Our
method exploits the fact that the projection coefficients of the functional data onto any given
projection function follow a univariate Gaussian
mixture model (GMM). By conducting multiple
one-dimensional projections and learning a univariate GMM for each, we create an ensemble
of GMMs. Each GMM serves as a base clustering, and applying ensemble clustering yields a
consensus clustering. Our approach significantly
reduces computational complexity compared to
state-of-the-art methods, and we provide theoretical guarantees on the identifiability and learnability of Gaussian process mixtures. Extensive
experiments on synthetic and real datasets confirm the superiority of our method over existing
techniques.

A GP mixture model can not be defined through the notion
of probability density, which generally does not exist for
random functions. We here define the GP mixture model
in accordance with prior pooling (Seitz, 2021): a random
function X is a K-mixture of GPs if the sub-populations are
characterized by K Gaussian random functions {Xk }K
k=1 ,
and that with probability πk (> 0), a random sample is a
realization of the kth random function Xk ∼ GP (µk , Σk ).
Here, we let GP (µk , Σk ) denote the GP with a mean function µk and a covariance function Σk . Note that, in the
above definition, the unknown weights {πk }K
k=1 are fixed
parameters. There are a few attempts at learning the GP mixture model with the above definition. Let {xi }ni=1 denote the
functional data from the GP mixture, and zi ∈ {1, . . . , K}
the hidden cluster label of the sample function xi . (James &
Sugar, 2003) assumed that each Gaussian random function
Xk has an individual mean function µk yet a common covariance function Σk = Σ. They adopted the mixed-effects
model that, given zi = k P
and the basis expansion
Pm xi (t) =
m
µk (t)+[xi (t)−µk (t)] = v=1 αkv bv (t)+ v=1 aiv bv (t),
the n coefficient vectors {a i = (ai1 , . . . , aim )T }ni=1 are
identically distributed and have a zero-mean Gaussian distribution. An EM-type algorithm was developed for parameter
estimation. In both (Shi & Wang, 2008) and (Huang et al.,
2014), each Gaussian random function Xk has a different
mean function µk and a different covariance function Σk .
(Huang et al., 2014) developed an EM-type algorithm for
parameter estimation. In (Shi & Wang, 2008), each subject
is characterized by both a sample function xi and a covariate vector c i . The covariates {c i }ni=1 are fitted by a logistic
regression model to predict the latent cluster labels. They
developed an EM-type algorithm, where the E-step updates
the expected log-likelihood function, and the M-step updates
all parameter estimates. (Wu & Ma, 2018) divided the function domain T ⊂ R into disjoint intervals: T = ∪j Tj , and
assumed that Xk (t) over each interval Tj is a different GP;
that is, the stochastic process {Xk (t) : t ∈ T} is piece-wise
Gaussian. They developed an EM-type algorithm, where
the E-step is built on an MCMC technique for generating
latent cluster labels.

1. Introduction
Gaussian process (GP) models are fundamental in
(Bayesian) machine learning. (Rasmussen & Williams,
2006) gave an overview of the mathematical foundations
and practical applications of GP for regression and classification tasks. The GP mixture model naturally generalizes
the concept of Gaussian mixture model (GMM), making it a
powerful tool for the statistical or cluster analysis of heterogeneous functional data. However, documented works on
GP mixture models all perform parameter estimation before
any inference or cluster analysis, resulting in cubic computational complexity with the number of data points. To
promote the application of GP mixture models for mixture
modelling or cluster analysis, we here take an innovative
1

School of Computer Science and Statistics, Trinity College Dublin, Ireland 2 I-Form Advanced Manufacturing Research
Centre, Science Foundation Ireland, Ireland. Correspondence
to: Emmanuel Akeweje <eakeweje@tcd.ie>, Mimi Zhang
<mimi.zhang@tcd.ie>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

