Accelerating Federated Learning with Quick Distributed Mean Estimation

Ran Ben-Basat * 1 Shay Vargaftik * 2 Amit Portnoy * 3 Gil Einziger 3 Yaniv Ben-Itzhak 2 Michael Mitzenmacher 4

Abstract

1

10−4
0

r
tte
Be

tte

r

10−3
Be

NMSE

Distributed Mean Estimation (DME), in which
n clients communicate vectors to a parameter
server that estimates their average, is a fundamental building block in communication-efficient
federated learning. In this paper, we improve on
previous DME techniques that achieve the optimal O(1/n) Normalized Mean Squared Error
(NMSE) guarantee by asymptotically improving
the complexity for either encoding or decoding
(or both). To achieve this, we formalize the problem in a novel way that allows us to use off-theshelf mathematical solvers to design the quantization. Using various datasets and training tasks, we
demonstrate how QUIC-FL achieves state of the
art accuracy with faster encoding and decoding
times compared to other DME methods.

Hadamard
Kashin-TF
Kashin
QSGD
EDEN
QUIC-FL

20

Encode time (ms)

40 0

200

400

600

Decode time (ms)

Figure 1. Normalized Mean Squared Error vs. processing time.

et al., 2022; Condat et al., 2022b; Basu et al., 2019; Condat et al., 2022a; Condat & Richtárik, 2022; Horváth et al.,
2023; Tyurin & Richtárik, 2023; He et al., 2023).
DME is defined as follows. Consider n clients with ddimensional vectors (e.g., gradients) to report; each client
sends an approximation of its vector to a parameter server
(hereafter referred to as ‘server’) which estimates the vectors’ mean. We briefly survey the most relevant and recent
related works for DME. Common to these techniques is that
they preprocess the input vectors into a different representation that allows for better compression, generally through
quantization of the coordinates.

Introduction

Federated learning (McMahan et al., 2017; Kairouz et al.,
2019; Karimireddy et al., 2020), is a technique to train models across multiple clients without having to share their data.
During each training round, the participating clients send
their model updates (hereafter referred to as gradients) to
a parameter server that calculates their mean and updates
the model for the next round. Collecting the gradients from
the participating clients is often communication-intensive,
which implies that the network becomes a bottleneck. A
promising approach for alleviating this bottleneck and thus
accelerating federated learning applications is compression.
We identify the Distributed Mean Estimation (DME) problem as a fundamental building block that is used for that
purpose either to directly communicate the gradients (Suresh
et al., 2017; Konečnỳ & Richtárik, 2018; Vargaftik et al.,
2022; Davies et al., 2021) or as part of more complex acceleration mechanisms (Richtárik et al., 2021; 2022; Szlendak

For example, in Suresh et al. (2017), each client, in
O(d · log d) time, uses a Randomized Hadamard Transform
(RHT) to preprocess its vector and then applies stochastic
quantization. The transformed vector has a smaller coordinate range (in expectation), which reduces the quantization
error. The server then aggregates the transformed vectors
before applying the inverse transform to estimate the mean,
for a total of O(n · d + d · log d) time. Such a method has a
Normalized Mean Squared Error (NMSE ) that is bounded
by O (log d/n) using O(1) bits per coordinate. Hereafter,
we refer to this method as ‘Hadamard’. This work also suggests an alternative method that uses entropy encoding to
achieve an NMSE of O(1/n), which is optimal. However,
entropy encoding is a compute-intensive process that does
not efficiently translate to GPU execution, resulting in a
slow decode time.

*

Equal contribution 1 University College London 2 VMware Research 3 Ben-Gurion University of the Negev 4 Harvard University.
Correspondence to: Ran Ben-Basat <r.benbasat@ucl.ac.uk>.

A different approach to DME computes the Kashin’s representation (Kashin, 1977; Lyubarskii & Vershynin, 2010)
of a client’s vector x before applying quantization (Caldas
et al., 2018; Safaryan et al., 2020). Intuitively, this replaces
the d-dimensional input vector by O(d) coefficients, each

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

