The Expressive Power of Path-Based Graph Neural Networks

Caterina Graziani * 1 Tamara Drucks * 2 Fabian Jogl 2 3 Monica Bianchini 1 Franco Scarselli 1
Thomas Gärtner 2

Abstract

Lander, 1990), which operates on k-tuples of nodes and is
more powerful due to its ability to count additional substructures. However, k-WL is impractical due to its prohibitive
complexity and lack of locality (Morris et al., 2019). To
address these well-studied limitations, several novel GNNs
that leverage graph substructures to improve expressivity
have been recently proposed (Geerts, 2020; Thiede et al.,
2021; Zhang & Li, 2021; Bodnar et al., 2021a;b; Bevilacqua
et al., 2022; Bouritsas et al., 2022). Please refer to Papp
& Wattenhofer (2022) for an extensive comparison of the
expressive power of many such GNN extensions.

We systematically investigate the expressive
power of path-based graph neural networks.
While it has been shown that path-based graph
neural networks can achieve strong empirical results, an investigation into their expressive power
is lacking. Therefore, we propose PATH -WL, a
general class of color refinement algorithms based
on paths and shortest path distance information.
We show that PATH -WL is incomparable to a
wide range of expressive graph neural networks,
can count cycles, and achieves strong empirical results on the notoriously difficult family of strongly
regular graphs. Our theoretical results indicate
that PATH -WL forms a new hierarchy of highly
expressive graph neural networks.

Related work. Paths are arguably one of the simplest
graph substructures. Despite this, paths have only recently
received attention in the context of GNNs. They can be
broadly categorized into GNNs which incorporate shortest
path information (Abboud et al., 2022; Kong et al., 2022;
Li et al., 2020; Ding et al., 2023; Ying et al., 2021; Nikolentzos et al., 2020; Feng et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023)
and GNNs which aggregate or sample from the set of all
paths (Sun et al., 2022; Truong & Chin, 2023; Michel et al.,
2023). Please find a more comprehensive related work discussion in Appendix A. While Michel et al. (2023) proved
that aggregating shortest paths alone is less expressive than
1-WL, they achieve strong empirical results with the incorporation of shortest path distance information. However,
a precise characterization of the expressive power of pathbased GNNs with distance information is lacking. In this
paper, we fill the existing gap in the literature and show that
path-based GNNs with shortest path distances form a novel
class of highly expressive graph neural networks.

1. Introduction
We investigate the discriminative power of paths to increase
the expressivity of graph neural networks (GNNs). The
expressive power of a GNN commonly refers to its ability to
compute different embeddings for non-isomorphic graphs.
The most common GNN, the message-passing graph neural
network, has been shown to be at most as expressive as the
Weisfeiler-Leman (1-WL) color refinement algorithm (Xu
et al., 2019; Morris et al., 2019). 1-WL is a polynomial-time
heuristic for testing graph isomorphism that identifies almost all graphs (Babai et al., 1980) but systematically fails
for some graph instances (see Figure 1 for an example). This
shortcoming can be partially explained by the limitation of
1-WL to recognize and count only simple substructures
such as star graphs (Arvind et al., 2020). The higher-order
extension of 1-WL is k-WL (Babai, 1979; Immerman &

Main contributions. We propose PATH -WL, a general
class of color refinement algorithms based on paths and
shortest path distance information. PATH -WL is an iterative
procedure that performs message passing on all paths up to a
certain length. We prove that PATH -WL is strictly more expressive than 1-WL and characterize graph classes that can
be distinguished by PATH -WL. We show that PATH -WL can
count cycles of arbitrary length and is incomparable to the
k-WL algorithm as well as several other expressive GNNs.
We design PAIN, a GNN with expressive power equivalent
to PATH -WL, and empirically verify our theoretical results.

*
1
Equal contribution
Department of Information Engineering and Mathematics, University of Siena, Siena,
Italy 2 RUML, TU Wien, Vienna, Austria 3 CAIML, TU
Wien, Vienna, Austria.
Correspondence to: Caterina
Graziani <caterina.graziani@student.unisi.it>, Tamara Drucks
<tamara.drucks@tuwien.ac.at >.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

