Stealthy Imitation: Reward-guided Environment-free Policy Stealing

Zhixiong Zhuang 1 2 Maria-Irina Nicolae 2 Mario Fritz 3

Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning policies, which are
integral to modern control systems, represent valuable intellectual property. The development of
these policies demands considerable resources,
such as domain expertise, simulation fidelity, and
real-world validation. These policies are potentially vulnerable to model stealing attacks, which
aim to replicate their functionality using only
black-box access. In this paper, we propose
Stealthy Imitation, the first attack designed to
steal policies without access to the environment
or knowledge of the input range. This setup has
not been considered by previous model stealing
methods. Lacking access to the victim’s input
states distribution, Stealthy Imitation fits a reward
model that allows to approximate it. We show
that the victim policy is harder to imitate when
the distribution of the attack queries matches that
of the victim. We evaluate our approach across
diverse, high-dimensional control tasks and consistently outperform prior data-free approaches
adapted for policy stealing. Lastly, we propose a
countermeasure that significantly diminishes the
effectiveness of the attack.1

Figure 1. Traditional data-free model extraction fails in control
systems due to the unknown environment with varying sensors.
Stealthy Imitation effectively extracts policies by stealing the environment first.

and Festo Robotino XT robot control (Bischoff et al., 2014).
Developing a reliable deep RL policy requires substantial
resources, including expertise in training, precise simulation, and real-world testing; the resulting policy becomes
important intellectual property. However, neural network
models are vulnerable to stealing attacks (Tramèr et al.,
2016; Orekondy et al., 2019b; Truong et al., 2021) that attempt to copy the functionality of the model via black-box
query access. The risks posed by such attacks in control
systems are multifaceted, including unauthorized model usage, exposure of sensitive information, and further attacks
that can lead to denial of service, operational failures, or
even physical damage on the equipment or surroundings.

1. Introduction

Model theft typically consists of two steps. First, a transfer dataset is created by querying the victim model with
publicly available data (Orekondy et al., 2019b), random
noise (Tramèr et al., 2016), or samples synthesized by a neural network (Truong et al., 2021), and recording the model
predictions as pseudo-labels. The latter two methods fall
under the category of data-free model stealing. After this
querying phase, the attackers train their own model via supervised learning, treating the pseudo-labels as ground truth
for their samples.

Neural networks trained with reinforcement learning (RL),
known as deep RL policies, are increasingly employed in
control systems due to the exceptional performance and automation capabilities. Examples include DeepMind’s use
of RL in cooling control systems (Luo et al., 2022), throttle
valve control in combustion engines (Bischoff et al., 2013),
1

Graduate School of Computer Science, Saarland University,
Saarbrücken, Germany 2 Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence,
Robert Bosch GmbH, Renningen, Germany 3 CISPA Helmholtz
Center for Information Security, Saarbrücken, Germany. Correspondence to: Zhixiong Zhuang <zhixiong.zhuang@bosch.com>.

Control systems, such as industrial automation, remotely
controlled drones or robots, pose additional challenges for
model stealing. A policy perceives states and rewards (also
known as the environment), based on which it decides the
next action to take. In this context, the attacker can potentially send queries to the system, but does not have access to

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
The project page is at https://zhixiongzh.github.io/stealthyimitation.

1

