In-Context Unlearning: Language Models as Few-Shot Unlearners

Martin Pawelczyk 1 Seth Neel * 1 Himabindu Lakkaraju * 1

Abstract

Standard Unlearning Paradigm
Personal Information
Name: Alice
Net worth: 30000
Zip code: 1010
Credit score: Positive

Machine unlearning, the study of efficiently removing the impact of specific training instances
on a model, has garnered increased attention in
recent years due to regulatory guidelines such
as the Right to be Forgotten. Achieving precise
unlearning typically involves fully retraining the
model and is computationally infeasible in case
of very large models such as Large Language
Models (LLMs). To this end, recent work has
proposed several algorithms which approximate
the removal of training data without retraining the
model. These algorithms crucially rely on access
to the model parameters in order to update them,
an assumption that may not hold in practice due
to computational constraints or having only query
access to the LLMs. In this work, we propose a
new class of unlearning methods for LLMs called
“In-Context Unlearning.” This method unlearns
instances from the model by simply providing specific kinds of inputs in context, without the need
to update model parameters. To unlearn specific
training instances, we present these instances to
the LLMs at inference time along with labels that
differ from their ground truth. Our experimental
results demonstrate that in-context unlearning performs on par with, or in some cases outperforms
other state-of-the-art methods that require access
to model parameters, effectively removing the influence of specific instances on the model while
preserving test accuracy.

Deletion Request

Gradient
update of 𝜃

Trained Model 𝜽

Updated Model 𝜽′

In-Context Unlearning Paradigm
Personal Information
Name: Alice
Net worth: 30000
Zip code: 1010
Credit score: Positive
Deletion Request

Update via incontext input

Blackbox Model

Updated Blackbox
Model

Figure 1. Differences between In-Context Unlearning and Standard Unlearning. Top: Traditional unlearning approaches require
access to model parameters θ and these parameters are updated in
response to deletion requests. Bottom: In-context unlearning does
not require access to the parameters. Unlearning works by providing certain kinds of inputs in context which mimic the model’s
performance as if the model was re-trained without the points.

in real-world applications, several regulatory guidelines
have been introduced to protect user privacy (OAG, 2021;
Union, 2016), one of which is called the Right to be
Forgotten. The Right to be Forgotten offers users more
control over their personal data by allowing them to submit
a deletion request to retract permission for a company to
use their personal data at any time, even if, for example, the
company has already trained an ML model with it (Biega
et al., 2020; Goldsteen et al., 2021; OAG, 2021; Union,
2016). This raises a significant dilemma for organizations
that aim to comply with the spirit of the regulation and
avoid potentially breaking the law (Voigt & Von dem
Bussche, 2017), particularly concerning how exactly this
data should be “removed” from any models trained on it.
A second motivation comes from a concern orthogonal to
privacy: copyright infringement. Generative models, like
Large Language Models (LLMs), can often reproduce their
training data verbatim or with only superficial changes. This
can lead to credible claims of copyright infringement when
the underlying data is protected by copyright. In such cases,
when a copyrighted input to a model is generated, the model
owner may be required to “take down” the copyrighted
work from the model. Unlearning the corresponding input
is one potential technical solution to comply with the take
down request without retraining the model from scratch.

1. Introduction
Over the past decade, machine learning (ML) models have
become ubiquitous in high-stakes decision making settings
such as hiring, criminal justice, and credit scoring. To
ensure responsible deployment and usage of these models
*
Equal contribution 1 Harvard University, US. Correspondence
to: Martin Pawelczyk <martin.pawelczyk.1@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

