Position: Is machine learning good or bad for the natural sciences?

David W. Hogg 1 2 3 Soledad Villar 3 4 5

Abstract

1. Introduction

Machine learning (ML) methods are having a
huge impact across all of the sciences. However,
ML has a strong ontology—in which only the
data exist—and a strong epistemology—in which
a model is considered good if it performs well on
held-out training data. These philosophies are in
strong conflict with both standard practices and
key philosophies in the natural sciences. Here we
identify some locations for ML in the natural sciences at which the ontology and epistemology
are valuable. For example, when an expressive
machine learning model is used in a causal inference to represent the effects of confounders,
such as foregrounds, backgrounds, or instrument
calibration parameters, the model capacity and
loose philosophy of ML can make the results
more trustworthy. We also show that there are
contexts in which the introduction of ML introduces strong, unwanted statistical biases. For one,
when ML models are used to emulate physical
(or first-principles) simulations, they amplify confirmation biases. For another, when expressive
regressions are used to label datasets, those labels
cannot be used in downstream joint or ensemble
analyses without taking on uncontrolled biases.
The question in the title is being asked of all of
the natural sciences; that is, we are calling on the
scientific communities to take a step back and
consider the role and value of ML in their fields;
the (partial) answers we give here come from the
particular perspective of physics.

It is an understatement to say that machine learning (ML)
is having a big impact across the sciences. A significant
fraction of all scientific papers in the natural sciences now
employ ML in part (or all) of their analyses. (We will define ML below in Section 2). However, when we ask what
scientific breakthroughs have been enabled by this influx of
new tools and methods, there isn’t a long list. The success
of the AlphaFold projects in protein structure (Jumper et al.,
2021) are often raised. But these are successes in a very
specific challenge-problem setting in which performance
is valued over understanding. In the natural sciences we
almost exclusively care about understanding, in the long
run.
The natural sciences are concerned with understanding the
world, and naturally occurring mechanisms in play in that
world. We make progress by discovering new kinds of objects and phenomena, and explaining (and, even better, predicting) qualitatively new kinds of objects and phenomena.
Our most successful investigations are judged in terms of
the questions they answer, or the new questions they raise,
or both. The question here is: How will ML contribute to
this mission?
In contrast to natural science, ML research and ML methods
are concerned with making accurate predictions for, or descriptions of, data. A ML method is considered successful
if it performs well on held-out training data, even if the
latent structure of the model is generic and the internals are
impossible to interpret. In ML, the considerations are almost
all at the level of the data, and we are happy to use models
in which we have little or no understanding of the meanings
or values of the latent parameters or weights.
In natural science, on the other hand, the most important
contributions and results are all at the level of the latents:
We use data to learn about the latent structure of the world or
of the system we are studying. In astrophysics, this could be
the interior structure of the Sun, or the processes that form
planets around other stars, or the map of the dark matter
surrounding the Milky Way. The things we care about are
almost never directly observable; they are parameters (or
hyper-parameters) of a physical (or chemical or biological)
model that predicts the observables. Often the thing we care
about is the model itself.

1

Center for Cosmology and Particle Physics, Department of
Physics, New York University, USA 2 Max-Planck-Institut für Astronomie, Heidelberg, Germany 3 Flatiron Institute, New York,
USA 4 Department of Applied Mathematics and Statistics, Johns
Hopkins University, USA 5 Mathematical Institute for Data Science, Johns Hopkins University, USA. Correspondence to: David
W. Hogg <david.hogg@nyu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

