Statistical Inference Under Constrained Selection Bias
Santiago Cortes-Gomez 1 Mateo Dulce 2 Carlos Patino 3 Bryan Wilder 1

Abstract

to sample from a true distribution of interest. Consequently,
such efforts have been hindered by sampling biases and
other distributional shifts between the observed data and
the target distribution. Such selection biases have presented
severe issues for past algorithmic systems (Chouldechova
et al., 2018; Gianfrancesco et al., 2018), policy analysis
(Harron et al., 2017; Knox et al., 2020), epidemiological
studies (Jensen et al., 2015; Haneuse & Daniels, 2016),
among others.

Large-scale datasets are increasingly being used
to inform decision making. While this effort aims
to ground policy in real-world evidence, challenges have arisen as selection bias and other
forms of distribution shifts often plague observational data. Previous attempts to provide robust
inference have given guarantees depending on
a user-specified amount of possible distribution
shift (e.g., the maximum KL divergence between
the observed and target distributions). However,
decision makers will often have additional knowledge about the target distribution which constrains
the kind of possible shifts. To leverage such information, we propose a framework that enables
statistical inference in the presence of selection
bias which obeys user-specified constraints in the
form of functions whose expectation is known
under the target distribution. The output is highprobability bounds on the value of an estimand
for the target distribution. Hence, our method
leverages domain knowledge in order to partially
identify a wide class of estimands. We analyze the
computational and statistical properties of methods to estimate these bounds and show that our
method can produce informative bounds on a variety of simulated and semisynthetic tasks, as well
as in a real-world use case.

As a motivating example, decision-makers in public health
want to target preventative interventions to mitigate the impact of a COVID-19 outbreak. To achieve this aim, they may
wish to estimate the risk factors contributing to a particular
adverse outcome related to COVID-19, e.g. hospitalizations.
Nevertheless, they typically only will have data from individuals who engaged with some specific services in the
past, such as patients who visited the healthcare system or
insurance claims. Furthermore, it is a known phenomenon
that individuals with a low income background will seek
care primarily when facing severe diseases, thus increasing
observed hospitalizations for this group. Hence, the selection bias present in the data will be driven by some latent
factors (for instance, high healthcare costs) and the outcome
itself; thus creating a problem similar to confounding when
estimating the relationship between these two quantities.
We consider the task of accurately estimating some functional of the ground-truth distribution using samples from
an observed, potentially shifted, distribution. For instance,
our goal might be to estimate the expectation of a measured
covariate or the treatment effect from an intervention. In
general, such inference is intractable without assumptions
on the relationship between the observed and target distributions. The simplest setting is where we can directly
observe some samples from the target distribution. However, we are interested in scenarios where this is not the case,
for example, the one introduced in the previous paragraph;
given that the data is conditioned among other things on
the outcome, it presents the insidious problem that it will
never be representative of the population as whole. Absent target-distribution samples, other frameworks such as
those related to distributionally robust optimization (DRO)
(Gupta & Rothenhäusler, 2021; Bertsimas et al., 2022; Yadlowsky et al., 2022; Rothenhäusler & Bühlmann, 2022) or
sensitivity analysis (Robins et al., 2000; Tan, 2006; Ding &

1. Introduction
Decision-makers in the public and private sectors increasingly rely on machine learning or statistical models built on
top of large-scale datasets in order to inform policy, operational decisions, individualized treatment rules, and more.
However, these administrative datasets are typically purely
observational, meaning that they are not carefully designed
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Machine Learning,
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Department of Statistics, Carnegie
Mellon University 3 Factored AI. Correspondence to: Santiago
Cortes-Gomez <scortesg@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

