Unveiling the Potential of AI for
Nanomaterial Morphology Prediction

Ivan Dubrovsky 1 Andrei Dmitrenko 1 2 Aleksei Dmitrenko 1 Nikita Serov 1 Vladimir Vinogradov 1

Abstract

stantially different synthesis procedures (Vaidyanathan &
Sendhilnathan, 2008; Sun et al., 2021). Each synthesis is
followed by a specific method of analysis to confirm the
experimental outcome. One of the most prominent methods for analyzing nanomaterials is the scanning electron
microscopy (SEM) (Smith & Oatley, 1955). With SEM, it
is possible to obtain information about the size and shape
of nanoparticles (NPs), as well as the structure of the surface, surface flaws and contaminants. Currently, the SEM
method is deemed irreplaceable despite being costly and
time-consuming (Singh, 2016). On average, one analysis
with SEM can cost up to a few hundred US dollars, leading
to vast amounts of resources required to run any large-scale
study. While conducting such experiments scientists are
most often guided by their experience and intuition acquired
in past experiments. This is because the problem of determining the morphology of nanomaterials based on the
synthesis parameters currently has no theoretical or computational solution, in general. At the same time, syntheses
of nanomaterials include too many different interdependent
parameters for a person to be able to account for. Therefore, there is a high demand (AbdelHamid et al., 2022) for
predictive models capable of characterizing the properties
of nanomaterials bypassing the need of costly experimental
work.

Creation of nanomaterials with specific morphology remains a complex experimental process,
even though there is a growing demand for these
materials in various industry sectors. This study
explores the potential of AI to predict the morphology of nanoparticles within the data availability
constraints. For that, we first generated a new
multi-modal dataset that is double the size of analogous studies. Then, we systematically evaluated
performance of classical machine learning and
large language models in prediction of nanomaterial shapes and sizes. Finally, we prototyped
a text-to-image system, discussed the obtained
empirical results, as well as the limitations and
promises of existing approaches.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, nanomaterials are spread across many fields of
science and industry (Zebarjadi et al., 2011; Liu & Lal, 2015;
Kairdolf et al., 2017; Shifrina et al., 2020; Gao et al., 2021;
Takechi-Haraya et al., 2022). In each of those fields, for a
nanomaterial to be fit for purpose, its size, shape, and other
morphological parameters must be precisely controlled, as
they directly influence toxicity, catalytic activity and other
properties of nanomaterials crucial for applications. Altering these parameters also allows to improve efficiency of
drug delivery systems (Sen Gupta, 2016), catalysts (Shifrina
et al., 2020), energy storage systems (Pomerantseva et al.,
2019), etc.

Artificial intelligence (AI) offers the most promising set
of tools to meet this demand. In fact, classical machine
learning (ML) models including artificial neural networks
have already been successfully applied to many tasks related
to nanomaterial science (Serov & Vinogradov, 2022; Chen
et al., 2023; Banaye Yazdipour et al., 2023). With recent
astonishing advances in deep learning (Jumper et al., 2021;
Rombach et al., 2021; Ramesh et al., 2022; OpenAI, 2023;
Touvron et al., 2023; Jiang et al., 2023; Merchant et al.,
2023), the potential of AI in the design of nanomaterials
seems truly immense. However, one has to possess large
volumes of carefully curated data to fully exploit the power
of AI. As discussed earlier, accumulating the data appropriate for the prediction of nanomaterial morphology has been
a major challenge for decades. Within realistic data constraints, the boundaries of AI in the design of nanomaterials
are underexplored.

Typically, creating a nanomaterial with a specific set of
properties requires a significant number of experiments
ranging from a few repetitive syntheses to a dozen of sub1

Center for AI in Chemistry, ChemBio Cluster, ITMO University, St. Petersburg, Russia 2 D ONE AG, Zurich, Greater
Zurich Area, Switzerland.
Correspondence to: Vladimir
Vinogradov <vinogradov@scamt-itmo.ru>, Andrei Dmitrenko
<dmitrenko@scamt-itmo.ru>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

