Differentially Private Decentralized Learning with Random Walks

Edwige Cyffers 1 Aurélien Bellet 2 Jalaj Upadhyay 3

Abstract

Le Bars et al., 2023; Nedic et al., 2018; Tang et al., 2018).
In addition to their scalability, these algorithms can exploit
the natural graph structure in some applications, such as
social networks where users are linked to their friends, or
the geographical position of devices that induces faster communications with the closest users.

The popularity of federated learning comes from
the possibility of better scalability and the ability for participants to keep control of their data,
improving data security and sovereignty. Unfortunately, sharing model updates also creates a new
privacy attack surface. In this work, we characterize the privacy guarantees of decentralized learning with random walk algorithms, where a model
is updated by traveling from one node to another
along the edges of a communication graph. Using a recent variant of differential privacy tailored
to the study of decentralized algorithms, namely
Pairwise Network Differential Privacy, we derive
closed-form expressions for the privacy loss between each pair of nodes where the impact of
the communication topology is captured by graph
theoretic quantities. Our results further reveal
that random walk algorithms yield better privacy
guarantees than gossip algorithms for nodes close
to each other. We supplement our theoretical results with empirical evaluation of synthetic and
real-world graphs and datasets.

Keeping data decentralized can reduce communication costs
and latency, and it is also welcomed from a privacy perspective when the data contains personal information or
represents a crucial asset for businesses. However, sharing
model parameters can indirectly leak sensitive information
and allow data reconstruction attacks (see e.g. Geiping et al.,
2020; Nasr et al., 2018; Shokri et al., 2017; Zhu et al., 2019).
To mitigate this problem, differential privacy (DP) (Dwork
et al., 2006) has become the de facto standard in machine
learning to provide robust guarantees of privacy. In a nutshell, DP compares two learning scenarios that only differ
from the data of a single user and ensures that the output
distribution of the algorithm remains similar. This, in particular, means that no attacker can learn too much about the
private data of a user by inspecting the outputs, even if they
have access to arbitrary auxiliary information.
Decentralized learning algorithms can be made differentially private by having each node add noise to their model
updates before sharing them with their neighbors in the
graph (Bellet et al., 2018; Cheng et al., 2019; Huang et al.,
2015; Xu et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2018). An important
challenge is then to bound as tightly as possible the privacy
leakage based on the level of noise and the threat model considered to achieve the best possible privacy-utility trade-off.
The baseline approach relies on local DP, which assumes
that all information a node sends is observed by all other
nodes. This leads to overly pessimistic privacy guarantees
for decentralized algorithms because nodes only observe the
messages sent by their direct neighbors.

1. Introduction
Federated learning allows multiple data owners to collaboratively train a model without sharing their data (Kairouz
et al., 2021). Some federated algorithms rely on a central server to orchestrate the process and aggregate model
updates (McMahan et al., 2017), with the downsides of creating a single point of failure and limiting the scalability
in the number of participants (Lian et al., 2017). In this
work, we focus on fully decentralized algorithms that replace the central server by peer-to-peer communications
between participants, viewed as nodes in a sparse network
graph (Koloskova et al., 2020; 2021; Lian et al., 2017;

Recent work has shown that it is possible to leverage the
graph topology of decentralized algorithms to develop more
tailored privacy guarantees specific to the relation between
the different nodes based on the notion of pairwise network
differential privacy (PNDP) (Cyffers & Bellet, 2022; Cyffers et al., 2022). PNDP takes into account the fact that
each node only has a local view of the communications, and
allows to reason on the privacy leakage between each pair of

1
Université de Lille, Inria, CNRS, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189 CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France 2 Inria, Univ Montpellier, Montpellier, France 3 Rutgers University. Correspondence to: Edwige
Cyffers <edwige.cyffers@inria.fr>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

