Classification under Nuisance Parameters and Generalized Label Shift
in Likelihood-Free Inference
Luca Masserano * 1 2 Alex Shen * 1 Michele Doro 3 Tommaso Dorigo 4 5 6 Rafael Izbicki 7 Ann B. Lee 1 2

Abstract

with a “theory” or model of the data-generating process — is
intractable, but one is able to simulate relatively large data
sets T = {(θ 1 , X1 ), . . . , (θ B , XB )} ∼ ptrain (θ)L(x; θ).
These mechanistic models (or simulators) implicitly define
the “causal” model θ → X that encodes our knowledge of
how internal parameters determine observable data, and are
widely used in several domains of science.

An open scientific challenge is how to classify events with reliable measures of uncertainty,
when we have a mechanistic model of the datagenerating process but the distribution over both
labels and latent nuisance parameters is different
between train and target data. We refer to this type
of distributional shift as generalized label shift
(GLS). Direct classification using observed data
X as covariates leads to biased predictions and
invalid uncertainty estimates of labels Y . We overcome these biases by proposing a new method for
robust uncertainty quantification that casts classification as a hypothesis testing problem under
nuisance parameters. The key idea is to estimate
the classifier’s receiver operating characteristic
(ROC) across the entire nuisance parameter space,
which allows us to devise cutoffs that are invariant
under GLS. Our method effectively endows a pretrained classifier with domain adaptation capabilities and returns valid prediction sets while maintaining high power. We demonstrate its performance on two challenging scientific problems in
biology and astroparticle physics with data from
realistic mechanistic models.

While the likelihood L(x; θ) stays the same under the assumed theory, the prior over parameters ptrain (θ) is chosen
by design and can be different from the true target distribution ptarget (θ), thereby causing a potentially harmful
bias when inferring θ given a new observation xtarget . If
the unknown parameter of interest is a categorical variable
Y ∈ Y = {0, 1, . . . , K} and the causal mechanistic model
remains the same — that is, ptrain (X | Y ) = ptarget (X | Y )
— the difference in the joint distribution of (θ, X) between
train and target data is referred to as prior probability shift or
label shift (Quinonero-Candela et al., 2008; Vaz et al., 2019;
Polo et al., 2023; Storkey et al., 2009; Fawcett & Flach,
2005; Moreno-Torres et al., 2012). We refer to this setting
as standard label shift (SLS).
In this paper, we consider a more general setup that reflects
a richer mechanistic model: θ = (Y, ν) → X, where
ν ∈ N are continuous or discrete nuisance parameters that
are not of direct interest but critically influence the datagenerating process. These nuisance parameters are available
at the training stage, but are not observed at the inference
stage when estimating Y from xtarget . We refer to a shift
that simultaneously affects Y and ν as generalized label
shift (GLS), and assume that ptrain (X | Y, ν) = ptarget (X |
Y, ν). Within this setting, our goal is not just to do binary
classification per se (that is, providing a 0 versus 1 response),
but rather to do trustworthy uncertainty quantification for
the classification output, even under GLS.

1. Introduction
Problem Set-up Likelihood-free inference refers to settings where the likelihood function L(x; θ) — associated
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics and Data Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA 2 Machine
Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh,
USA 3 Department of Physics and Astronomy, Università di
Padova, Padova, Italy 4 Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, Sezione di Padova, Italy 5 Lulea Techniska Universitet,
Lulea, Sweden 6 Universal Scientific Education and Research
Network, Italy 7 Department of Statistics, Universidade Federal de São Carlos, São Paulo, Brazil. Correspondence to:
Luca Masserano <lmassera@andrew.cmu.edu>, Ann B. Lee
<annlee@andrew.cmu.edu>.

Scientific Motivation Nuisance parameters can be seen
as a way of accounting for model misspecifications. Statistical models are indeed rarely accurate in capturing the
complexity of physical phenomena. To account for “known
unknowns”, such as calibration errors in the measuring device or inaccuracies and approximations in the theory, scientists usually resort to enlarging the mechanistic model with
additional parameters that are not of direct relevance, but

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

