Robust CLIP: Unsupervised Adversarial Fine-Tuning of Vision Embeddings
for Robust Large Vision-Language Models

Christian Schlarmann * 1 2 Naman Deep Singh * 1 2 Francesco Croce 3 Matthias Hein 1 2

Abstract
Multi-modal foundation models like OpenFlamingo, LLaVA, and GPT-4 are increasingly
used for various real-world tasks. Prior work
has shown that these models are highly vulnerable to adversarial attacks on the vision modality.
These attacks can be leveraged to spread fake
information or defraud users, and thus pose a significant risk, which makes the robustness of large
multi-modal foundation models a pressing problem. The CLIP model, or one of its variants, is
used as a frozen vision encoder in many large
vision-language models (LVLMs), e.g. LLaVA
and OpenFlamingo. We propose an unsupervised
adversarial fine-tuning scheme to obtain a robust
CLIP vision encoder, which yields robustness on
all vision down-stream tasks (LVLMs, zero-shot
classification) that rely on CLIP. In particular, we
show that stealth-attacks on users of LVLMs by a
malicious third party providing manipulated images are no longer possible once one replaces the
original CLIP model with our robust one. No retraining or fine-tuning of the down-stream LVLMs
is required. The code and robust models are available on GitHub.

Figure 1: (Robust) performance of LLaVA-1.5 on visionlanguage tasks and zero-shot (robust) classification for
different CLIP models as vision encoder: (i) the original
CLIP, (ii) TeCoA2 : robust CLIP with supervised adversarial
fine-tuning (Mao et al., 2023) at ℓ∞ radius of 2/255, and
(iii) FARE2 : robust CLIP using our proposed unsupervised
adversarial fine-tuning at ℓ∞ radius of 2/255. The original
CLIP is completely non-robust. Our FARE2 model has
better clean and robust performance than TeCoA2 on almost
all down-stream tasks, see Fig. 2 for qualitative outputs.

1. Introduction

very good performance in zero-shot settings: for example,
they can encode virtually any class via its textual description, which makes them well-suited for zero-shot image
classification. Additionally, CLIP-like models are an essential component of recent large vision language models
(LVLMs): in fact, OpenFlamingo (Awadalla et al., 2023)
and LLaVA (Liu et al., 2023b;a) are built connecting the
frozen vision encoder of the original CLIP with a large language model (MPT (MosaicML, 2023) and Vicuna (Chiang
et al., 2023) respectively). These LVLMs exhibit excellent
zero-shot generalization capabilities, e.g. in image captioning, visual question answering (VQA) and classification
from text prompts.

Several recent foundation models are trained to semantically align inputs from different modalities in a joint embedding space. The most relevant example is CLIP (Radford
et al., 2021), which learns, via contrastive training, to encode text and images into a feature space where inputs,
in either form, capturing similar concepts are mapped to
be close to each other. These models show great promise
for many down-stream tasks, in particular thanks to their
*

1
Equal contribution
Tübingen AI Center, Germany
University of Tübingen, Germany 3 EPFL, Switzerland. Correspondence to: <christian.schlarmann@uni-tuebingen.de>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Given the flexibility and effectiveness of such large foundation models, in particular LVLMs, it is foreseeable that they
1

