To the Max: Reinventing Reward in Reinforcement Learning

Grigorii Veviurko 1 Wendelin Böhmer 1 Mathijs de Weerdt 1

Abstract

Hence, designing a reward function that enables learning
and corresponds to a certain optimal policy is a challenging
problem in modern reinforcement learning.

In reinforcement learning (RL), different reward
functions can define the same optimal policy
but result in drastically different learning performance. For some, the agent gets stuck with a
suboptimal behavior, and for others, it solves the
task efficiently. Choosing a good reward function
is hence an extremely important yet challenging
problem. In this paper, we explore an alternative approach for using rewards for learning. We
introduce max-reward RL, where an agent optimizes the maximum rather than the cumulative
reward. Unlike earlier works, our approach works
for deterministic and stochastic environments and
can be easily combined with state-of-the-art RL
algorithms. In the experiments, we study the performance of max-reward RL algorithms in two
goal-reaching environments from GymnasiumRobotics and demonstrate its benefits over standard RL. The code is available at https://
github.com/veviurko/To-the-Max.

In many RL problems, the true reward function is sparse, i.e.,
only successful completion of the task is rewarded. In particular, the sparse reward is characteristic to goal-reaching
problems where the agent needs to enter the goal state (Plappert et al., 2018; Florensa et al., 2018; Ghosh et al., 2020).
Sparse reward problems are notoriously hard to solve with
standard RL. A popular and simple solution is to introduce
a dense surrogate reward that represents some sort of distance between the agent and the goal (Towers et al., 2023;
de Lazcano et al., 2023). However, this approach is very
sensitive and should be carefully tailored to each problem
individually, in order to not change the induced optimal policy. Specifically, this dense artificial dense reward should a)
increase when the agent gets closer to the goal, and b) not
distract the agent from the reaching the goal. Designing a
function that satisfies both criteria can be tricky for a human
expert, as it requires estimating the (discounted) cumulative
returns in various states.
In this work, we propose max-reward RL, where the agent
optimizes the maximum reward achieved in the episode
rather than the cumulative return. This paradigms makes
the reward design process much more intuitive and straightforward, as it only requires that “better” states correspond
to larger rewards. Hence, as long as the goal-reaching action has the highest reward, the optimal policy does not
change. Besides simplifying the reward design, the maximum reward objective can also be easier to optimize for.
In standard RL, learning a value of a non-terminal state
involves bootstrapping, and hence has a moving target. In
max-reward RL, bootstrapping does not happen when the
immediate reward is not smaller than the largest reward
explored so far. Therefore, max-reward RL bootstraps less
and hence, potentially, learns better.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a learning paradigm where
an intelligent agent solves sequential decision-making problems through trial and error. The main objective that an
RL agent learns to optimize is the cumulative return, i.e.,
a discounted sum of the rewards. This makes the reward
a crucial element of the problem, as it defines the optimal
decision-making policy that the agent will try to learn.
It is well known (Ng et al., 1999) that there are infinitely
many ways to define the reward function under which a desired policy is optimal. Practically, however, these rewards
often result in drastically different learning processes. For
example, many major successes of RL required meticulous
engineering of the reward: by hand (Berner et al., 2019) or
by learning it from a human example (Vinyals et al., 2019).

One of the key properties of the cumulative return is that it
satisfies the Bellman equation (Bellman, 1954) and hence
can be efficiently approximated and optimized by iteratively
applying the Bellman operator. To make the max-reward
RL approach viable, an analogous learning rule is required.
However, Cui & Yu (2023) prove that naively changing
summation into a max operator in the standard Bellman

1
Delft University of Technology. Correspondence to: Grigorii
Veviurko <g.veviurko@tudelft.nl>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

