Actions Speak Louder than Words: Trillion-Parameter Sequential Transducers
for Generative Recommendations

Xuan Cao

1

Jiaqi Zhai 1 Lucy Liao 1 Xing Liu 1 Yueming Wang 1 Rui Li 1
Leon Gao 1 Zhaojie Gong 1 Fangda Gu 1 Jiayuan He 1 Yinghai Lu 1 Yu Shi 1

Abstract

10000
Training PetaFLOP/s-days

Large-scale recommendation systems are characterized by their reliance on high cardinality, heterogeneous features and the need to handle tens
of billions of user actions on a daily basis. Despite being trained on huge volume of data with
thousands of features, most Deep Learning Recommendation Models (DLRMs) in industry fail to
scale with compute. Inspired by success achieved
by Transformers in language and vision domains,
we revisit fundamental design choices in recommendation systems. We reformulate recommendation problems as sequential transduction tasks
within a generative modeling framework (“Generative Recommenders”), and propose a new architecture, HSTU, designed for high cardinality,
non-stationary streaming recommendation data.
HSTU outperforms baselines over synthetic and
public datasets by up to 65.8% in NDCG, and is
5.3x to 15.2x faster than FlashAttention2-based
Transformers on 8192 length sequences. HSTUbased Generative Recommenders, with 1.5 trillion
parameters, improve metrics in online A/B tests
by 12.4% and have been deployed on multiple
surfaces of a large internet platform with billions
of users. More importantly, the model quality of
Generative Recommenders empirically scales as a
power-law of training compute across three orders
of magnitude, up to GPT-3/LLaMa-2 scale, which
reduces carbon footprint needed for future model
developments, and further paves the way for the
first foundation models in recommendations.

100

1

0.01

2012

2014

2016

2018

2020

2022

2024

Year

Figure 1. Total compute used to train deep learning models over
the years. DLRM results are from (Mudigere et al., 2022); GRs are
deployed models from this work. DLRMs/GRs are continuously
trained in a streaming setting; we report compute used per year.

in personalizing billions of user experiences on a daily basis.
State-of-the-art approaches in recommendations have been
based on Deep Learning Recommendation Models (DLRMs) (Mudigere et al., 2022) for about a decade (Covington
et al., 2016; Cheng et al., 2016; Zhou et al., 2018; Tang et al.,
2020; Wang et al., 2021; Xia et al., 2023). DLRMs are characterized by their usage of heterogeneous features, such as
numerical features – counters and ratios, embeddings, and
categorical features such as creator ids, user ids, etc. Due
to new content and products being added every minute, the
feature space is of extreme high cardinality, often in the
range of billions (Eksombatchai et al., 2018). To leverage
tens of thousands of such features, DLRMs employ various
neural networks to combine features, transform intermediate
representations, and compose the final outputs.
Despite utilizing extensive human-engineered feature sets
and training on vast amounts of data, most DLRMs in industry scale poorly with compute (Zhao et al., 2023). This
limitation is noteworthy and remains unanswered.

1. Introduction
Recommendation systems, quintessential in the realm of online content platforms and e-commerce, play a pivotal role

Inspired by the success achieved by Transformers in language and vision, we revisit fundamental design choices in
modern recommendation systems. We observe that alternative formulations at billion-user scale need to overcome
three challenges. First, features in recommendation systems
lack explicit structures. While sequential formulations have
been explored in small-scale settings (detailed discussions

1
MRS, Meta AI. Correspondence to:
<{jiaqiz, lucyyl,
xingl, yuemingw, ruili}@meta.com>.
Code available at
https://github.com/facebookresearch/generative-recommenders.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

