Convergence of Some Convex Message Passing Algorithms to a Fixed Point

Václav Voráček 1 Tomáš Werner 2

Abstract

A popular approach to MAP inference is the class of methods known as convex (or convergent) message passing.
These are in fact versions of (block-)coordinate descent
(BCD) applied to a dual linear programming (LP) or Lagrangian relaxation/decomposition of the problem, which
aims to minimize an upper bound on the true optimal value.
The earliest (and arguably the simplest) such method is
max-sum diffusion (Kovalevsky & Koval, 1975), revisited
in (Werner, 2007; 2010). Other examples are sequential treereweighted message passing (TRW-S) (Kolmogorov, 2006),
max-product linear programming (MPLP) (Globerson &
Jaakkola, 2008), max-marginal averaging (Johnson et al.,
2007), and sequential reweighted message passing (SRMP)
(Kolmogorov, 2015). Message-passing methods for MAP
inference have a rich history, reviewing which is beyond the
scope of this paper, see also (Meltzer et al., 2009; Ruozzi &
Tatikonda, 2013; Sontag et al., 2012; Tourani et al., 2020).

A popular approach to the MAP inference problem in graphical models is to minimize an upper
bound obtained from a dual linear programming
or Lagrangian relaxation by (block-)coordinate
descent. This is also known as convex/convergent
message passing; examples are max-sum diffusion and sequential tree-reweighted message passing (TRW-S). Convergence properties of these
methods are currently not fully understood. They
have been proved to converge to the set characterized by local consistency of active constraints,
with unknown convergence rate; however, it was
not clear if the iterates converge at all (to any
point). We prove a stronger result (conjectured
before but never proved): the iterates converge to
a fixed point of the method. Moreover, we show
that the algorithm terminates within O(1/ε) iterations. We first prove this for a version of coordinate descent applied to a general piecewise-affine
convex objective. Then we show that several convex message passing methods are special cases
of this method. Finally, we show that a slightly
different version of coordinate descent can cycle.

Besides MAP inference, convex message passing methods
have been applied to other combinatorial optimization problems (Wedelin, 1995; Swoboda et al., 2017a;b; Swoboda
& Andres, 2017) including the general 0-1 ILPs (Lange &
Swoboda, 2021; Abbas & Swoboda, 2022), outperforming
commercial ILP solvers on many large-scale instances.
The dual LP or Lagrangian relaxations of MAP inference
are convex non-smooth and/or constrained problems. Coordinate descent applied to a convex function is known to
converge to a global minimum if the function is smooth (or
its non-smooth part is separable) and has unique coordinatewise minimizers (Bertsekas, 1999; Tseng, 2001) but for
non-smooth and/or constrained problems it can get stuck in
local (w.r.t. coordinate moves) minima (Warga, 1963). To
alleviate this drawback, a number of globally optimal largescale methods have been adapted to solve the relaxations,
such as subgradient methods (Komodakis et al., 2011), bundle methods (Savchynskyy, 2012), ADMM (Martins et al.,
2011), or adaptive diminishing smoothing (Savchynskyy
et al., 2012). It was however observed in the experimental study by (Kappes et al., 2015) that for large sparse instances from computer vision, dual BCD methods with treestructured blocks (such as TRW-S) are consistently faster
and the obtained local optima are usually very good.

1. Introduction
Maximum aposterior (MAP) inference in undirected graphical models (Markov random fields) (Wainwright & Jordan,
2008) leads to an NP-hard combinatorial optimization problem, which is also known as discrete energy minimization
(Szeliski et al., 2006; Kappes et al., 2015) or valued constraint satisfaction (Meseguer et al., 2006; Cooper et al.,
2010). Graphical models find many applications even in
various areas of deep learning (Chen et al., 2015; Tourani
et al., 2018; Munda et al., 2017).
1
Tübingen AI center, University of Tübingen 2 Dept. of
Cybernetics, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague. Correspondence to: Václav Voráček
<vaclav.voracek@uni-tuebingen.de>.

Convergence properties of the convex message-passing
methods are currently not fully understood. The objective

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

