Transformers Get Stable: An End-to-End
Signal Propagation Theory for Language Models

Akhil Kedia * 1 Mohd Abbas Zaidi * 1 Sushil Khyalia * 2 JungHo Jung 1 Harshith Goka 1 Haejun Lee 1

Abstract

2021; Noci et al., 2022) that adversely affect training stability. Proposed remedies include residual scaling, changing
initialization or extra/modified layernorms (Zhang et al.,
2019a; Xiong et al., 2020; Bachlechner et al., 2021; Wang
et al., 2024; Dehghani et al., 2023).

In spite of their huge success, transformer models
remain difficult to scale in depth. In this work,
we develop a unified signal propagation theory
and provide formulae that govern the moments
of the forward and backward signal through the
transformer model. Our framework can be used
to understand and mitigate vanishing/exploding
gradients, rank collapse, and instability associated
with high attention scores. We also propose DeepScaleLM, an initialization and scaling scheme that
conserves unit output/gradient moments throughout the model, enabling the training of very deep
models with 1000 layers. We find that transformer
models could be much deeper – our deep models
with fewer parameters outperform shallow models in Language Modeling, Speech Translation,
and Image Classification, across encoder-only,
decoder-only and encoder-decoder variants, for
both Pre-LN and Post-LN transformers, for multiple datasets and model sizes. These improvements also translate into improved performance
on downstream Question Answering tasks and
improved robustness for Image Classification.

1

Theoretical analysis via signal propagation and kernel methods has led to an improved understanding of these issues.
Several works in the signal propagation domain (Glorot &
Bengio, 2010; Arpit et al., 2016; Xu et al., 2019; Dong et al.,
2021; Davis et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022) have analysed
the propagation of moments for some components of deep
transformers, but often make simplifying assumptions of IID
inputs, uncorrelated outputs, ignoring effect of query/key
initialization, simplifying non-linearity, etc. We observed
break down of each of these assumptions with real world
data, adversely affecting model stability.
These issues highlight the need for a holistic theoretical
framework that can fully explain signal propagation through
transformer models with real data. In this work, we provide
a framework to fully explain signal propagation through
transformer models, by deriving closed-form expressions
for the first and second-order moments (mean and variance)
of the outputs and gradients of each of the components of
the transformer model (Embeddings, FFN, ReLU/GeLU,
LayerNorm, Dropout, Softmax, Single-Head Attention),
Attention and FFN blocks, and through the entire model.
Our derived equations are empirically verified within strict
error bounds with real world data1 .

Introduction

Transformer models are extremely popular across different
domains of machine learning, however, deep transformers
are plagued with issues of gradient explosion/vanishing (Rae
et al., 2021; Shleifer et al., 2021; Smith et al., 2022; Takase
et al., 2022; Smith et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022c; Dehghani et al., 2023; Chowdhery et al., 2023; Molybog et al.,
2023; Wortsman et al., 2024) and rank collapse (Zhou et al.,

We apply this framework to understand and mitigate instability issues with deep transformers – vanishing/exploding
gradients, rank collapse, and instability caused by high QK
values. To harness the improved complexity of deeper models (Montúfar et al., 2014; Poole et al., 2016; Raghu et al.,
2017), we propose DeepScaleLM, a novel initialization
scheme that augments residual/output scaling, and ensures
the moments of outputs and gradients remain fully conserved throughout the model. DSLM enables us to break the
depth barrier and train models with 100s of layers which outperform shallow models for BERT, GPT, Encoder-Decoder
models across text, vision and speech modalities.

*

Equal contribution 1 Language Intelligence Lab, Samsung
Research, Seoul, South Korea. 2 Department of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA
(work done while at Samsung). Correspondence to: Akhil Kedia
<akhil.kedia@samsung.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

1

Code: https://github.com/akhilkedia/TranformersGetStable

