EiG-Search: Generating Edge-Induced Subgraphs
for GNN Explanation in Linear Time

Shengyao Lu 1 Bang Liu 2 Keith G. Mills 1 Jiao He 3 Di Niu 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

The explainability of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) has
become a crucial topic, driven by their “black box” nature
and the demand for transparency in sensitive fields. While
earlier works focus on generating node-level or edge-level
explanations (Pope et al., 2019; Baldassarre & Azizpour,
2019; Shrikumar et al., 2017; Vu & Thai, 2020; Huang et al.,
2022; Ying et al., 2019; Luo et al., 2020; Schlichtkrull et al.,
2021; Zhang et al., 2021; Lin et al., 2021), there is growing
attention on subgraph-level explanations (Yuan et al., 2021;
Shan et al., 2021; Feng et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022; Ye
et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023; Pereira et al., 2023), since they
are more intuitive and human-understandable.

Understanding and explaining the predictions
of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), is crucial
for enhancing their safety and trustworthiness.
Subgraph-level explanations are gaining attention for their intuitive appeal. However, most
existing subgraph-level explainers face efficiency
challenges in explaining GNNs due to complex
search processes. The key challenge is to find
a balance between intuitiveness and efficiency
while ensuring transparency. Additionally, these
explainers usually induce subgraphs by nodes,
which may introduce less-intuitive disconnected
nodes in the subgraph-level explanations or omit
many important subgraph structures. In this paper, we reveal that inducing subgraph explanations by edges is more comprehensive than other
subgraph inducing techniques. We also emphasize the need of determining the subgraph explanation size for each data instance, as different data instances may involve different important substructures. Building upon these considerations, we introduce a training-free approach,
named EiG-Search. We employ an efficient lineartime search algorithm over the edge-induced subgraphs, where the edges are ranked by an enhanced gradient-based importance. We conduct
extensive experiments on a total of seven datasets,
demonstrating its superior performance and efficiency both quantitatively and qualitatively over
the leading baselines. Our code is available at:
https://github.com/sluxsr/EiG-Search.

However, existing subgraph-level explainers often involve
sophisticated processes to generate subgraph explanations,
resulting in inefficiency and limiting their practical applications. For example, MotifExplainer (Yu & Gao, 2022)
relies on costly expert knowledge to first identify subgraphs
before passing them to the explainer. As another example,
SubgraphX (Yuan et al., 2021) searches for the subgraph
explanations with the Shapley value serving as the scoring
function. Although employing the Monte Carlo Tree Search
algorithm, their method is still computationally demanding.
Therefore, it remains a key challenge to balance intuitiveness and efficiency of GNN explainability. Moreover, most
existing subgraph-level explainers induce the subgraphs by
node groups, which may result in disconnected nodes in
the explanations, reducing the intuitiveness. Inducing by
nodes also leads to non-exhaustive enumeration over the
possible subgraphs, posing the risk of omitting important
subgraph structures. Futhermore, they usually pre-specify
a universally fixed number or ratio for the explanation size.
Nevertheless, given that different data samples may have
varying explanation sizes, this setup makes the explanations
less convincing and reliable.
Another line of existing GNN explainability approaches rely
on a second auxiliary black-box model (Ying et al., 2019;
Luo et al., 2020; Vu & Thai, 2020; Bajaj et al., 2021; Shan
et al., 2021; Lin et al., 2021; Huang et al., 2022; Li et al.,
2023; Pereira et al., 2023). While these methods provide
high quality explanations, they can be inconsistent across
different runs. As pointed out by Zhao et al. (2023), these

1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Alberta 2 DIRO, Université de Montréal & Mila, Canada
CIFAR AI Chair 3 Kirin AI Algorithm & Solution, Huawei. Correspondence to: Shengyao Lu <shengyao@ualberta.ca>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

