Estimating Barycenters of Distributions with Neural Optimal Transport

Alexander Kolesov ∗ 1 Petr Mokrov ∗ 1 Igor Udovichenko 1 Milena Gazdieva 1 Gudmund Pammer 2
Evgeny Burnaev 1 3 Alexander Korotin 1 3

Abstract

problem has been consistently gaining significant attention
in the research community. This is partially due to the
compelling mathematical theory and an extensive list of
applications: Bayesian inference (Srivastava et al., 2018),
Geometric modelling (Solomon et al., 2015), Style Transfer
(Mroueh, 2020), Texture mixing (Lacombe et al., 2023),
Reinforcement Learning (Likmeta et al., 2023), Federated
Learning (Singh & Jaggi, 2020), etc. Reflecting the practitioners’ interest, the computational OT literature is also
inspired by the Wasserstein barycenter problem and proposes several methods for solving this task. Early works,
e.g., (Cuturi & Doucet, 2014; Anderes et al., 2016), deal
with a discrete learning setup, i.e., they assume that the
distributions of interest are discrete. Unfortunately, the resulting solvers mostly lack certain beneficial properties a
practitioner may require, see §2.3. Our work is in line with
the alternative continuous learning setup. To tackle this
challenge, existing barycenter solvers for the continuous
learning setup typically

Given a collection of probability measures, a practitioner sometimes needs to find an “average” distribution which adequately aggregates reference
distributions. A theoretically appealing notion
of such an average is the Wasserstein barycenter,
which is the primal focus of our work. By building upon the dual formulation of Optimal Transport (OT), we propose a new scalable approach
for solving the Wasserstein barycenter problem.
Our methodology is based on the recent Neural
OT solver: it has bi-level adversarial learning
objective and works for general cost functions.
These are key advantages of our method since the
typical adversarial algorithms leveraging barycenter tasks utilize tri-level optimization and focus
mostly on quadratic cost. We also establish theoretical error bounds for our proposed approach
and showcase its applicability and effectiveness in
illustrative scenarios and image data setups. Our
source code is available at https://github.
com/justkolesov/NOTBarycenters.

a) resort to complex algorithmic procedures, e.g.: tri-level
adversarial learning objectives (Fan et al., 2021; Korotin
et al., 2022), Langevin sampling (Kolesov et al., 2023).
b) consider only specific formulations of the Wasserstein
barycenter problem to make it more tractable, e.g.: deal
with quadratic cost (Noble et al., 2023), utilize entropic/quadratic regularization (Li et al., 2020).

1. Introduction
Generative Modeling encompasses a set of tools designed
for manipulating probability distributions. Among them,
a special place is occupied by the Wasserstein barycenter
problem. This problem consists in finding a distribution
which minimizes the average of specific divergences to
some pre-defined distributions. In the context of Wasserstein barycenters, the divergences are chosen to be Optimal
Transport (OT) costs due to attractive geometrical properties
and clear intuition behind them. Starting with the seminal
work (Agueh & Carlier, 2011), the Wasserstein barycenter

Contribution. We take a step forward and propose a pioneering approach for solving the Wasserstein barycenter
problem which a) permits conventional bi-level (max-min)
adversarial objective and b) can be adapted to various formulations of the barycenter problem, e.g., with general cost
functions, w/wo regularizations. In particular:
1. We combine recent Neural OT method (Korotin et al.,
2023b) with the congruence condition (§4.1) and derive a
novel practical barycenter algorithm (§4.2, §4.3).

*
Equal contribution 1 Skolkovo Institute of Science and
Technology, Moscow, Russia 2 Department of Mathematics, ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland 3 Artificial Intelligence
Research Institute, Moscow, Russia.
Correspondence to:
Alexander Kolesov <a.kolesov@skoltech.ru>, Petr Mokrov
<petr.mokrov@skoltech.ru>.

2. We consider several formulations of the barycenter problem, and for each particular formulation, we obtain quality
bounds for the recovered solutions (§4.1).
3. We showcase the performance of our method on moderateand high dimensional data (§5), e.g., in image space and
the latent space of a pre-trained StyleGAN.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

