Few-Shot Unsupervised Implicit Neural Shape Representation Learning with
Spatial Adversaries

Amine Ouasfi 1 Adnane Boukhayma 1

Abstract

2021) (dubbed NeuralPull) have shown to be one of the most
successful ones in learning implicit shapes from point cloud
unsupervisedly. However, upon observing the behavior of
the training and validation errors of this method under sparse
and dense input point clouds (Figure 1), we notice that the
validation error starts increasing quite early on in the training in the sparse input case, whilst the training loss keeps on
decreasing. This suggests an overfitting problem evidently
intensifying in the sparse setting. Qualitatively, this increase
in the validation error is usually synonymous to deterioration in the extracted shape with symptoms varying between
shape instances, including shape hallucinations, missing
shape parts, and shape becoming progressively wavy, bumpy
and noisy. In extreme cases, shapes can also break into separate components or clusters around input points. When
the input is additionally noisy, these phenomena are further
exacerbated.

Implicit Neural Representations have gained
prominence as a powerful framework for capturing complex data modalities, encompassing
a wide range from 3D shapes to images and audio. Within the realm of 3D shape representation, Neural Signed Distance Functions (SDF)
have demonstrated remarkable potential in faithfully encoding intricate shape geometry. However,
learning SDFs from sparse 3D point clouds in the
absence of ground truth supervision remains a
very challenging task. While recent methods rely
on smoothness priors to regularize the learning,
our method introduces a regularization term that
leverages adversarial samples around the shape
to improve the learned SDFs. Through extensive
experiments and evaluations, we illustrate the efficacy of our proposed method, highlighting its
capacity to improve SDF learning with respect to
baselines and the state-of-the-art using synthetic
and real data.

Recent work in the field relies on various smoothness priors
(e.g. (Chen et al., 2023a; Gropp et al., 2020; Ben-Shabat
et al., 2022; Ouasfi & Boukhayma, 2024c)) to regularize
the implicit shape functions, and hence reduce overfitting.
One side of the problem that remains underexplored however is how training data is sampled during learning, and
understanding to which extent this sampling could affect
performance. This is even the more an important question
in our situation. In fact, while standard supervised learning
uses typically data/label sample pairs, fitting implicit representations entails mapping spatial coordinates to labels or
pseudo labels, where these spatial queries can be sampled
uniformly or normally around the input point cloud. In the
case of our baseline NeuralPull, the nearest point could sample to a spatial query is a pseudo-label approximating the
unavailable nearest groundtruth surface point in the training. Hence, both inherent input point cloud noise and its
sparsity represent a noise (i.e. displacement) on the perfect
surface labels. This composite noise can affect both the SDF
function and gradient orientation. In practice, we notice the
network first produces a very smooth shape. When it tries to
refine it, it tends to overfit to the noise present in the supervision signal. At this stage, further fitting on easy samples
(predominant samples) means overfitting on this noise. The
samples that can benefit the implicit representation can be
drowned within easy samples.

1. Introduction
Obtaining faith-full and intelligible neural representations
of the 3D world from limited and corrupted point clouds is a
challenge of paramount importance, that finds applications
in countless downstream computer vision and graphics tasks.
While many methods rely on data priors learned from large
fully labeled datasets, these priors can fail to generalize
to unseen shapes especially under very sparse unoriented
inputs (Chen et al., 2023a; Ouasfi & Boukhayma, 2024b).
Hence, it is important to design learning frameworks that
can lead to efficient and robust learning of implicit shape
representations under such extreme constraints.
In this context, the learning strategy introduced by (Ma et al.,
1

Inria, Univ.
Rennes, CNRS, IRISA, M2S,
France.
Correspondence to: Adnane Boukhayma <adnane.boukhayma@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

