Information Complexity of Stochastic Convex Optimization:
Applications to Generalization, Memorization, and Tracing

Idan Attias 1 2 Gintare Karolina Dziugaite 3 Mahdi Haghifam 4 Roi Livni 5 Daniel M. Roy 6 2

Abstract

This intuition is supported by theoretical work demonstrating the benefits of limited memorization for strong generalization [LW86; RZ15; RZ16; XR17; BMNSY18; SZ20].

In this work, we investigate the interplay between memorization and learning in the context of
stochastic convex optimization (SCO). We define
memorization via the information a learning algorithm reveals about its training data points. We
then quantify this information using the framework of conditional mutual information (CMI)
proposed by Steinke and Zakynthinou [SZ20].
Our main result is a precise characterization of
the tradeoff between the accuracy of a learning
algorithm and its CMI, answering an open question posed by Livni [Liv23]. We show that, in the
L2 Lipschitz–bounded setting and under strong
convexity, every learner with an excess error ε
has CMI bounded below by Ω(1/ε2 ) and Ω(1/ε),
respectively. We further demonstrate the essential role of memorization in learning problems
in SCO by designing an adversary capable of accurately identifying a significant fraction of the
training samples in specific SCO problems. Finally, we enumerate several implications of our results, such as a limitation of generalization bounds
based on CMI and the incompressibility of samples in SCO problems.

This intuition, however, is challenged by the success of modern overparameterized deep neural networks (DNNs). These
models often achieve high test accuracy despite memorizing
a significant number of training data (see, e.g., [ZBHRV17;
SSSS17; CLEKS19; FZ20; CIJLT+22]). Recent studies
suggest that memorization plays a more complex role in
generalization than previously thought: memorization might
even be necessary for good generalization [Fel20; FZ20;
BBFST21].
In this work, we investigate the interplay between generalization and memorization in the context of stochastic convex
optimization (SCO; [SSSS09]). A (Euclidean) SCO problem is defined by a triple (Θ, Z, f ), where Θ ⊆ Rd is a
convex subset and f : Θ × Z → R is convex in its first
argument for every fixed second argument. In such an SCO
problem, a learner receives a finite sample of data points
in the dataspace, Z, presumed to be drawn i.i.d. from an
unknown data distribution, D. The goal of the learner is
to find an approximate minimizer of the population risk
FD (θ) ≜ EZ∼D [f (θ, Z)].
In recent years, SCO has been shown to serve as a useful
theoretical model for understanding generalization in modern machine learning [Fel16; DFKL20; ACKL21; AKL21;
KLMS22]. The importance of SCO can be traced to a
number of factors, including: (1) it is suitable for studying gradient-based optimization algorithms, which are the
workhorse behind state-of-the-art machine learning algorithms; and (2) while arbitrary empirical risk minimizers
(ERMs) require sample complexity that scales with the problem dimension [Fel16; CLY23], carefully designed algorithms can achieve optimal generalization with sample complexity independent of dimension [BE02; SSSS09]. This
property aligns with our goal of studying generalization in
overparameterized settings such as DNNs where first-order
methods output models that generalize well, despite the fact
that there exist ERMs that perform poorly [ZBHRV17].

1. Introduction
Despite intense study, the relationship between generalization and memorization in machine learning has yet to be
fully characterized. Classically, ideal learning algorithms
would primarily extract relevant information from their training data, avoiding memorization of irrelevant information.
1
Department of Computer Science, Ben-Gurion University
Vector Institute 3 Google DeepMind 4 Khoury College of Computer Sciences, Northeastern University 5 Department of Electrical
Engineering, Tel Aviv University. 6 Department of Statistical Sciences, University of Toronto and Vector Institute. Correspondence
to: Mahdi Haghifam <haghifam.mahdi@gmail.com>.
2

To shed light on the role of memorization in SCO, we analyze the information-theoretic properties of ε-learners for

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

