Purifying Quantization-conditioned Backdoors via Layer-wise
Activation Correction with Distribution Approximation

Boheng Li 1 * Yishuo Cai 2 * Jisong Cai 1 Yiming Li 3 Han Qiu 4 Run Wang 1 Tianwei Zhang 3

Abstract

However, the extensive computational and memory requirements of DNNs pose difficulties in environments that demand real-time responses or have limited resources. A
widely adopted solution for these issues is model quantization (Gong et al., 2019; Kuzmin et al., 2022; Jeon et al.,
2022), which reduces the precision of the model’s parameters from typical 32-bit floating-point numbers to lower
precision formats, e.g., 8-bit or 4-bit integers.

Model quantization is a compression technique
that converts a full-precision model to a more compact low-precision version for better storage. Despite the great success of quantization, recent studies revealed the feasibility of malicious exploiting
model quantization via implanting quantizationconditioned backdoors (QCBs). These special
backdoors remain dormant in full-precision models but are exposed upon quantization. Unfortunately, existing defenses have limited effects on
mitigating QCBs. In this paper, we conduct an
in-depth analysis of QCBs. We reveal an intriguing characteristic of QCBs, where activation of
backdoor-related neurons on even benign samples
enjoy a distribution drift after quantization, although this drift is more significant on poisoned
samples. Motivated by this finding, we propose
to purify the backdoor-exposed quantized model
by aligning its layer-wise activation with its fullprecision version. To further exploit the more
pronounced activation drifts on poisoned samples, we design an additional module to layerwisely approximate poisoned activation distribution based on batch normalization statistics of
the full-precision model. Extensive experiments
are conducted, verifying the effectiveness of our
defense. Our code is publicly available here.

Despite the great success of DNNs, recent studies revealed
that they are vulnerable to backdoor attacks, where adversaries can implant ‘hidden backdoors’ into the victim model
during the training phase to cause misclassifications (Li
et al., 2022a). Specifically, the backdoor will be activated
by adversary-specified trigger patterns (e.g., a local image
patch). While most existing backdoor attacks focus on
directly compromising DNNs in full-precision formats, a
few recent studies (Hong et al., 2021; Tian et al., 2022;
Ma et al., 2023) built new attacks with the quantizationconditioned triggering paradigm, which maliciously exploits the standard quantization process. Compared to traditional backdoor attacks on full-precision DNNs, these
special quantization-conditioned backdoors (QCBs) remain
dormant (cannot be triggered) in full-precision format. The
dormant backdoor will be woken up and ready for attacks
only when the user quantifies the model to a lower precision.
To mitigate the threats of backdoor attacks, many backdoor defenses have been proposed (Li et al., 2021c; Zeng
et al., 2022; Zhu et al., 2023). Despite their great success in
defending against state-of-the-art attacks on full-precision
models, as we will validate in the experiments, they are
insufficient in defending against QCBs. The main reason
lies in the peculiarity of these attacks: on full-precision
formats, which is the most common setting of existing defenses, these backdoors stay dormant even in the presence
of the trigger. As a result, the model behaves as if it is
benign, helping it to bypass SOTA detection methods (Ma
et al., 2023). Moreover, since the models backdoored by
QCBs already fit benign samples well, existing tuning-based
defenses can hardly make significant weight changes on the
backdoor neurons, rendering them less effective in breaking
backdoor connections. These limitations underscore the
urgent need for new defenses against this brand new attack.

1. Introduction
In recent years, various deep neural networks (DNNs) have
achieved remarkable success and have been integrated into
many security-critical scenarios (e.g., facial recognition)
(Zablocki et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2023).
*
Equal contribution. 1 School of Cyber Science and Engineering,
Wuhan University. 2 Central South University. 3 Nanyang Technological University. 4 Tsinghua University. Correspondence to:
Yiming Li <liyiming.tech@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

