Enabling Few-Shot Learning with PID Control: A Layer Adaptive Optimizer

Le Yu * 1 2 3 Xinde Li * 1 2 3 4 Pengfei Zhang * 1 2 Zhentong Zhang 1 2 Fir Dunkin 1 2

Abstract

adaptively training a network with limited labeled samples
for new tasks is an increasingly significant challenge.

Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning (MAML) and its
variants have shown remarkable performance in
scenarios characterized by a scarcity of labeled
data during the training phase of machine learning models. Despite these successes, MAMLbased approaches encounter significant challenges
when there is a substantial discrepancy in the
distribution of training and testing tasks, resulting in inefficient learning and limited generalization across domains. Inspired by classical
proportional-integral-derivative (PID) control theory, this study introduces a Layer-Adaptive PID
(LA-PID) Optimizer, a MAML-based optimizer
that employs efficient parameter optimization
methods to dynamically adjust task-specific PID
control gains at each layer of the network, conducting a first-principles analysis of optimal convergence conditions. A series of experiments
conducted on four standard benchmark datasets
demonstrate the efficacy of the LA-PID optimizer, indicating that LA-PID achieves state-ofthe-art performance in few-shot classification and
cross-domain tasks, accomplishing these objectives with fewer training steps. Code is available
on https://github.com/yuguopin/LA-PID.

(a) SGD

(b) LA-PID

0

0

2

1
3

1

4
5

6
x (i )

F t

*

*

2
yˆ (  i )

y (i )

f i

 t 1   t  K P   ( f )  K I 
i

i

  ( f )  K M

i ~ p( )

i

i

D

t 1

Figure 1: Overview the proposed optimization algorithm for
few-shot classification tasks. (a) Traditional gradient-based
optimizer (e.g., SGD) updates parameters θ: multiple steps
needed to reach optimal values θ∗ . (b) LA-PID achieves
optimal parameter values with just two gradient updates for
specific task Ti , the green box shows the proposed gradient
update rule.

1. Introduction

Meta-learning has emerged as an effective approach for
the implementation of few-shot learning (Vettoruzzo et al.,
2024). This is attributable to its reinforcement of a model’s
capacity for heightened generalization and adaptability, consequently enabling superior performance in tasks involving
limited sample sizes. Numerous studies in the field of metalearning have been structured around a dual-level paradigm:
the deliberate learning of a meta-level model for cross-task
performance (Qin et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2023) and the swift
acquisition of knowledge by a base-level model specific to
each task(Li et al., 2023; Richards et al., 2021; Li et al.,
2021; LI et al., 2023). Nevertheless, these studies usually
involve the fine-tuning of various hyperparameters, including learning rate and task sampling strategies, to achieve
optimal performance. This can necessitate a plethora of
experiments and adjustments, thereby imposing an extra

Few-shot learning (Aggarwal et al., 2023; Luo et al., 2023;
Song et al., 2023) aims to adapt to new tasks by training a
new classifier with only a small set of labeled image sample,
and even generalizing to unseen query examples. From
this research, effectively leveraging prior knowledge and
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Automation, Southeast University, Nanjing, China. 2 Nanjing Center for Applied Mathematics,
Nanjing, China. 3 Key Laboratory of Measurement and Control of
Complex Systems of Engineering, Ministry of Education, Southeast University, Nanjing, China. 4 Southeast University Shenzhen
Research Institute, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to: Xinde
Li <xindeli@seu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

