A Dense Reward View on Aligning Text-to-Image Diffusion with Preference

Shentao Yang * 1 Tianqi Chen * 1 Mingyuan Zhou 1

Abstract

et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2023b). To remove the complexity in
the modeling and computing of an explicit reward function,
recent work has generalized direct preference optimization
(DPO, Rafailov et al., 2023) from LLM into T2I’s preference alignment (Wallace et al., 2023a), under a counterpart
assumption of DPO that there is a latent reward function
evaluating the entire diffusion reverse chain as a whole.

Aligning text-to-image diffusion model (T2I) with
preference has been gaining increasing research
attention. While prior works exist on directly
optimizing T2I by preference data, these methods are developed under the bandit assumption
of a latent reward on the entire diffusion reverse
chain, while ignoring the sequential nature of the
generation process. This may harm the efficacy
and efficiency of preference alignment. In this
paper, we take on a finer dense reward perspective and derive a tractable alignment objective
that emphasizes the initial steps of the T2I reverse chain. In particular, we introduce temporal discounting into DPO-style explicit-rewardfree objectives, to break the temporal symmetry
therein and suit the T2I generation hierarchy. In
experiments on single and multiple prompt generation, our method is competitive with strong
relevant baselines, both quantitatively and qualitatively. Further investigations are conducted
to illustrate the insight of our approach. Source
code is available at https://github.com/
Shentao-YANG/Dense_Reward_T2I .

While DPO-style approaches have shown impressive potential, from the reinforcement learning (RL) perspective, these
methods typically formulate the diffusion reverse chain as a
contextual bandit, i.e., treating the entire generation trajectory as a single action; though the diffusion reverse chain is
intrinsically a sequential generation process (Sohl-Dickstein
et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020). Since the reverse chain typically requires tens or even thousands of steps (Song et al.,
2020; 2021), such a bandit assumption, in particular, of a
reward function on the whole chain/trajectory, can lead to a
combinatorially large decision space over all timesteps. This
issue is twined with the well-known sparse reward (delayed
feedback) issue in RL (Andrychowicz et al., 2017; Liu et al.,
2019), where an informative feedback is only provided after
generating the entire trajectory. We hereafter use “sparse
reward” to refer to this issue. Without considering the sequential nature of the generation process, it is known from
RL and LLM literature that this sparse reward issue, which
often comes with high gradient variance and low sample
efficiency (Guo et al., 2022), can clearly hurt model training
(Marbach & Tsitsiklis, 2003; Takanobu et al., 2019).

1. Introduction
Text-to-image diffusion model (T2I, Ramesh et al., 2022;
Saharia et al., 2022), trained by large-scale text-image pairs,
has achieved remarkable success in image generation. As
an effort towards more helpful and less harmful generations,
methods have been proposing to align T2I with preference,
partially motivated by the progress of human/AI-feedback
alignment for large language models (LLMs) (Bai et al.,
2022b; OpenAI, 2023; Touvron et al., 2023). Prior works
in this field typically optimize the T2I against an explicit reward function trained in the first place (Wu et al., 2023b; Xu

In this paper, we contribute to the research on DPO-style
explicit-reward-free alignment methods by taking on a finergrain dense-reward perspective, motivated by recent studies
on the latent preference-generating reward function in NLP
(e.g., Yang et al., 2023) and robotics (e.g., Kim et al., 2023;
Hejna et al., 2023). Instead of the hypothetical trajectorylevel reward function, we assume a latent reward function
that can score each step of the reverse chain, in hoping
an easier learning problem from the RL viewpoint (e.g.,
Laidlaw et al., 2023). Inspired by studies on diffusion and
T2I generation that the initial portion of the reverse chain
sets up the image outline based on the given text conditional,
and image’s high-level attributes and aesthetic shapes (Ho
et al., 2020; Wang & Vastola, 2023), we hypothesize that
emphasizing those initial steps in T2I’s preference alignment
can help efficacy and efficiency, since those steps can be

*
1
Equal contribution
The University of Texas
at Austin.
Correspondence to:
Shentao Yang
<shentao.yang@mccombs.utexas.edu>, Mingyuan
Zhou <mingyuan.zhou@mccombs.utexas.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

