Generalization Analysis of Deep Non-linear Matrix Completion

Antoine Ledent 1
Rodrigo Alves 2

Abstract

discovery (Qiaosheng et al., 2019) and drug interaction
prediction (Li et al., 2015). To recover a ground truth matrix
based on a small number of observations, it is necessary
to assume that it has some structure. Accordingly, there
are a wide set of constraints and regularizers which aim to
indirectly induce rank sparsity. One of the most well-known
examples is the nuclear norm } . }˚ , which is defined as the
sum of the singular values (Mazumder et al., 2010).

We provide generalization bounds for matrix completion with Schatten p quasi-norm constraints,
which is equivalent to deep matrix factorization with Frobenius constraints. In the uniform
sampling regime, the sample complexity scales
r prnq where n is the size of the matrix and
like O
r is a constraint of the same order as the ground
truth rank in the isotropic case. In the
` distribution˘
r r1´ p2 n1` p2 ,
free setting, the bounds scale as O
? 3
which reduces to the familiar rn 2 for p “ 1.
Furthermore, we provide an analogue of the
weighted trace norm for this setting which brings
the sample complexity down to r
Opnrq in all cases.
We then present a non-linear model, Functionally
Rescaled Matrix Completion (FRMC) which applies a single trainable function from R Ñ R to
each entry of a latent matrix, and prove that this
adds only negligible terms of the overall sample
complexity, whilst experiments demonstrate that
this simple model improvement already leads to
significant gains on real data. We also provide
extensions of our results to various neural architectures, thereby providing the first comprehensive uniform convergence PAC analysis of neural
network matrix completion.

The Schatten p quasi-norm (for p ă 1) provides an alternative form of rank sparsity inducing constraint. The Schatten
ř
1
p quasi-norm }Z}sc,p of a matrix Z is defined as r v ρpv s p ,
where the ρv s are the singular values
of Z. In particular,
ř
when p approaches 0, }Z}psc,p “ v ρpv approaches the rank
of Z. When p “ d2 for some integer d, this is known to be
equivalent to the popular deep matrix factorization (DMF)
framework (De Handschutter et al., 2021; Arora et al., 2019;
Fan & Cheng, 2018), whose predictors take the form of a
product of matrices AD1 . . . ř
Dd´2 B J , with a regularizer
of the form LpA, D, Bq :“
}Dv }2Fr ` }A}2Fr ` }B}2Fr .
Indeed, the minimum
min LpA, D, Bq

s.t. AD1 . . . Dd´2 B J “ Z

(1)

is d}Z}psc,p (see (Dai et al., 2021), or Theorem F.22). This
equivalence with Schatten p quasi-norm constrained MC is
gathering substantial interest in recent years (Arora et al.,
2019; Giampouras et al., 2020), and implications for sample
complexity are not fully explored. Indeed, the early literature on deep matrix factorization is mostly concerned with
algorithmic and optimization issues. It is also worth noting
the equivalence has intriguing implications beyond matrix
completion, to the study of the implicit regularization of
depth in neural networks, which seen explosion of recent interest in the community (Jacot, 2022; Wang & Jacot, 2023).

1. Introduction
Matrix Completion (MC), the problem which consists in
estimating a ground truth matrix G P Rmˆn from a small
number N ! mn of observations, is an important machine
learning problem with applications in various fields such as
recommender systems (Mazumder et al., 2010; Hastie et al.,
2015; Zhang et al., 2018; Koren et al., 2009), community

The last few years have also witnessed a surge in the popularity of non-linear matrix completion models. For instance,
a branch of the deep matrix factorization literature incorporates non-linear functions inside the product (Xue et al.,
2017; Fan & Cheng, 2018; Fan, 2021), leading to predictors of the form g0 pAg1 pD1 . . . gd´2 pDd´2 gd´1 pB J qq . . .q,
where the gs are activation functions. Moreover, many models are simply neural network architectures which take a
(row, column) combination as input. Such models typically
incorporate learnable row and column embeddings. This

1

School of Computing and Information Sciences, Singapore Management University, Singapore 2 Department of Applied Mathematics, Czech Technical University in Prague,
Prague, Czech Republic. Correspondence to: Antoine Ledent
<aledent@smu.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

