An Independence-promoting Loss for
Music Generation with Language Models

Jean-Marie Lemercier 1 † * Simon Rouard 2 3 * Jade Copet 3 Yossi Adi 3 4 Alexandre Defossez 5 †

Abstract

2022), text (Brown et al., 2020), speech (van den Oord
et al., 2016; Kong et al., 2020; 2021) or audio (Borsos et al.,
2023; Agostinelli et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023b; Kreuk
et al., 2023). These models rely on artificial neural networks
parameterizing approaches such as generative adversarial
networks (Goodfellow et al., 2014), diffusion models (Ho
et al., 2020; Song & Ermon, 2019) or transformer-based language models (Radford et al., 2019; Vaswani et al., 2017).
We focus here on the task of generating music based on
a text prompt. Music signals occupy the full frequency
spectrum (unlike speech) and can be very long sequences
(unlike most images), making the generation task arduous.
Text-to-music language models (Agostinelli et al., 2023;
Kreuk et al., 2023; Copet et al., 2023; Borsos et al., 2023)
try to model the distribution of a vocabulary of discrete
units i.e. tokens. The audio tokens are often generated by a
multi-stage quantizer operating in the latent space learnt by
a neural compression model (Défossez et al., 2023; Zeghidour et al., 2021). As the quantizer uses a distinct codebook
for each stage, the language model decoding strategy must
be adapted to model either the joint distribution over all
codebooks, or the factorization of codebook marginal distributions. On the one hand, modelling the joint distribution
requires either using an impractically large vocabulary size,
or multiplying the number of auto-regressive timesteps by
the number of codebooks. On the other hand, modelling the
factorized distribution significantly facilitates the training of
the language model and speeds inference up, but only provides an approximation of the true model. Several strategies
for modelling the factorized distribution have been proposed
(Wang et al., 2023; Kharitonov et al., 2022; Kreuk et al.,
2023; Copet et al., 2023) yielding satisfying results. However, we argue that these solutions do not directly address
the issue, which is that the factorized distribution is equivalent to the full joint distribution only if the codebooks are
mutually independent.

Music generation schemes using language modeling rely on a vocabulary of audio tokens, generally provided as codes in a discrete latent space
learnt by an auto-encoder. Multi-stage quantizers are often employed to produce these tokens,
therefore the decoding strategy used for token
prediction must be adapted to account for multiple codebooks: either it should model the joint
distribution over all codebooks, or fit the product of the codebook marginal distributions. Modelling the joint distribution requires a costly increase in the number of auto-regressive steps,
while fitting the product of the marginals yields
an inexact model unless the codebooks are mutually independent. In this work, we introduce
an independence-promoting loss to regularize the
auto-encoder used as the tokenizer in language
models for music generation. The proposed loss
is a proxy for mutual information based on the
maximum mean discrepancy principle, applied in
reproducible kernel Hilbert spaces. Our criterion
is simple to implement and train, and it is generalizable to other multi-stream codecs. We show
that it reduces the statistical dependence between
codebooks during auto-encoding. This leads to
an increase in the generated music quality when
modelling the product of the marginal distributions, while generating audio much faster than the
joint distribution model.

1. Introduction
Generative models are being increasingly used to produce
multimedia content such as e.g. image (Rombach et al.,

In this work, we propose to introduce an independence
constraint between codebooks, in the form of an auxiliary
objective for training the auto-encoder used as the tokenizer
for the language model. Instead of leveraging adversarial
training as in (Belghazi et al., 2018; Brakel & Bengio, 2017),
we propose to use a proxy for mutual information based
on the maximum mean discrepancy (Gretton et al., 2012),

*

Equal contribution 1 Universität Hamburg 2 IRCAM 3 Meta
AI The Hebrew University of Jerusalem 5 Kyutai † Work done
while at Meta AI. Correspondence to: Jean-Marie Lemercier
<jeanmarie.lemercier@uni-hamburg.de>.
4

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

