StableMask: Refining Causal Masking in Decoder-only Transformer

Qingyu Yin 1 Xuzheng He 2 Xiang Zhuang 1 Yu Zhao 3 Jianhua Yao 3 Xiaoyu Shen 4 Qiang Zhang 1

Abstract

decoder-only Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017;
Radford et al., 2019), characterized by the self-attention
mechanism and relative positional encoding (RPE) to aggregate information and catch the dependency among tokens. It
has exhibited superior zero-shot generalization capabilities
in comparison to its encoder-decoder counterparts, leading
to its increased prevalence in pre-trained LLMs (Lester et al.,
2021; Patel et al., 2023). Despite the impressive success, we
identified two important issues within this architecture.

The decoder-only Transformer architecture with
causal masking and relative position encoding
(RPE) has become the de facto choice in language
modeling. Despite its exceptional performance
across various tasks, we have identified two limitations: First, it requires all attention scores to be
non-zero and sum up to 1, even if the current embedding has sufficient self-contained information.
This compels the model to assign disproportional
excessive attention to specific tokens. Second,
RPE-based Transformers are not universal approximators due to their limited capacity at encoding
absolute positional information, which limits their
application in position-critical tasks. In this work,
we propose StableMask: a parameter-free method
to address both limitations by refining the causal
mask. It introduces pseudo-attention values to
balance attention distributions and encodes absolute positional information via a progressively decreasing mask ratio. StableMask’s effectiveness
is validated both theoretically and empirically,
showing significant enhancements in language
models with parameter sizes ranging from 71M to
1.4B across diverse datasets and encoding methods. We further show that it naturally supports (1)
efficient extrapolation without special tricks such
as StreamingLLM and (2) easy integration with
existing attention optimization techniques. 1

The first issue arises from the softmax function used in selfattention, as its outputs consist solely of non-zero values
summing up to 1 (Pang et al., 2019). This forces to allocate a certain distribution of attention probability across
all available tokens, even when the current token already
has sufficient self-contained information (Xiao et al., 2023)
or when the attention mechanism does not need to prioritize any token (Hua et al., 2022; Bondarenko et al., 2023).
In such cases, the model tends to allocate disproportional
attention scores to specific tokens like punctuation marks.
This problem is exacerbated in decoder-only models as the
varied sequence length leads to an extremely uneven attention distribution, particularly on the initial tokens. While
approaches have been proposed to mitigate this issue, they
all entail significant complexity. e.g., modifying the sparseness of softmax (Laha et al., 2018), or adding dedicated
tokens to absorb unnecessary attention (Darcet et al., 2023).
The second limitation is associated with various relative
positional encoding strategies (Ke et al., 2020), e.g. ALiBi (Press et al., 2022), T5 (Raffel et al., 2020), and
RoPE (Su et al., 2021). Compared with absolute position
encoding (APE), RPE has achieved state-of-the-art performance in most natural language task. It also exhibits better
extrapolation capabilities, and naturally preserves invariant
properties for several important transformations like rotation
and translation, making it more widely used in Transformers (Press et al., 2022). However, RPE fails to capture
enough absolute positional information as the softmax always generates a right stochastic matrix (Luo et al., 2022),
i.e., a square matrix where each row consists of non-negative
real numbers adding up to 1. This restricts its application
in situations where such positional information is crucial.
Previous attempts to address this, such as URPE (Luo et al.,
2022), added learnable relative position matrices atop the
softmax outputs, which hurt the extrapolation capabilities

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have revolutionized natural
language processing for their task-agnostic in-context learning paradigm (Brown et al., 2020). The core of LLMs is the
1
Zhejiang University 2 Peking University 3 Tencent AI Lab
Eastern Institute of Technology, Ningbo. Correspondence
to: Qiang Zhang <qiang.zhang.cs@zju.edu.cn>, Xiaoyu Shen
<xyshen@eitech.edu.cn>.

4

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
The code of this paper is available at https://github.
com/MikaStars39/StableMask

1

