Counterfactual Metarules for Local and Global Recourse
Tom Bewley 1 Salim I. Amoukou 1 Saumitra Mishra 1 Daniele Magazzeni 1 Manuela Veloso 1
x2

Abstract
We introduce T-CREx, a novel model-agnostic
method for local and global counterfactual explanation (CE), which summarises recourse options
for both individuals and groups in the form of
human-readable rules. It leverages tree-based surrogate models to learn the counterfactual rules,
alongside metarules denoting their regions of optimality, providing both a global analysis of model
behaviour and diverse recourse options for users.
Experiments indicate that T-CREx achieves superior aggregate performance over existing rulebased baselines on a range of CE desiderata, while
being orders of magnitude faster to run.

5

A

3

B

1
3

x1

Figure 1. Application of T-CREx to a binary classifier, producing
CEs for the red class x. Shown are two rules (dark green/orange)
for which ≥ 90% of contained points have the alternative blue
class x. The rules are paired with metarules denoting regions of the
input space where each rule is an optimal CE (light green/orange),
which can be interpreted as follows. For inputs with x1 ≤ 3 and
x2 ≤ 5, the orange rule is optimal because it requires changing
only one feature (sparsity). Elsewhere, the green rule is preferred
because it contains a greater number of points (feasibility). The
two rules and three metarules can be combined to create a global
textual summary of all recourse options (shown on the right), which
in turn enables the near-instantaneous generation of a CE for any
single instance (e.g. A or B) via a simple lookup.

1. Introduction
Counterfactual explanation (CE), which describes how input features could be changed to alter a model’s output, is a
ubiquitous technique in eXplainable AI (XAI). As AI models make increasingly many decisions that impact human
users, CEs provide a foundation for recourse, whereby users
act to change an adverse output (e.g. loan rejection) to a
desirable one (e.g. acceptance) (Wachter et al., 2017).

We present T-CREx, a method combining both forms of
generalisation. It uses tree-based surrogate models to learn
counterfactual rules denoting regions of the input space
where a model changes its output with high probability,
alongside metarules denoting regions for which each rule
is an optimal CE. The optimal rule for each input (and thus
for each metarule) is a joint function of the number of features that must change to satisfy the rule (sparsity) and the
rule’s population under a given data distribution (feasibility).
The method is model-agnostic, requiring only black box access to the target model, and handles both numerical and
categorical features and both classification and regression
problems. Figure 1 shows the rules and metarules produced
by T-CREx for a simple binary classification example.

While the most basic objective is to find one CE example per
instance, several works have generalised this to find either
a single group-level CE for a set of instances (Carrizosa
et al., 2024), or a diverse set of CEs for a single instance
(Mothilal et al., 2020), optionally summarising each kind of
set using human-interpretable rules (Kanamori et al., 2022;
Rawal & Lakkaraju, 2020). Both generalisations bring benefits: group-level CEs provide a route to globally analysing
a model’s behaviour and subgroup fairness properties, while
diverse CEs present users with a range of recourse options,
which increases the chance of one being practically actionable. In addition, summarising diverse CEs in a compact
rule-based form mitigates the information overload that may
result from diversity, and provides robustness to the problem
of recourse noise (Pawelczyk et al., 2022) by specifying an
extended range of values that each feature can take.

We are aware of one prior method that uses rules to provide diverse CEs for groups of instances comparably to our
rule/metarule formulation (Rawal & Lakkaraju, 2020), and
several others that find rule-based CEs for single instances
(Guidotti et al., 2019; Fernández et al., 2020). Through direct comparison, we show that T-CREx reliably matches or
outperforms these baselines on various CE desiderata, and

1

J.P. Morgan AI Research. Correspondence to: Tom Bewley
<tom.bewley@jpmorgan.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

