Critical windows: non-asymptotic theory for feature emergence in diffusion
models
Marvin Li 1 Sitan Chen 2

Abstract

mains (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Dhariwal & Nichol,
2021; Song et al., 2020; Ho et al., 2020b). At their core
is a “forward process” that transforms data into noise, and
a learned “reverse process” that progressively undoes this
noise, thus generating fresh samples. Recently, a series of
works has established rigorous convergence guarantees for
diffusion models for arbitrary data distributions (Chen et al.,
2023c; Lee et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023a; Benton et al.,
2023a). While these results prove that in some sense diffusion models are entirely principled, the generality with
which they apply suggests further theory is needed to explain the rich behaviors of diffusion models specific to the
real-world distributions on which they are trained.

We develop theory to understand an intriguing
property of diffusion models for image generation that we term critical windows. Empirically,
it has been observed that there are narrow time
intervals in sampling during which particular features of the final image emerge, e.g. the image
class or background color (Ho et al., 2020b; Meng
et al., 2022; Choi et al., 2022; Raya & Ambrogioni, 2023; Georgiev et al., 2023; Sclocchi et al.,
2024; Biroli et al., 2024). While this is advantageous for interpretability as it implies one can
localize properties of the generation to a small segment of the trajectory, it seems at odds with the
continuous nature of the diffusion. We propose
a formal framework for studying these windows
and show that for data coming from a mixture
of strongly log-concave densities, these windows
can be provably bounded in terms of certain measures of inter- and intra-group separation. We also
instantiate these bounds for concrete examples
like well-conditioned Gaussian mixtures. Finally,
we use our bounds to give a rigorous interpretation of diffusion models as hierarchical samplers
that progressively “decide” output features over
a discrete sequence of times. We validate our
bounds with experiments on synthetic data and
show that critical windows may serve as a useful
tool for diagnosing fairness and privacy violations
in real-world diffusion models.

In this work, we focus on a phenomenon that we term critical windows. In the context of image generation, it has
been observed that there are narrow time intervals along the
reverse process during which certain features of the final
image are determined, e.g. the class, color, background (Ho
et al., 2020b; Meng et al., 2022; Choi et al., 2022; Raya &
Ambrogioni, 2023; Georgiev et al., 2023; Sclocchi et al.,
2024; Biroli et al., 2024). This suggests that even though
the reverse process operates in continuous time, there is a series of discrete “jumps” during the sampling process during
which the model “decides” on certain aspects of the output.
The existence of these critical windows is highly convenient
from an interpretability standpoint, as it lets one zoom in on
specific parts of the diffusion model trajectory to understand
how some feature of the generated output emerged.
Despite the strong empirical evidence for the existence of
critical windows (e.g. the striking Figures 3, B.6, and B.10
from Georgiev et al. (2023) and Figures 1 and 2 from (Sclocchi et al., 2024)), our mathematical understanding of critical
windows is very immature. Indeed, from the perspective
of prior theory,1 the different times of the reverse process
largely behave as equal-class citizens, outside the realm of
very simple toy models of data. We thus ask:

1. Introduction
Diffusion models currently stand as the predominant approach to generative modeling in audio and image do1

Harvard College, Cambridge, MA, USA 2 John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard
University, Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Marvin Li <marvinli@college.harvard.edu>, Sitan Chen <sitan@seas.harvard.edu>.

Can we prove the existence of critical windows in the
reverse process for a rich family of data distributions?
Before stating our theoretical findings, we outline the framework we adopt (see Section 3.2 for a formal treatment). Also,

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

1

See Section 2 for a discussion of concurrent works.

