Is DPO Superior to PPO for LLM Alignment? A Comprehensive Study

Shusheng Xu 1 Wei Fu 1 Jiaxuan Gao 1 Wenjie Ye 2 Weilin Liu 2
Zhiyu Mei 1 Guangju Wang 2 Chao Yu * 1 Yi Wu * 1 2 3

Abstract

practical applications, a growing amount of research has
underscored the importance of aligning these models with
human preferences (Agrawal et al., 2023; Kadavath et al.,
2022; Shi et al., 2023; Liang et al., 2021; Sheng et al., 2019).
Various methods have been developed for fine-tuning LLMs,
with popular approaches including Supervised Fine-Tuning
(SFT) (Peng et al., 2023) and Reinforcement Learning from
Human Feedback (RLHF) (Ziegler et al., 2019; Stiennon
et al., 2020; Ouyang et al., 2022). Typically, fine-tuning involves two phases: SFT to establish a base model, followed
by RLHF for enhanced performance. SFT involves imitating high-quality demonstration data, while RLHF refines
LLMs through preference feedback.

Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback
(RLHF) is currently the most widely used method
to align large language models (LLMs) with human preferences. Existing RLHF methods can
be roughly categorized as either reward-based or
reward-free. Novel applications such as ChatGPT
and Claude leverage reward-based methods that
first learn a reward model and apply actor-critic
algorithms, such as Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO). However, in academic benchmarks,
the state-of-the-art results are often achieved via
reward-free methods, such as Direct Preference
Optimization (DPO). Is DPO truly superior to
PPO? Why does PPO perform poorly on these
benchmarks? In this paper, we first conduct both
theoretical and empirical studies on the algorithmic properties of DPO and show that DPO may
have fundamental limitations. Moreover, we also
comprehensively examine PPO and reveal the key
factors for the best performances of PPO in finetuning LLMs. Finally, we benchmark DPO and
PPO across a collection of RLHF testbeds, ranging from dialogue to code generation. Experiment
results demonstrate that PPO is able to surpass
other alignment methods in all cases and achieve
state-of-the-art results in challenging code competitions.

Within RLHF, two prominent approaches are reward-based
and reward-free methods. Reward-based methods, pioneered by OpenAI (Ouyang et al., 2022; Ziegler et al., 2019;
Stiennon et al., 2020), construct a reward model using preference data and then employ actor-critic algorithms like
Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) to optimize the reward signal. In contrast, reward-free methods, including Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) (Rafailov et al., 2023),
RRHF (Yuan et al., 2023), and PRO (Song et al., 2023),
eliminate the explicit use of a reward function. DPO, a
representative reward-free method, expresses the reward
function in a logarithmic form of the policy and focuses
solely on policy optimization.
Notably, the most successful applications like ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2022) and Claude (Antropic, 2023) are produced by the reward-based RLHF method PPO, while strong
performances in academic benchmarks often result from the
reward-free RLHF method DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023; MistralAI, 2023). This discrepancy raises two fundamental
questions: 1) Is DPO truly superior to PPO in the RLHF domain? and 2) Can the performance of PPO be substantially
improved in common RLHF benchmarks? In this paper, we
delve into these questions. Through theoretical and empirical analysis, we uncover the fundamental limitations of
DPO and explore critical factors that enhance the practical
performance of PPO in RLHF.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) derive their extensive language patterns and knowledge through pre-training on substantial textual datasets (Brown et al., 2020; OpenAI, 2023;
Touvron et al., 2023; Chowdhery et al., 2023; Anil et al.,
2023). To leverage the formidable capabilities of LLMs in
*
Co-corresponding authors. 1 Tsinghua University, Beijing
China 2 OpenPsi Inc. 3 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute, Shanghai, China.
Correspondence to: Shusheng Xu <xssstory@gmail.com>, Chao
Yu <zoeyuchao@gmail.com>, Yi Wu <jxwuyi@gmail.com>.

First, our theoretical examination reveals that DPO might
find biased solutions that exploit out-of-distribution responses. Empirically, we demonstrate that the performance

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

