Mean-field Chaos Diffusion Models
Sungwoo Park 1 Dongjun Kim 2 Ahmed M. Alaa 1 3

Abstract

Despite the remarkable empirical successes, recent theoretical studies (De Bortoli, 2022; Chen et al., 2023) have
highlighted the limitations on the scalability of SGMs when
applied to high-dimensional and high-cardinality data structures. To tackle the challenge, a series of research (Lim
et al., 2023; Kerrigan et al., 2023; Dutordoir et al., 2023;
Hagemann et al., 2023) broadens the scope of diffusion
models, introducing new methods for data representation in
an infinite-dimensional function space. These macroscopic
approaches fully mitigate dimensionality issues in diffusion
modeling; however, they make strong assumptions on the
function-valued representations of the input data, which limits their applicability to practical settings such as modeling
3D point clouds.

In this paper, we introduce a new class of scorebased generative models (SGMs) designed to handle high-cardinality data distributions by leveraging concepts from mean-field theory. We present
mean-field chaos diffusion models (MF-CDMs),
which address the curse of dimensionality inherent in high-cardinality data by utilizing the
propagation of chaos property of interacting particles. By treating high-cardinality data as a large
stochastic system of interacting particles, we develop a novel score-matching method for infinitedimensional chaotic particle systems and propose
an approximation scheme that employs a subdivision strategy for efficient training. Our theoretical
and empirical results demonstrate the scalability and effectiveness of MF-CDMs for managing
large high-cardinality data structures, such as 3D
point clouds.

This paper introduces another strategy to manage high cardinality data
through the lens of mean-field theory (MFT) and restructure existing
SGMs. MFT has long been recognized as a powerful analytical tool
for large-scale particle systems in
multiple disciplines, such as staFigure 1. 3D representistical physics (Kadanoff, 2009),
tations of (ν N , µ).
biology (Koehl & Delarue, 1994),
and macroeconomics (Lachapelle et al., 2010). Among the
diverse concepts developed in MFT, our interest specifically focuses on the property called propagation of chaos
(PoC) (Sznitman, 1991a; Gottlieb, 1998), which describes
statistical independency and symmetry in proximity to the
mean-field limit of large-particle system. While the direct
integration of PoC into conventional SGMs poses a considerable challenge due to the infinite dimensionality, our
systematic approach begins by defining denoising models
with interacting N -particle diffusion dynamics (i.e., , ν N ,
block dots, Fig. 1). We then explore ways to approximate its
mean-field limit (i.e., N → ∞, µ, organ surface), which
can possess extensive representational capabilities. This
work is centered on two key contributions to achieve this:

1. Introduction
Generative models serve as a fundamental focus in machine
learning, aiming to learn a high-dimensional probability
density function. Among the contenders such as Normalizing flows (Rezende & Mohamed, 2015) and energy-based
models (Zhao et al., 2016), Score-based Generative Models
(SGMs), especially have gained widespread recognition of
their capabilities on various domains, such as images (Song
et al., 2021b), time-series (Tashiro et al., 2021; Park et al.,
2023), graphs (Jo et al., 2022) and point-clouds (Zeng et al.,
2022). The key idea of SGMs is to conceptualize a combination of forward and reverse diffusion processes as generative models. In forward dynamics, the data density is
progressively corrupted by following a Markov probability trajectory, eventually transformed into Gaussian density.
Consequently, denoising score networks sequentially remove noises in the reverse dynamics, aiming to restore the
original state.
1

• Mean-field Score Matching. We introduce a variational
framework on Wasserstein space by applying the ItôWentzell-Lions formula and derive a mean-field score
matching (MF-SM) to generalize conventional SGMs for
mean-field particle system. We provide mean-field analysis on the asymptotic behavior of the proposed novel

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences,
UC Berkeley 2 Department of Computer Science, Stanford 3 UCSF.
Correspondence to: Ahmed M. Alaa <amalaa@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

