Adaptive Stabilization Based on Machine Learning for Column Generation

Yunzhuang Shen 1 Yuan Sun 2 Xiaodong Li 3 Zhiguang Cao 4 Andrew Eberhard 3 Guangquan Zhang 1

Abstract

cutting stock problem (Gilmore & Gomory, 1961), and the
graph coloring problem (Mehrotra & Trick, 1996).

Column generation (CG) is a well-established
method for solving large-scale linear programs.
It involves iteratively optimizing a subproblem
containing a subset of columns and using its dual
solution to generate new columns with negative
reduced costs. This process continues until the
dual values converge to the optimal dual solution
to the original problem. A natural phenomenon
in CG is the heavy oscillation of the dual values
during iterations, which can lead to a substantial
slowdown in the convergence rate. Stabilization
techniques are devised to accelerate the convergence of dual values by using information beyond
the state of the current subproblem. However,
there remains a significant gap in obtaining more
accurate dual values at an earlier stage. To further narrow this gap, this paper introduces a novel
approach consisting of 1) a machine learning approach for accurate prediction of optimal dual solutions and 2) an adaptive stabilization technique
that effectively capitalizes on accurate predictions.
On the graph coloring problem, we show that our
method achieves a significantly improved convergence rate compared to traditional methods.

CG solves a large-scale LP in iterative steps. In an iteration,
a set of dual values is obtained by solving the LP that contains a small subset of columns and is then used to generate
new columns with negative reduced costs. As this process
repeats, the dual values converge to optimal dual values, i.e.,
an optimal dual solution to the original LP. This point of
convergence is identified when no column with a negative
reduced cost can be further generated.
As CG updates dual values by iteratively re-optimizing an
evolving subproblem, this method may lead to significant
oscillations in the dual iterates within the high-dimensional
dual space. In this context, a dual iterate refers to the set
of dual values obtained in a specific iteration of CG. This
phenomenon is depicted in Figure 1, which shows the trajectory of dual iterates for CG marked in green. Notably, the
dual iterates tend to stay far from the optimal dual solution
until a later stage. These issues can lead to the generation of
redundant columns, causing a significant slowdown in the
convergence rate.
Various techniques, termed stabilization, have been devised
to overcome this challenge. These techniques succeed in
deriving dual values that are more closely aligned with
the optimal dual solution by using information beyond the
current state of the subproblem. Typically, this additional
information includes the problem data (Agarwal et al., 1989;
Briant et al., 2008; Kraul et al., 2023) and/or historical dual
iterates collected during the solution process (Du Merle
et al., 1999; Pessoa et al., 2018). However, there is still
significant room to obtain more accurate dual values at an
earlier stage to further accelerate CG.

1. Introduction
Column generation (CG) is an effective method for solving
linear programs (LP) with a large number of variables (or
columns) (Lübbecke & Desrosiers, 2005). It has many
applications in solving combinatorial optimization problems
with a decomposable structure (Vanderbeck, 2000), such
as the vehicle routing problem (Agarwal et al., 1989), the

In this paper, we propose a new stabilization method to
further narrow this gap. Our method consists of two parts:
1) a machine learning (ML) approach to effectively predict
the optimal dual solution, and 2) an adaptive stabilization
method that effectively uses ML prediction to guide the convergence of dual values. Specifically, we penalize dual variables taking values that deviate from ML prediction during
subproblem optimization, resulting in a basin-in-attraction
effect pulling the dual values toward ML prediction. The
strength of this attraction is adapted in line with the progression of CG, motivated by the fact that the accuracy of dual

1

Australian Artificial Intelligence Institute, University of Technology Sydney, Australia 2 La Trobe Business School, La Trobe
University, Australia 3 School of Computing Technologies, Royal
Melbourne Institute of Technology, Australia 4 School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore Management University, Singapore. Correspondence to: Yunzhuang Shen <shenyunzhuang@outlook.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

