Mean-field Analysis on Two-layer Neural Networks from a Kernel Perspective

Shokichi Takakura 1 2 * Taiji Suzuki 1 2

Abstract

Suzuki, 2020). However, the NTK regime is reffered as a
lazy regime and cannot explain the feature learning ability
to adapt the intrinsic structure of the data since neural networks behave as a static kernel machine in the NTK regime.
On the other hand, several works have shown the superiority
of the neural networks to the kernel methods in terms of
the sample complexity (Barron, 1993; Yehudai & Shamir,
2019; Hayakawa & Suzuki, 2020). Thus, as shown in several empirical studies (Atanasov et al., 2021; Baratin et al.,
2021), neural networks must acquire the data-dependent
kernel by gradient descent. However, it is challenging to
establish a beyond NTK results on the feature learning of
neural networks with gradient-based algorithm due to the
non-convexity of the optimization landscape.

In this paper, we study the feature learning ability
of two-layer neural networks in the mean-field
regime through the lens of kernel methods. To
focus on the dynamics of the kernel induced by
the first layer, we utilize a two-timescale limit,
where the second layer moves much faster than
the first layer. In this limit, the learning problem is reduced to the minimization problem over
the intrinsic kernel. Then, we show the global
convergence of the mean-field Langevin dynamics and derive time and particle discretization error. We also demonstrate that two-layer neural
networks can learn a union of multiple reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces more efficiently than
any kernel methods, and neural networks aquire
data-dependent kernel which aligns with the target function. In addition, we develop a label noise
procedure, which converges to the global optimum and show that the degrees of freedom appears as an implicit regularization.

One promising approach is the mean-field analysis (Mei
et al., 2018; Hu et al., 2020), which is an infinite-width
limit of the neural networks in a different scaling than the
NTK regime. In the mean-field regime, the optimization
of 2-layer neural networks, which is non-convex in general,
is reduced to the convex optimization problem over the
distribution on the parameters. Exploiting the convexity
of the problem, several works (Nitanda & Suzuki, 2017;
Mei et al., 2018; Chizat & Bach, 2018) have shown the
convergence to the global optimum. Recently, quantitative
optimiztion guarantees has been established for the meanfield Langevin dynamics (MFLD) which can be regarded as
a continuous limit of a noisy gradient descent (Chizat, 2022;
Nitanda et al., 2022). Moreover, very recently, uniform-intime results on the particle discretization error have been
obtained (Chen et al., 2023; Suzuki et al., 2022; 2023a).
This allows us to extend results effectively from infinitewidth neural networks to finite-width neural networks.

1. Introduction
Although deep learning has achieved great success in various fields, the theoretical understanding is still limited.
Several works studied the relation between deep learning
and kernel medhods, which are well-studied in the machine
learning community. A line of work has shown that the
training dynamics of infinite-width neural networks can be
approximated by linearized dynamics and the corresponding
kernel is called neural tangent kernel (NTK) (Jacot et al.,
2018; Arora et al., 2019b). Furthermore, generalizability of
neural networks is shown to be characterized by the spectral properties of the NTK (Arora et al., 2019a; Nitanda &

Although the mean-field limit allows us to analyze the feature learning in neural networks, the connection between
mean-field neural networks and its corresponding kernel is
still unclear. To establish the connection to the previous
works (Jacot et al., 2018; Suzuki, 2018; Ma & Wu, 2022) on
the relationship between neural networks and kernel methods, we address the following question:
Is it possible to learn the optimal kernel through the MFLD?
Futhermore, can this kernel align with the target function
by excluding the effect of noise?

*
The current affiliation is LY Corporation. This work was done
when ST was affiliated with the University of Tokyo and AIPRIKEN. 1 Department of Mathematical Informatics, the University
of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan 2 Center for Advanced Intelligence Project,
RIKEN, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Shokichi Takakura
<stakakur@lycorp.co.jp>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

To analyze the dynamics of the kernel inside the neural net-

1

