The Role of Learning Algorithms in Collective Action

Omri Ben-Dov* 1 2 Jake Fawkes* 3 Samira Samadi 1 2 Amartya Sanyal 1

Abstract

by altering the data they provide to the firm. This naturally
leads to various technical questions regarding how large the
collective needs to be, how effective different data altering
strategies are, and which details about firm’s algorithm can
be leveraged by the collective to achieve the best results.

Collective action in machine learning is the study
of the control that a coordinated group can have
over machine learning algorithms. While previous
research has concentrated on assessing the impact
of collectives against Bayes (sub-)optimal classifiers, this perspective is limited in that it does
not account for the choice of learning algorithm.
Since classifiers seldom behave like Bayes classifiers and are influenced by the choice of learning
algorithms along with their inherent biases, in this
work we initiate the study of how the choice of the
learning algorithm plays a role in the success of a
collective in practical settings. Specifically, we focus on distributionally robust optimization (DRO),
popular for improving a worst group error, and on
the ubiquitous stochastic gradient descent (SGD),
due to its inductive bias for “simpler” functions.
Our empirical results, supported by a theoretical foundation, show that the effective size and
success of the collective are highly dependent on
properties of the learning algorithm. This highlights the necessity of taking the learning algorithm into account when studying the impact of
collective action in machine learning.

Hardt et al. (2023) initiated the formal study into the success of different collective action strategies. Their work
provided theoretical analysis based on the fractional size
of the collective and on the properties of the signal with regards to the original data distribution. However, their results
only hold for Bayes (sub-)optimal classifiers which do not
immediately adapt to peculiarities of practical learning algorithms. In this work, we investigate two types of commonly
used learning algorithms that exhibit distinct properties: (1)
Distributional robustness and (2) Simplicity bias. We show
how these properties lead to significantly different levels of
collective success that are unexplained by prior work.
When the data is composed of multiple sub-populations,
algorithms that optimise for average performance often
perform poorly in minority sub-populations (Meinshausen
& Bühlmann, 2015). A fairness-focused firm will want
to ensure that their trained learning model performs well
uniformly on all sub-populations, as opposed to being onaverage good. Distributionally Robust Optimisation (DRO)
is a family of algorithms designed to maximize this pergroup accuracy (Hashimoto et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2020).
We show that as a consequence, a small collective achieves
higher success when the training algorithm performs DRO,
compared to standard empirical risk minimization (ERM).
Conversely, a large collective in the same settings achieves
lower success, contradicting the expectation set by previous
work regarding the effectiveness of large collectives.

1. Introduction
With the rapid increase in deployed machine learning models, a large number of firms rely on data contributed by
users (Gerlitz & Helmond, 2013) to train their algorithms.
In response to this, consumers and users have searched for
ways to alter their data to influence the outputs of such models (Chen, 2018; Burrell et al., 2019; Rahman, 2021). Algorithmic collective action (Olson, 1965; Hardt et al., 2023)
has emerged as a formal framework to study the effect a
coordinated group of individuals can have on such models,

Second, most machine learning algorithms used today are
based on some form of gradient descent (GD). Such algorithms, including the popular Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015), and RMSProp,
exhibit a preference for learning functions that are “simpler”. This inductive bias of GD algorithms is popularly
referred to as simplicity bias (Kalimeris et al., 2019; Shah
et al., 2020). In practice, this preference results in the model
“overlooking” certain complex features. We demonstrate
that these overlooked features can be leveraged by a collective to design a strategy that will gain higher success

*
Equal contribution 1 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 2 Tübingen AI Center 3 Department of
Statistics, University of Oxford. Correspondence to: Omri BenDov <omri.ben-dov@tuebingen.mpg.de>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

