Kernel-Based Evaluation of Conditional Biological Sequence Models

Pierre Glaser 1 Steffanie Paul 2 Alissa M. Hummer 2 3 Charlotte M. Deane 3 Debora S. Marks 4 Alan N. Amin 5

Abstract

In such problems, it is crucial to evaluate the properties
of the trained model. Model evaluation can help assess
the risk of using the model’s predictions in the real world,
such as performing in-vitro experiments (a time-intensive
process), guide hyperparameter searches, and deepen one’s
understanding of the model’s behavior. Two properties are
particularly important to measure: the first one is model accuracy, which describes how well the model approximates
the true conditional distribution of the target variable given
the input. Models with high accuracy have learned the underlying structure of the data, suggesting a high potential
value in deploying them in real-world applications. However, in practice, it is likely that models will not be perfectly
accurate. Inaccurate models can still be useful as long as
they fall back to conservative guesses (in the extreme case,
the prior distribution) when they are uncertain. From a
statistical perspective, this property is known as reliability
(Bröcker, 2008; Vaicenavicius et al., 2019; Widmann et al.,
2021), and will be the second property of interest in this
work.

We propose a set of kernel-based tools to evaluate the designs and tune the hyperparameters
of conditional sequence models, with a focus on
problems in computational biology. The backbone of our tools is a new measure of discrepancy
between the true conditional distribution and the
model’s estimate, called the Augmented Conditional Maximum Mean Discrepancy (ACMMD).
Provided that the model can be sampled from, the
ACMMD can be estimated unbiasedly from data
to quantify absolute model fit, integrated within
hypothesis tests, and used to evaluate model reliability. We demonstrate the utility of our approach
by analyzing a popular protein design model, ProteinMPNN. We are able to reject the hypothesis
that ProteinMPNN fits its data for various protein families, and tune the model’s temperature
hyperparameter to achieve a better fit.

Given a set of real samples, the standard approach to
evaluate models in protein design consists in using loglikelihoods or sequence recovery (Dauparas et al., 2022;
Hsu et al., 2022; Gao et al., 2022). However, log-likelihoods
cannot be used to evaluate reliability, and are only relative
measures of accuracy: these methods can only be used to
compare models and would not alert the practitioner for
example if all models make very poor predictions. Instead,
to assess how far a model is from being optimally accurate
and consistent — and thus the potential value in improving
it, by for example collecting more data or increasing its complexity, one should consider absolute rather than relative
metrics, that is, metrics that not only allow one to compare
models to each other, but also to evaluate a single model’s
performance without any other point of comparison. For
these metrics to have practical value, they should come with
estimators computable from data samples. These estimators
should be efficiently computable, recover the true metric
as in the large sample size limit (i.e. be consistent), and
preferably be centered around the true value of the metric
(i.e. be unbiased). Finally, to factor out the statistical error
coming from estimating these metrics using a finite number
of samples, these metrics should be integrable into hypothesis tests built to detect statistically significant mismatches

1. Introduction
Conditional sequence models constitute one of the most
prominent model classes of modern machine learning. Such
models have allowed progress in longstanding problems in
fields ranging from natural language generation to biomedical applications such as genomics and protein design. Abstracting away the precise nature of the data, the objective
common to many of these problems can be summarized
as the prediction of high-dimensional discrete-valued sequences, given some possibly high-dimensional input information about the sequence. For example, in protein design,
inverse folding models (Dauparas et al., 2022) seek to learn
the conditional distribution of amino acid sequences (proteins) that are likely to fold to a given input protein backbone
3D geometry, or structure.
1
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit, London, UK
Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, USA
3
Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
4
Harvard Medical School, Broad Institute, Boston, USA 5 Courant
Institute, New York University, New York, USA. Correspondence
to: Pierre Glaser <pierreglaser@gmail.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

