Distinguishing the Knowable from the Unknowable with Language Models

Gustaf Ahdritz * 1 Tian Qin * 1 Nikhil Vyas 1 Boaz Barak 1 Benjamin L. Edelman 1

Abstract

can be called knowledge-based, or epistemic. In most cases,
however, the probability distribution of free-form text exhibits inherent, or aleatoric, entropy. For example, there
are multiple natural continuations for the prompt “Vänern
is ”. Unlike epistemic uncertainty, aleatoric uncertainty
is not reducible: it does not disappear even in the limit of
infinitely large models that have been trained with infinite
data.

We study the feasibility of identifying epistemic
uncertainty (reflecting a lack of knowledge), as opposed to aleatoric uncertainty (reflecting entropy
in the underlying distribution), in the outputs of
large language models (LLMs) over free-form
text. In the absence of ground-truth probabilities,
we explore a setting where, in order to (approximately) disentangle a given LLM’s uncertainty,
a significantly larger model stands in as a proxy
for the ground truth. We show that small linear probes trained on the embeddings of frozen,
pretrained models accurately predict when larger
models will be more confident at the token level
and that probes trained on one text domain generalize to others. Going further, we propose a fully
unsupervised method that achieves non-trivial accuracy on the same task. Taken together, we interpret these results as evidence that LLMs naturally
contain internal representations of different types
of uncertainty that could potentially be leveraged
to devise more informative indicators of model
confidence in diverse practical settings. Code
can be found at: https://github.com/
KempnerInstitute/llm_uncertainty

In some structured settings—e.g. multiple-choice question
answering—it can be clear whether there is a single answer in the ground truth and hence how to classify model
uncertainty. Indeed, prior work has primarily focused on
these cases (Osband et al., 2021; 2023; Kadavath et al.,
2022; Cole et al., 2023; Kuhn et al., 2023). But in general,
whether model uncertainty is epistemic or aleatoric (or both
at once) is more difficult to determine.
In this work, we take the first steps toward a new approach
for identifying epistemic uncertainty in completely unconstrained text at the token level. Since the “ground truth distribution” is, of course, unknown, we use the assumption—
validated by scaling laws (Kaplan et al., 2020; Hoffmann
et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023a)—that larger and more
compute-heavy models are better proxies of said distribution
and generally exhibit less epistemic uncertainty. Accordingly, we contrast the outputs of small target models with
those of the largest models at our disposal to generate token
labels. Given a token on which a small target model is uncertain, we run the same prompt through the large model. If the
large model is confident about its prediction, we consider
the small model’s uncertainty about the prediction of this
token to be epistemic. Conversely, if the large model is
also unconfident about its token prediction, we consider the
small model’s uncertainty to be approximately “aleatoric,”
or “aleatoric-like” (including tokens about which the large
model is itself epistemically uncertain). See Figure 1 for an
illustration of the labeling scheme.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) are remarkably wellcalibrated; in question-answering settings, token-level probabilities output by a pre-trained model tend to match the
rates at which the corresponding tokens actually occur (Kadavath et al., 2022; OpenAI et al., 2023). Nevertheless, the
degree of a model’s uncertainty alone is not always informative, since uncertainty can arise from multiple sources.
The token that follows “Vänern is the largest lake in ”
is largely deterministic, and so uncertainty on this prompt

We describe supervised and unsupervised methods for this
task. In the supervised setting, we train both linear and nonlinear probes on different activations of the small model
to predict the uncertainty label on different variations of
the task. Figure 1 (right) contains a simplified overview.
The unsupervised method, which we call the In-Context
Learning Test (ICLT), is inspired by the in-context learning

*

Equal contribution 1 Harvard University. Correspondence
to: Gustaf Ahdritz <gahdritz@g.harvard.edu>, Tian Qin
<tqin@g.harvard.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

