One Prompt is not Enough:
Automated Construction of a Mixture-of-Expert Prompts

Ruochen Wang * 1 Sohyun An * 2 Minhao Cheng 3 Tianyi Zhou 4 Sung Ju Hwang 2 Cho-Jui Hsieh 1

Abstract

2023; Touvron et al., 2023; Peters et al., 2018; Devlin et al.,
2018; Brown et al., 2020; Wei et al., 2022b). Despite the
success, there still exists a substantial gap between user intention and the model’s interpretation. Therefore, carefully
designed prompts (a.k.a. Prompt Engineering) become an
essential ingredient for fully eliciting LLM’s superior generalization ability (Alhoshan et al., 2022; Zhao et al., 2021;
Liu et al., 2021; Lu et al., 2021; Su et al., 2022; Wang et al.,
2022a; Wei et al., 2022a; Yao et al., 2023; Schick et al.,
2023; Kojima et al.). However, it usually requires laborious
efforts through inefficient trial and error. To reduce human
efforts, several recent attempts have shown tremendous potential in utilizing LLMs themselves to design prompts for
language generation (Zhou et al., 2022; Pryzant et al., 2023;
Chen et al., 2023; Fernando et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023;
Xu et al., 2022). These methods are part of a broader conceptual framework termed “LLM as Optimizers” (Yang
et al., 2023). While the results are promising, pioneering
efforts along this line primarily focus on finding the optimal
demo-free instruction for a specified task, based on a set
of (input, output) demonstrations. While the prompts produced by these methods can outperform human-designed
counterparts, a single demo-free instruction might not suffice to serve all the possible instances of a task or cover the
whole problem space, limiting the LLM’s problem-solving
potential.

Large Language Models (LLMs) exhibit strong
generalization capabilities to novel tasks when
prompted with language instructions and incontext demos. Since this ability sensitively depends on the quality of prompts, various methods have been explored to automate the instruction design. While these methods demonstrated
promising results, they also restricted the searched
prompt to one instruction. Such simplification significantly limits their capacity, as a single demofree instruction might not be able to cover the
entire complex problem space of the targeted task.
To alleviate this issue, we adopt the Mixture-ofExpert paradigm and divide the problem space
into a set of sub-regions; Each sub-region is governed by a specialized expert, equipped with both
an instruction and a set of demos. A two-phase
process is developed to construct the specialized
expert for each region: (1) demo assignment: Inspired by the theoretical connection between incontext learning and kernel regression, we group
demos into experts based on their semantic similarity; (2) instruction assignment: A region-based
joint search of an instruction per expert complements the demos assigned to it, yielding a synergistic effect. The resulting method, codenamed
Mixture-of-Prompts (MoP), achieves an average
win rate of 81% against prior arts across several
major benchmarks.

This paper aims to expand the problem space coverage for
automatic prompting by optimizing a Mixture of Prompts
(MoP). Our key insight is to adopt the Mixture of Experts
(MoE) paradigm (Jacobs et al., 1991; Jordan & Jacobs,
1994) to partition the problem space into multiple homogeneous regions, each governed by a specialized expert
(prompt). At inference time, a single expert will be selected
to prompt the LLM to answer a new input query. Under the
MoE framework, prompt optimization reduces to an expert
assignment problem that aims to search for the most suitable prompt for each expert, with the goal of optimizing
the performance of their mixture as a whole.

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in large language models (LLMs)
have demonstrated a remarkable ability to solve novel tasks
described by user instructions (Ouyang et al., 2022; OpenAI,
*

Equal contribution 1 University of California, Los Angeles
Korea Advanced Institute of Science & Technology 3 Penn State
University 4 University of Maryland, College Park. Correspondence to: Cho-Jui Hsieh <chohsieh@cs.ucla.edu>, Ruochen
Wang <ruocwang@g.ucla.edu>.
2

Another primary improvement proposed in this paper is
to expand the prompt of each expert to contain both the
instruction and demos, jointly optimized for each expert
region in the problem space. Intuitively, concrete demos
are good at providing fine-grained knowledge and expertise
(local information) matching the details of input queries in

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

