No Free Prune: Information-Theoretic Barriers to Pruning at Initialization

Tanishq Kumar * 1 Kevin Luo * 1 Mark Sellke 1

Abstract

or inference, while maintaining performance on a task.
Typically, pruning is done by masking away a certain fraction of weights (setting them to zero), so that they can be
ignored for the purposes of training or inference, reducing
the number of operations and thus cost required to achieve
good performance on a task. There are three stages of the
machine learning pipeline at which networks can be pruned:

The existence of “lottery tickets” (Frankle &
Carbin, 2018) at or near initialization raises the
tantalizing question of whether large models are
necessary in deep learning, or whether sparse networks can be quickly identified and trained without ever training the dense models that contain
them. However, efforts to find these sparse subnetworks without training the dense model (“pruning
at initialization”) have been broadly unsuccessful
(Frankle et al., 2020b). We put forward a theoretical explanation for this, based on the model’s
effective parameter count, peff , given by the sum
of the number of non-zero weights in the final
network and the mutual information between the
sparsity mask and the data. We show the Law of
Robustness of (Bubeck & Sellke, 2023) extends
to sparse networks with the usual parameter count
replaced by peff , meaning a sparse neural network
which robustly interpolates noisy data requires a
heavily data-dependent mask. We posit that pruning during and after training outputs masks with
higher mutual information than those produced by
pruning at initialization. Thus two networks may
have the same sparsities, but differ in effective
parameter count based on how they were trained.
This suggests that pruning near initialization may
be infeasible and explains why lottery tickets exist,
but cannot be found fast (i.e. without training the
full network). Experiments on neural networks
confirm that information gained during training
may indeed affect model capacity.

1. At initialization, before training weights on the data
(Lee et al., 2018; Tanaka et al., 2020; Wang et al.,
2020), often using the network’s connection structure
or the loss landscape around initialization.
2. During training, usually in an gradual manner, starting
with the dense network, training on the data, and pruning some fraction of the smallest magnitude weights,
and repeating. Methods differ on what they do to
weights after each prune step. The contribution of
(Frankle & Carbin, 2018) was showing rewinding to
initial weights is important for good performance at
this stage of pruning. Other methods include (Zhu &
Gupta, 2018), which iteratively prunes the smallest
magnitude weights according to a predefined sparsity
schedule.
3. After training, before inference, usually using simple
but effective heuristics involving dropping the lowest
magntitude weights (Han et al., 2015)
(Frankle & Carbin, 2018) show empirically that sparse subnetworks that can train to accuracy matching or exceeding
that of the full, dense model, do indeed exist at or near initialization (“matching” subnetworks). This work and the
follow-ups (Frankle et al., 2019; 2020a) present an algorithm to find these subnetworks called iterative magnitude
pruning (IMP) with weight rewinding, dubbing such subnetworks present at initialization “lottery tickets.” In principle,
this raises the enticing prospect of quickly finding these
networks at initialization and training only at high sparsity,
but IMP requires repeatedly training the whole model on
the dataset to find these lottery tickets, defeating the original
point of finding highly sparse yet trainable subnetworks.

1. Introduction
Motivated by perennially growing model sizes and associated costs, neural network pruning is a technique used to
reduce the size and cost of neural networks during training
*
Equal contribution 1 Harvard University. Correspondence to:
Tanishq Kumar <tkumar@college.harvard.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Since then, research on “pruning at initialization” has sought
to find these lottery tickets fast (i.e., without training the
1

