Non-convex Stochastic Composite Optimization with Polyak Momentum

Yuan Gao 1 2 Anton Rodomanov 1 Sebastian U. Stich 1

Abstract

Pesquet, 2010), image processing (Luke, 2020) and many
more. It also naturally covers constrained optimization
problems by considering the indicator function of the constraint set, and some recent variants of such ideas have
been applied to distributed and federated machine learning
problems (Mishchenko et al., 2022).

The stochastic proximal gradient method is a powerful generalization of the widely used stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) method and has found numerous applications in Machine Learning. However, it is notoriously known that this method
fails to converge in non-convex settings where
the stochastic noise is significant (i.e. when only
small or bounded batch sizes are used). In this
paper, we focus on the stochastic proximal gradient method with Polyak momentum. We prove
this method attains an optimal convergence rate
for non-convex composite optimization problems,
regardless of batch size. Additionally, we rigorously analyze the variance reduction effect of the
Polyak momentum in the composite optimization
setting and we show the method also converges
when the proximal step can only be solved inexactly. Finally, we provide numerical experiments
to validate our theoretical results.

The problem formulation (1) is often used in Machine Learning as the proximal term ψ allows encoding prior domain
knowledge. For instance, it can impose constraints on the
variables, handle non-differentiability, induce sparsity, or it
can take the form of a regularizer. Recently, there has been
a surge of interest in these preconditioning techniques in the
Deep Learning context (Hendrikx et al., 2020; Woodworth
et al., 2023). Given a loss objective function ℓ : Rd → R, an
auxiliary function (or preconditioner) ℓ̂ is constructed—for
instance, by approximating ℓ with a subset of the data samples or synthetic samples. This results in the formulation:
min {ℓ(x) − ℓ̂(x) + ℓ̂(x)} .
{z
} |{z}
|

x∈Rd

f (x)

This is a special case of Problem (1), with f := ℓ − ℓ̂ and
ψ := ℓ̂. This formulation has the advantage that the training
can be accelerated if the proxy function ℓ̂ remains simple to
optimize. These applications motivate the need to further
our understanding of the stochastic composite optimization
problem in the non-convex regime, especially where large
batches are less preferred or even unavailable (LeCun et al.,
2012; Rieke et al., 2020).

1. Introduction
Stochastic gradient descent and its variants are the
workhorse of modern machine learning. The stochastic proximal gradient method is a simple yet powerful extension of
the vanilla stochastic gradient descent method, which aims
to solve the following stochastic composite optimization
problem:
min {F (x) := f (x) + ψ(x)} ,

x∈Rd

ψ(x)

In the convex and strongly convex case, the complexity
of solving Problem (1) is well understood (Ghadimi et al.,
2016; Ghadimi & Lan, 2013a). On the other hand, the existing theory in the non-convex regime is unsatisfactory. In
particular, when the gradient noise has variance σ 2 , with
the vanilla algorithm, the squared norm of the gradient of
F is only shown to converge to O(1/K ) + Ω(σ 2 ) after K
iterations. This implies that, to converge to an arbitrary ε
error, one needs to take mega batches of size Ω(ε−1 ) at
each iteration of the algorithm to reduce the stochastic noise
term; and the total number of stochastic gradient oracle calls
is Ω(ε−2 ). In practice and theory, smaller-batch methods
are often preferred over mega-batch methods. For example,
mega-batch methods follow the full gradient methods much
more closely at each step than smaller batch methods, and
it is observed empirically to be adversarial to the generaliza-

(1)

where f : Rd → R is smooth and ψ : Rd → R ∪ {+∞} is
not necessarily differentiable, but a simple function. Such
paradigm is ubiquitous in machine learning and beyond, and
it covers a wide range of generalizations of the vanilla optimization problem, including regularized machine learning
problems (Liu et al., 2015), signal processing (Combettes &
1
CISPA, Saarbrücken, Germany 2 Universität des Saarlandes.
Correspondence to: Yuan Gao <yuan.gao@cispa.de>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

