Towards Certified Unlearning for Deep Neural Networks

Binchi Zhang 1 Yushun Dong 1 Tianhao Wang 1 Jundong Li 1

Abstract

deleting user data and its lineage from a machine learning
model. Although the target data can be effectively unlearned
by retraining the model from scratch, this method can incur
a high computational cost, limiting its practical applications.
To address this problem, certified unlearning was proposed
to find an efficient approximation of the retrained model. In
particular, the difference between the distributions of the unlearned model and the retrained model is bounded, making
certified unlearning a stringent unlearning notion.

In the field of machine unlearning, certified unlearning has been extensively studied in convex
machine learning models due to its high efficiency
and strong theoretical guarantees. However, its application to deep neural networks (DNNs), known
for their highly nonconvex nature, still poses challenges. To bridge the gap between certified unlearning and DNNs, we propose several simple
techniques to extend certified unlearning methods to nonconvex objectives. To reduce the time
complexity, we develop an efficient computation
method by inverse Hessian approximation without
compromising certification guarantees. In addition, we extend our discussion of certification to
nonconvergence training and sequential unlearning, considering that real-world users can send
unlearning requests at different time points. Extensive experiments on three real-world datasets
demonstrate the efficacy of our method and the
advantages of certified unlearning in DNNs.

Despite the extensive study of certified unlearning in various
machine learning models such as linear models (Guo et al.,
2020; Izzo et al., 2021; Mahadevan & Mathioudakis, 2021),
general convex models (Ullah et al., 2021; Sekhari et al.,
2021; Neel et al., 2021), Bayesian models (Nguyen et al.,
2020), sum-product networks (Becker & Liebig, 2022), and
graph neural networks (Pan et al., 2023; Chien et al., 2023;
Wu et al., 2023b;a), the understanding of certified unlearning for deep neural networks (DNNs) remains nascent. Most
of the previous unlearning methods applied to DNNs (Golatkar et al., 2020; 2021; Tarun et al., 2023; Chundawat et al.,
2023) only introduced empirical approximation of the retrained model and failed to obtain a theoretical certification.
Although Mehta et al. tentatively analyzed the certification
for DNNs, their results strongly rely on the convexity assumption, which is unrealistic and yields a significant gap
between certified unlearning and DNNs.

1. Introduction
In modern machine learning applications, model training
often requires access to vast amounts of user data. For example, computer vision models often rely on images sourced
from platforms such as Flickr, shared by its users (Thomee
et al., 2016). However, as concerns about user data privacy
grow, recent legislation such as the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR, 2016) and the California Consumer
Privacy Act (CCPA, 2018) have underscored the importance of the right to be forgotten, which enables users to
request the deletion of their data from entities that store it.
The emergence of the right to be forgotten has prompted
the development of a new research domain known as machine unlearning (Sommer et al., 2022; Mercuri et al., 2022;
Nguyen et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023), i.e.,

To bridge the gap between certified unlearning and DNNs,
we investigate the problem of certified unlearning without
relying on convexity assumptions. First, we divide certified
unlearning into two steps, estimating the retrained model
with a bounded error and adding random noises corresponding to the approximation error bound. Existing works (Golatkar et al., 2020; 2021; Mehta et al., 2022; Warnecke et al.,
2023) typically estimate the retrained model based on a
single-step Newton update for convex objectives. In this paper, we demonstrate that by making simple modifications to
the Newton update, we can establish an approximation error
bound for nonconvex (more precisely, weakly convex (Davis
& Grimmer, 2019; Davis & Drusvyatskiy, 2019)) functions
such as DNNs. It is worth noting that our proposed techniques can be adapted to different approximate unlearning
strategies for convex models to improve their soundness
in DNNs. To improve the efficiency of the Newton update, we follow previous work to exploit a computationally

1
University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA. Correspondence to: Jundong Li <jundong@virginia.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

