Knowledge-aware Reinforced Language Models for Protein Directed Evolution

Yuhao Wang * 1 2 Qiang Zhang * 1 2 Ming Qin 1 2 Xiang Zhuang 1 2 Xiaotong Li 1 2 Zhichen Gong 2
Zeyuan Wang 1 2 Yu Zhao 3 Jianhua Yao 3 Keyan Ding 1 2 Huajun Chen 1 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Proteins play a pivotal role in numerous biological processes,
and their study is fundamental to advancing our understanding of life sciences. Deep learning, a subset of machine
learning, has been extensively applied in the field of protein
research, including function annotation (Xu et al., 2021),
3D structure prediction (Jumper et al., 2021), amino acid
sequence generation, and protein engineering (Anishchenko
et al., 2021). The incorporation of deep learning techniques
has substantially improved both the accuracy and efficiency
of protein research.

Directed evolution, a cornerstone of protein optimization, is to harness natural mutational processes to enhance protein functionality. Existing Machine Learning-assisted Directed Evolution (MLDE) methodologies typically rely on
data-driven strategies and often overlook the profound domain knowledge in biochemical fields.
In this paper, we introduce a novel Knowledgeaware Reinforced Language Model (KnowRLM)
for MLDE. An Amino Acid Knowledge Graph
(AAKG) is constructed to represent the intricate
biochemical relationships among amino acids.
We further propose a Protein Language Model
(PLM)-based policy network that iteratively samples mutants through preferential random walks
on the AAKG using a dynamic sliding window
mechanism. The novel mutants are actively sampled to fine-tune a fitness predictor as the reward
model, providing feedback to the knowledgeaware policy. Finally, we optimize the whole
system in an active learning approach that mimics
biological settings in practice. KnowRLM stands
out for its ability to utilize contextual amino acid
information from knowledge graphs, thus attaining advantages from both statistical patterns of
protein sequences and biochemical properties of
amino acids. Extensive experiments demonstrate
the superior performance of KnowRLM in more
efficiently identifying high-fitness mutants compared to existing methods.

Directed evolution (Arnold, 1998; Smith & Petrenko, 1997;
Winter et al., 1994), a commonly used technique in protein engineering, aims to refine and optimize the protein
functions of interest by mimicking the process of natural
selection (Packer & Liu, 2015). The essence of this technique lies in screening and optimizing protein sequences to
achieve improved biological performance, such as catalytic
efficiency (Toyao et al., 2019), thermal stability (Tian et al.,
2010), or drug affinity (Hie et al., 2020). Conventionally, researchers rely on random or unsupervised sampling methods
to generate a range of protein mutants and then select those
with desired traits (Wu et al., 2019). This approach is often
labor-intensive and time-consuming, with a key challenge
of effective exploration of the complex and astronomical
protein sequence space to identify optimal mutants.
The rapid development of machine learning technologies
has provided new momentum for protein directed evolution.
Machine learning’s capacity to process and analyze vast
quantities of biological data is particularly beneficial for
unraveling complex protein sequence-function relationships.
For example, researchers use clustering to find informative
mutants (Qiu et al., 2021). More recently, reinforcement
learning (RL) has been leveraged in the realm of directed
evolution. It enables effective navigation in the protein
sequence space, optimizing search strategies to discover
mutations that yield the desired performance. A prime example of this application is EvoPlay (Wang et al., 2023),
which draws inspirations from the AlphaZero self-play reinforcement learning framework. This method enhances
search efficiency while simultaneously reducing experimental workload, showcasing RL’s potential in protein design.

*
1
Equal contribution
Zhejiang University 2 ZJUHangzhou Global Scientific and Technological Innovation Center 3 Tencent AI Lab.
Correspondence to:
Qiang
Zhang
<qiang.zhang.cs@zju.edu.cn>,
Keyan
Ding <dingkeyan@zju.edu.cn>, Huajun Chen <huajunsir@zju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

