Guarantees for Nonlinear Representation Learning:
Non-identical Covariates, Dependent Data, Fewer Samples

Thomas T. Zhang 1 Bruce D. Lee 1 Ingvar Ziemann 1 George J. Pappas 1 Nikolai Matni 1

Abstract

natural language processing (Devlin et al., 2019). The principle enabling the success of these approaches is the use
of a large dataset to extract compressed features which are
broadly useful for downstream tasks. The extraction of such
generally useful features from data is referred to as representation learning (Bengio et al., 2013). Despite its critical
role in the success of deep learning, statistical guarantees
remain somewhat limited.

A driving force behind the diverse applicability of
modern machine learning is the ability to extract
meaningful features across many sources. However, many practical domains involve data that
are non-identically distributed across sources, and
possibly statistically dependent within its source,
violating vital assumptions in existing theoretical studies of representation learning. Toward
addressing these issues, we establish statistical
guarantees for learning general nonlinear representations from multiple data sources that admit
different input distributions and possibly dependent data. Specifically, we study the sample(t)
complexity of learning T + 1 functions f⋆ ◦ g⋆
(t)
from a function class F × G, where f⋆ are task
specific linear functions and g⋆ is a shared nonlinear representation. An approximate representation ĝ is estimated using N samples from each
of T source tasks, and a fine-tuning function fˆ(0)
is fit using N ′ samples from a target task passed
through ĝ. Our results show that the excess risk
of theestimate fˆ(0) ◦ĝ on the target task decays
dim(F )
as Õ C(G)
, where C(G) denotes the
NT +
N′
complexity of G. Notably, our rates match that of
the iid setting, while requiring fewer samples per
task than prior analysis and admitting no dependence on the mixing time. We support our analysis
with numerical experiments performing imitation
learning over non-linear dynamical systems.

Only recently have studies formalized multi-task representation learning in a way that illustrates how generalization
improves when data is aggregated across many tasks (Du
et al., 2020; Tripuraneni et al., 2020). These regression set(t)
tings consider learning T +1 functions f⋆ ◦g⋆ in a function
(t) (t)
class F × G from covariate-observation pairs {(xi , yi )},
(t)
where f⋆ are task-specific functions, and g⋆ is a shared
representation. The tasks for t = 1, . . . , T are denoted
source (training) tasks, while t = 0 is the target (test) task.
A basic model of transfer learning can be expressed as a
two-step procedure in which an estimate ĝ for the representation is determined by solving a least squares problem
using N data samples from each of the source tasks with
measurements corrupted by zero-mean noise. This representation is then used to determine an estimate fˆ(0) by solving a
least squares problem using N ′ samples from the target task,
also with measurements corrupted by zero-mean noise. Du
et al. (2020); Tripuraneni et al. (2020) show generalization
bounds on the
in which the excess risk
 learned predictor

C(G)
C(F )
scales as Õ N T + N ′ , where C quantifies the complexity of a function class. These rates capture the desirable
behavior where the error from fitting the shared representation decays with the total amount of data aggregated across
the T source tasks.

1. Introduction
Transfer learning, in which a model is pre-trained on a large
dataset, and then finetuned for a specific application, has
shown great success in various fields of machine learning
including computer vision (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021) and

While a rather complete picture can be stitched for linear
settings, for such rates to hold in settings where the representation class G is nonlinear, prior work crucially relies upon
the assumption that covariates are independent and identically distributed (iid) across all tasks, such that the only
(t)
source of variation comes from the task-specific f⋆ . Such
assumptions are fundamentally incompatible with many potential use cases of multi-task representation learning, such
as in domain generalization and sequential decision-making.

1

Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering, University
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA. Correspondence to: Thomas
Zhang <ttz2@seas.upenn.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

