Bayesian Uncertainty for Gradient Aggregation in Multi-Task Learning

Idan Achituve 1 2 Idit Diamant 2 Arnon Netzer 2 Gal Chechik 3 Ethan Fetaya 1

Abstract

task (Caruana, 1997). Besides reducing the computational
demand at test time, MTL also has the potential to improve
generalization (Baxter, 2000). It is therefore not surprising
that applications of MTL are taking central roles in various
domains, such as vision (Achituve et al., 2021a; Shamshad
et al., 2023; Zheng et al., 2023), natural language processing
(Liu et al., 2019b; Zhou et al., 2023), speech (Michelsanti
et al., 2021), robotics (Devin et al., 2017; Shu et al., 2018),
and general scientific problems (Wu et al., 2018) to name a
few.

As machine learning becomes more prominent
there is a growing demand to perform several
inference tasks in parallel. Multi-task learning
(MTL) addresses this challenge by learning a single model that solves several tasks simultaneously
and efficiently. Often optimizing MTL models
entails first computing the gradient of the loss for
each task, and then aggregating all the gradients
to obtain a combined update direction. However,
common methods following this approach do not
consider an important aspect, the sensitivity in the
dimensions of the gradients. Some dimensions
may be more lenient for changes while others may
be more restrictive. Here, we introduce a novel
gradient aggregation procedure using Bayesian inference. We place a probability distribution over
the task-specific parameters, which in turn induce
a distribution over the gradients of the tasks. This
valuable information allows us to quantify the
uncertainty associated with each of the gradients’
dimensions which is factored in when aggregating
them. We empirically demonstrate the benefits of
our approach in a variety of datasets, achieving
state-of-the-art performance.

However, optimizing multiple tasks simultaneously is a
challenging problem that may lead to degradation in performance compared to learning them individually (Standley
et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2020). To address this issue, one basic
formula that many MTL optimization algorithms follow is
to first calculate the gradient of each task’s loss, and then aggregate these gradients according to some specified scheme.
For example, several studies focus on reducing conflicts between the gradients before averaging them (Yu et al., 2020;
Wang et al., 2020), others find a convex combination with
minimal norm (Sener & Koltun, 2018; Désidéri, 2012), and
some use a game theoretical approach (Navon et al., 2022).
However, by relying only on the gradient these methods
miss an important aspect, the sensitivity of the gradient in
each dimension.
Our approach builds on the following observation - for each
task, there may be many “good” parameter configurations.
Standard MTL optimization methods take only a single
value into account, and as such lose information in the aggregation step. Hence, tracking all of the parameter configurations will yield a richer description of the gradient space
that can be advantageous when finding an update direction.
Specifically, to account for all parameter values, we propose
to place a probability distribution over the task-specific parameters, which in turn induces a probability distribution
over the gradients. As a result, we obtain uncertainty estimates for the gradients that reflect the sensitivity in each of
their dimensions. High-uncertainty dimensions are more lenient for changes while dimensions with a lower uncertainty
are more strict (see illustration in Figure 2).

1. Introduction
In many application domains, there is a need to perform
several machine learning inference tasks simultaneously.
For instance, an autonomous vehicle needs to identify and
detect objects in its vicinity, perform lane detection, track
the movements of other vehicles over time, and predict free
space around it, all in parallel and in real-time. In deep
Multi-Task Learning (MTL) the goal is to train a single
neural network (NN) to solve several tasks simultaneously,
thus avoiding the need to have one dedicated model for each
1
Faculty of Engineering, Bar-Ilan University, Israel 2 Sony
Semiconductor Israel 3 Department of Computer Science, BarIlan University, Israel. Correspondence to: Idan Achituve
<Idan.Achituve@Sony.com>.

To obtain a probability distribution over the task-specific
parameters we take a Bayesian approach. According to the
Bayesian view, a posterior distribution over parameters of

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

