Prometheus: Out-of-distribution Fluid Dynamics Modeling with
Disentangled Graph ODE

Hao Wu 1 2 Huiyuan Wang 3 4 Kun Wang 2 Weiyan Wang 1 Changan Ye 1 Yangyu Tao 1
Chong Chen 5 Xian-Sheng Hua 5 Xiao Luo 6

1. Introduction

Abstract
Fluid dynamics modeling has received extensive
attention in the machine learning community. Although numerous graph neural network (GNN)
approaches have been proposed for this problem,
the problem of out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization remains underexplored. In this work,
we propose a new large-scale dataset Prometheus
which simulates tunnel and pool fires across various environmental conditions and builds an extensive benchmark of 13 baselines, which demonstrates that the OOD generalization performance
is far from satisfactory. To tackle this, this paper
introduces a new approach named Disentangled
Graph ODE (DGODE), which learns disentangled representations for continuous interacting
dynamics modeling. In particular, we utilize a
temporal GNN and a frequency network to extract
semantics from historical trajectories into node
representations and environment representations
respectively. To mitigate the potential distribution shift, we minimize the mutual information
between invariant node representations and the
discretized environment features using adversarial
learning. Then, they are fed into an environmentaware graph ODE framework, which models the
evolution using neighboring nodes and dynamical
environmental context. In addition, we enhance
the stability of the framework by perturbing the
environment features to enhance robustness. Experiments validate the effectiveness of DGODE
compared with state-of-the-art approaches.

Computational fluid dynamics modeling (Kochkov et al.,
2021; Obiols-Sales et al., 2020; Steeven et al., 2024; Li et al.,
2021; Wu et al., 2023c; Wu et al.) is an important problem
in fluid mechanics, which can facilitate our understanding
of fluid flows (Li et al., 2023a; Yu et al., 2024). Recently, a
range of machine learning approaches have been developed
to solve this problem (Pfaff et al., 2021; Li et al., 2023b;
Shao et al., 2022; Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2020; Han et al.,
2022a; Deng & Hooi, 2021). They usually construct geometric graphs to model the relationships between neighborhood
observation points and then adopt graph neural networks
(GNNs) to model fluid dynamics, which follow the message passing mechanism (Kipf & Welling, 2017; Veličković
et al., 2018) by aggregating neighborhood information of
each node for interactive updating.
Although these approaches have achieved some progress
in fluid dynamics modeling (Yu et al., 2023; Huang et al.,
2023a; Luo et al., 2024), they usually assume that training and test data come from the same distribution (Pfaff
et al., 2021; Shao et al., 2022; Sanchez-Gonzalez et al.,
2020; Lippe et al., 2023), which is not practical in the realworld analysis since fluid mechanisms always face different
environments resulting from system parameters such as
temperature, viscosity and pressure (Baradel et al., 2019;
Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2020; Huang et al., 2023b). Existing machine learning algorithms would suffer from inferior
out-of-distribution (OOD) performance (Hendrycks et al.,
2021). Therefore, in this work, we study the problem of
OOD fluid dynamics modeling, which aims to learn datadriven models generalized well on systems with different
parameters. However, there are limited large-scale fluid
dynamics datasets and benchmarks for this practical and
emerging problem, which could hinder from algorithm research and development.

1

Machine Learning Platform Department, Tencent 2 University
of Science and Technology of China 3 The Center for Health AI
and Synthesis of Evidence (CHASE), University of Pennsylvania
4
Department of Biostatistics, Epidemiology, and Informatics, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine 5 Terminus
Group 6 University of California, Los Angeles. Correspondence to:
Xiao Luo <xiaoluo@cs.ucla.edu>.

In this work, we first build a large-scale OOD fluid dynamics dataset Prometheus using extensive fire simulations. In
particular, both tunnel and pool fires are modeled using
fire dynamics simulators, which solve Navier-Stokes equations in fire scenarios. More importantly, our simulators
consider 25 different environments with varying parame-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

