MADA: Meta-Adaptive Optimizers Through Hyper-Gradient Descent

Kaan Ozkara 1 Can Karakus 2 Parameswaran Raman 2 Mingyi Hong 2 3 Shoham Sabach 4 Branislav Kveton 2
Volkan Cevher 2 5

1. Introduction

Abstract

The choice of an optimization algorithm plays a critical
role in determining the downstream performance of a machine learning model. Adaptive moment optimizers are
the most preferred class of optimizers employed in most
learning tasks such as training Large Language Models
(LLMs) (Brown et al., 2020; Touvron et al., 2023) and Diffusion Models (Rombach et al., 2022). In particular, Adam
(Kingma and Ba, 2015) is still the “go-to” optimizer in LLM
training, despite the emergence of many other optimizers
since then.

Following the introduction of Adam, several novel
adaptive optimizers for deep learning have been
proposed. These optimizers typically excel in
some tasks but may not outperform Adam uniformly across all tasks. In this work, we introduce Meta-Adaptive Optimizers (MADA), a unified optimizer framework that can generalize several known optimizers and dynamically learn the
most suitable one during training. The key idea in
MADA is to parameterize the space of optimizers
and dynamically search through it using hypergradient descent during training. We empirically
compare MADA to other popular optimizers on
vision and language tasks, and find that MADA
consistently outperforms Adam and other popular
optimizers, and is robust against sub-optimally
tuned hyper-parameters. MADA achieves a greater
validation performance improvement over Adam
compared to other popular optimizers during GPT2 training and fine-tuning. We also propose AVGrad, a modification of AMSGrad that replaces
the maximum operator with averaging, which is
more suitable for hyper-gradient optimization. Finally, we provide a convergence analysis to show
that parameterized interpolations of optimizers
can improve their error bounds (up to constants),
hinting at an advantage for meta-optimizers.

Recently proposed optimizers (Chen et al., 2023; Xie et al.,
2023; Liu et al., 2023; You et al., 2020; Foret et al., 2021)
report improved performance compared to Adam in specific
tasks. However, it is unclear if their strong performance
generalizes across a wide range of tasks as Adam’s does
(Schmidt et al., 2021). It is also unclear if a single optimizer
can be uniformly the best across all learning tasks and training regimes, such as different batch sizes, hyper-parameters,
and datasets.
In this work, we introduce the concept of a parameterized
optimizer, which can be viewed as a unified parameterization of a collection of given optimizers. The parameters
of a parameterized optimizer define a convex polytope (e.g.
hypercube), whose vertices may correspond to individual
base optimizers, while the interior represents new optimizers formed by interpolating between them. To make this
concept operational, we propose the meta-adaptive optimizer (MADA), which combines the parameterized optimizer
with hyper-gradient descent (Baydin et al., 2018) to learn
the optimizer coefficients. MADA dynamically adjusts the
parameterized optimizer coefficients during training, and
effectively adapts the optimizer choice to the learning task.
While MADA bears some connections to optimizer search
methods, such as (Chen et al., 2023), it does not solely
output a final optimizer state. It dynamically adapts the
optimizer to the current neighborhood of the loss landscape
on-the-fly, removing the need for an offline optimizer search
stage, or an outer hyper-parameter selection loop.

1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California Los Angeles, USA 2 Amazon Web Services
3
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University
of Minnesota, USA 4 Faculty of Data and Decision Sciences, Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, Israel 5 LIONS, IEM, STI,
Ecole Polytechnique F´ed´erale de Lausanne, Switzerland. SS,
MH, and VC hold concurrent appointments as an Amazon Scholar
and as a faculty at Technion, University of Minnesota, and EPFL,
respectively. This paper describes their work performed at Amazon.
Correspondence to: Can Karakus <cakarak@amazon.com>.

Contributions. We make the following contributions:

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

• We introduce the concept of a parameterized optimizer,
1

