Diffusion-based Missing-view Generation With the Application on Incomplete
Multi-view Clustering

Jie Wen 1 Shijie Deng 1 Waikeung Wong* 2 3 Guoqing Chao 4 Chao Huang 5 Lunke Fei 6 Yong Xu 1

Abstract

machine learning and data mining (Wang et al., 2022; Wen
et al., 2023a; Zhou et al., 2023; Ren et al., 2021). For example, for face recognition, researchers designed more robust
recognition systems based on multi-modal face images collected by different sensors, such as the visual camera and
infrared camera (Kortli et al., 2020). For social media analysis, it has been proved that combining text, images, and
user behavior data enables the model to understand user
interactions and social trends better (Chandrasekaran et al.,
2021). Audiovisual and time information are considered for
acoustic event classification (Liu et al., 2023b). Similarly,
multi-view data often yields better results in clustering tasks
(Wang et al., 2023; Kang et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2020; Zhou
et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2023a; Ren et al., 2020).

As a branch of clustering, multi-view clustering
has received much attention in recent years. In
practical applications, a common phenomenon is
that partial views of some samples may be missing
in the collected multi-view data, which poses a
severe challenge to design the multi-view learning
model and explore complementary and consistent
information. Currently, most of the incomplete
multi-view clustering methods only focus on exploring the information of available views while
few works study the missing view recovery for
incomplete multi-view learning. To this end, we
propose an innovative diffusion-based missing
view generation (DMVG) network. Moreover, for
the scenarios with high missing rates, we further
propose an incomplete multi-view data augmentation strategy to enhance the recovery quality
for the missing views. Extensive experimental
results show that the proposed DMVG can not
only accurately predict missing views, but also
further enhance the subsequent clustering performance in comparison with several state-of-the-art
incomplete multi-view clustering methods.

Clustering is a classic problem in unsupervised learning (Liu
et al., 2023c). Past research works on multi-view clustering
generally focus on exploring the complementary and consistent information of multi-view data based on the assumption
that all views of data points are fully collected (Du et al.,
2023; Ren & Sun, 2020; Yang et al., 2023; Zhou & Du,
2023; Liang et al., 2020). These methods commonly ignore
the scenarios with missing views and thus cannot be applied
to incomplete multi-view clustering tasks. Considering the
universality of missing views in practical applications (Wen
et al., 2023b), we study incomplete multi-view clustering
(IMVC) in this paper. For IMVC, researchers have also designed various methods (Zhang et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2021;
Li et al., 2022b; Zhang et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2021). Generally speaking, with the increase of missing view rates or
the decrease of paired view rates, the clustering performance
of nearly all IMVC methods declines, some even drastically.
Based on the idea that recovering missing views and then
conducting clustering could potentially enhance the clustering performance and reduce the sensitivity to missing view
rates, researchers proposed some generative IMVC methods, such as AIMC (Xu et al., 2021), GP-MVC (Wang et al.,
2021), COMPLETER (Lin et al., 2021), and DCP (Lin et al.,
2023). However, these methods integrate missing view recovery and clustering into a single framework, which may
result in more uncertainty and even very poor performance
on both tasks. A better approach is to decompose incomplete multi-view learning into two independent sub-tasks:
missing view generation and multi-view learning (MVL).

1. Introduction
In recent years, multi-view data, representing the same object from different views, has played an important role in
1

Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Visual Object Detection and
Recognition, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
2
School of Fashion and Textiles, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong 3 Laboratory for Artificial Intelligence in Design, Hong Kong 4 School of Computer Science
and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Weihai, China
5
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Shenzhen Campus
of Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, China 6 School of Computer Science and Technology, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Waikeung Wong
<calvin.wong@polyu.edu.hk>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

