Domain-wise Data Acquisition to Improve Performance under
Distribution Shift
Yue He * 1 Dongbai Li * 1 Pengfei Tian 2 Han Yu 1 Jiashuo Liu 1 Hao Zou 3 Peng Cui 1

Abstract

paradigms often assume that training data and test data are
drawn from the same distribution. However, this hypothesis starkly contrasts with the real-world scenarios where
data exhibits significant heterogeneity, leading to changed
distributions across different domains. In addressing the
challenges of deploying machine learning models in real applications, there is an increasing focus (Koh et al., 2021; Arjovsky et al., 2019; Ben-David et al., 2010; Shen et al., 2021)
on enhancing the model performance when confronted with
the distribution shift.

Despite notable progress in enhancing the capability of machine learning against distribution
shifts, training data quality remains a bottleneck
for cross-distribution generalization. Recently,
from a data-centric perspective, there have been
considerable efforts to improve model performance through refining the preparation of training data. Inspired by realistic scenarios, this
paper addresses a practical requirement of acquiring training samples from various domains
on a limited budget to facilitate model generalization to target test domain with distribution
shift. Our empirical evidence indicates that the
advance in data acquisition can significantly benefit the model performance on shifted data. Additionally, by leveraging unlabeled test domain
data, we introduce a Domain-wise Active Acquisition framework. This framework iteratively optimizes the data acquisition strategy as training
samples are accumulated, theoretically ensuring
the effective approximation of test distribution.
Extensive real-world experiments demonstrate
our proposal’s advantages in machine learning
applications. The code is available at https:
//github.com/dongbaili/DAA.

In order to facilitate model generalization to target test
domain, domain adaptation methods propose to align the
source and target domains in terms of population distribution (Li & Zhang, 2019), data representation (Hoffman et al.,
2017), and model parameters (Motiian et al., 2017), respectively. In the scenarios where only unlabeled data from
the test domain is available, the solutions of unsupervised
domain adaptation include mitigating distribution discrepancies by sample reweighting (Zhang et al., 2018), generating
pseudo labels via self-supervised learning (French et al.,
2018). However, these methods suppose the training samples are predetermined, thereby their model performance
closely depends on the training data quality.
Recently, data-centric machine learning has been receiving
increasing attention. By refining the data preparation process (Chen et al., 2023; Mazumder et al., 2024; Schmarje
et al., 2022), they have successfully employed more effective
training samples to breakthrough the bottlenecks in model
performance. To address the distribution shift in test domain,
Fu et al. (2021); Xie et al. (2022) propose to select and label the most representative samples from the unlabeled test
data, enabling efficient access to test domain information.
However, in many real-world applications, sample labels
cannot be provided by a third party. For instance, manually determining if an individual has public health insurance
based on profile features is difficult without self-disclosure.

1. Introduction
In the past years, the field of machine learning has witnessed unprecedented growth. Traditional machine learning
*

1
Equal contribution
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing,
China 2 Qiuzhen College, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 3 Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China.
Emails:
hy865865@gmail.com, lidongbai30@gmail.com,
e9tian@gmail.com,
yuh21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
liujiashuo77@gmail.com,
zouh@zgclab.edu.cn,
cuip@tsinghua.edu.cn.
Correspondence to:
Peng Cui
<cuip@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

In this paper, we consider a new problem setting for learning
under distribution shift from a data-centric perspective. It is
noteworthy that in many applications, not only the annotations but also the unlabeled data point are difficult to obtain.
Therefore, it is limited that we can at most acquire T pairs
of both training data and corresponding label as the budget.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

