HyperFields: Towards Zero-Shot Generation of NeRFs from Text

Sudarshan Babu * 1 Richard Liu * 2 Avery Zhou * 1 2 Michael Maire 2 Greg Shakhnarovich 1 Rana Hanocka 2

Figure 1. HyperFields is a hypernetwork that learns to map text to the space of weights of Neural Radiance Fields (first column). After
training, HyperFields is capable of generating in-distribution scenes - unseen during training - in a feed forward manner (second column),
and for out-of-distribution prompts HyperFields can be fine-tuned to yield scenes respecting prompt semantics with just a few gradient
steps (third column).

.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in text-to-image synthesis methods,
highlighted by the works of Ramesh et al. (2021); Yu et al.
(2022), have ignited similar interest in the field of text-to3D synthesis. This interest has grown in tandem with the
emergence of Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) (Mildenhall
et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2021b; Jain et al., 2021), which is a
popular 3D representation for this task, due to their ability
to robustly depict complex 3D scenes.

We introduce HyperFields, a method for generating text-conditioned Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRFs) with a single forward pass and (optionally) some fine-tuning. Key to our approach
are: (i) a dynamic hypernetwork, which learns
a smooth mapping from text token embeddings to
the space of NeRFs; (ii) NeRF distillation training, which distills scenes encoded in individual
NeRFs into one dynamic hypernetwork. These
techniques enable a single network to fit over a
hundred unique scenes. We further demonstrate
that HyperFields learns a more general map between text and NeRFs, and consequently is capable of predicting novel in-distribution and outof-distribution scenes — either zero-shot or with
a few finetuning steps. Finetuning HyperFields
benefits from accelerated convergence thanks to
the learned general map, and is capable of synthesizing novel scenes 5 to 10 times faster than
existing neural optimization-based methods. Our
ablation experiments show that both the dynamic
architecture and NeRF distillation are critical to
the expressivity of HyperFields.

To date, most text-conditioned 3D synthesis methods rely
on either text-image latent similarity matching or diffusion
denoising, both of which involve computationally intensive
per-prompt NeRF optimization (Jain et al., 2022; Poole et al.,
2022; Lin et al., 2022). Bypassing the need for per-prompt
optimization remains a non-trivial challenge.
We propose to solve this problem through a hypernetworkbased neural pipeline, in which a single hypernetwork (Ha
et al., 2016b) is trained to generate the weights of individual NeRF networks, each corresponding to a unique scene.
Once trained, this hypernetwork is capable of efficiently
producing the weights of NeRFs corresponding to novel
prompts, either through a single forward pass or with minimal fine-tuning. Sharing the hypernetwork across multiple training scenes enables effective transfer of knowledge
to new scenes, leading to better generalization and faster
convergence. However, we find that a naive hypernetwork
design is hard to train.

*

Equal contribution 1 Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
University of Chicago. Correspondence to: Sudarshan Babu
<sudarshan@ttic.edu>.
2

Our method, HyperFields, overcomes these challenges
through several design choices. We propose predicting the
weights of each layer of the NeRF network in a progres-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

