SFC: Achieve Accurate Fast Convolution under Low-precision Arithmetic

Liulu He 1 Yufei Zhao 1 Rui Gao 1 Yuan Du 1 2 Li Du 1 2

Abstract

improving model deployment efficiency. Fast Convolution
Algorithms and Quantization are two distinct approaches to
mitigate the computational burden. Fast convolution algorithms can reduce the arithmetic complexity by multiplying
inputs and kernel weights in the transformation domain.
A 3×3 convolution performed with Winograd F(2×2, 3×3)
1
algorithm consumes just 2.25
multiplications compared to
direct computing. Whereas, model quantization reduces
the cost of a single arithmetic operation and data transmission by converting high-precision floating numbers to
low-precision integers. An int8 multiply-and-accumulate
1
operation consumes only 16
of the energy compared to a
fp32 operation.

Fast convolution algorithms, including Winograd
and FFT, can efficiently accelerate convolution
operations in deep models. However, these algorithms depend on high-precision arithmetic to
maintain inference accuracy, which conflicts with
the model quantization. To resolve this conflict
and further improve the efficiency of quantized
convolution, we proposes SFC, a new algebra
transform for fast convolution by extending the
Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT) with symbolic
computing, in which only additions are required
to perform the transformation at specific transform points, avoiding the calculation of irrational
number and reducing the requirement for precision. Additionally, we enhance convolution efficiency by introducing correction terms to convert
invalid circular convolution outputs of the Fourier
method into effective ones. The numerical error analysis is presented for the first time in this
type of work and proves that our algorithms can
provide a 3.68× multiplication reduction for 3×3
convolution, while the Winograd algorithm only
achieves a 2.25× reduction with similarly low numerical errors. Experiments carried out on benchmarks and FPGA show that our new algorithms
can further improve the computation efficiency of
quantized models while maintaining accuracy, surpassing both the quantization-alone method and
existing works on fast convolution quantization.

However, when attempting to combine existing fast convolution algorithms and model quantization to further improve computational efficiency, the model accuracy could
be severely degraded. This is due to the significant increase
in numerical error when the two methods are used together.
For example, Winograd, a well-known fast convolution algorithm for small filter sizes (Lavin & Gray, 2016), has
ill-conditioned transformation matrices (with high condition numbers), necessitating the use of high-precision arithmetic to avoid numerical issues (Barabasz et al., 2020).
Another renowned fast algorithm for convolution is the
Fast Fourier transform (FFT). While its transformation is
well-conditioned, its irrational coefficients can introduce
significant rounding errors, particularly under low-precision
representation. Number Theoretic Transform (NTT) can
achieve precise computation for integer convolution, but
it involves module operations and the transformations for
inputs and filters would extend the bit-width to be equivalent
to that of the outputs.

1. Introduction

At present, two research approaches have been developed
to tackle the aforementioned problem. One approach involves customizing the quantization method specifically
optimized for fast convolution algorithms (Li et al., 2021;
Chikin & Kryzhanovskiy, 2022; Andri et al., 2022; Tianqi
et al., 2023). However, this approach struggles to maintain satisfactory accuracy under int8 quantization for faster
algorithms such as Winograd F(4×4, 3×3). The other approach is to explore new fast algorithms that are better fit for
quantization (Liu & Mattina, 2020; Alam et al., 2022). Nevertheless, these emerging algorithms encounter challenges
in achieving low arithmetic complexity. These facts show

Convolution operations are a crucial component of many
deep learning models. Due to their intensive computation
requirements, optimizing convolution calculations is key to
1

School of Electronic Science and Engineering, Nanjing
University, Nanjing 210023, China 2 Interdisciplinary Research
Center for Future Intelligent Chips (Chip-X), Nanjing University, Suzhou 215163, China. Correspondence to: Yuan Du
<yuandu@nju.edu.cn>, Li Du <ldu@nju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

