On the Tractability of SHAP Explanations under Markovian Distributions

Reda Marzouk 1 Colin de la Higuera 1

Abstract

exactly the SHAP score for tree-based models. However,
subsequent research (den Broeck et al., 2021; Arenas et al.,
2023) has identified flaws in the main claim of TreeSHAP.
Indeed, other works have demonstrated that the TreeSHAP
algorithm is an implementation of interventional SHAP,
another variant of the SHAP score (Janzing et al., 2020).
A more rigorous proof for the tractability of the original
SHAP score for various families of boolean functions has
been provided in (den Broeck et al., 2021) when features are
assumed to be independent. (Arenas et al., 2023) extended
these positive results to cover the family of Decomposable
Deterministic circuits which includes the family of decision
trees among other classes of boolean circuits.

Thanks to its solid theoretical foundation, the
SHAP framework is arguably one the most widely
utilized frameworks for local explainability of ML
models. Despite its popularity, its exact computation is known to be very challenging, proven
to be NP-Hard in various configurations. Recent
works have unveiled positive complexity results
regarding the computation of the SHAP score for
specific model families, encompassing decision
trees, random forests, and some classes of boolean
circuits. Yet, all these positive results hinge on
the assumption of feature independence, often
simplistic in real-world scenarios. In this article,
we investigate the computational complexity of
the SHAP score by relaxing this assumption and
introducing a Markovian perspective. We show
that, under the Markovian assumption, computing
the SHAP score for the class of Weighted automata, Disjoint DNFs and Decision Trees can be
performed in polynomial time, offering a first positive complexity result for the problem of SHAP
score computation that transcends the limitations
of the feature independence assumption.

All the tractability results reported in the literature are, however, derived under the feature independence assumption.
Although practical for its simplicity, this assumption is often irrealistic in real-case scenarios. A slight relaxation of
this assumption has been examined in (den Broeck et al.,
2021) through the lens of complexity theory by considering
the family of naı̈ve bayes models and empirical distributions. Computing the SHAP score for the family of decision
trees under this relaxed assumption has been proven to be
#P-Hard in both these settings.
Between independent distributions and latent variable models, an intermediate class of distributions that hasn’t been
explored yet is the class of Markovian distributions. Markovian distributions constitute an interesting class of distributions that incorporate a degree of feature correlation often
considered sufficient to model various stochastic phenomena
(Bassler et al., 2006; Kampen, 2007; Goutsias & Jenkinson,
2013).

1. Introduction
Since its introduction in the seminal paper (Lundberg
& Lee, 2017), the local explanatory (SHapley Additive
exPlanations) SHAP method gained increasing popularity
in the field of interpretable ML. Nevertheless, one of its
main limitations pertains to its computational intractabilty:
In general, computing the SHAP score is NP-Hard (Bertossi
et al., 2020; den Broeck et al., 2021). Recent studies have
shown positive results regarding the tractability of computing the SHAP score under specific configurations. In particular, (Lundberg et al., 2020) proposed a polynomial-time
algorithm, known as TreeSHAP, that purported to compute

Previous works examining the complexity of computing
the SHAP score were mostly directed towards families of
boolean functions. In this article, we shift our focus to
sequential models, in particular the family of weighted automata (WAs). WAs offer a powerful formalism for modeling sequential tasks and encompass a large family of
classical models, including Deterministic and Non deterministic finite automata, Hidden Markov Models, and has
been shown to be equivalent to second-order linear RNNs
(Rabusseau et al., 2019). They have been employed in
various applications, such as NLP (Knight & May, 2009),
speech processing (Pereira & Riley, 1996; Mohri et al.,

1
LS2N, Université de Nantes, France. Correspondence to: Reda
Marzouk <mohamed-reda.marzouk@univ-nantes.fr>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

