NExT-Chat: An LMM for Chat, Detection and Segmentation

Ao Zhang 1 Yuan Yao 1 Wei Ji 1 Zhiyuan Liu 2 Tat-Seng Chua 1

Abstract
text

The development of large language models
(LLMs) has greatly advanced the field of multimodal understanding, leading to the emergence
of large multimodal models (LMMs). In order
to enhance visual comprehension, recent studies have equipped LMMs with region-level understanding capabilities by representing object
bounding box coordinates as a series of text sequences (pix2seq). In this paper, we introduce
a novel paradigm for object location modeling
called the pix2emb method, where we ask the
LMM to output the location embeddings and
then decode them with different decoders. This
paradigm allows us to use different location formats (such as bounding boxes and masks) in multimodal conversations. Leveraging the proposed
pix2emb method, we train an LMM named NExTChat and demonstrate its capability of handling
multiple tasks like visual grounding, region captioning, and grounded reasoning. Comprehensive experiments show the effectiveness of our
NExT-Chat on various tasks, e.g., NExT-Chat
(87.7) vs. Shikra (86.9) on POPE-Random, NExTChat (71.3) vs. LISA (67.9) on referring expression segmentation task, and NExT-Chat (79.6) vs.
Kosmos-2 (62.3) on region caption task.

Word Emb

box

LLM

Word Emb

box

(a) pix2seq

Word Emb

text

Word Emb

text

text

LLM

Box Dec
box

box

Box Enc

Mask Dec

(b) pix2emb

mask

Figure 1. (a) pix2seq is the pixel-to-sequence paradigm, which
converts bounding boxes into text. (b) pix2emb is the pixel-toembedding paradigm proposed in this paper, which tries to unify
all different location formats with embeddings.

without the ability to conduct region-level reasoning, for
example, locating the referred objects in the conversation.
Aiming at region-level understanding, some initial works
have focused solely on incorporating location data as inputs (Zhang et al., 2023b; Chen et al., 2023a) or outputs (Lai
et al., 2023) in LMMs. Nevertheless, these approaches fall
short of integrating both location input and output processing within a unified LMM framework. The primary solution (Peng et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a; Chen et al.,
2023b) for unifying both the location input and output is
the pix2seq paradigm (Fig. 1 (a)), where the object coordinates are converted to LLM understandable text tokens
(e.g., [x1 , y1 , x2 , y2 ]). Consequently, LMMs can generate
object coordinates as part of their standard next token prediction process. However, the pix2seq paradigm is limited
to discrete coordinate outputs and struggles to provide pixellevel outputs (i.e., segmentation masks), which significantly
hinders real-world applications.

1. Introduction
Recently, large language models (LLMs) have shown
spreading influence in different areas, among which large
multimodal models (LMMs) is one of the most attractive
area. Researchers try to equip LLMs with visual perception
modules resulting in LMMs (Huang et al., 2023; Zhu et al.,
2023; Zhang et al., 2023a; Li et al., 2023c) that can describe
the visual content and answer visual questions. However,
these LMMs are limited to holistic image understanding
1

National University of Singapore 2 Tsinghua University. Correspondence to: Ao Zhang <aozhang@u.nus.edu>, Yuan Yao
<yaoyuanthu@gmail.com>.

To address the limitations, we propose the pix2emb
paradigm (Fig. 1), which can accept both locations as inputs and outputs, and accommodate different location formats. The key idea is to model all location information
as embeddings, which can be generated from and decoded
into different location formats with corresponding encoders

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

