Towards Causal Foundation Model:
on Duality between Optimal Balancing and Attention

Jiaqi Zhang * 1 Joel Jennings 2 3 Agrin Hilmkil 4 Nick Pawlowski 4 Cheng Zhang 3 Chao Ma * 4

Abstract

tion models (Bommasani et al., 2021). These models, which
often employ self-supervision, can extract valuable knowledge from various types of data, including natural language
(Devlin et al., 2018; Brown et al., 2020), images (Radford
et al., 2021), and biological sequencing counts (Theodoris
et al., 2023). This acquired knowledge allows the model to
generalize when asked to perform tasks in novel scenarios.
With vast amounts of data becoming increasingly available
from diverse sources, such models are of interest to leverage information that can be learned in order to build more
intelligent systems (Bubeck et al., 2023).

Foundation models have brought changes to the
landscape of machine learning, demonstrating
sparks of human-level intelligence across a diverse array of tasks. However, a gap persists in
complex tasks such as causal inference, primarily
due to challenges associated with intricate reasoning steps and high numerical precision requirements. In this work, we take a first step towards
building causally-aware foundation models for
treatment effect estimations. We propose a novel,
theoretically justified method called Causal Inference with Attention (CInA), which utilizes multiple unlabeled datasets to perform self-supervised
causal learning, and subsequently enables zeroshot causal inference on unseen tasks with new
data. This is based on our theoretical results that
demonstrate the primal-dual connection between
optimal covariate balancing and self-attention, facilitating zero-shot causal inference through the
final layer of a trained transformer-type architecture. We demonstrate empirically that CInA effectively generalizes to out-of-distribution datasets
and various real-world datasets, matching or even
surpassing traditional per-dataset methodologies.
These results provide compelling evidence that
our method has the potential to serve as a stepping
stone for the development of causal foundation
models.

A critical aspect of intelligent systems is the ability to
reason about cause-and-effect relationships, which is vital to making informed decisions across various domains,
including healthcare, economics, and statistics (Harrison &
March, 1984; Kube et al., 2019; Geffner et al., 2022; Zhang
et al., 2023c). There have been significant debates regarding whether current foundation models acquire the ability
to reason about causality (Kıcıman et al., 2023; Zečević
et al., 2023). However, it was observed that existing foundation models have difficulties with causal tasks that involve
intricate reasoning or high numerical precision (Bubeck
et al., 2023; Mahowald et al., 2023; Wolfram, 2023; Zečević
et al., 2023; Jin et al., 2023), such as treatment effect estimations. Furthermore, performance may decline when tested
on datasets that were not part of the training set (Feder
et al., 2022). Motivated by this shortcoming, it is crucial to
build causally-aware foundation models (see Appendix A
for a definition) capable of extracting causal information
and performing causal inference at scale, harnessing the vast
amounts of data available from diverse sources.

1. Introduction

However, creating a suitable self-supervised learning
paradigm for causal foundation models with theoretical
guarantees remains an open question. Unlike existing foundational models for natural language and vision (e.g., Devlin
et al. (2018); Radford et al. (2021)), causal foundation models generally lack clearly defined supervised signals since
most available machine learning datasets only contain observational data without intervention, rendering key causal
quantities, such as treatment effects, unknown. On top of
this, common datasets used in the causality community contain complex relationships between variables that might be

Recent advances in artificial intelligence have created a
paradigm shift in which models are trained on large amounts
of data and can be adapted to different tasks, dubbed founda*
Equal contribution 1 Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2 Google DeepMind 3 Work done while at Microsoft
4
Microsoft Research Cambridge. Correspondence to: Jiaqi Zhang
<viczhang@mit.edu>, Chao Ma <chaoma@microsoft.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

