A Geometric Decomposition of Finite Games:
Convergence vs. Recurrence under Exponential Weights

Davide Legacci 1 Panayotis Mertikopoulos 1 Bary Pradelski 2

Abstract

ally learn to emulate rational behavior through repeated
interactions. Put differently, whether a game-theoretic learning process converges to a rational outcome, what type of
outcome this could be, under which mode of convergence,
in which games, etc. This question has long been one of
the mainstays of non-cooperative game theory, and it has
recently received increased attention owing to a surge of
breakthrough applications in machine learning and AI, from
generative adversarial networks (GANs), to multi-agent reinforcement learning and online ad auctions.

In view of the complexity of the dynamics of
learning in games, we seek to decompose a game
into simpler components where the dynamics’
long-run behavior is well understood. A natural starting point for this is Helmholtz’s theorem,
which decomposes a vector field into a potential
and an incompressible component. However, the
geometry of game dynamics – and, in particular, the dynamics of exponential / multiplicative
weights (EW) schemes – is not compatible with
the Euclidean underpinnings of Helmholtz’s theorem. This leads us to consider a specific Riemannian framework based on the so-called Shahshahani metric, and introduce the class of incompressible games, for which we establish the following results: First, in addition to being volumepreserving, the continuous-time EW dynamics in
incompressible games admit a constant of motion
and are Poincaré recurrent – i.e., almost every trajectory of play comes arbitrarily close to its starting point infinitely often. Second, we establish a
deep connection with a well-known decomposition of games into a potential and harmonic component (where the players’ objectives are aligned
and anti-aligned respectively): a game is incompressible if and only if it is harmonic, implying
in turn that the EW dynamics lead to Poincaré
recurrence in harmonic games.

1

Depending on the precise context, this question may admit
a wide range of answers, from positive to negative. Starting
with the positive, a folk result states that if the players of a
finite game follow a no-regret learning process, the players’
empirical frequency of play converges in the long run to
the set of coarse correlated equilibria (CCE) – also known
as the game’s Hannan set [28]. This result has been pivotal for the development of the field because no-regret play
can be achieved through fairly simple myopic processes
like the exponential / multiplicative weights (EW) update
scheme [6, 7, 57, 83] and its many variants [71, 76, 79].
On the downside however (a) this convergence result does
not concern the actual strategies employed by the players
day-to-day; and (b) in many games, the notion of a CCE
can lead to outcomes that fail even the weakest axioms of
rationalizability. For example, as was shown by Viossat &
Zapechelnyuk [82], players may enjoy negative regret for
all time, but still play only strictly dominated strategies for
the entire horizon of play.
This takes us to the negative end of the spectrum. If we focus
on the evolution of the players’ strategies, a series of wellknown impossibility results by Hart & Mas-Colell [30, 31]
have established that there are no uncoupled learning dynamics – deterministic or stochastic, in either continuous or
discrete time – that converge to Nash equilibrium (NE) in
all games from any initial condition.1 In turn, this lends further weight to the question of determining in which games
a learning process converges to Nash equilibrium in the
day-to-day sense, and in which it does not.

Introduction

One of the driving open questions in game-theoretic learning
is whether – and under what conditions – players eventu1 Univ.

Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Inria, Grenoble INP, LIG,
38000 Grenoble, France 2 CNRS, Maison Française d’Oxford,
2–10 Norham Road, Oxford, OX2 6SE, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Davide Legacci <davide.legacci@univ-grenoblealpes.fr>.

1 The adjective “uncoupled” refers here to learning processes
where a player’s update rule does not explicitly depend on the
other players’ strategies.

Proceedings of the 41𝑠𝑡 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

