A Universal Class of Sharpness-Aware Minimization Algorithms

Behrooz Tahmasebi 1 Ashkan Soleymani 2 Dara Bahri 3 Stefanie Jegelka 4 1 Patrick Jaillet 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Understanding the generalization capabilities of overparameterized networks is a fundamental, yet unsolved challenge
in deep learning. It is postulated that achieving near-zero
training loss alone may be insufficient as there exist many
instances where global minima fail to exhibit satisfactory
generalization performance. To this end, a dominant observation asserts that the characteristics of the loss landscape
play a pivotal role in determining which parameters have
low training loss while also exhibiting generalization capabilities.

Recently, there has been a surge in interest in
developing optimization algorithms for overparameterized models as achieving generalization
is believed to require algorithms with suitable
biases. This interest centers on minimizing sharpness of the original loss function; the SharpnessAware Minimization (SAM) algorithm has proven
effective. However, most literature only considers a few sharpness measures, such as the maximum eigenvalue or trace of the training loss Hessian, which may not yield meaningful insights for
non-convex optimization scenarios like neural networks. Additionally, many sharpness measures
are sensitive to parameter invariances in neural
networks, magnifying significantly under rescaling parameters. Motivated by these challenges,
we introduce a new class of sharpness measures in
this paper, leading to new sharpness-aware objective functions. We prove that these measures are
universally expressive, allowing any function of
the training loss Hessian matrix to be represented
by appropriate hyperparameters. Furthermore,
we show that the proposed objective functions
explicitly bias towards minimizing their corresponding sharpness measures, and how they allow
meaningful applications to models with parameter
invariances (such as scale-invariances). Finally,
as instances of our proposed general framework,
we present Frob-SAM and Det-SAM, which are
specifically designed to minimize the Frobenius
norm and the determinant of the Hessian of the
training loss, respectively. We also demonstrate
the advantages of our general framework through
extensive experiments.

A recently proposed approach to consider the geometric aspects of the loss landscape, with the aim of achieving generalization, entails the avoidance of sharp minima. For example, the celebrated Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM)
algorithm has shown enhancements in generalization across
many practical tasks (Foret et al., 2021). While the concept
of sharpness lacks a precise definition in a general sense,
people often introduce various measures to quantify it in
practice (Dinh et al., 2017). Many sharpness measures in the
literature rely on the second-order derivative characteristics
of the training loss function, such as the trace or the operator
norm of the Hessian matrix (Chaudhari et al., 2019; Keskar
et al., 2017).
Nevertheless, traditional methodologies for quantifying
sharpness may not suffice to ensure generalization, given
the intricate geometry of the loss landscape, which may
necessitate different regularization techniques. Moreover,
many existing sharpness measures fail to encapsulate the
genuine essence of sharpness in deep neural networks because the Hessian matrix no longer maintains positive semidefiniteness. Furthermore, neural networks exhibit parameter invariances, wherein different parameterizations can
yield identical functions — such as scaling invariances in
ReLU networks. Consequently, an effective measure of
sharpness should remain invariant in the face of such parameter variations. Unfortunately, conventional approaches
for quantifying sharpness frequently fall short in addressing
this phenomenon.

1
MIT CSAIL 2 MIT LIDS 3 Google DeepMind 4 TU Munich.
Correspondence to: Behrooz Tahmasebi <bzt@mit.edu>.

Therefore, a fundamental question arises: how can one
succinctly represent all measures of sharpness within a compact parameterized framework that also enables meaningful
applications to models with parameter invariances? This

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

