Position: A Safe Harbor for AI Evaluation and Red Teaming

Shayne Longpre* 1 Sayash Kapoor** 2 Kevin Klyman** 3 Ashwin Ramaswami 4 Rishi Bommasani 3
Borhane Blili-Hamelin 5 Yangsibo Huang 2 Aviya Skowron 6 Zheng-Xin Yong 7 Suhas Kotha 8 Yi Zeng 9
Weiyan Shi 10 Xianjun Yang 11 Reid Southen Alexander Robey 12 Patrick Chao 12 Diyi Yang 3 Ruoxi Jia 9
Daniel Kang 13 Sandy Pentland 1 Arvind Narayanan 2 Percy Liang 3 Peter Henderson 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

Generative AI systems have been deployed rapidly in recent
years, amassing hundreds of millions of users. These systems have already raised concerns of widespread misuse,
bias (Deshpande et al., 2023), hate speech (Douglas Heaven,
2020), privacy (Carlini et al., 2021; 2023), disinformation
(Burtell & Woodside, 2023), self harm (Park et al., 2023),
copyright infringement (Henderson et al., 2023; Gil et al.,
2023), fraud (Stupp, 2019), weapons acquisition (Boiko
et al., 2023; Urbina et al., 2022), and the proliferation of nonconsensual and abusive images (Lakatos, 2023; Thiel et al.,
2023), among others (Kapoor et al., 2024). To ensure sufficient public scrutiny and accountability, such high-impact
systems should be evaluated (Liang et al., 2023; Solaiman
et al., 2023; Weidinger et al., 2023) by independent and
external entities (Raji et al., 2022; Birhane et al., 2024;
Toner & McCauley, 2024). However, (Bommasani et al.,
2023a) found that leading generative AI companies provide
limited transparency and access into their systems. In particular, they found that only 25% of policy enforcement
and evaluation criteria were satisfied on average, and no
company provided reproducible evaluations to characterize
the effectiveness of their risk mitigations.

Independent evaluation and red teaming are critical for identifying the risks posed by generative
AI systems. However, the terms of service and enforcement strategies used by prominent AI companies to deter model misuse have disincentives on
good faith safety evaluations. This causes some
researchers to fear that conducting such research
or releasing their findings will result in account
suspensions or legal reprisal. Although some companies offer researcher access programs, they are
an inadequate substitute for independent research
access, as they have limited community representation, receive inadequate funding, and lack
independence from corporate incentives. We propose that major generative AI developers commit
to providing a legal and technical safe harbor,
protecting public interest safety research and removing the threat of account suspensions or legal reprisal. These proposals emerged from our
collective experience conducting safety, privacy,
and trustworthiness research on generative AI systems, where norms and incentives could be better
aligned with public interests, without exacerbating model misuse. We believe these commitments
are a necessary step towards more inclusive and
unimpeded community efforts to tackle the risks
of generative AI.

Leading AI firms’ terms of service prohibit independent
evaluation into most sensitive model flaws (see Table 3).
While these terms act as a deterrent to malicious behavior,
they also restrict good faith research—auditors fear that
releasing findings or conducting research could result in
their accounts being suspended, ending their ability to do
such research, or even lawsuits for violating such terms. In
the process of conducting good faith research, researchers’
accounts have been suspended without warning, justification, or an opportunity to appeal (Marcus & Southen, 2024).
Some companies authorize selected research through researcher access programs, but their community representation remains limited and lacks independence from corporate
incentives such as favoritism towards researchers aligned
with the companies’ values. Taken together, these observations exacerbate concerns that generative AI companies
could suffer similar challenges to social media companies in

1
MIT 2 Princeton University 3 Stanford University 4 Georgetown
University 5 AI Risk and Vulnerability Alliance 6 Eleuther AI
7
Brown University 8 Carnegie Mellon University 9 Virginia Tech
10
Northeastern University 11 UCSB 12 University of Pennsylvania
13
UIUC. * Corresponding author. ** Equal contribution. Correspondence to: Shayne Longpre <slongpre@media.mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

