Finite Time Logarithmic Regret Bounds for Self-Tuning Regulation

Rahul Singh 1 Akshay Mete 2 Avik Kar 1 P. R. Kumar 2

Abstract

regret (Lai, 1986; Lai & Wei, 1987).
However, in many applications, in addition to the asymptotics, how to control the system shortly after its initialization so as to control its transient behavior is also important since one wishes to avoid large initial transients.
This requires the design of transient control and analysis of
the finite time regret of the singular learning system. This
problem has remained an open problem. Such an analysis of finite time behavior has been conducted for the socalled Linear Quadratic (LQ) control problems that feature
a strictly positive definite weighting on the control inputs
in addition to quadratic weighting of the system’s outputs
(Abbasi-Yadkori & Szepesvári, 2011; Lale et al., 2022; Cohen et al., 2019; Mete et al., 2022; Jedra & Proutiere, 2022;
Simchowitz & Foster, 2020; Mania et al., 2019; Faradonbeh et al., 2020; Shirani Faradonbeh et al., 2020; Abeille
& Lazaric, 2017). However, these analyses do not apply to
the minimum variance control problem since it is a singular
problem that does not feature a positive definite quadratic
penalty on the control
√ inputs. Moreover, LQ problems generally only admit C T regret, rather than the logarithmic
regret that we establish in the singular minimum variance
case.

We establish the first finite-time logarithmic regret bounds for the self-tuning regulation problem.
We introduce a modified version of the certainty
equivalence algorithm, which we call PIECE, that
clips inputs in addition to utilizing probing inputs
for exploration. We show that it has a C log T
upper bound on the regret after T time-steps for
bounded noise, and C log3 T in the case of subGaussian noise, unlike the LQ problem where logarithmic regret is shown to be not possible. The
PIECE algorithm is also designed to address the
critical challenge of poor initial transient performance of reinforcement learning algorithms for
linear systems. Comparative simulation results
illustrate the improved performance of PIECE.

1. Introduction
Minimizing the variance of the output of a system with
respect to a desired set-point is an important problem in
control systems. When the system model is unknown, this
results in the extensively studied “self-tuning regulation”
problem. It has a large number of engineering applications,
including large scale paper production, ore crushing, adaptive autopiloting of supertankers, etc. It differentiates itself
from LQ control or self-tuning “controllers” by the fact that
it is a singular limit where there is no added penalty on
control effort.

1.1. Background on Self-Tuning Regulation and
Difference from Adaptive LQ
The problem of controlling a paper machine was the seminal application that launched the field of self-tuning regulators (Åström & Wittenmark, 1973), (Fjeld & Wilhelm,
1981), (Borisson & Wittenmark, 1974), (Cegrell & Hedqvist,
1975), (Åström, 1967), (Åström, 1987). Paper manufacture
is subject to several uncertainties. These include pulp quality, moisture control, machine speed, pressure distribution,
etc. Thus the basis weight of the paper produced, related to
its thickness, is “stochastic.” At the same time, the sale of
the paper produced is related to its minimum basis weight.
In order to provide a guarantee on minimum basis weight
for the paper produced, the manufacturer therefore has to
set a set-point that is larger than the mean by a multiple of
the standard deviation of basis weight. If one can reduce the
variance of basis weight, then one can accordingly reduce
the set-point, which leads to a large savings of paper pulp,
and concomitantly, cost. Similarly, in other applications
too, reducing the variance of the output improves product

Self-tuning regulators have been deeply examined with
respect to several asymptotic properties such as stability
(Goodwin et al., 1981), whether it asymptotically achieves
the minimum variance (Goodwin et al., 1981), whether the
controller self-tunes itself asymptotically to the optimal controller for the unknown system (Becker et al., 1985; Kumar
& Praly, 1987), and how to achieve asymptotically optimal
1
Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, Karnataka, India.
Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA. Correspondence to: Rahul Singh <rahulsingh0188@gmail.com, rahulsingh@iisc.ac.in>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

