Efficient Algorithms for Empirical
Group Distributionally Robust Optimization and Beyond

Dingzhi Yu 1 2 Yunuo Cai 2 Wei Jiang 1 Lijun Zhang 1 3

Abstract

et al., 2019; Mohri et al., 2019; Carmon & Hausler, 2022;
Zhang et al., 2023; Mehta et al., 2024). GDRO optimizes
the maximal risk over a group of m distributions, which
can be formulated as the following stochastic minimax optimization problem:

In this paper, we investigate the empirical counterpart of Group Distributionally Robust Optimization (GDRO), which aims to minimize the maximal empirical risk across m distinct groups. We
formulate empirical GDRO as a two-level finitesum convex-concave minimax optimization problem and develop an algorithm called ALEG to
benefit from its special structure. ALEG is a
double-looped stochastic primal-dual algorithm
that incorporates variance reduction techniques
into a modified mirror prox routine. To exploit
the two-level finite-sum structure, we propose a
simple group sampling strategy to construct the
stochastic gradient with a smaller Lipschitz constant and then perform variance reduction for all
groups. Theoretical analysis shows that ALEG
achieves ε-accuracy
 √ within
 a computation comm n̄ ln m
plexity of O
, where n̄ is the averε
age number of samples among m groups. Notably, our approach outperforms
the state-of-the√
art method by a factor of m. Based on ALEG,
we further develop a two-stage optimization algorithm called ALEM to deal with the empirical Minimax Excess Risk Optimization (MERO)
problem. The computation complexity of ALEM
nearly matches that of ALEG, surpassing the rates
of existing methods.

min max Eξ∼Pi [ℓ(w; ξ)] ,

w∈W i∈[m]

(1)

where {Pi }i∈[m] is a group of distributions and ℓ(w; ξ) is
the loss function, measuring the predictive error of the model
w ∈ W for a sample ξ. Similar to Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) (Shalev-Shwartz & Ben-David, 2014), which
replaces the risk minimization problem over a distribution
by its empirical counterpart, this paper focuses on the empirical variant of problem (1):


ni


1 X
min max Ri (w) :=
ℓ(w; ξij ) ,
(2)
w∈W i∈[m] 

ni
j=1

where {Ri (·)}i∈[m] are empirical risk functions for each
group, ni is the number of samples for group i, and P
ξij is the
m
1
j-th sample in group i. We further denote n̄ := m
i=1 ni
as the average number of samples for m groups. Many
popular machine learning tasks can be mathematically
modeled by (empirical) GDRO, including federated learning (Mohri et al., 2019; Laguel et al., 2021a;b), robust language modeling (Oren et al., 2019), robust neural network
training (Sagawa et al., 2020), and collaborative PAC learning (Blum et al., 2017; Nguyen & Zakynthinou, 2018; Rothblum & Yona, 2021).

1. Introduction

To leverage the powerful first-order optimization methods, we transform (2) into an equivalent finite-sum convexconcave saddle-point problem (Nemirovski et al., 2009):
(
)
m
X
min max F (w, q) :=
qi Ri (w) ,
(3)

Recently, a popular class of Distributionally Robust Optimization (DRO) problem named as Group DRO (GDRO),
has drawn significant attention in machine learning (Oren
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China 2 School of Data Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China 3 Pazhou Laboratory
(Huangpu), Guangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Lijun Zhang
<zhanglj@lamda.nju.edu.cn>.

w∈W q∈∆m

i=1

where ∆m = {q ≥ 0, 1T q = 1|q ∈ Rm } is the (m − 1)dimensional simplex, and {Ri (·)}i∈[m] are assumed to be
convex.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

The existing vast amount of work on general convexconcave optimization can be applied to (3). For instance,
1

