Beyond Implicit Bias: The Insignificance of SGD Noise in Online Learning

Nikhil Vyas * 1 Depen Morwani * 1 Rosie Zhao * 1 Gal Kaplun * 1 Sham Kakade 1 2 Boaz Barak 1

Abstract

the search space explored by the optimization algorithm,
consequently impacting the final learned model.

The success of SGD in deep learning has been ascribed by prior works to the implicit bias induced
by finite batch sizes (“SGD noise”). While prior
works focused on offline learning (i.e., multipleepoch training), we study the impact of SGD noise
on online (i.e., single epoch) learning. Through
an extensive empirical analysis of image and
language data, we demonstrate that small batch
sizes do not confer any implicit bias advantages
in online learning. In contrast to offline learning, the benefits of SGD noise in online learning
are strictly computational, facilitating more costeffective gradient steps. This suggests that SGD
in the online regime can be construed as taking
noisy steps along the “golden path” of the noiseless gradient descent algorithm. We study this
hypothesis and provide supporting evidence in
loss and function space. Our findings challenge
the prevailing understanding of SGD and offer
novel insights into its role in online learning.

The implicit bias induced by the algorithm and hyperparameter choices can significantly affect the quality of the
learned model, including generalization, robustness to distribution shifts, downstream performance, and more. Hence,
the implicit bias of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) has
garnered considerable attention within the research community (Jastrzebski et al., 2017; Lewkowycz et al., 2020;
Damian et al., 2021; He et al., 2019; Nacson et al., 2022;
HaoChen et al., 2021; Andriushchenko et al., 2022). In
particular, this implicit bias emerges due to SGD using finite batch sizes resulting in a noisy approximation of the
population gradient.
Perhaps counter-intuitively, SGD noise is often deemed
advantageous for implicit bias. In particular, several works
showed that higher learning rates and smaller batch sizes
yield flatter minima (Keskar et al., 2016; LeCun et al., 1998;
Masters & Luschi, 2018; Goyal et al., 2017), which tend to
generalize well (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997; Smith
et al., 2020) (see also Figure 1, left). However, these works
are limited to the setting of multi-epoch or offline training.

1. Introduction

In this work, we examine the implicit bias of SGD in the
online learning setting, in which data is processed through
a single epoch. Online learning is common in several
self-supervised settings, including large language models
(LLMs) (Komatsuzaki, 2019; Brown et al., 2020; Hoffmann
et al., 2022b;a; Chowdhery et al., 2022). While in online
learning, the train and test distributions are identical (and
hence there are no generalization considerations), it is still a
non-convex optimization. So, the inductive bias introduced
by algorithm and hyperparameter choices could still potentially play a major role in learning trajectory and model
quality. However, we find that the impact of batch sizes in
practical settings of online learning is qualitatively similar
to their impact on convex optimization. Specifically, we
undertake an extensive empirical investigation and find that,
in online learning, SGD noise is indeed only “noise” and
offers no implicit benefits beyond optimization efficiency.
This can be seen in Figure 1 (right), where we observe
that (neglecting computational cost) performance in online
learning improves with increasing batch size.

In the field of optimization theory, the selection of hyperparameters, such as learning rate and batch size, plays a
significant role in determining the optimization efficiency,
which refers to the computational resources required to minimize the loss function to a predetermined level. In strongly
convex problems, altering these hyperparameters does not
affect the final solution since all local minima are global.
Hence, the final model only depends on the explicit biases of
architecture and objective function (including any explicit
regularizers). In contrast, Deep Learning is non-convex,
which means that the choices of algorithm and hyperparameters can impact not only optimization efficiency but
also introduce an implicit bias, i.e., change the regions of
*
Equal contribution 1 SEAS, Harvard University 2 Kempner
Institute, Harvard University. Correspondence to: Nikhil
Vyas <nikhil@g.harvard.edu>, Depen Morwani <dmorwani@g.harvard.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

The “Golden Path” Hypothesis. When taking SGD to
1

