Spider

: A Unified Framework for Context-dependent Concept Segmentation

Xiaoqi Zhao * 1 2 Youwei Pang * 1 2 Wei Ji * 3 Baicheng Sheng 1 Jiaming Zuo 2 Lihe Zhang 1 Huchuan Lu 1

Abstract
Different from the context-independent (CI) concepts such as human, car, and airplane, contextdependent (CD) concepts require higher visual
understanding ability, such as camouflaged object
and medical lesion. Despite the rapid advance
of many CD understanding tasks in respective
branches, the isolated evolution leads to their limited cross-domain generalisation and repetitive
technique innovation. Since there is a strong coupling relationship between foreground and background context in CD tasks, existing methods
require to train separate models in their focused
domains. This restricts their real-world CD concept understanding towards artificial general intelligence (AGI). We propose a unified model with
a single set of parameters, Spider, which only
needs to be trained once. With the help of the
proposed concept filter driven by the image-mask
group prompt, Spider is able to understand and
distinguish diverse strong context-dependent concepts to accurately capture the Prompter’s intention. Without bells and whistles, Spider significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art specialized
models in 8 different context-dependent segmentation tasks, including 4 natural scenes (salient,
camouflaged, and transparent objects and shadow)
and 4 medical lesions (COVID-19, polyp, breast,
and skin lesion with color colonoscopy, CT, ultrasound, and dermoscopy modalities). Besides,
Spider shows obvious advantages in continuous
learning. It can easily complete the training of
new tasks by fine-tuning parameters less than 1%
and bring a tolerable performance degradation of
less than 5% for all old tasks. The source code
will be publicly available at Spider-UniCDSeg.

Figure 1. Eight different segmentation tasks with contextdependent concepts are unified into our Spider model. With the
interlaced concepts within task domains and class semantic space,
Spider can wander to any target of interest.

1. Introduction
In philosophy and cognitive science (Barsalou, 1982; Martial et al., 2018; Lachmann & Van Leeuwen, 2005), concepts usually contain the context-independent (CI) and
context-dependent (CD) concepts. For example, semantic segmentation tasks define numerous CI concepts (i.e.,
multi-granularity semantic classes). The class of an object
is fixed no matter what scene it locates in. The contextdependent concepts mean that the target is not cognizable
without its environment, such as salient/camouflaged object
detection, shadow detection, medical lesion segmentation,
as shown in Figure 1. People determine where the target
locates mainly according to the surroundings. In this work,
we focus on the context-dependent segmentation tasks and
expect to build a parameter-unified framework. Existing
works explore the in-domain modeling, resulting in repetitive structure design, inefficient data utilisation, and limited
multi-domain generalisation. As an alternative, a seminal
work of EVP (Liu et al., 2023b) attempts to unify three
CD tasks based on low-level structure, but it still requires
to train the model one by one for each task and lacks the
unification of parameters.
With the development of strong backbones like ConvNeXt (Liu et al., 2022) and ViT(Dosovitskiy et al., 2020),
and visual prompt technology (Yan et al., 2023; Potlapalli
et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023b;c), some unification models
appear towards the attempt of AGI. In the field of segmentation, generalist models typified by SAM (Kirillov et al.,
2023) and SegGPT (Wang et al., 2023c), have shown gratifying versatility. They rely on the visual prompt of a single

*

Equal contribution 1 Dalian University of Technology, China
X3000 Inspection Co., Ltd, China 3 Yale University, America.
Correspondence to: Lihe Zhang <zhanglihe@dlut.edu.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

