OT-CLIP: Understanding and Generalizing CLIP via Optimal Transport

Liangliang Shi * 1 Jack Fan * 2 Junchi Yan 1

Abstract

both images and text using paired data. Groundbreaking
works such as CLIP (Radford et al., 2021b) and ALIGN (Jia
et al., 2021) have demonstrated the feasibility of this approach at a large scale. The standard approach to pretraining
such models involves using image-text contrastive objectives, which align image and text embeddings to match
(positive) image-text pairs while ensuring that unrelated
(negative) image-text pairs are dissimilar in the embedding
space. This is achieved through the contrastive InfoNCE
loss (Oord et al., 2018), which is applied twice to normalize
the pairwise similarity scores for all images and then for
all texts. However, the batch-level softmax-based InfoNCE
loss seems simple and the underlying alignment mechanism
seems to not have been explored.

We propose to understand Contrastive LanguageImage Pretraining model (CLIP) from the Optimal Transport (OT) perspective. Specifically,
we show that training of CLIP is an embodiment of inverse OT and the adopted two InfoNCE
losses in CLIP correspond to a special case of
bilevel optimization of a modified entropic OT.
We then generalize the original CLIP loss to an
OT-based loss family using variants of Regularized OT (e.g. Fused Gromov OT, unbalanced OT,
etc.), and show their superior performance on public datasets for downstream tasks in both image
and text domain. We also rethink the inference
stage of CLIP by using the tool of OT, and propose
to adopt the fused Gromov OT for (zero-shot) classification, in which the prediction is based on the
graph representation whereby images and texts
are nodes for graph matching. By our new technique, we show how to generalize zero-shot classification to other more flexible zero-shot tasks
with competitive performance: long-tailed classification and selective classification. The former
assumes the known prior distribution of labels,
while in the latter case, only a subset of samples
are asked to predict, yet with the need of high
prediction confidence. The code is available at
https://github.com/fan23j/ICML2024-OT-CLIP.

In this paper, the optimal transport (OT) perspective is applied for the contrastive vision-language pertaining models
for both learning the representation and zero-shot classification inference. In the training process, the alignment
between the image-text pair can be reformulated with inverse optimal transport (IOT) (Stuart & Wolfram, 2020) that
learns the cost matrix with the bi-level optimization given
the known coupling supervision. Note the cost matrix depends on the distance between image and text features and
thus the optimization of IOT is exactly equivalent to learning the representations. In the inference process, zero-shot
classification can also be viewed with the optimization of
OT: matching the image features to the corresponding labels.
Both InfoNCE loss and softmax inference can be a special
case under the modification of the constraints of OT.
From this perspective, we can naturally introduce OT technologies for both the learning and inference processes for
CLIP. Since softmax can be understood from the perspective
of entropic regularized OT with half-constraints as discussed
in (Shi et al., 2023), an OT-CLIP loss family is proposed
for learning representations by modifying the constraints
and utilizing variants of regularized OT. Specifically, we replace the traditional loss function with a series of OT-based
losses, such as regularized OT (Dessein et al., 2018) with
full constraints, unbalanced OT (Liero et al., 2018), fused
Gromov OT (Vayer et al., 2018), and Double-Bounded OT
(DBOT) (Shi et al., 2024a), to enhance the training process.

1. Introduction
Using weakly supervised image-text pairs for contrastive
pretraining is becoming the preferred method for acquiring
a general-purpose computer vision backbone, gradually replacing pretraining on large annotated multiclass datasets.
The core idea is to learn aligned representation spaces for
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Artificial Intelligence & Department of Computer Science and Engineering & MoE Lab of AI,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China 2 Department of
Computer Science, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Correspondence to: Junchi Yan <yanjunchi@sjtu.edu.cn>.

Then, for zero-shot inference, considering the structural information between the representations, we incorporate the

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

