Compact Optimality Verification for Optimization Proxies

Wenbo Chen 1 2 Haoruo Zhao 1 2 Mathieu Tanneau 1 2 Pascal Van Hentenryck 1 2

Abstract

in the autoregression decoding (Bello et al., 2016; Khalil
et al., 2017; Song et al., 2022) or designing projection procedures (Joshi et al., 2019; Amos & Kolter, 2017; Agrawal
et al., 2019; Tordesillas et al., 2023; Park et al., 2023; Li
et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023a). For better efficiency, the
projection procedure can be approximated with unrolled
first-order methods (Chen et al., 2020; Donti et al., 2021;
Scieur et al., 2022; Monga et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2022).

Recent years have witnessed increasing interest in
optimization proxies, i.e., machine learning models that approximate the input-output mapping
of parametric optimization problems and return
near-optimal feasible solutions. Following recent
work by (Nellikkath & Chatzivasileiadis, 2021),
this paper reconsiders the optimality verification
problem for optimization proxies, i.e., the determination of the worst-case optimality gap over the
instance distribution. The paper proposes a compact formulation for optimality verification and
a gradient-based primal heuristic that brings substantial computational benefits to the original formulation. The compact formulation is also more
general and applies to non-convex optimization
problems. The benefits of the compact formulation are demonstrated on large-scale DC Optimal
Power Flow and knapsack problems.

However, quality guarantees for optimization proxies have
received much less attention and have remained largely
empirical. To the authors’ knowledge, (Nellikkath & Chatzivasileiadis, 2021) is the only work that provably provides
worst-case guarantees for optimization proxies. They formalize the optimality verification problem as a bilevel optimization and reformulate it into a single level using traditional techniques from optimization theory. However, the
resulting single-level formulation faces significant computational challenges as it introduces a large number of auxiliary
decision variables and constraints. Moreover, it only applies
to convex parametric optimization problems.
This paper reconsiders the optimality verification problem
and proposes a compact formulation that applies to nonconvex problems and is more advantageous from a computational standpoint. Moreover, the paper proposes an effective
primal heuristic, based on a (parallelized) Projected Gradient Attack (PGA). When the problem is convex, PGA
makes use of a conservative approximation of the value
function of the optimization that leverages subgradients. To
showcase the benefits of these modeling and algorithmic
contributions, the paper considers two applications: the DC
Optimal Power Flow (DC-OPF) problems and the knapsack
problems. The DC-OPF illustrates how the compact optimality verification formulation and PGA can be applied
to realistic industrial-sized test cases, while the knapsack
problem shows their applicability to a non-convex problem.
The paper also proposes novel Mixed-Integer Programming
(MIP) encoding of the feasibility layers of the DC-OPF and
knapsack optimization proxies. Experimental results are
provided to highlight the benefits of the compact optimality
verification formulation.

1. Introduction
In recent years, there has been a surge of interest in optimization proxies, i.e., differentiable programs that approximate the input/output mappings of parametric optimization
problems. Parametric optimization problems arise in many
application areas, including power systems operations, supply chain management, and manufacturing. To be applicable
in practice, these optimization proxies need to satisfy two
key properties: they must return feasible solutions and they
must return high-quality solutions. Feasibility has received
significant attention in recent years. Constraint violations
can be mitigated by incorporating them in the loss function
(Fioretto et al., 2020; Tran et al., 2021; Velloso & Van Hentenryck, 2021; Pan et al., 2020). In some cases, the feasibility could be guaranteed by designing mask operations
1

H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA 2 NSF
Artificial Intelligence Research Institute for Advances in Optimization (AI4OPT), USA. Correspondence to: Wenbo Chen
<wenbo.chen@gatech.edu>.

The contributions of this paper are summarized as follows.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

• The paper proposes a compact formulation for the opti1

