IOI: Invisible One-Iteration Adversarial Attack on No-Reference
Image- and Video-Quality Metrics

Ekaterina Shumitskaya 1 2 3 Anastasia Antsiferova 2 1 Dmitriy Vatolin 1 2 3

Abstract

transformations is adversarial attacks. In the case of imageand video-quality metrics, adversarial attacks are modifications of input images or videos that change the predicted
quality score without significant influence on perceptual
quality. Several studies (Zhang et al., 2022a; Korhonen &
You, 2022a; Sang et al., 2022; Shumitskaya et al., 2022;
2023b; Meftah et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2024) unveiled vulnerabilities in NR image quality metrics when exposed to
adversarial attacks.

No-reference image- and video-quality metrics
are widely used in video processing benchmarks.
The robustness of learning-based metrics under
video attacks has not been widely studied. In addition to having success, attacks on metrics that
can be employed in video processing benchmarks
must be fast and imperceptible. This paper introduces an Invisible One-Iteration (IOI) adversarial
attack on no-reference image and video quality
metrics. The proposed method uses two modules
to ensure high visual quality and temporal stability of adversarial videos and runs for one iteration,
which makes it fast. We compared our method
alongside eight prior approaches using image and
video datasets via objective and subjective tests.
Our method exhibited superior visual quality
across various attacked metric architectures while
maintaining comparable attack success and speed.
We made the code available on GitHub: https:
//github.com/katiashh/ioi-attack.

NR metrics are employed in various image- and videoprocessing benchmarks, such as super-resolution (PIRM-SR,
2019; Khrulkov & Babenko, 2021; Ma et al., 2017), video
generation (VideoGeneration, 2024), video compression
(Ghadiyaram et al., 2017). For some tasks, NR metrics show
even better performance than FR metrics; for example, video
super-resolution (SR-MSU, 2023) or video compression by
new encoding standards such as H.266/VVC (Antsiferova
et al., 2022). The developers of video-processing algorithms
can integrate adversarial attacks on quality metrics into their
methods to achieve higher positions in public benchmarks.
Today, such cheating can be detected in benchmarks that
publish subjective comparisons along with objective ones.
For example, in MSU Codec Comparison 2021 (CC-MSU,
2021), the leaderboard by a learning-based metric VMAF,
which was shown to be vulnerable to attacks (Siniukov et al.,
2022; Zvezdakova et al., 2019), differs from a subjective
one. Algorithms in these benchmarks compete in both visual quality and speed, and a high speed is essential for
some real-life applications like universal encoding for video
compression (from one to ten frames per second). Thus, to
cheat in video processing benchmarks, it is profitable for
an attacker to inject an imperceptible perturbation into the
video without significantly decreasing the method speed.

1. Introduction
No-reference (NR) image- and video-quality assessment
poses a significant challenge in computer vision. In contrast
to full-reference (FR) quality metrics, NR metrics do not
estimate the similarity of a distorted image or video to the
original one but evaluate its visual appeal. The rapid integration of deep-learning-based NR image-and video-quality
assessment metrics (Ying et al., 2020; Talebi & Milanfar,
2018; Su et al., 2020; Golestaneh et al., 2022) led to the
importance of investigating their vulnerabilities to transformations of input. One of the most common types of input

In the literature, most of the existing approaches evaluate
NR metrics robustness in the image domain. However, to
evaluate the robustness of NR metrics for videos, an adversary has to satisfy several essential conditions, making such
a task more challenging:

1

ISP RAS Research Center for Trusted Artificial Intelligence, Moscow, Russia 2 MSU Institute for Artificial Intelligence
Moscow, Russia 3 Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow,
Russia. Correspondence to: Ekaterina Shumitskaya <ekaterina.shumitskaya@graphics.cs.msu.ru>.

1. Quantitative success of an attack. For NR metrics, the
success of an attack is measured by the amount of the
metric’s score change. Both decreasing and increasing

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

