Meta Evidential Transformer for Few-Shot Open-Set Recognition

Hitesh Sapkota 1 2 Krishna Prasad Neupane 1 2 Qi Yu 2

Abstract

learning (FSL) offers another promising direction by assuming that only limited labeled data samples are available for
model training (Jeong et al., 2021). Once trained, the model
is expected to perform well on unseen data samples. While
existing FSL models achieve promising results, most of
them primarily focus on the closed-set setting, where both
the training and test samples are assumed to be from the
same data distribution over a common set of classes (Luo
et al., 2019). Nevertheless, when deployed in a practical
setting, the model may very likely be exposed to samples
from unknown classes, which are not part of the training
distribution. In this case, it is ideal that the model can detect
these samples as unknown.

Few-shot open-set recognition (FSOSR) aims to
detect instances from unseen classes by utilizing a small set of labeled instances from closedset classes. Accurately rejecting instances from
open-set classes in the few-shot setting is fundamentally more challenging due to the weaker
supervised signals resulting from fewer labels.
Transformer-based few-shot methods exploit attention mapping to achieve a consistent representation. However, the softmax-generated attention map normalizes all the instances that assign unnecessary high attentive weights to those
instances not close to the closed-set classes that
negatively impact the detection performance. In
addition, open-set samples that are similar to a certain closed-set class also pose a significant challenge to most existing FSOSR models. To address
these challenges, we propose a novel Meta Evidential Transformer (MET) based FSOSR model
that uses an evidential open-set loss to learn more
compact closed-set class representations by effectively leveraging similar closed-set classes. MET
further integrates an evidence-to-variance ratio to
detect fundamentally challenging tasks and uses
an evidence-guided cross-attention mechanism
to better separate the difficult open-set samples.
Experiments on real-world datasets demonstrate
consistent improvement over existing competitive
methods in unseen class recognition without deteriorating closed-set performance.

The open-set recognition (OSR) problem has been studied in the general setting with ample training data samples
(Bendale & Boult, 2016; Ge et al., 2017; Yoshihashi et al.,
2019; Sun et al., 2020). However, the few-shot setting poses
unique challenges, making existing solutions inadequate.
There have been few attempts to address few-shot open-set
recognition (FSOSR). For example, PEELER is designed to
learn a high-entropy posterior distribution for samples from
the open-set classes (Liu et al., 2020). SnaTCHer further
improves PEELER by leveraging transformer consistency
(Jeong et al., 2021). It considers a set as a whole that includes all the prototypes of closed-set classes to detect the
open-set ones. Because of the attention-based transformation of the entire set, this approach can provide a compact
representation for the entire closed-set classes, leading to
improved detection performance. However, when facing
more challenging scenarios, where open-set classes share
some similarities with closed-set ones, existing techniques
become less effective.
As shown in Figure 1 (a), golden retriever (Class ID:
82) shares some feature similarities (e.g., body structure,
whiskers, and tail) with the closed-set class ferrets (Class ID:
88). As such, when a golden retriever is evaluated, it may
be predicted as a ferrets. In this case, the distance between
the altered prototype (where the class ferrets prototype is
replaced by a golden retriever sample) and the original prototype will be very small, resulting in the mis-classification
of an open-set sample as a closed-set one with high confidence. As illustrated in Figure 1 (b), the mean prototype
distance from this open-set class (i.e., 82) is smaller than
most other closed-set classes (e.g., 80, 91, 92), leading

1. Introduction
Various learning strategies have been explored to reduce label dependency, including semi-supervised learning (Oliver
et al., 2018; Chapelle et al., 2006) and weakly supervised
learning (Ilse et al., 2018; Sapkota et al., 2021). Few shot
1

Amazon Inc. (Work was done at RIT, which is not relate to
the position at Amazon) 2 Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT).
Correspondence to: Qi Yu <qi.yu@rit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

