Clifford-Steerable Convolutional Neural Networks
Maksim Zhdanov 1 David Ruhe * 1 2 3 Maurice Weiler * 1 Ana Lucic 4 Johannes Brandstetter 5 6 Patrick Forré 1 2

Abstract
We present Clifford-Steerable Convolutional Neural Networks (CS-CNNs), a novel class of E(p, q)equivariant CNNs. CS-CNNs process multivector
fields on pseudo-Euclidean spaces Rp,q . They
cover, for instance, E(3)-equivariance on R3 and
Poincaré-equivariance on Minkowski spacetime
R1,3 . Our approach is based on an implicit
parametrization of O(p, q)-steerable kernels via
Clifford group equivariant neural networks. We
significantly and consistently outperform baseline
methods on fluid dynamics as well as relativistic
electrodynamics forecasting tasks.
Figure 1. CS-CNNs process multivector fields while respecting
E(p, q)-equivariance. Shown here is a Lorentz-boost O(1, 1) of
electromagnetic data on 1+1-dimensional spacetime R1,1 .

1. Introduction
Physical systems are often described by fields on (pseudo)Euclidean spaces. Their equations of motion obey
various symmetries, such as isometries E(3) of Euclidean space R3 or relativistic Poincaré transformations E(1, 3) of Minkowski spacetime R1,3 .
PDE
solvers should respect these symmetries. In the case
of deep learning based surrogates, this property is
ensured by making the neural networks equivariant
(commutative) w.r.t. the transformations of interest.

This work proposes Clifford-steerable CNNs (CS-CNNs),
which process multivector fields on pseudo-Euclidean
spaces Rp,q , and are equivariant to the pseudo-Euclidean
group E(p, q): the isometries of Rp,q . Multivectors are elements of the Clifford (or geometric) algebra Cl(Rp,q ) of
Rp,q . Neural networks based on Clifford algebras have seen
a recent surge in popularity in the field of deep learning
and were used to build both non-equivariant (Brandstetter
et al., 2023; Ruhe et al., 2023b) and equivariant (Ruhe et al.,
2023a; Brehmer et al., 2023) models. While multivectors do
not cover all possible field types, e.g. general tensor fields,
they include those most relevant in physics. For instance,
the Maxwell or Dirac equation and General Relativity can
be formulated using the spacetime algebra Cl(R1,3 ).

A fairly general class of equivariant CNNs covering arbitrary spaces and field types is described by the theory of
steerable CNNs (Weiler et al., 2023). The central result
there is that equivariance requires a “G-steerability” constraint on convolution kernels, where G = O(n) or O(p, q)
for E(n)- or E(p, q)-equivariant CNNs, respectively. This
constraint was solved and implemented for O(n) (Lang &
Weiler, 2021; Cesa et al., 2022), however, O(p, q)-steerable
kernels are so far still missing.

The steerability constraint on convolution kernels is usually
either solved analytically or numerically, however, such solutions are not yet known for O(p, q). Observing that the
G-steerability constraint is just a G-equivariance constraint,
Zhdanov et al. (2023) propose to implement G-steerable kernels implicitly via G-equivariant MLPs. Our CS-CNNs follow this approach, implementing implicit O(p, q)-steerable
kernels via the O(p, q)-equivariant neural networks for multivectors developed by Ruhe et al. (2023a).

*

Equal contribution 1 AMLab, Informatics Institute, University of Amsterdam 2 AI4Science Lab, Informatics Institute, University of Amsterdam 3 Anton Pannekoek Institute for Astronomy, University of Amsterdam 4 AI4Science, Microsoft Research
5
ELLIS Unit Linz, Institute for Machine Learning, JKU Linz,
Austria 6 NXAI GmbH. Correspondence to: Maksim Zhdanov
<m.zhdanov@uva.nl>.

We demonstrate the efficacy of our approach by predicting the evolution of several physical systems. In particular,
we consider a fluid dynamics forecasting task on R2 , as
well as relativistic electrodynamics simulations on both R3

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

