AlphaFold Meets Flow Matching for Generating Protein Ensembles

Bowen Jing 1 Bonnie Berger 1 2 Tommi Jaakkola 1

Abstract

have excelled in the single-state modeling of experimental
protein structures, they fail to account for this conformational heterogeneity (Lane, 2023; Ourmazd et al., 2022).
Hence, a method which builds upon the level of accuracy of
single-structure predictors, but reveals underlying structural
ensembles, would be of great value to structural biologists.

The biological functions of proteins often depend on dynamic structural ensembles. In this
work, we develop a flow-based generative modeling approach for learning and sampling the
conformational landscapes of proteins. We repurpose highly accurate single-state predictors
such as AlphaFold and ESMFold and fine-tune
them under a custom flow matching framework
to obtain sequence-conditioned generative models of protein structure called AlphaF LOW and
ESMF LOW. When trained and evaluated on
the PDB, our method provides a superior combination of precision and diversity compared to
AlphaFold with MSA subsampling. When further trained on ensembles from all-atom MD,
our method accurately captures conformational
flexibility, positional distributions, and higherorder ensemble observables for unseen proteins.
Moreover, our method can diversify a static
PDB structure with faster wall-clock convergence
to certain equilibrium properties than replicate
MD trajectories, demonstrating its potential as a
proxy for expensive physics-based simulations.
Code is available at https://github.com/
bjing2016/alphaflow.

Existing machine learning approaches for generating structural ensembles have focused on inference-time interventions in AlphaFold that modify the multiple sequence
alignment (MSA) input (Del Alamo et al., 2022; Stein &
Mchaourab, 2022; Wayment-Steele et al., 2023), resulting in
a different structure prediction for each version of the MSA.
While these approaches have demonstrated some success,
they suffer from two key limitations. First, by operating on
the MSA, they cannot be generalized to structure predictors
based on protein language models (PLMs) such as ESMFold
(Lin et al., 2023) or OmegaFold (Wu et al., 2022), which
have grown in popularity due to their fast runtime and ease
of use. Secondly, these inference-time interventions do not
provide the capability to train on protein ensembles from
beyond the PDB—for example, ensembles from molecular
dynamics, which are of significant scientific interest but can
be extremely expensive to simulate (Shaw et al., 2010).
To address these limitations, in this work we combine AlphaFold and ESMFold with flow matching, a recent generative modeling framework (Lipman et al., 2022; Albergo &
Vanden-Eijnden, 2022), to propose a principled method for
sampling the conformational landscape of proteins. While
AlphaFold and ESMFold were originally developed and
trained as regression models that predict a single best protein
structure for a given MSA or sequence input, we develop
a strategy for repurposing them as (sequence-conditioned)
generative models of protein structure. This synthesis relies
on the key insight that iterative denoising frameworks (such
as diffusion and flow-matching) provide a general recipe
for converting regression models to generative models with
relatively little modification to the architecture and training
objective. Unlike inference-time MSA ablation, this strategy applies equally well to PLM-based predictors and can
be used to train or fine-tune on arbitrary ensembles.

1. Introduction
Proteins adopt complex three-dimensional structures, often
as members of structural ensembles with distinct states, collective motions, and disordered fluctuations, to carry out
their biological functions. For example, conformational
changes are critical in the function of transporters, channels,
and enzymes, and the properties of equilibrium ensembles
help govern the strength and selectivity of molecular interactions (Meller et al., 2023; Vögele et al., 2023). While deep
learning methods such as AlphaFold (Jumper et al., 2021)
1

CSAIL, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2 Department
of Mathematics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Bowen Jing <bjing@mit.edu>.

While flow matching has been well established for images,
its application to protein structures remains nascent (Bose
et al., 2023). Hence, we develop a custom flow matching

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

