PIVOT: Iterative Visual Prompting Elicits Actionable Knowledge for VLMs

Soroush Nasiriany * 1 2 Fei Xia * 1 Wenhao Yu * 1 Ted Xiao * 1 Jacky Liang 1 Ishita Dasgupta 1 Annie Xie 3
Danny Driess 1 Ayzaan Wahid 1 Zhuo Xu 1 Quan Vuong 1 Tingnan Zhang 1 Tsang-Wei Edward Lee 1
Kuang-Huei Lee 1 Peng Xu 1 Sean Kirmani 1 Yuke Zhu 2 Andy Zeng 1 Karol Hausman 1 Nicolas Heess 1
Chelsea Finn 1 Sergey Levine 1 Brian Ichter * 1

Abstract

and HuggingFace demo.

Vision language models (VLMs) have shown impressive capabilities across a variety of tasks,
from logical reasoning to visual understanding.
This opens the door to richer interaction with
the world, for example robotic control. However, VLMs produce only textual outputs, while
robotic control and other spatial tasks require
outputting continuous coordinates, actions, or
trajectories. How can we enable VLMs to handle such settings without fine-tuning on taskspecific data? In this paper, we propose a novel
visual prompting approach for VLMs that we
call Prompting with Iterative Visual Optimization (PIVOT), which casts tasks as iterative visual question answering. In each iteration, the
image is annotated with a visual representation
of proposals that the VLM can refer to (e.g., candidate robot actions, localizations, or trajectories). The VLM then selects the best ones for
the task. These proposals are iteratively refined,
allowing the VLM to eventually zero in on the
best available answer. We investigate PIVOT
on real-world robotic navigation, real-world manipulation from images, instruction following in
simulation, and additional spatial inference tasks
such as localization. We find, perhaps surprisingly, that our approach enables zero-shot control of robotic systems without any robot training
data, navigation in a variety of environments, and
other capabilities. Although current performance
is far from perfect, our work highlights potentials
and limitations of this new regime and shows a
promising approach for Internet-Scale VLMs in
robotic and spatial reasoning domains. Website

Task: What actions should the robot take to pick up the DNA chew toy?

Iteration 0:
Arrows [7, 13, 18]

Iteration 1:
Arrows [16]

Task: What numbers overlay the “L kid”?

Iteration 0:
Markers: [10, 1, 14, 17]

Iteration 4:
Markers: [5]

Task: What actions should the robot take to go to wooden bench without
hitting the obstacle?

Iteration 0:
Markers: [12, 13, 14]

Iteration 3:
Markers: [2]

Figure 1: Prompting with Iterative Visual Optimization (PIVOT)
casts spatial reasoning tasks, such as robotic control, as a VQA
problem. This is done by first annotating an image with a visual
representation of robot actions or 3D coordinates, then querying
a VLM to select the most promising annotated actions seen in the
image. The best action is iteratively refined by fitting a distribution to the selected actions and requerying the VLM. This procedure enables us to solve complex tasks that require outputting
grounded continuous coordinates or robot actions utilizing a VLM
without any domain-specific training.

*

Equal contribution 1 Google DeepMind 2 The University of
Texas at Austin 3 Stanford University. Correspondence to: <xiafei,magicmelon,tedxiao@google.com>.

1. Introduction

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

Large language models (LLMs) have shown themselves
capable of solving a broad range of practical problems,
from code generation to question answering and even logical deduction (Brown et al., 2020; Austin et al., 2021;
1

