ESNet: Evolution and Succession Network for High-Resolution Salient Object
Detection
Hongyu Liu 1 Runmin Cong 2 Hua Li 3 Qianqian Xu 4 Qingming Huang 5 Wei Zhang 2

Abstract

(a) Patch-based
two-stage model

(c) Our proposed
ESNet

(b) Lightweight
end-to-end model

𝑃𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ𝑒𝑠 𝑓𝑟𝑜𝑚 𝐼ℎ

Preserving details and avoiding high computational costs are the two main challenges for
the High-Resolution Salient Object Detection
(HRSOD) task. In this paper, we propose
a two-stage HRSOD model from the perspective of evolution and succession, including an
evolution stage with Low-resolution Location
Model (LrLM) and a succession stage with Highresolution Refinement Model (HrRM). The evolution stage achieves detail-preserving salient objects localization on the low-resolution image
through the evolution mechanisms on supervision and feature; the succession stage utilizes
the shallow high-resolution features to complement and enhance the features inherited from
the first stage in a lightweight manner and generate the final high-resolution saliency prediction. Besides, a new metric named BoundaryDetail-aware Mean Absolute Error (M AE BD )
is designed to evaluate the ability to detect details in high-resolution scenes. Extensive experiments on five datasets demonstrate that our network achieves superior performance at real-time
speed (49 FPS) compared to state-of-the-art methods. Our code is publicly available at: https:
//github.com/rmcong/ESNet_ICML24.

…

𝐼𝑙
Encoder

𝐼ℎ

𝐼ℎ

𝐼𝑙

Encoder

Global
context

Encoder

Local
detail

Encoder

Evolution

Decoder

Decoder

Decoder

𝑆𝑙
Merge & Fuse

𝑆𝑜𝑢𝑡

Encoder

Decoder
Fuse

Succession

Decoder

Decoder

𝑆𝑙

𝑆𝑜𝑢𝑡

𝑆𝑜𝑢𝑡

Figure 1: Typical structures for the HRSOD task, where (a)
is the patch-based two-stage model, (b) is the lightweight
end-to-end model, and (c) is our Evolution and Succession
Network (ESNet).

1. Introduction
Salient object detection (SOD) is inspired by the human
visual system, aiming at locating the most attractive objects
and segmenting them from a given image. Recently, especially in the era of deep learning, SOD task has developed
vigorously, and formed a full-scene and multi-source research system. With the rapid development of intelligent
shooting devices (e.g., smartphones) and terminal display
devices, captured high-resolution (HR) image can offer a
more refined viewing experience, preserving greater detail
that enhances the quality of perception and understanding.
The task of high-resolution salient object detection
(HRSOD) (Zeng et al., 2019) emerged as a means to more
effectively adapt to the processing requirements of HR images. Unlike traditional tasks of normal-resolution salient
object detection (NRSOD), the HRSOD task addresses two
crucial issues. First, from a data source perspective, HR images can capture details more accurately and vividly. This
ability to perceive these intricate elements sets HRSOD
apart from NRSOD. However, detecting these fine details
is challenging. On the one hand, the small proportion of
detailed areas within the entire image often gets overlooked
during model training. On the other hand, the existing evaluation metrics, such as F-measure and MAE score, fall short
in effectively evaluating these critical detail regions. The
primary reason for this is that enhancements in detailed

1

Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University &
Beijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Information Science and Network Technology, Beijing, China 2 School of Control Science and
Engineering, Shandong University & Key Laboratory of Machine
Intelligence and System Control, Ministry of Education, Jinan,
China 3 School of Computer Science and Technology, Hainan
University, Hainan, China 4 Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing,
China 5 School of Computer Science and Technology, University
of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. Correspondence
to: Runmin Cong <rmcong@sdu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

