FRAG: Frequency Adapting Group for Diffusion Video Editing

Input video

Sunjae Yoon 1 Gwanhyeong Koo 1 Geonwoo Kim 1 Chang D. Yoo 1

Abstract

“A man wears a yellow shirt ”

“A man wears a yellow shirt ”

“A man wears a yellow shirt ”

(a) Content blur

(b) Content flicker

(c) Our results

Zoom in view

Edited video

In video editing, the hallmark of a quality edit lies
in its consistent and unobtrusive adjustment. Modification, when integrated, must be smooth and
subtle, preserving the natural flow and aligning
seamlessly with the original vision. Therefore, our
primary focus is on overcoming the current challenges in high quality edit to ensure that each edit
enhances the final product without disrupting its
intended essence. However, quality deterioration
such as blurring and flickering is routinely observed in recent diffusion video editing systems.
We confirm that this deterioration often stems
from high-frequency leak: the diffusion model
fails to accurately synthesize high-frequency components during denoising process. To this end, we
devise Frequency Adapting Group (FRAG) which
enhances the video quality in terms of consistency
and fidelity by introducing a novel receptive field
branch to preserve high-frequency components
during the denoising process. FRAG is performed
in a model-agnostic manner without additional
training and validates the effectiveness on video
editing benchmarks (i.e., TGVE, DAVIS).

Figure 1. Illustration of video quality deterioration represented into
two distinct categories: (a) content blur and (b) content flicker. For
the comparison, we present our results in (c).
Input video

Edited videos with quality deterioration

Edited videos on FRAG (Ours)

Low: 𝒇 < 𝟎. 𝟐𝟓𝝅

High: 𝒇 > 𝟎. 𝟐𝟓𝝅

1

Quality
0.96

Consistency

Relative magnitude

Clip
1

0.8

0.6

0.92

0.88

Quality
0.4

Low frequency

High frequency

0.84
10

12

14

16

∞
psnr

Fidelity

(a) Frequency magnitude evaluations

(b) Video quality evaluations

Figure 2. (a) Frequency magnitude evaluations of videos according
to low and high frequencies. (b) Video quality evaluations about
frame consistency and fidelity according to low and high-frequency
components in videos. Normalized frequency 0 < f < π, low
frequency: f < 0.25π, high frequency: f > 0.25π.

1. Introduction
Denoising diffusion models (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021;
Song et al., 2020b;a; Ho et al., 2020) have significantly
advanced the generative capabilities of artificial intelligence,
leading to groundbreaking achievements in image, speech,
and video generation. We focus here on video editing based
on diffusion which holds immense promise for revolutionizing the entertainment industry. Video editing systems (BarTal et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2023a; Geyer et al., 2023) are
designed to work with both the input video and a target
text prompt that outlines the user’s desired modifications.
The systems incorporate these modifications into the video,

ensuring that the edits are seamless and unobtrusive. This
process is then carefully managed to produce a coherent
final output that maintains a natural flow, whilst aligning
closely with the original input video.
Recent advancements (Wu et al., 2023a; Liu et al., 2023;
Geyer et al., 2023) in video editing systems have aimed at
preserving the temporal consistency across edited frames.
However, a significant challenge persists as these systems
often struggle with maintaining the quality of various attributes, including the color and shape of objects. This inconsistency manifests not just over time but also across the
spatial dimensions of the video, leading to a deterioration
in the overall quality of the edits. To be specific, Figure
1 illustrates two distinct types of quality deterioration: (1)
content blur and (2) content flicker. As shown in Figure 1

1

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
(KAIST), South Korea. Correspondence to: Chang D. Yoo
<cd yoo@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

