CaPS: Collaborative and Private
Synthetic Data Generation from Distributed Sources

Sikha Pentyala 1 Mayana Pereira 2 Martine De Cock 1 3
privacy in AI applications – such as the GDPR1 in Europe
and the AI Bill of Rights2 in the United States – impose
substantial barriers to data sharing across organisations, especially in highly regulated domains like healthcare and
finance.

Abstract
Data is the lifeblood of the modern world, forming a fundamental part of AI, decision-making,
and research advances. With increase in interest
in data, governments have taken important steps
towards a regulated data world, drastically impacting data sharing and data usability and resulting in
massive amounts of data confined within the walls
of organizations. While synthetic data generation
(SDG) is an appealing solution to break down
these walls and enable data sharing, the main
drawback of existing solutions is the assumption
of a trusted aggregator for generative model training. Given that many data holders may not want
to, or be legally allowed to, entrust a central entity
with their raw data, we propose a framework for
collaborative and private generation of synthetic
tabular data from distributed data holders. Our
solution is general, applicable to any marginalbased SDG, and provides input privacy by replacing the trusted aggregator with secure multi-party
computation (MPC) protocols and output privacy
via differential privacy (DP). We demonstrate the
applicability and scalability of our approach for
the state-of-the-art select-measure-generate SDG
algorithms MWEM+PGM and AIM.

Secret
share

M MPC Servers run MPC protocols
(DP-in-MPC)

...

Secret
share

CaPS

...

...

MPC Protocols

Secret
share
N Data
Holders

DP
COMP

SELECT

DP
MEASURE

GENERATE

Synthetic
Data

Figure 1. CaPS: A framework that leverages ‘DP-in-MPC’ to collaboratively and privately generate tabular synthetic data using
marginal-based SDG techniques with the ‘select-measure-generate’
template. Servers run MPC protocols for ‘select’ and ‘measure’.
The ‘generate’ step is performed over differentially private measurements.

Synthetic data, i.e. artificial data generated using a purposebuilt synthesizer trained on real data, offers an appealing
solution to share microdata while mitigating privacy concerns. Synthetic data generation (SDG) with differential
privacy (DP) has received considerable attention from the
research community (see e.g. (Zhang et al., 2017; Jordon
et al., 2019; McKenna et al., 2021; Tao et al., 2022) and references therein). This generated data fits any data processing
workflow designed for the original data, while providing
formal privacy guarantees.

1. Introduction
The success of data-driven applications in a variety of domains – including but not limited to healthcare, finance, and
automation – can be attributed to the availability of data
sharing for analysis. However, such sharing of data raises
many privacy concerns. Laws and guidelines to protect user

Tabular data is ubiquitous in many domains ranging from
healthcare, to humanitarian action, education, and socioeconomic studies Differentially private synthetic tabular data
can be used for machine learning tasks and data analysis, as
well as enable answering an arbitrary number of statistical
queries. While many methods have been proposed in the
literature to generate differentially private synthetic tabular

1
School of Engineering and Technology, University of Washington Tacoma, USA 2 Department of Electrical Engineering, Universidade de Brasilia, Brazil 3 Department of Applied Mathematics,
Computer Science and Statistics, Ghent University, Belgium. Correspondence to: Sikha Pentyala <sikha@uw.edu>.

1
European General Data Protection Regulation
https://gdpr-info.eu/
2
https://www.whitehouse.gov/ostp/ai-bil
l-of-rights/

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

