DE-COP: Detecting Copyrighted Content in Language Models Training Data

André V. Duarte 1 Xuandong Zhao 2 Arlindo L. Oliveira 1 Lei Li 3

Abstract
How can we detect if copyrighted content was
used in the training process of a language model,
considering that the training data is typically
undisclosed? We are motivated by the premise
that a language model is likely to identify verbatim excerpts from its training text. We propose DE-COP, a method to determine whether
a piece of copyrighted content was included in
training. DE-COP’s core approach is to probe
an LLM with multiple-choice questions, whose
options include both verbatim text and their paraphrases. We construct BookTection, a benchmark
with excerpts from 165 books published prior and
subsequent to a model’s training cutoff, along
with their paraphrases. Our experiments show
that DE-COP surpasses the prior best method by
9.6% in detection performance (AUC) on models with logits available. Moreover, DE-COP also
achieves an average accuracy of 72% for detecting
suspect books on fully black-box models where
prior methods give approximately 4% accuracy.
The code and datasets are available at https:
//github.com/LeiLiLab/DE-COP.

Figure 1. Our DE-COP identifies copyrighted books within ChatGPT training data. We detect that a specific book was seen during
training by showing that the LLMs performance on the task of
identifying book verbatim is significantly higher on a “suspect”
book than on a recent one (published 2023 onward).

personal details, financial records, and copyrighted material,
among other ethical concerns (Zhao et al., 2022). Neglecting
the application of specific safeguards in the data collection
step can lead to unintended consequences, notably the incorporation of copyrighted content into the models’ knowledge
without crediting the creators (Zhang et al., 2023b; Chang
et al., 2023), thus compromising their intellectual property
rights (Elkin-Koren et al., 2023; Vyas et al., 2023; The Authors Guild, 2023). This then leads to incidents, like the
recent lawsuit between The New York Times and OpenAI
(Grynbaum & Mac, 2023), or the class action against Stable Diffusion, Midjourney, and DeviantArt (Brittain, 2023),
which not only damage the reputation of AI companies but
also negatively affects the public’s view of AI development.

1. Introduction
Whenever a new Large Language Model (LLM) emerges, it
may significantly outperform previous models in standard
tests, thanks largely to the use of a large amount of data
(Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020; OpenAI, 2023).
However, as we gather more data, it becomes increasingly
difficult to guarantee that it meets all ethical and legal standards. This involves protecting sensitive information like
1
INESC-ID / Instituto Superior Técnico, ULisboa
University of California, Santa Barbara 3 Carnegie Mellon University.
Correspondence to: André V. Duarte
<andre.v.duarte@tecnico.ulisboa.pt>,
Xuandong
Zhao
<xuandongzhao@cs.ucsb.edu>, Arlindo L. Oliveira <arlindo.oliveira@tecnico.ulisboa.pt>, Lei Li <leili@cs.cmu.edu>.
2

Detecting copyrighted content in the training data of LLMs
is critical to democratizing AI products. For instance, this
could push model owners to conform to copyright legal
requirements, and provide accountability in compensating
content authors. However, the task of detecting such content
is fraught with challenges. Companies, for competitive

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

