Meta-Reinforcement Learning Robust to Distributional Shift Via
Performing Lifelong In-Context Learning

Tengye Xu 1 Zihao Li 1 Qinyuan Ren 1

Abstract

imize expected returns across any task sampled from the
task distribution. However, most meta-RL methods evaluate
their performance on tasks drawn from the same distribution, leaving the generalization capability, particularly with
frozen parameters, in Out-of-Distribution (OOD) tasks less
studied. This aspect is crucial for real-world applications,
as obtaining a comprehensive prior of all possible situations
an RL agent might encounter is challenging (Beck et al.,
2023).

A key challenge in Meta-Reinforcement Learning (meta-RL) is the task distribution shift, since
the generalization ability of most current metaRL methods is limited to tasks sampled from the
training distribution. In this paper, we propose
Posterior Sampling Bayesian Lifelong In-Context
Reinforcement Learning (PSBL), which is robust
to task distribution shift. PSBL meta-trains a variant of transformer to directly perform amortized
inference about the Predictive Posterior Distribution (PPD) of the optimal policy. Once trained, the
network can infer the PPD online with frozen parameters. The agent then samples actions from the
approximate PPD to perform online exploration,
which progressively reduces uncertainty and enhances performance in the interaction with the environment. This property is known as in-context
learning. Experimental results demonstrate that
PSBL significantly outperforms standard Meta
RL methods both in tasks with sparse rewards and
dense rewards when the test task distribution is
strictly shifted from the training distribution.

A popular approach in meta-RL is to meta-learn a good initialization of the network across tasks, requiring only a few
policy gradient steps for adaptation in test tasks (Finn et al.,
2017; Stadie et al., 2018; Zintgraf et al., 2019a). However,
when a task distribution shift occurs, these methods struggle
to provide a robust initialization for OOD tasks. Meanwhile,
the meta-RL algorithm degrades into a conventional RL algorithm, forcing the agent to start almost from scratch and
rely on policy gradients to tackle unseen tasks (Beck et al.,
2023). This process can necessitate millions of interactions
at test time, which is costly in real-world applications.
Another promising meta-RL approach involves metatraining a memory-augmented network to infer the task
distribution and a policy network conditioned on this distribution to maximize expected returns (Humplik et al., 2019;
Zintgraf et al., 2019b; Liu et al., 2021). Once trained, the
memory-augmented network can function as if performing online inference, achieving high data efficiency when
adapting new tasks sampled from the training distribution.
However, these methods often struggle to generalize to OOD
tasks. This is because the policy network, typically a simple feedforward network, lacks the capability to perform
approximate inference online, making it difficult to map
unseen task distributions to optimal actions.

1. Introduction
Overfitting and lack of generalization are considered as
the two of the main challenges for Deep Reinforcement
Learning (RL), which hinder the wide range of application
in the Real world (Rajeswaran et al., 2017; Zhang et al.,
2018; Cobbe et al., 2019; Fakoor et al., 2019; Song et al.,
2019; Mendonca et al., 2020). Recently, a growing number
of Meta-Reinforcement Learning (meta-RL) methods have
been proposed to tackle these issues by meta-learning policies that quickly adapt to unseen but similar tasks. Given a
task distribution, these meta-RL agents are trained to max-

To tackle these generalization challenges, we propose training a transformer-based network to directly perform amortized inference about the Predictive Posterior Distribution
(PPD) of the optimal policy. This can be accomplished
within an end-to-end posterior sampling framework in Reinforcement Learning. Once trained, the network can infer
the PPD online with frozen parameters. The agent then samples actions from the approximate PPD to perform online
exploration, thereby progressively reducing uncertainty and

1

College of Control Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University, 38 Zheda Road, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.. Correspondence
to: Qinyuan Ren <renqinyuan@zju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

