Language Models are Super Mario:
Absorbing Abilities from Homologous Models as a Free Lunch

Le Yu 1 Bowen Yu 1 Haiyang Yu 1 Fei Huang 1 Yongbin Li 1

Abstract
In this paper, we unveil that Language Models
(LMs) can acquire new capabilities by assimilating parameters from homologous models without
retraining or GPUs. We first introduce DARE to
set most delta parameters (i.e., the disparity between fine-tuned and pre-trained parameters) to
zeros without affecting the abilities of Supervised
Fine-Tuning (SFT) LMs, which randomly Drops
delta parameters with a ratio p And REscales the
remaining ones by 1/(1 − p) to approximate the
original embeddings. Then, we use DARE as a
versatile plug-in to sparsify delta parameters of
multiple SFT homologous models for mitigating
parameter interference and merge them into a single model by parameter fusing. We experiment
with encoder- and decoder-based LMs, showing
that: (1) SFT delta parameter value ranges are
typically small (within 0.002) with extreme redundancy, and DARE can effortlessly eliminate 90%
or even 99% of them; (2) DARE can merge multiple task-specific LMs into one LM with diverse
capabilities. Notably, this phenomenon is more
pronounced in large-scale LMs, where the merged
LM reveals the potential to surpass the performance of any source LM, providing a new discovery. We also utilize DARE to create a merged
LM that ranks first among models with 7 billion
parameters on the Open LLM Leaderboard.

Figure 1: (Left) DARE can effectively eliminate 90% or
even 99% delta parameters of WizardMath on GSM8K.
(Right) DARE can merge multiple task-specific SFT language models into a single model with all the abilities.
LM, MATH, and Code are abbreviations of WizardLM13B, WizardMath-13B, and llama-2-13b-code-alpaca.

of other mutants to strengthen himself. Likewise, the protagonist in the Super Mario games can gain superpowers
like throwing fireballs by absorbing in-game items. In this
paper, we astonishingly find that Language Models (LMs),
similar to Apocalypse and Super Mario, can enhance their
capabilities by absorbing other models without the need for
retraining or even GPUs.
Formally, Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) is the most widely
adopted strategy for unlocking task-specific abilities to LMs
by optimizing their parameters (Dodge et al., 2020; Zhao
et al., 2023). The effectiveness of SFT is fully evident in
the alteration of the model parameters before and after SFT,
referred to as delta parameters (Ding et al., 2023). We
first show that SFT LM (either encoder- or decoder-based)
always tends to acquire excessively redundant delta parameters. To be specific, we present DARE (Drop And REscale),
which randomly sets certain delta parameters to zeros with a
drop rate p and subsequently rescales the remaining ones by
a factor of 1/(1 − p). Although conceptually simple, DARE
can eliminate up to 99% delta parameters with minimal impact on the performance when the LM’s parameters reach 70
billion (see Figure 1(a)). Moreover, the more parameters the
LM has, the larger p it can tolerate. We attribute the effectiveness of DARE to its ability to approximate the original
embeddings, which is verified theoretically and empirically.

1. Introduction
Human beings have harbored a longstanding desire to acquire additional abilities through various ways, as expressed
in mediums like movies and games. For example, in XMen’s Apocalypse, the character can absorb the powers
1

Alibaba Group.
Correspondence to:
Bowen
<yubowen.ybw@alibaba-inc.com>,
Yongbin
Li
Yu
<shuide.lyb@alibaba-inc.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Furthermore, we can merge multiple homologous SFT LMs
(fine-tuned from the same backbone) based on DARE with1

