Generalization in Kernel Regression Under Realistic Assumptions

Daniel Barzilai 1 Ohad Shamir 1

Abstract

Rakhlin, 2020; Mei et al., 2022; Xiao & Pennington, 2022;
Mallinar et al., 2022). This is due both to their classical
importance and their relation to over-parameterized neural
networks via the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) and Gaussian Process Kernel (GPK, also known as NNGP) (Lee et al.,
2017; Jacot et al., 2018). However, there is still a large gap
between empirical observations and current theoretical analysis. As we argue in detail in Sec. 2, past works tend to
either make unrealistic assumptions (often inspired by the
analysis of linear regression) that do not hold for common
kernels of interest, or are limited to a very narrow problem
setup. This is not just a technical limitation, but rather, as we
will show, may result in an inaccurate analysis for common
kernels in practice. In this paper, we provide simple, sharp,
and rigorous upper bounds for the generalization error of
kernel regression, which hold under realistic assumptions
and can be applied to a wide range of kernels and settings.

It is by now well-established that modern overparameterized models seem to elude the biasvariance tradeoff and generalize well despite overfitting noise. Many recent works attempt to analyze this phenomenon in the relatively tractable
setting of kernel regression. However, as we argue in detail, most past works on this topic either
make unrealistic assumptions, or focus on a narrow problem setup. This work aims to provide a
unified theory to upper bound the excess risk of
kernel regression for nearly all common and realistic settings. When applied to common kernels,
our results imply benign overfitting in high input
dimensions, nearly tempered overfitting in fixed
dimensions, and explicit convergence rates for
regularized regression. As a by-product, we obtain time-dependent bounds for neural networks
trained in the kernel regime. Our results rely on
new relative perturbation bounds for the eigenvalues of kernel matrices, which may be of independent interest. These reveal a self-regularization
phenomenon, whereby a heavy tail in the eigendecomposition of the kernel implicitly leads to good
generalization.

Specifically, we demonstrate that many kernels have a builtin self-regularization property, meaning that the structure of
the kernel provides an implicit form of regularization. This
is characterized by novel relative deviation bounds on the
eigenvalues of kernel matrices, which may be of independent interest and may be useful in many other settings.
We then apply these tools to analyze the generalization
performance of regularized and un-regularized kernel regression. Self-regularization causes the kernel to learn a
function that generalizes well, even if it can interpolate the
data. As such, we provide upper bounds for the excess risk
(and its bias and variance components) regardless of the
amount of explicit regularization. Importantly, our mild
assumptions allow us to apply these bounds to common
kernels, including NTKs (and hence provide insights on
generalization in neural networks). Specifically, our main
results and insights include the following:

1. Introduction
It is by now well-established that various families of highly
over-parameterized models tend to generalize well, even
when perfectly fitting noisy data (Zhang et al., 2021; Belkin
et al., 2019). This phenomenon seemingly contradicts the
classical intuition of the bias-variance tradeoff, and motivated a large literature attempting to explain it (Bartlett et al.,
2020; Hastie et al., 2022).

Relative concentration bounds for the eigenvalues of
kernel matrices (Thm. 3.1). We derive both upper and
lower bounds for the eigenvalues of kernel matrices under
very mild assumptions which hold for common kernels. In
particular, this highlights a self-regularization phenomenon
whereby the eigenvalues of the kernel matrix behave as if
one added an explicit regularization term to the training
objective.

In particular, a long series of works attempted to understand
this phenomenon in the context of kernel methods (Liang &
1

Weizmann Institute of Science.
Correspondence to:
Daniel Barzilai <daniel.barzilai@weizmann.ac.il>, Ohad Shamir
<ohad.shamir@weizmann.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

A general-purpose upper bound for the excess risk in
1

