Gaussian Plane-Wave Neural Operator For Electron Density Estimation

Seongsu Kim 1 Sungsoo Ahn 1

Abstract

complex relationships within data. Sinitskiy & Pande (2018)
utilized a voxel-based 3D convolutional net with a U-Net
architecture to predict density at a voxel level. Jørgensen &
Bhowmik (2020) and Jørgensen & Bhowmik (2022) aimed
to predict the electron density using graph neural networks,
where the graph consists of interacting atom vertices and a
special query point vertex for which the density is predicted.

This work studies machine learning for electron
density prediction, which is fundamental for understanding chemical systems and density functional theory (DFT) simulations. To this end, we
introduce the Gaussian plane-wave neural operator (GPWNO), which operates in the infinitedimensional functional space using the planewave and Gaussian-type orbital bases, widely recognized in the context of DFT. In particular, both
high- and low-frequency components of the density can be effectively represented due to the complementary nature of the two bases. Extensive
experiments on QM9, MD, and material project
datasets demonstrate GPWNO’s superior performance over ten baselines.

More recently, Cheng & Peng (2023) tackled the problem
with neural operator, an attractive paradigm that can map
the given molecule into a function space of electron density
whose output can be evaluated at an arbitrary point. In
particular, they proposed to predict the density using atomcentered Gaussian-type orbital (Hehre et al., 1972, GTO).
In particular, exploration of the plane-wave (PW) basis, a
cornerstone in DFT solvers like VASP (Hafner, 2008), Quantum Espresso (Giannozzi et al., 2017), and ABINIT (Gonze
et al., 2009), remains absent within the domain of neural
operators. The PW basis comprises periodic wavefunctions
that meet the periodic boundary condition of the molecule.
It is an appealing approach due to its ease of manipulation
via fast Fourier transformation and its ability to effectively
capture low-frequency signals such as those associated with
long-range interactions, e.g., Coloumb potentials. The most
similar work is the Fourier neural operator (Li et al., 2020a,
FNO) baseline considered by Cheng & Peng (2023), which
uses the Fourier basis consisting of periodic functions. The
difference is how the Fourier basis does not respect the
periodic boundary condition while the PW basis does.

1. Introduction
The study of electron density is fundamental for understanding the properties and behaviors of chemical systems. Its
estimation is a crucial component of Kohn-Sham density
functional theory (Kohn & Sham, 1965, DFT) for simulations like ground-state energy estimation with applications
to the development of new battery cathodes (Kondrakov
et al., 2017), solar cell materials (Chang et al., 2021) or drug
design (Adekoya et al., 2022). However, the computational
complexity of the DFT is cubic in the system size and is
often prohibitively expensive for real-world problems.

Motivated by this lack of exploration, we aim to predict the
electron density using neural operators that operate on the
PW basis. However, using a moderately-sized PW basis,
e.g., with 103 elements, alone cannot accurately express the
electron density, which is in agreement with the poor performance of FNO reported by Cheng & Peng (2023). While
DFT solvers overcome this by increasing the size, e.g., up
to 8.9 × 107 , the neural operators are not scalable to such
high frequencies. Our focus is to enjoy the benefits of PW
basis while keeping the basis size realistic for neural operators. Prior works on DFT, e.g., pseudopotential (Harrison,
1966; Bachelet et al., 1982), linearized augmented planewave (Koelling & Arbman, 1975), projector augmented
wave (Blöchl, 1994), and mixed density fitting (Sun et al.,
2017), hint that it is possible to reduce the required basis

Machine learning has shown promise in predicting electron
density with less computational complexity. Early works investigated methods based on kernel ridge regression (Grisafi
et al., 2018; Bogojeski et al., 2018) and Gaussian processbased regression (Grisafi et al., 2018; Fabrizio et al., 2019).
Recently, deep learning methods have been increasingly
investigated due to their remarkable capability to capture
1
Pohang University of Science and Technology
(POSTECH), Pohang, South Korea.
Correspondence to:
Seongsu Kim <seongsukim@postech.ac.kr>, Sungsoo Ahn
<sungsoo.ahn@postech.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

