Transforming and Combining Rewards for Aligning Large Language Models

Zihao Wang 1 † Chirag Nagpal 2 Jonathan Berant 3 Jacob Eisenstein 3 Alex D’Amour 3 Sanmi Koyejo 4 3
Victor Veitch 1 3

Abstract
A common approach for aligning language models to human preferences is to first learn a reward
model from preference data, and then use this reward model to update the language model. We
study two closely related problems that arise in
this approach. First, any monotone transformation
of the reward model preserves preference ranking;
is there a choice that is “better” than others? Second, we often wish to align language models to
multiple properties: how should we combine multiple reward models? Using a probabilistic interpretation of the alignment procedure, we identify
a natural choice for transformation for (the common case of) rewards learned from Bradley-Terry
preference models. The derived transformation is
straightforward: we apply a log-sigmoid function
to the centered rewards, a method we term “LSCtransformation” (log-sigmoid-centered transformation). This transformation has two important
properties. First, it emphasizes improving poorlyperforming outputs, rather than outputs that already score well. This mitigates both underfitting
(where some prompts are not improved) and reward hacking (where the model learns to exploit
misspecification of the reward model). Second, it
enables principled aggregation of rewards by linking summation to logical conjunction: the sum
of transformed rewards corresponds to the probability that the output is “good” in all measured
properties, in a sense we make precise. Experiments aligning language models to be both helpful
and harmless using RLHF show substantial improvements over the baseline (non-transformed)
approach.

Figure 1. Transforming the Bradley-Terry reward both mitigates
overfitting and makes addition behave as logical AND. This leads
to significant improvements in aligned model quality relative to
standard practice. Each point on the plot is a LLM aligned with a
different KL penalty weight. The y-axis shows improvement over
the base supervise finetuned (SFT) LLM in both helpfulness AND
harmlessness, as judged by an external evaluator model (not used
for RLHF). The baseline aggregates suboptimally (usually losing
on either helpfulness or harmlessness) and suffers reward hacking
(performance decays in the high KL regime). Details in Section 5.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we are interested in how to align large language models in order to bias their outputs towards having
desired properties—e.g., to be helpful, harmless, factual, or
creative (Ziegler et al., 2019; Stiennon et al., 2020; Ouyang
et al., 2022). We study the two-stage approach where we
first learn a reward model from human preferences, and then
align the language model so that its outputs have high values
under the reward model. In this context, we’re interested in
two fundamental problems:
1. The alignment step maximizes the expected learned
reward model. However, any monotone transformation of the reward preserves the interpretation of the
alignment procedure as biasing the language model
towards human-preferred outputs. Can we improve the
alignment step by transforming the learned reward?

† Work done during internship at Google DeepMind 1 University
of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA 2 Google Research, Mountain
View, CA, USA 3 Google DeepMind, Mountain View, CA, USA
4
Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Zihao Wang <wangzh@uchicago.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

2. We often wish to align language models to multiple
properties—e.g., outputs should be helpful, and harm1

