Nonparametric Teaching of Implicit Neural Representations

Chen Zhang 1 * Steven Tin Sui Luo 2 * Jason Chun Lok Li 1 Yik-Chung Wu 1 Ngai Wong 1

Abstract

(a)

Target

Current

1-4999th
Iteration

Initial

VS

We investigate the learning of implicit neural
representation (INR) using an overparameterized
multilayer perceptron (MLP) via a novel nonparametric teaching perspective. The latter offers an
efficient example selection framework for teaching nonparametrically defined (viz. non-closedform) target functions, such as image functions
defined by 2D grids of pixels. To address the
costly training of INRs, we propose a paradigm
called Implicit Neural Teaching (INT) that treats
INR learning as a nonparametric teaching problem, where the given signal being fitted serves as
the target function. The teacher then selects signal fragments for iterative training of the MLP
to achieve fast convergence. By establishing
a connection between MLP evolution through
parameter-based gradient descent and that of function evolution through functional gradient descent
in nonparametric teaching, we show for the first
time that teaching an overparameterized MLP is
consistent with teaching a nonparametric learner.
This new discovery readily permits a convenient
drop-in of nonparametric teaching algorithms to
broadly enhance INR training efficiency, demonstrating 30%+ training time savings across various
input modalities.

(b)

Nonparametric Teacher

0th Iteration

…

Selected
Fragments

4999th Iteration

Tth Iteration

…
(e)

Final

5000th
Iteration

(c) MLP Learner

(d)

Learnt

1st Iteration

T+1th Iteration

…

5000th Iteration

…

Figure 1. Fitting a 2D grayscale image signal with Implicit Neural
Teaching (INT): By comparing the disparity between the given
signal and the current MLP output (a), the nonparametric teacher
(b) selectively chooses examples (pixels) of the greatest disparity
(red boxes), instead of a raster scan, to feed to the MLP learner (c)
who undergoes learning (d) and outputs the final (e).

coordinates of the given signal and outputs corresponding
values for each input location, e.g., the MLP maps 2D input
coordinates to their respective 8-bit levels for a grayscale
image. INR has proven to be promising in various domains, including vision data representation (Sitzmann et al.,
2020b; Reddy et al., 2021), view synthesis (Martin-Brualla
et al., 2021; Mildenhall et al., 2021) and signal compression (Dupont et al., 2021; Pistilli et al., 2022; Strümpler
et al., 2022; Schwarz et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
Implicit neural representation (INR) (Sitzmann et al., 2020b;
Tancik et al., 2020) focuses on modeling a given signal,
which is often discrete, through the use of an overparameterized multilayer perceptron (MLP) such that the signal
is accurately fitted by this MLP preserving great details.
Such an overparameterized MLP inputs low-dimensional
Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, The University of Hong Kong, HKSAR,
China 2 Department of Computer Science, The University of
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Correspondence to: Ngai Wong
<nwong@eee.hku.hk>.

Nevertheless, the training of an overparameterized multilayer perceptron (MLP) in INR can be costly, especially
when dealing with high-definition signals. For instance,
consider the case of a 2D grayscale image with a resolution
of 1024 × 1024, which leads to a training set comprising
106 pixels. Additionally, for long videos, the scale of the

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Our project page is available at https://chen2hang.github.
io/_publications/nonparametric_teaching_of_implicit_
neural_representations/int.html.

*

1

