Tag-LLM: Repurposing General-Purpose LLMs for Specialized Domains

Junhong Shen∗ 1 Neil Tenenholtz 2 James Brian Hall 2 David Alvarez-Melis 2 3 Nicolò Fusi 2

Abstract

non-linguistic, symbolic representations, such as DNA and
protein sequences. For instance, general-purpose LLMs like
LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023) and GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023)
have demonstrated notable deficiencies in processing amino
acid sequences for proteins (e.g., MTVPDRSEIAG) (Walker
et al., 2023) and SMILES strings for chemical compounds
(e.g., CCO[C@H](C(=O)O)) (Guo et al., 2023), hampering their adoption for a wide range of scientific problems.

Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable proficiency in understanding
and generating natural language. However, their
capabilities wane in highly specialized domains
underrepresented in the pretraining corpus, such
as physical and biomedical sciences. This work
explores how to repurpose general LLMs into effective task solvers for specialized domains. We
introduce a novel, model-agnostic framework for
learning custom input tags, which are parameterized as continuous vectors appended to the LLM’s
embedding layer, to condition the LLM. We design two types of input tags: domain tags are used
to delimit specialized representations (e.g., chemical formulas) and provide domain-relevant context; function tags are used to represent specific
functions (e.g., predicting molecular properties)
and compress function-solving instructions. We
develop a three-stage protocol to learn these tags
using auxiliary data and domain knowledge. By
explicitly disentangling task domains from task
functions, our method enables zero-shot generalization to unseen problems through diverse combinations of the input tags. It also boosts LLM’s
performance in various specialized domains, such
as predicting protein or chemical properties and
modeling drug-target interactions, outperforming
expert models tailored to these tasks.

To address this issue, various specialized LMs have been
developed in fields such as disease diagnosis (Wang et al.,
2023), chemical synthesis (Chilingaryan et al., 2022), and
drug discovery (Vinod et al., 2023). While these models
perform well, they are trained from scratch, requiring a significant amount of compute and in-domain data. To reduce
the development cost and take advantage of the capacity
of general LLMs, recent work has proposed to fine-tune existing LLMs or perform in-context learning, but the former
is prone to catastrophic forgetting and can hurt the model’s
reasoning abilities (Singhal et al., 2022; Lewkowycz et al.,
2022), while the latter is less effective and robust (Hou & Ji,
2023; Lu et al., 2022b). We thus ask: can we effectively repurpose general-purpose LLMs for specialized tasks without
compromising their linguistic and reasoning capabilities?
Our proposed solution is TAG -LLM, a modular system
of meta-linguistic input tags that condition the LLM for
domain- and task-specific behavior (Figure 1). These input
tags are parameterized as continuous vectors appended to
the LLM’s embedding layer, preserving its original weights
and language capabilities. The idea of adapting models via
learnable embeddings has been partially explored by prompt
tuning (Lester et al., 2021) and prefix tuning methods (Li
& Liang, 2021), which learn soft prompts prepended to the
input. However, these methods require learning a dedicated
set of parameters for every single task, resulting in higher
computational costs and limited reusability. The prompts
are trained directly on the target task, and do not distinguish
between task-specific and general domain knowledge. Once
learned, they affect the entire input globally. In contrast, our
approach seeks to learn modifiers that are reusable across
tasks, have fine-grained localized effects on the input, and
can be trained using more general types of in-domain data.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) excel at processing and
generating text across diverse topics due to their generalpurpose design. However, their performance degrades in
specialized domains underrepresented in the pretraining
corpus. These domains range from natural language with
non-standard lexical distributions, such as health records, to
*

Work done during internship at Microsoft Research. 1 Carnegie
Mellon University 2 Microsoft Research 3 Harvard University. Correspondence to: Junhong Shen <junhongs@andrew.cmu.edu>.

Our method enables generalization to new settings by disentangling domains (e.g., ‘French language’ or ‘protein

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

