Unsupervised Representation Learning of Brain Activity via Bridging Voxel
Activity and Functional Connectivity

Ali Behrouz∗ 1 Parsa Delavari∗ 2 Farnoosh Hashemi∗ 1

Abstract

to take advantage of powerful machine learning models in
analyzing them. To overcome this challenge, representation
learning serves as the backbone of machine learning methods on neuroimage data and provides a low-dimensional representation of brain components at different levels of granularity, enabling the understanding of behaviors (Schneider
et al., 2023), brain functions (Yamins & DiCarlo, 2016)
and/or detecting neurological diseases (Uddin et al., 2017).

Effective brain representation learning is a key
step toward the understanding of cognitive
processes and diagnosis of neurological diseases/disorders. Existing studies have focused on
either (1) voxel-level activity, where only a single
weight relating the voxel activity to the task (i.e.,
aggregation of voxel activity over a time window)
is considered, missing their temporal dynamics,
or (2) functional connectivity of the brain in the
level of region of interests, missing voxel-level
activities. We design B RAIN M IXER, an unsupervised learning framework that effectively utilizes
both functional connectivity and associated time
series of voxels to learn voxel-level representation in an unsupervised manner. B RAIN M IXER
employs two simple yet effective MLP-based encoders to simultaneously learn the dynamics of
voxel-level signals and their functional correlations. To encode voxel activity, B RAIN M IXER
fuses information across both time and voxel dimensions via a dynamic attention mechanism. To
learn the structure of the functional connectivity,
B RAIN M IXER presents a temporal graph patching
and encodes each patch by combining its nodes’
features via a new adaptive temporal pooling. Our
experiments show that B RAIN M IXER attains outstanding performance and outperforms 14 baselines in different downstream tasks and setups.

In the neuroimaging literature, studies have mainly focused
on two spatial scales—voxel-level and network-level—as
well as two analysis approaches—multivariate pattern analysis (MVPA) and functional connectivity (Mahmoudi et al.,
2012; Van Den Heuvel & Pol, 2010). The MVPA is often
employed at the voxel-level scale and in task-based studies
to associate neural activities at a very fine-grained and local
level with particular cognitive functions, behaviors, or stimuli. This method has found applications in various areas,
including the detection of neurological conditions (Sundermann et al., 2014; Bray et al., 2009), neurofeedback interventions (Cortese et al., 2021), decoding neural responses
to visual stimuli (Horikawa & Kamitani, 2017), and classifying cognitive states (Mitchell et al., 2003). The functional
connectivity analysis, on the other hand, focuses on the temporal correlations or statistical dependencies between the
activity of different brain regions at larger scales to assess
how these areas communicate and collaborate. This method
has been utilized to study various topics such as task-related
network dynamics (Gonzalez-Castillo & Bandettini, 2018;
Hutchison et al., 2013) and the effects of neurological disorders on brain connectivity (Greicius, 2008; Du et al., 2018).
Limitation of Previous Methods. Despite the advances in
the representation learning of brain signals, existing studies suffer from a subset of five limitations: 1 Study the
human brain at a single scale: Most existing studies study
the brain at either voxel-level or functional connectivity,
while these two scales can provide complementary information to each other; e.g., although voxel-level activity provides detailed and more accurate information about brain
activity, it misses the information about how different areas communicate with each other at a high level. Recently,
this limitation has motivated researchers to search for new
methods of integrating these two levels of analyses (Nieto-

1. Introduction
The recent advancement of neuroimaging has provided rich
information to understand the human brain. The provided
data, however, is high-dimensional and complex in nature (Poldrack & Gorgolewski, 2014), which makes it hard
*

Equal contribution 1 Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada. Correspondence to: Ali Behrouz <ab2947@cornell.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

