ArCHer: Training Language Model Agents via Hierarchical Multi-Turn RL

Yifei Zhou 1 Andrea Zanette 1 Jiayi Pan 1 Sergey Levine 1 Aviral Kumar 2

Abstract

pressed in text or natural language, from writing code (Yang
et al., 2023a; Li et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2018), navigating
the web (Zhou et al., 2023a; Yao et al., 2023a), and using
tools (Schick et al., 2023), all the way to interacting with
humans (Ghosal et al., 2022; Verma et al., 2022; Jaques
et al., 2020). In order to succeed in these domains, an
LLM needs to make a sequence of intelligent decisions over
multiple turns instead of generating the most probable text
completion at each step that is trained to do in pre-training.

A use case of large language models (LLMs) is
in goal-directed decision-making tasks (or “agent”
tasks), where an LLM needs to make intelligent
decisions over a multi-turn interaction to accomplish a task. Reinforcement learning (RL) provides a general paradigm to address such agent
tasks, but current RL methods for LLMs largely
focus on optimizing single-turn rewards (e.g.,
PPO for RLHF). By construction, most singleturn RL methods cannot endow LLMs with the
ability to perform credit assignment, or reason
about their past actions, in multiple turns. How
can we design effective and efficient multi-turn
RL algorithms for LLMs? In this paper, we develop a framework for building multi-turn RL algorithms for fine-tuning LLMs, that preserves the
flexibility of existing single-turn RL methods for
LLMs, while accommodating multiple turns, long
horizons, and delayed rewards. Our framework
builds a hierarchical RL approach and runs two
RL algorithms in parallel: a high-level off-policy
value-based RL algorithm to aggregate reward
over utterances, and a low-level policy gradient
RL algorithm that utilizes this high-level value
function to train a token policy within each turn.
Our hierarchical framework, Actor-Critic Framework with a Hierarchical Structure (ArCHer),
can also give rise to other RL methods. Empirically, we find that ArCHer significantly improves
efficiency and performance on agent tasks, attaining a sample efficiency of about 100x over existing methods, while also improving with larger
model capacity (upto the 7 billion scale).

Despite clear use cases in multi-turn agent problems, most
methods for eliciting goal-directed behavior from LLMs
often rely on myopic objectives that either attempt to
mimic successful demonstrations at each step (Zeng et al.,
2023; Chen et al., 2023), or optimize for single-turn preferences (Touvron et al., 2023; Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al.,
2022). Policies trained via single-turn methods often fail to
perform effective credit assignment (e.g., they fail to identify
good actions that may lead to long-term future performance
despite appearing sub-optimal just at a given step) and do not
endow policies with information-seeking behavior, which
is important in agent problems (e.g., when dealing with a
new tool). Therefore, we consider the problem of building
multi-turn RL approaches that are able to directly maximize
long-term objective of interest (e.g., customer satisfaction at
the end of a multi-turn conversation with an LLM assistant),
formulated via a scalar reward function.
Unlike single-step RL (Touvron et al., 2023; Ouyang et al.,
2022; Bai et al., 2022), training LLMs via multi-turn RL
presents a number of unique challenges. First of all, multiturn RL would require online interaction with external
sources such as humans or web servers, which can be slow
and expensive. Due to this, on-policy methods such as
PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) quickly become impractical
owing to their inability to reuse data from past interaction.
While off-policy methods circumvent this problem, these
methods present other challenges: as the number of tokens
increase with multiple turns (often substantially so, due to
the bias of LLMs towards producing long responses), tokenlevel methods (Snell et al., 2023; Jaques et al., 2020) that
consider individual tokens as actions need to now propagate
reward signal over extremely long horizons. This results
in extremely slow learning speeds over long horizons, with
additional error compounding. For example, token-level
ILQL (Snell et al., 2023) takes more than 10 days to converge on a task in our experiments, while filtered behavior
cloning takes less than a day. To address long horizon issues,

1. Introduction
Owing to their generalist knowledge, large language models
(LLMs) have a tremendous potential to address a wide variety of decision-making or “agent” problems that can be ex1

University of California, Berkeley 2 Google Deepmind. Correspondence to: Yifei Zhou <yifei zhou@berkeley.edu>, Aviral
Kumar <aviralkumar@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

