Understanding Server-Assisted Federated Learning in the Presence of
Incomplete Client Participation

Haibo Yang 1 Peiwen Qiu 2 Prashant Khanduri 3 Minghong Fang 4 Jia Liu 2

1. Introduction

Abstract
Existing works in federated learning (FL) often
assume either full client or uniformly distributed
client participation. However, in reality, some
clients may never participate in FL training (aka
incomplete client participation) due to various
system heterogeneity factors. A popular solution
is the server-assisted federated learning (SA-FL)
framework, where the server uses an auxiliary
dataset. Despite empirical evidence of SA-FL’s
effectiveness in addressing incomplete client participation, theoretical understanding of SA-FL is
lacking. Furthermore, the effects of incomplete
client participation in conventional FL are poorly
understood. This motivates us to rigorously investigate SA-FL. Toward this end, we first show
that conventional FL is not PAC-learnable under
incomplete client participation in the worst case.
Then, we show that the PAC-learnability of FL
with incomplete client participation can indeed
be revived by SA-FL, which theoretically justifies the use of SA-FL for the first time. Lastly,
to provide practical guidance for SA-FL training
under incomplete client participation, we propose
the SAFARI (server-assisted federated averaging)
algorithm that enjoys the same linear convergence
speedup guarantees as classic FL with ideal client
participation assumptions, offering the first SAFL algorithm with convergence guarantee. Extensive experiments on different datasets show
SAFARI significantly improves the performance
under incomplete client participation.

Since the seminal work by McMahan et al. (2017), federated
learning (FL) has emerged as a powerful distributed learning
paradigm that enables a large number of clients (e.g., edge
devices) to collaboratively train a model under a central
server’s coordination. However, as FL gaining popularity, it
has also become apparent that FL faces a key challenge unseen in traditional distributed learning in data-center settings
– system heterogeneity. Generally speaking, system heterogeneity in FL is caused by the massively different computation and communication capabilities at each client (computational power, communication capacity, drop-out rate,
etc.). Studies have shown that system heterogeneity can significantly impact client participation in a highly non-trivial
fashion and render incomplete client participation, which
severely degrades the learning performance (Bonawitz et al.,
2019; Yang et al., 2021a). For example, it is shown in (Yang
et al., 2021a) that more than 30% clients never participate
in FL, while only 30% of the clients contribute to 81% of
the total computation even if the server uniformly samples
the clients. Exacerbating the problem is the fact that clients’
status could be unstable and time-varying due to the aforementioned computation/communication constraints. This
situation sharply contrasts with existing works on FL with
partial client participation, which often assume that clients
engage based on a known random process (Karimireddy
et al., 2020; Malinovsky et al., 2023; Cho et al., 2023).
To mitigate the impact of incomplete client participation,
one approach called server-assisted federated learning (SAFL) has been widely adopted in real-world FL systems in recent years (see, e.g., (Zhao et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2021b)).
The basic idea of SA-FL is to equip the server with a small
auxiliary dataset sampled from population distribution, so
that the distribution deviation induced by incomplete client
participation can be corrected. Nonetheless, while SA-FL
has empirically demonstrated its considerable efficacy in addressing incomplete client participation problem in practice,
there remains a lack of theoretical understanding for SA-FL.
This motivates us to rigorously investigate the efficacy of
SA-FL in the presence of incomplete client participation.

1
Department of Computing and Information Sciences
Ph.D., Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, NY, USA
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The Ohio
State University, Columbus, OH, USA 3 Department of Computer
Science, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA 4 Department
of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Louisville,
Louisville, KY, USA. Correspondence to: Haibo Yang <hbycis@rit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Somewhat counterintuitively, to understand SA-FL, one
must first fully understand the impact of incomplete client
1

