Et Tu Certifications: Robustness Certificates Yield Better Adversarial Examples

Andrew C. Cullen 1 Shijie Liu 1 Paul Montague 2 Sarah M. Erfani 1 Benjamin I.P. Rubinstein 1

Abstract

that practical attacks still exist outside the region of certification. While the existence of norm-minimising adversarial
examples that satisfy this condition should not be controversial, we strongly argue that the certification community has
been underestimating the impact of how these techniques
are framed on non-expert users. Presenting certification
techniques as being robust to adversarial examples has the
potential to induce a false sense of security in users who are
not familiar with the inherent risks facing these models.

In guaranteeing the absence of adversarial examples in an instance’s neighbourhood, certification
mechanisms play an important role in demonstrating neural net robustness. In this paper, we ask if
these certifications can compromise the very models they help to protect? Our new Certification
Aware Attack exploits certifications to produce
computationally efficient norm-minimising adversarial examples 74% more often than comparable
attacks, while reducing the median perturbation
norm by more than 10%. While these attacks
can be used to assess the tightness of certification
bounds, they also highlight that releasing certifications can paradoxically reduce security.

Within this work we demonstrate that this risk is amplified
by the fact that certifications can be exploited to construct
smaller adversarial perturbations than prior approaches.
This attack, which we will henceforth refer to as a Certification Aware Attack exploits the very nature of certifications to
assist in rapidly identifying adversarial examples—a process
that is demonstrated in Figure 1. Exploiting certifications
allows our new attack framework to (i) speed up the initial stages of the search with larger and more informative
jumps, and (ii) to reduce the total adversarial perturbation, which ensures that these adversarial examples have a
higher chance of avoiding detection (Gilmer et al., 2018).
As part of this, we also introduce a cohesive framework for
attacking certified models.

1. Introduction
A troubling property of learned models is that semantically
indistinguishable samples can trigger different model outputs (Biggio et al., 2013). Known as adversarial examples
when constructed deliberately, these samples can be incredibly difficult to detect, especially when the distance to clean
examples is minimised. While adversarial defences have
been proposed as a best-response countermeasure, the security they provide is often illusory as they can be exploited
or evaded by motivated attackers.

The utility of such an attack extends to improving our understanding of the tightness of calculated certifications—for if
a certification is a guaranteed lower bound on the location of
the nearest adversarial example, a norm-minimising attack
corresponds to an upper bound of the same quantity. However, while there is beneficial utility in these attacks, their
existence still demonstrates that certification researchers
must fundamentally reconsider how we think about the security implications of certifications. We believe that the only
appropriate defence is to treat the certifications and class
expectations as highly confidential information that must
not be released, lest it be used to help compromise the very
models the certification mechanisms purport to defend.

As a response to this dynamic, guarantees that no adversarial examples exist within a calculable, bounded region—
through techniques known as Certified Robustness—have
emerged (Weng et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2018; Li et al.,
2019; Salman et al., 2019b; Cullen et al., 2022).
However while these certifications are typically framed as
providing security, they cannot intrinsically distinguish between clean or adversarial examples. This is a consequence
of adversarial examples also being able to be certified, and

2. Background: Certification Mechanisms

1
School of Computing and Information Systems, University of
Melbourne, Parkville, Australia 2 Defence Science and Technology
Group, Adelaide, Australia. Correspondence to: Andrew C. Cullen
<andrew.cullen@unimelb.edu.au>.

Certification mechanisms eschew the responsive view of
adversarial defences in favour of bounding the region in
which adversarial examples x′ can exist for a given input
sample x—typically Bp (x, r) a x-centred p-norm ball of
some radius r. To be sound, a radius must be strictly less

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

