Fast Sampling-Based Sketches for Tensors

William Swartworth 1 David Woodruff 1

Abstract

can be applied to the smaller problem resulting in improved
runtimes.

We introduce a new approach for applying
sampling-based sketches to two and three mode
tensors. We illustrate our technique to construct
sketches for the classical problems of ℓ0 sampling
and producing ℓ1 embeddings. In both settings
we achieve sketches that can be applied to a rank
one tensor in (Rd )⊗q (for q = 2, 3) in time scaling with d rather than d2 or d3 . Our main idea is
a particular sampling construction based on fast
convolution which allows us to quickly compute
sums over sufficiently random subsets of tensor
entries.

A lot of work on sketching has focused on efficiently applying sketches to structured data. For example, if the underlying data is sparse, one might hope for a sketch that can
be applied in input-sparsity time. A different type of structure that has been widely studied in this context is tensor
structure. A line of work has been devoted to developing
fast tensor sketches (Pham & Pagh, 2013; Ahle et al., 2020;
Ahle & Knudsen, 2019; Meister et al., 2019), which are
sketches that can be applied quickly to low-rank tensors. A
rank-one tensor in Rn ⊗ Rn for example (i.e., a rank-one
matrix) only requires O(n) parameters to specify. However,
a naive sketch might require O(n2 ) time to apply if each
entry of the tensor must be calculated to form the sketch.
The goal with tensor sketches is to do better then expanding
into a vector form prior to sketching.

1. Introduction
In the modern area of enormous data sets, space is often at
a premium, and one would like algorithms that either avoid
storing all available data, or that compress existing data. A
common and widely-applied strategy is sketching. Given
a vector x ∈ Rn consisting of the relevant data, a (linear)
sketch of x is given by Sx where S is a linear map down to
a dimension much smaller than n. Typically the goal is to
design S so that some useful statistic of x can be computed
from the sketched vector Sx, even though most of the information about x has been discarded. Linear sketches are
particularly useful in the context of streaming algorithms,
since linear updates to x can be translated to the sketch,
simply by sketching the vector of updates, and adding it to
the previous value of the sketch. Sketches have also found
important applications in speeding up linear-algebraic (and
related) computations (Woodruff et al., 2014). Here, the idea
is to first apply a sketch to reduce the dimensionality of the
problem, while approximately preserving a quantity of interest (e.g., a regression solution). Then standard algorithms

Much of the work based on sketching tensors has focused
on ℓ2 -norm settings. The most studied example is JohnsonLindenstrauss (JL) embeddings, which have been studied
extensively for tensors. For JL sketches, the ideal sketch is
a dense Gaussian sketch. However, such sketches are slow
to apply and so the main interest is in approximating the
properties of a Gaussian sketch with a sketch that can be
applied faster.
We study a completely different type of “sampling-based”
sketch, which is embodied by the ℓ0 sampling problem. The
goal here is to observe a linear sketch of x, and then to
(nearly) uniformly sample an element from x’s support. A
dense Gaussian sketch is completely useless as we would
like a row of our sketch to single out an element of supp(x).
To allow for this, the standard idea is to take a sketch which
performs sparse samples at various scales. We ask: Are there
sampling-based sketches which can be applied quickly to
rank-one tensors?
For tensors with two and three modes (which cover many
tensors of practical importance), we provide a new approach
for constructing sampling-based sketches in the tensor setting. To illustrate our approach, we focus on two fundamental problems: ℓ0 sampling, and ℓ1 embeddings. We recall
the setup for these problems.

Research of William Swartworth and David P. Woodruff
was supported by a Simons Investigator Award, a Google Faculty Award, and NSF Grant No. CCF-2335412. 1 Carnegie
Mellon University. Correspondence to: William Swartworth <wswartwo@andrew.cmu.edu>, David P. Woodruff
<dwoodruf@andrew.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

