Harmonic Self-Conditioned Flow Matching
for joint Multi-Ligand Docking and Binding Site Design

Hannes Stark 1 Bowen Jing 1 Regina Barzilay 1 Tommi Jaakkola 1

Abstract
A significant amount of protein function requires
binding small molecules, including enzymatic
catalysis. As such, designing binding pockets
for small molecules has several impactful applications ranging from drug synthesis to energy
storage. Towards this goal, we first develop H AR MONIC F LOW , an improved generative process
over 3D protein-ligand binding structures based
on our self-conditioned flow matching objective.
F LOW S ITE extends this flow model to jointly generate a protein pocket’s discrete residue types and
the molecule’s binding 3D structure. We show
that H ARMONIC F LOW improves upon state-ofthe-art generative processes for docking in simplicity, generality, and average sample quality in
pocket-level docking. Enabled by this structure
modeling, F LOW S ITE designs binding sites substantially better than baseline approaches.

Figure 1. Binding site design. Given the backbone (green) and
multi-ligand without structure, F LOW S ITE generates residue types
and structure (orange) to bind the multi-ligand and its jointly generated structure (blue). The majority of the pocket is omitted for
visibility.

1. Introduction

we are given a protein pocket via the 3D backbone atom
locations of its residues as well as the 2D chemical graph
of the ligand. We do not assume any knowledge of the 3D
structure or the binding pose of the ligand. Based on this
information, our goal is to predict the amino acid identities
for the given backbone locations (see Figure 1). We also
consider the more challenging task of designing pockets that
simultaneously bind multiple molecules and ions (which we
call multi-ligand). Such multi-ligand binding proteins are
important, for example, in enzyme design, where the ligands
correspond to reactants.

Designing proteins that can bind small molecules has many
applications, ranging from drug synthesis to energy storage
or gene editing. Indeed, a key part of any protein’s function
derives from its ability to bind and interact with other molecular species. For example, we may design proteins that act
as antidotes that sequester toxins or design enzymes that
enable chemical reactions through catalysis, which plays
a major role in most biological processes. We develop
F LOW S ITE to address this design challenge by building on
recent advances in deep learning (DL) based protein design (Dauparas et al., 2022) and protein-molecule docking
(Corso et al., 2023).

This task has not been addressed by deep learning yet. While
deep learning has been successful in designing proteins that
can bind to other proteins (Watson et al., 2023), designing
(multi-)ligand binders is different and arguably harder in
various aspects. For example, no evolutionary information
is directly available, unlike when modeling interactions
between amino acids only. The existing approaches, such
as designing 6 drug binding proteins Polizzi & DeGrado
(2020) or a single enzyme Yeh et al. (2023), build on expert
knowledge and require manual steps. Therefore, we develop

Specifically, we aim to design protein pockets to bind a
certain small molecule (called ligand). We assume that
1
CSAIL, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Hannes Stark <hstark@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

