On the Independence Assumption in Neurosymbolic Learning

Emile van Krieken 1 Pasquale Minervini 1 Edoardo M. Ponti 1 Antonio Vergari 1

r, g

Abstract
All minima
Minima under independence

State-of-the-art neurosymbolic learning systems
use probabilistic reasoning to guide neural networks towards predictions that conform to logical
constraints over symbols. Many such systems assume that the probabilities of the considered symbols are conditionally independent given the input
to simplify learning and reasoning. We study
and criticise this assumption, highlighting how it
can hinder optimisation and prevent uncertainty
quantification. We prove that loss functions bias
conditionally independent neural networks to become overconfident in their predictions. As a result, they are unable to represent uncertainty over
multiple valid options. Furthermore, we prove
that these loss functions are difficult to optimise:
they are non-convex, and their minima are usually highly disconnected. Our theoretical analysis
gives the foundation for replacing the conditional
independence assumption and designing more expressive neurosymbolic probabilistic models.

¬r, ¬g
p1

¬r, g

p2

r, ¬g

Figure 1. The conditional independence assumption discards
valid and potentially meaningful solutions. The tetrahedron (a
3-dimensional probability simplex) represents the distributions
over the options of the problem in Example 1.1: r refers to the red
light and g to the green light. The green triangle represents distributions that assign zero probability to r ∧ g. The blue lines are the
distributions in the green triangle that an independent distribution
can represent. The left (resp. right) blue line represents the distributions where the probability of r (resp. g) is zero. Independent
distributions cannot represent distributions in the dotted green line,
such as p2 that assigns equal probability to only the green or only
the red light being on.
minima immoralia

1. Introduction
Example 1.1. We consider a perception model responsible
for recognising the red and green lights on a traffic light. It
sees a traffic light that it believes to be simultaneously red
and green. A constraint specifies this is impossible, and the
neurosymbolic loss should penalise this. There are three
possible worlds: the model can output that the red light is
on, the green light is on, or neither. How do we choose
among these?

Neurosymbolic learning studies neurosymbolic models that
combine neural perception and symbolic reasoning (Manhaeve et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2018; Badreddine et al., 2022).
These models use logical constraints and data to create a loss
function for learning neural perception models (Giunchiglia
et al., 2022). When used effectively, neurosymbolic learning
methods can use these constraints to improve data efficiency.
However, researchers in the neurosymbolic learning community have found optimising the parameters of the perception
models challenging (Marconato et al., 2023a; van Krieken
et al., 2022; Manhaeve et al., 2021). A major underlying
reason is that neurosymbolic learning cannot provide exact
feedback on how the neural perception model should behave.
We highlight this issue with a simple example.

The set of all beliefs can be represented by the tetrahedron
in Figure 1. We argue that the perception model should
be able to express uncertainty over these three worlds, as
there is no evidence to conclude which one is correct. This
corresponds to the distributions in the green triangle at the
bottom of the figure. We should leave determining any
further preference to the provided data as the constraint
only specifies what worlds are possible but does not specify
which one is correct.

1
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh. Correspondence to: Emile van Krieken <Emile.van.Krieken@ed.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

The majority of probabilistic methods for neurosymbolic
learning rely on a strong assumption: namely, that the differ1

