Explaining Graph Neural Networks via Structure-aware Interaction Index

Ngoc Bui 1 Hieu Trung Nguyen 2 Viet Anh Nguyen 3 Rex Ying 1

Abstract

et al., 2022b) to AI for science (Sun et al., 2020). However,
understanding the rationale behind the prediction of GNNs
remains challenging. As GNNs are gaining popularity in
high-stake domains, their (lack of) explainability becomes
a growing concern (Yuan et al., 2022; Kakkad et al., 2023).
Attempts towards explaining GNNs can be categorized into
two main directions: white- and black-box explanability.
White-box explainers (Pope et al., 2019; Feng et al., 2022b)
typically necessitate access to a model’s internal structures
or gradients. In contrast, black-box explainers (Ying et al.,
2019; Luo et al., 2020; Vu & Thai, 2020; Schlichtkrull et al.,
2020; Yuan et al., 2020) only require querying the model’s
output; hence they are more versatile and applicable to a
broader range of architectures.

The Shapley value is a prominent tool for interpreting black-box machine learning models
thanks to its strong theoretical foundation. However, for models with structured inputs, such as
graph neural networks, existing Shapley-based
explainability approaches either focus solely on
node-wise importance or neglect the graph structure when perturbing the input instance. This
paper introduces the Myerson-Taylor interaction
index that internalizes the graph structure into
attributing the node values and the interaction values among nodes. Unlike the Shapley-based methods, the Myerson-Taylor index decomposes coalitions into components satisfying a pre-chosen connectivity criterion. We prove that the MyersonTaylor index is the unique one that satisfies a
system of five natural axioms accounting for
graph structure and high-order interaction among
nodes. Leveraging these properties, we propose Myerson-Taylor Structure-Aware Graph Explainer (MAGE), a novel explainer that uses the
second-order Myerson-Taylor index to identify
the most important motifs influencing the model
prediction, both positively and negatively. Extensive experiments on various graph datasets
and models demonstrate that our method consistently provides superior subgraph explanations
compared to state-of-the-art methods.

Shapley value (Shapley, 1953) is a game theory concept
successfully applied to explain black-box ML models in
various domains, such as tabular or image data (Lundberg &
Lee, 2017). However, adopting the Shapley values to models
with graph input poses a significant challenge, mainly due
to the combinatorial nature of graph structures. Several
works (Duval & Malliaros, 2021; Yuan et al., 2021; Ye
et al., 2023) have utilized the Shapley value to determine
node importance in the graph input by perturbing the graph
and measuring the change in the model’s prediction when
specific nodes are removed or ablated. The importance
scores, or attribution scores, are used to identify a subset
of nodes most influential to the model prediction (Zhang
et al., 2022a). However, existing approaches to leveraging
Shapley values for graph data encounter several challenges.
First, the Shapley value does not consider the graph structure
when perturbing the graph input. This can lead to perturbed
graphs that may be disconnected or pathological, which the
GNN model does not observe during the training. Assessing
the model on these pathological graphs may inject bias, adversely affecting the estimated attribution scores. Therefore,
Shapley’s attribution may not reflect the true importance of
nodes (Zhang et al., 2022a).

1. Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are ubiquitous thanks to
their predictive power in many applications (Zhou et al.,
2020; Wu et al., 2020). GNNs proliferate in various realworld applications, from natural language processing (Wu
et al., 2023b), image recognition and detection (Han et al.,
2022), point cloud analysis (Shi & Rajkumar, 2020; Zhang

Second, most existing methods focus on attributing importance scores for nodes or edges individually (Zhang et al.,
2022a; Duval & Malliaros, 2021). They then apply a greedy
algorithm to highlight a group of nodes/edges with the highest total node-wise importance. However, this approach is
not suitable for applications requiring the identification of

1

Yale University 2 VinAI Research 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong.
Correspondence to: Ngoc Bui
<ngoc.bui@yale.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

