Estimating Canopy Height at Scale

Jan Pauls 1 Max Zimmer 2 Una M. Kelly 1 Martin Schwartz 3 Sassan Saatchi 4 Philippe Ciais 3
Sebastian Pokutta 2 Martin Brandt 5 Fabian Gieseke 1 6

Abstract
We propose a framework for global-scale canopy
height estimation based on satellite data. Our
model leverages advanced data preprocessing
techniques, resorts to a novel loss function designed to counter geolocation inaccuracies inherent in the ground-truth height measurements, and
employs data from the Shuttle Radar Topography
Mission to effectively filter out erroneous labels in
mountainous regions, enhancing the reliability of
our predictions in those areas. A comparison between predictions and ground-truth labels yields
an MAE / RMSE of 2.43 / 4.73 (meters) overall
and 4.45 / 6.72 (meters) for trees taller than five
meters, which depicts a substantial improvement
compared to existing global-scale maps. The
resulting height map as well as the underlying
framework will facilitate and enhance ecological
analyses at a global scale, including, but not limited to, large-scale forest and biomass monitoring.

Figure 1. A global canopy height map at a 10 m resolution.

affecting our climate is crucial. This includes an accurate
quantification of carbon sinks to monitor carbon distribution, gains, and losses. Despite decades of interest, this
quantification is still inadequate for detailed policymaking.
Traditional methods such as National Forest Inventory (NFI)
measurements, which are based on tracking and measuring
individual trees, have been fundamental in estimating forest
growth and loss, but are limited by their costly nature and
lack of global reach. This problem is worsened by considerably varying forest monitoring efforts/techniques between
nations with different financial resources (Sloan & Sayer,
2015). Advances in both Earth observation and machine
learning have paved the way for the automation of forest
monitoring using satellite data, including optical, radar, and
LiDAR measurements, and nowadays enable more comprehensive global forest assessments (Hu et al., 2020).

1. Introduction
Managing and conserving forest ecosystems worldwide is an
indispensable component of climate adaptation and climate
change mitigation strategies. Precise and up-to-date information about the health and the carbon balance of forests
are, hence, critical to assess the current state of forests, to
trigger appropriate countermeasures against forest loss, and
to develop improved management strategies. In light of
growing carbon emissions and the necessity to comply with
the Paris Agreement on climate, understanding all factors
Department of Information Systems, University of Münster,
Germany 2 Department for AI in Society, Science, and Technology, Zuse Institute Berlin, Germany 3 Laboratoire des Sciences du
Climat et de l’Environnement, LSCE/IPSL, France 4 Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), California Institute of Technology, USA
5
Department of Geosciences and Natural Resource Management,
University of Copenhagen, Denmark 6 Department of Computer
Science, University of Copenhagen, Denmark. Correspondence to:
Jan Pauls <jan.pauls@uni-muenster.de>.

A common way to assess the state of forests is to measure or
to estimate their height, resulting in so-called canopy height
maps. Such height estimates are then used to approximate
the biomass and, thus, carbon, stored in the trees. For this
reason, accurate high-resolution canopy height maps provide insights into forest cycles and dynamics and are vital
for forest management and climate change mitigation. Recent research has addressed canopy height prediction with
classical machine learning approaches (Potapov et al., 2021;
Kacic et al., 2023) and deep neural networks (Schwartz
et al., 2024; Fayad et al., 2023; Lang et al., 2023). While
both global and regional canopy height maps are available,
there is a notable disparity in their quality.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

We address this by providing a framework for generating
global-scale height maps based on satellite imagery. The
overall pipeline is based on a (fully) convolutional neural

1

1

