Visual-Text Cross Alignment:
Refining the Similarity Score in Vision-Language Models

Jinhao Li 1 Haopeng Li 1 Sarah M. Erfani 1 Lei Feng 2 James Bailey 1 Feng Liu 1

Abstract
What does a woodpecker look like?

It has recently been discovered that using a pretrained vision-language model (VLM), e.g., CLIP,
to align a whole query image with several finer
text descriptions generated by a large language
model can significantly enhance zero-shot performance. However, in this paper, we empirically
find that the finer descriptions tend to align more
effectively with local areas of the query image
rather than the whole image, and then we theoretically validate this finding. Thus, we present
a method called weighted visual-text cross alignment (WCA). This method begins with a localized
visual prompting technique, designed to identify
local visual areas within the query image. The
local visual areas are then cross-aligned with the
finer descriptions by creating a similarity matrix using the pre-trained VLM. To determine
how well a query image aligns with each category, we develop a score function based on the
weighted similarities in this matrix. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that our method significantly improves zero-shot performance across
various datasets, achieving results that are even
comparable to few-shot learning methods. The
code is available at github.com/tmlr-group/WCA.

LLM
A red patch on the head

Image Encoder

Text Encoder

Score

24.94

Image Encoder

30.10

Figure 1. Aligning an entire image with a detailed text description results in lower scaled cosine similarity, as shown on the
left. Aligning the description with a specific image part, such as
the detailed red patch (on the right), increases the score.

remarkable performance in zero-shot classification. Despite
its achievements, CLIP’s performance exhibits notable sensitivity to the prompts used during the inference stage (Radford et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2022b). For example, Zhou
et al. (2022b) has highlighted that changing the prompt
from “a photo of [CLASS]” to “a photo of a [CLASS]”
can lead to a performance boost of 6%. Crafting effective
prompts is crucial but it requires significant time, effort, and
domain-specific knowledge (Zhou et al., 2022b), making it
challenging to deploy such models in practical applications.
To address the above issue, a promising solution is to use
large language models (LLMs) to generate several finer text
descriptions of each category (Menon & Vondrick, 2022;
Pratt et al., 2023). This strategy helps reduce the manual effort in creating prompts and, more importantly, does not necessitate additional turning, thereby more easily preserving
models’ generalization abilities. The ability to generalize is
a crucial issue in prompt-learning methods (Li et al., 2022b;
Wang et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2023; Tanwisuth et al., 2023)
as these methods tend to overfit training data. LLM-based
visual-text alignment emphasizes global matching, namely,
text descriptions are aligned with the whole image.

1. Introduction
Following the significant advancements of large-scale pretraining in natural language processing (Devlin et al., 2018;
Radford et al., 2018; 2019; Brown et al., 2020), the CLIP
model (Radford et al., 2021) scales up its pre-training data
through aligning images and the corresponding natural language captions in the shared latent space, which achieves
1
School of Computing and Information Systems, University
of Melbourne, Australia. 2 Information Systems Technology and
Design Pillar, Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore. Correspondence to: Feng Liu <fengliu.ml@gmail.com>.

However, in this paper, we find:
Finer-grained text descriptions may align more accurately with the specific area of an image but not necessarily with the image as a whole.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

