Environment Design for Inverse Reinforcement Learning

Thomas Kleine Buening 1 * Victor Villin 2 * Christos Dimitrakakis 2

Abstract

dynamics differ from the ones we learned from.

Learning a reward function from demonstrations suffers from low sample-efficiency. Even
with abundant data, current inverse reinforcement
learning methods that focus on learning from a single environment can fail to handle slight changes
in the environment dynamics. We tackle these
challenges through adaptive environment design.
In our framework, the learner repeatedly interacts
with the expert, with the former selecting environments to identify the reward function as quickly
as possible from the expert’s demonstrations in
said environments. This results in improvements
in both sample-efficiency and robustness, as we
show experimentally, for both exact and approximate inference.

However, recent work has found that IRL methods tend
to heavily specialise (“overfit”) to the specific transition
dynamics under which the demonstrations were provided,
thereby failing to generalise even across minor changes in
the environment (Toyer et al., 2020). More generally, even
with unlimited access to expert demonstrations, we may still
fail to learn suitable reward functions from a fixed environment. In particular, prior work has explored the identifiability problem in IRL (Cao et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2021),
illustrating the inherent limitations of IRL when learning
from expert demonstrations in a single, fixed environment.
In our study, we consider the situation where we can design a sequence of environments, in which the expert will
demonstrate the task. This can either mean slightly modifying a base environment, or selecting an environment from
a finite set. Crafting new environments can involve simple
adjustments such as relocating objects or adding obstacles,
which can be done with little effort and cost. In open-world
settings, simply having different task conditions (e.g., different cars, locations, or time-of-day in a vehicle scenario)
amounts to a different environment.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a powerful framework for
autonomous decision-making in games (Mnih et al., 2015),
continuous control problems (Lillicrap et al., 2015), and
robotics (Levine et al., 2016). However, specifying suitable
reward functions remains one of the main barriers to the
wider application of RL in real-world settings and methods
that allow us to communicate tasks without manually defining reward functions could be of great practical value. One
such approach is Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL),
which aims to find a reward function that explains observed
(human) behaviour (Russell, 1998; Ng & Russell, 2000).

Contributions. We propose algorithms for designing environments in order to infer human goals from demonstrations.
This requires two key components: firstly, an environment
design algorithm and secondly, an inference algorithm for
data from multiple environment dynamics. Our hypothesis is that intelligent environment design can significantly
improve both sample-efficiency of IRL methods and the
robustness of learned rewards against variations in the environment dynamics. An example where our approach is
applicable is given in Figure 1, where we need to learn
the reward function (i.e., the location of the goal and lava
squares). In summary, our contributions are:

Much of recent effort in IRL has been devoted to making
existing methods more sample-efficient as well as robust
to changes in the environment dynamics (Arora & Doshi,
2021). Sample-efficiency is crucial, as data requires expensive human input. We also need robust estimates of the
unknown reward function, so that the resulting policies remain near-optimal, even when the deployed environment

1. An environment design framework that selects informative demo environments for the experts (Section 3).
2. An objective based on maximin Bayesian regret to
choose environments in a way that compels the expert
to provide useful information about the unknown reward
function (Section 4).

*

Equal contribution 1 The Alan Turing Institute, London, UK
Université de Neuchâtel, Neuchâtel, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Thomas Kleine Buening <tbuening@turing.ac.uk>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

3. An extension of Bayesian IRL and Maximum Entropy
IRL to multiple environments (Section 5). We provide
1

