Probabilistic Modeling of Interpersonal Coordination Processes

Paulo Soares 1 Adarsh Pyarelal 1 Meghavarshini Krishnaswamy 1 Emily Butler 1 Kobus Barnard 1

Abstract

they need to be coordinated. This example illustrates that
the concept of coordination is intuitively understood by
most people, i.e., ‘you know it when you see it’. However,
defining it precisely—and computationally—is challenging.

We develop a novel probabilistic model for interpersonal coordination as a latent phenomenon
explaining statistical temporal influence between
multiple components in a system. For example,
the state of one person can influence that of another at a later time, as indicated by their observed
behaviors. We characterize coordination as the
degree to which the distributions for such states at
one time point are merged for the next salient time
point. We evaluate our model in the context of
three-person teams executing a virtual search and
rescue (SAR) mission. We first use synthetic data
to confirm that our technical definition of coordination is consistent with expectations and that we
can recover generated coordination despite noise.
We then show that captured coordination can be
predictive of team performance on real data. Here
we use speech vocalics and semantics to infer
coordination for 36 teams carrying out two successive SAR missions. In two different datasets,
we find that coordination is generally predictive
of team score for the second mission, but not for
the first, where teams are largely learning to play
the game. In addition, we found that including a
semantic modality improves prediction in some
scenarios. This shows that our intuitive technical
definition can capture useful explanatory aspects
of team behavior.

We study coordination in the context of a system of humans
working together towards a common goal (i.e., collaboration) or contrastive goals (i.e., competition). Coordination
here means the spontaneous temporal synchronization of
behavioral sub-processes among individuals in social interactions, known as interpersonal coordination (Cornejo
et al., 2017; Butler, 2022). Computationally, we interpret
coordination as the causal linkage of a latent process that
captures important interactions and could predict outcomes.
This perspective on coordination does not require agency,
goal-directed behavior, or modeling as a game, unlike the
game-theoretic view (Cooper, 1999). It focuses on how one
system abstraction (e.g., communication behavior), influences another.
Such abstraction is needed to endow systems with interpretable understanding of complex interactions among humans. We are motivated to assess coordination in scenarios where it remains implicit, subliminal, unconscious,
or perhaps salient to participants but not easily explained,
such as when two individuals seamlessly connect while
performing a task. We are specifically interested in temporal correlations resulting from causal interactions between
system components, excluding coordination due to unrelated factors—e.g., correlated brain activity between people
watching the same movie simultaneously, without being in
the same place (Hasson et al., 2004). This phenomenon is
often labeled as coordination, but we prefer the term ‘synchrony’. It is typically assessed through data correlations
over time, but these correlations do not reflect interpersonal
interaction; rather, they are tied to shared external factors,
such as the movie being co-watched in this example.

1. Introduction
In a basketball game, when a team is on the offense, they
must maintain proper spacing and timing to execute plays
effectively without interfering with each other’s positions.
When on defense, they must work together to switch assignments, cover open areas, and block shots. In other words,

Most current approaches do not directly address coordination front and center as an explanatory concept. It is
commonly assumed that temporal correlations reflect coordination without defining what it means computationally.
This limits the interpretability of coordination quantities
and makes integrating signals from different modalities and
timescales complex.

* Equal contribution 1 University of Arizona. Correspondence
to: Paulo Soares <paulosoares@arizona.edu>, Adarsh Pyarelal
<adarsh@arizona.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41𝑠𝑡 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Notably, Butner et al. (2014)—influenced by von Holst
1

