Transformers, Parallel Computation, and Logarithmic Depth

Clayton Sanford 1 Daniel Hsu 1 Matus Telgarsky 2

Abstract

grained representational results in the scaling regime where
context length grows but model depth is constant. In this
regime, basic algorithmic tasks like matching parentheses
and evaluating Boolean formulas are impossible.

We show that a constant number of self-attention
layers can efficiently simulate—and be simulated by—a constant number of communication
rounds of Massively Parallel Computation, a popular model of distributed computing with wideranging algorithmic results. As a consequence,
we show that logarithmic depth is sufficient for
transformers to solve basic computational tasks
that cannot be efficiently solved by several other
neural sequence models and sub-quadratic transformer approximations. We thus establish parallelism as a key distinguishing property of transformers.

1

In this work, we identify parallelism as a key to distinguishing transformers from other architectures. While recurrent architectures process their inputs serially, transformers allow independent interactions between the input tokens, mediated by the inner products between query and
key embeddings in self-attention units. We leverage this
property of self-attention to establish a formal connection
between transformers and Massively Parallel Computation
(MPC) (Karloff et al., 2010). Concretely, we design transformers that simulate MPC protocols (and vice versa), and
in doing so, we exhibit a wide range of computational tasks
that are solved by logarithmic-depth transformers, including
tasks that cannot be efficiently solved with other architectures such as graph neural nets and recurrent models.

Introduction

The transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) has emerged as the
dominant neural architecture for many sequential modeling
tasks such as machine translation (Radford et al., 2019) and
protein folding (Jumper et al., 2021). Reasons for the success of transformers include suitability to modern hardware
and training stability: unlike in recurrent models, inference
and training can be efficiently parallelized, and training is
less vulnerable to vanishing and exploding gradients. However, the advantages of transformers over other neural architectures can be understood more fundamentally via the lens
of representation, which regards neural nets as parameterized functions and asks what they can efficiently compute.

1.1

Our Results

We advance the understanding of transformers’ representational capabilities with the following results.
1. The algorithmic capabilities and limitations of
logarithmic-depth transformers are captured by the MPC
model (Section 3).
2. There is a simple sequential task that (i) is solved by
(and, empirically, learned from data using) logarithmicdepth transformers, but (ii) cannot be efficiently solved
by several alternative architectures (Sections 4 and 5).

Many previous theoretical studies of transformers establish
(approximation-theoretic and computational) universality
properties, but only at large model sizes (Yun et al., 2020;
Pérez et al., 2021). These results are not unique to transformers and reveal little about which tasks can be solved in a
size-efficient manner. Several other works (e.g., Hahn, 2020;
Merrill & Sabharwal, 2022; Sanford et al., 2023) give fine-

In more detail, our first collection of results, Theorems 3.1
and 3.4, show that any R-round MPC protocol can be implemented by a transformer of depth O(R), and that any depthL transformer can be simulated by an O(L)-round MPC protocol. The former implies that several graph problems are
solved by logarithmic-depth transformers (Corollary 3.3);
the latter implies the near-optimality of these transformers (Corollary 3.5) conditional on a well-known conjecture
about the limitations of MPC algorithms (Conjecture 2.4). A
key technical step (Lemma 3.2) shows how transformers can
implement the simultaneous message-passing used in MPC
protocols to communicate between machines. While previous works (Sanford et al., 2023) have used communication

1
Department of Computer Science, Columbia University, New
York, NY, USA 2 Courant Institute, New York University, New
York, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Clayton Sanford <clayton.h.sanford@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

