Momentum Particle Maximum Likelihood
Jen Ning Lim 1 Juan Kuntz 2 Samuel Power 3 Adam M. Johansen 1

Abstract

by constructing an objective defined over an extended space,
whose optima are in one-to-one correspondence with those
of the MLE problem. To this end, we define the ‘free energy’
functional:


Z
q (x)
E (θ, q) := log
q (x) dx.
(1)
pθ (y, x)

Maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) of latent
variable models is often recast as the minimization of a free energy functional over an extended
space of parameters and probability distributions.
This perspective was recently combined with insights from optimal transport to obtain novel
particle-based algorithms for fitting latent variable
models to data. Drawing inspiration from prior
works which interpret ‘momentum-enriched’ optimization algorithms as discretizations of ordinary
differential equations, we propose an analogous
dynamical-systems-inspired approach to minimizing the free energy functional. The result is a
dynamical system that blends elements of Nesterov’s Accelerated Gradient method, the underdamped Langevin diffusion, and particle methods.
Under suitable assumptions, we prove that the
continuous-time system minimizes the functional.
By discretizing the system, we obtain a practical algorithm for MLE in latent variable models. The algorithm outperforms existing particle
methods in numerical experiments and compares
favourably with other MLE algorithms.

The infimum of E over the extended space Rdθ × P(Rdx )
(where P(Rdx ) denotes the space of probability distributions over Rdx ) coincides with negative of the log marginal
likelihood’s supremum:
E ∗ := inf E(θ, q) = − sup log pθ (y).
(θ,q)

(2)

θ∈Rdθ

To see this, note that
E (θ, q) = − log pθ (y) + KL (q, pθ (· | y)) ,

(3)

where KL denotes the Kullback–Leibler divergence and
pθ (·|y) := pθ (y, ·)/pθ (y) the posterior distribution. So, if
(θ∗ , q ∗ ) minimizes the free energy, then θ∗ maximizes the
marginal likelihood and q ∗ (·) = pθ∗ (·|y). In other words,
by minimizing the free energy, we solve our MLE problem.
This perspective motivates the search for practical procedures that minimize the free energy E. One such example
is the classical Expectation Maximization (EM) algorithm
applicable to models for which the posterior distributions
pθ (·|y) are available in closed form. As shown in Neal and
Hinton (1998), its iterates coincide with those of coordinate descent applied to the free energy E. Recently, Kuntz
et al. (2023) sought analogues of gradient descent (GD)
applicable to the free energy E. In particular, building on
ideas popular in optimal transport (e.g., see Ambrosio et al.
(2005)), they identified an appropriate notion for the free
energy’s gradient ∇E, discretized the corresponding gradient flow (θ̇t , q̇t ) = −∇E(θt , qt ), and obtained a practical
algorithm they called particle gradient descent (PGD).

1. Introduction
In this work, we study parameter estimation for (probabilistic) latent variable models pθ (y, x) with parameters
θ ∈ Rdθ , unobserved (or latent) variables x ∈ Rdx , and observed variables y ∈ Rdy (which we treat as fixed throughout). The type II maximum likelihood approach (Good,
1983) estimates
θ by maximizing the marginal likelihood
R
pθ (y) := pθ (y, x) dx. However, for most models of
practical interest, the integral has no known closed-form
expressions and we are unable to optimize the marginal
likelihood directly.

In optimization, GD is well-known to be suboptimal:
other practical first-order methods achieve better worstcase convergence guarantees and practical performance (Nemirovskij and Yudin, 1983; Nesterov, 1983). A common
feature among algorithms that achieve the optimal ‘accelerated’ convergence rates is the presence of ‘momentum’
effects in the dynamics of the algorithm. Roughly speaking,

This issue is often overcome (e.g., Neal and Hinton (1998))
1
University of Warwick 2 Polygeist 3 University of Bristol. Correspondence to: Jen Ning Lim <Jen-Ning.Lim@warwick.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

