Statistical Test for Attention Maps in Vision Transformers

Tomohiro Shiraishi 1 Daiki Miwa 2 Teruyuki Katsuoka 1 Vo Nguyen Le Duy 3 4 5 Kouichi Taji 1
Ichiro Takeuchi 1 5

Abstract

spatial relationships and contextual information, surpassing
the limitations of CNNs in handling global context (Wu
et al., 2020; Henaff, 2020; Xiao et al., 2021; Touvron et al.,
2021; Jia et al., 2021; Khan et al., 2022).

The Vision Transformer (ViT) demonstrates exceptional performance in various computer vision
tasks. Attention is crucial for ViT to capture
complex wide-ranging relationships among image
patches, allowing the model to weigh the importance of image patches and aiding our understanding of the decision-making process. However,
when utilizing the attention of ViT as evidence in
high-stakes decision-making tasks such as medical diagnostics, a challenge arises due to the potential of attention mechanisms erroneously focusing
on irrelevant regions. In this study, we propose a
statistical test for ViT’s attentions, enabling us to
use the attentions as reliable quantitative evidence
indicators for ViT’s decision-making with a rigorously controlled error rate. Using the framework
called selective inference, we quantify the statistical significance of attentions in the form of pvalues, which enables the theoretically grounded
quantification of the false positive detection probability of attentions. We demonstrate the validity and the effectiveness of the proposed method
through numerical experiments and applications
to brain image diagnoses.

In ViT, attention plays a pivotal role in capturing complex
visual relationships by allowing the model to weigh the
importance of different image regions. The interpretability
of attention mechanisms is crucial for understanding how
the model makes decisions. ViT’s attention mechanisms
enable the identification of salient features and contribute to
the model’s ability to recognize patterns.
However, when utilizing ViT’s attentions as evidence in
high-stakes decision-making tasks such as medical diagnostics or autonomous driving (Dai et al., 2021; He et al., 2023;
Prakash et al., 2021; Hu et al., 2022), a challenge arises
due to the potential of attention mechanisms erroneously
focusing on irrelevant regions. In this study, we propose a
statistical test for ViT’s attentions, enabling the quantification of the false positive detection probability of attentions
in the form of p-values. This enables us to use the attentions as reliable quantitative evidence indicators for ViT’s
decision-making with a rigorously controlled error rate.
For example, in medical field, wrongly identifying the brain
tumor regions leads to wrong treatments and patients may
become apprehensive about seeking medical help, fearing
misdiagnosis and unnecessary treatments. Similarly, in autonomous driving, wrongly identifying the road signs or
obstacles can lead to inappropriate actions, resulting in traffic accidents. Therefore, in high-stakes decision-making
tasks, it is crucial to control the probability of false positives, often referred to as the type I error rate in the statistical
inference literature.

1. Introduction
The Vision Transformer (ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020)
demonstrates exceptional performance in various computer
vision tasks by replacing traditional Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) with transformer-based architectures.
ViT divides images into fixed-size patches and processes
them using self-attention mechanisms, capturing wide-range
dependencies. This enables the model to effectively learn

To our knowledge, there are no prior studies that investigate
the statistical significance of ViT’s attentions. The challenge
in assessing the statistical significance of ViT’s attentions
stems from the inherent selection bias in ViT’s attention
mechanism. Testing image patches with high attention is
biased, given that the ViT selects these patches by looking
at the image itself. Consequently, it becomes imperative to
develop an appropriate statistical test that can account for
selection bias by properly considering the complex attention
mechanism of ViT.

1

Nagoya University, Aichi, Japan 2 Nagoya Institute of Technology, Aichi, Japan 3 University of Information Technology, Ho Chi
Minh City, Vietnam 4 Vietnam National University, Ho Chi Minh
City, Vietnam 5 RIKEN, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Ichiro
Takeuchi <takeuchi.ichiro.n6@f.mail.nagoya-u.ac.jp>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

