Collective Certified Robustness against Graph Injection Attacks

Yuni Lai 1 Bailin Pan 2 Kaihuang Chen 2 Yancheng Yuan 2 Kai Zhou 1
Normal node

Abstract
？

Sample-wise

Certified node
1

？
？

？
Collective

Probability

？
？

Injected node

0

Attack field

&%

"!
"($# )

Linear Program
Certifiably
robust

"($# )
""
y!

Clean graph # Perturbated graph # * ∈ B+,- (#)

y"

+

1
int
tra
ns
Co

We investigate certified robustness for GNNs under graph injection attacks. Existing research
only provides sample-wise certificates by verifying each node independently, leading to very
limited certifying performance. In this paper, we
present the first collective certificate, which certifies a set of target nodes simultaneously. To
achieve it, we formulate the problem as a binary
integer quadratic constrained linear programming
(BQCLP). We further develop a customized linearization technique that allows us to relax the
BQCLP into linear programming (LP) that can
be efficiently solved. Through comprehensive
experiments, we demonstrate that our collective
certification scheme significantly improves certification performance with minimal computational overhead. For instance, by solving the
LP within 1 minute on the Citeseer dataset, we
achieve a significant increase in the certified ratio from 0.0% to 81.2% when the injected node
number is 5% of the graph size. Our paper marks
a crucial step towards making provable defense
more practical. Our source code is available at
https://github.com/Yuni-Lai/CollectiveLPCert.

Target node

？

……

？

Feasible
region

Const
raint
2

Collective certifier

&$

Certified robustness

Figure 1: While the sample-wise certificate verifies target
nodes one by one, our collective certificate verifies a set of
target nodes simultaneously by linear programming.
Injection Attack (GIA) has raised considerable attention.
Unlike the commonly studied Graph Modification Attack
(GMA), which involves inserting and deleting edges, GIA
will inject carefully crafted malicious nodes into the graph.
Recent research (Chen et al., 2022; Tao et al., 2023; Ju
et al., 2023) has demonstrated that GIA is not only more
cost-efficient but also more powerful than GMA.
To counteract these attacks, significant efforts have been
dedicated to robustifying GNNs. Representative defense
approaches include adversarial training (Gosch et al., 2023),
the development of robust GNN architectures (Jin et al.,
2020; Zhu et al., 2019; Zhang & Zitnik, 2020), and the detection of adversaries (Zhang et al., 2019; 2020). While these
approaches are quite effective against known attacks, there
remains a concern that new adaptive attacks could undermine their robustness. To tackle the challenge of emerging
novel attacks, researchers have explored provable defense
approaches (Cohen et al., 2019; Li et al., 2023; Bojchevski
et al., 2020; Scholten et al., 2022; Schuchardt et al., 2023)
that offer certified robustness for GNN models: the predictions of models are theoretically guaranteed to be consistent
if the attacker’s budget (e.g., the number of edges could be
modified) is constrained in a certain range.

1. Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have emerged as the dominant models for graph learning tasks, demonstrating remarkable success across diverse applications. However, recent
studies (Zügner et al., 2018; Zügner & Günnemann, 2019;
Liu et al., 2022) have revealed the vulnerability of GNNs to
adversarial attacks, raising significant concerns regarding
their security. Notably, a new type of attack called Graph
1
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic
University, Hong Kong, China; 2 Department of Applied Mathematics, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong,
China. Correspondence to: Kai Zhou <kaizhou@polyu.edu.hk>,
Yancheng Yuan <yancheng.yuan@polyu.edu.hk>, Yuni Lai <csylai@comp.polyu.edu.hk>.

Sample-wise vs. Collective certification The certification against attacks over graphs can be categorized into two
types: sample-wise and collective. Sample-wise certification approaches (Cohen et al., 2019; Bojchevski et al., 2020;
Lai et al., 2023) essentially verify the prediction for a node
one by one, assuming that the attacker can craft a different
perturbed graph each time to attack a single node (Figure
1, top). However, in reality, the attacker can only produce

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

