C HEM R EASONER: Heuristic Search over a Large Language Model’s
Knowledge Space using Quantum-Chemical Feedback

Henry W. Sprueill 1 Carl Edwards 2 Khushbu Agarwal 1 Mariefel V. Olarte 1 Udishnu Sanyal 1
Conrad Johnston 3 Hongbin Liu 3 Heng Ji 2 Sutanay Choudhury 1

Abstract

and use these descriptors to propose catalysts. However,
such descriptors are only empirically understood, presenting a challenge for computational studies of catalysis. Typically, chemists actively reason to mentally search through
reactants, catalysts, and operating conditions that enable
more energy-efficient chemical conversions. However, as
discussed by Nørskov et al. (2011), linking microscopic
surface properties to macroscopic catalytic performance via
chemical descriptors remains a barrier to descriptor-based
catalyst search.

The discovery of new catalysts is essential for
the design of new and more efficient chemical
processes in order to transition to a sustainable
future. We introduce an AI-guided computational
screening framework unifying linguistic reasoning with quantum-chemistry based feedback from
3D atomistic representations. Our approach formulates catalyst discovery as an uncertain environment where an agent actively searches for highly
effective catalysts via the iterative combination
of large language model (LLM)-derived hypotheses and atomistic graph neural network (GNN)derived feedback. Identified catalysts in intermediate search steps undergo structural evaluation
based on spatial orientation, reaction pathways,
and stability. Scoring functions based on adsorption energies and reaction energy barriers steer
the exploration in the LLM’s knowledge space toward energetically favorable, high-efficiency catalysts. We introduce planning methods that automatically guide the exploration without human
input, providing competitive performance against
expert-enumerated chemical descriptor-based implementations. By integrating language-guided
reasoning with computational chemistry feedback,
our work pioneers AI-accelerated, trustworthy catalyst discovery.1

Large Language Models (LLMs) (Wei et al., 2022; Ouyang
et al., 2022; Taylor et al., 2022; Lai et al., 2023; OpenAI,
2023) offer a new opportunity to realize such a data-driven
autonomous search to accelerate scientific discovery. Our
work aims to enhance natural language reasoning capabilities with quantum-chemical feedback to discover optimal
catalysts for target reactions.
The Challenge However, reasoning about complex catalytic
processes requires modelling across multiple modalities, extending beyond the capabilities of existing language models.
This includes merging scientific concepts from literature
and property prediction with 3D atomistic configurations.
Determining the best catalyst is a multi-step process, requiring reasoning about multiple macroscopic properties. The
first step involves identifying an optimal set of chemical descriptors (e.g. “resistance to poisoning”, “porosity”) which
are relevant to the reaction in question. Formally, given a set
of these important descriptors P, |P| = n , we want to identify the optimal subset R ⊂ P, |R| = r to consider when
n!
suggesting new catalysts. This yields Prn = (n−r)!
possible
permutations to reason over. The amount of reasoning required scales combinatorially with the number of available
properties, necessitating an autonomous reasoner: an LLM.
Using its knowledge of scientific concepts, the LLM both
proposes important properties and proposes the best possible catalysts (from all possible catalysts) that have these
properties. Pruning this large space of candidate catalysts
requires reasoning about the complex microscopic interactions that occur between atomistic structures in 3D space
based on macroscopic properties (Figure 2). Further, while
simple reactions can be assessed via adsorption energies

1. Introduction
The discovery of new catalysts requires one to identify the
optimal combination of chemical descriptors (or properties)
1

Pacific Northwest National Laboratory 2 University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign, 3 Azure Quantum, Microsoft. Correspondence
to: Sutanay Choudhury <sutanay.choudhury@pnnl.gov>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
The code and datasets discussed in this paper are available at
https://github.com/pnnl/chemreasoner.

1

