A Single-Loop Robust Policy Gradient Method for Robust Markov Decision
Processes
Zhenwei Lin * 1 Chenyu Xue * 1 Qi Deng 2 Yinyu Ye 3

Abstract

respect to the true parameters may be employed since the
optimal policy obtained from the estimated parameters could
be highly sensitive to the small changes in the problem
parameters, resulting in suboptimal outcomes (Goyal &
Grand-Clément, 2023).

Robust Markov Decision Processes (RMDPs)
have recently been recognized as a valuable and
promising approach to discovering a policy with
creditable performance, particularly in the presence of a dynamic environment and estimation
errors in the transition matrix due to limited data.
Despite extensive exploration of dynamic programming algorithms for solving RMDPs, there
has been a notable upswing in interest in developing efficient algorithms using the policy gradient method. In this paper, we propose the first
single-loop robust policy gradient (SRPG) method
with the global optimality guarantee for solving
RMDPs through its minimax formulation. Moreover, we complement the convergence analysis of
the nonconvex-nonconcave min-max optimization
problem with the objective function’s gradient
dominance property, which is not explored in the
prior literature. Numerical experiments validate
the efficacy of SRPG, demonstrating its faster and
more robust convergence behavior compared to
its nested-loop counterpart.

Motivated by recent developments in robust optimization
and its practical performance (Ben-Tal & Nemirovski, 2002;
Bertsimas & Sim, 2004), robust Markov Decision Processes
(RMDPs) have emerged as a valuable and promising approach to overcome this obstacle. It assumes that the transition kernel lies in a pre-determined ambiguity set and then
seeks a policy with the best performance under the worstcase transition kernel. Hence, it involves solving a min-max
optimization problem. Moreover, it has been demonstrated
that the optimal policies of RMDPs display an advantageous
performance in out-of-sample scenarios when the transition
kernel needs to be estimated from limited data or undergoes
changes over time (Xu & Mannor, 2009; Ghavamzadeh
et al., 2016; Mannor et al., 2016).
With general uncertainty sets, Wiesemann et al. (2013) prove
that it is NP-hard to find the optimal policy for RMDPs.
However, under certain rectangular assumptions of the ambiguity set, the problem becomes tractable. For example,
when the ambiguity set is (s, a)-rectangular, the dynamic
programming techniques apply, and the value iteration is
known to achieve linear convergence to optimal robust
value (Iyengar, 2005; Nilim & El Ghaoui, 2005). Here,
the (s, a)-rectangular ambiguity set allows the adversarial
nature to choose the worst-case transition probability vector of each state and action pair independently. Since the
(s, a)-rectangular assumption is too restrictive and leads
to conservative policies, we consider the more general srectangular ambiguity set, which allows the nature to choose
the transition kernel for each state without observing the
action and also preserves tractability (Wiesemann et al.,
2013).

1. Introduction
Markov decision processes (MDPs) serve as an important
model for sequential decision-making under uncertainty and
enjoys wide applications in finance (Deng et al., 2016; Jiang
et al., 2017), autonomous driving (Kiran et al., 2021; Sallab
et al., 2017), and revenue management (den Boer & Zwart,
2015), etc. However, in most applications, the decisionmaker can only estimate model parameters, especially the
transition kernel, from noisy and scarce observation data.
Consequently, a policy that exhibits poor performance with
*
Equal contribution 1 Shanghai University of Finance and Economics 2 Antai College of Economics and Management, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University 3 Stanford University. Correspondence to: Qi
Deng <qdeng24@sjtu.edu.cn>.

Nowadays, the policy gradient (PG) method has become the
workhorse for solving a special case of RMDPs, where there
is no ambiguity in the transition kernel. It is scalable, easy
to implement, and versatile across various settings, including model-free and continuous state-action spaces (Kakade
& Langford, 2002; Schulman et al., 2017). However, the

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

