Predicting Lagrangian Multipliers for Mixed Integer Linear Programs

Francesco Demelas 1 Joseph Le Roux 1 Mathieu Lacroix 1 Axel Parmentier 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Mixed Integer Linear Programs (MILPs) (Wolsey, 2021)
have two main strengths that make them ubiquitous in combinatorial optimization (Korte & Vygen, 2012). First, they
can model many combinatorial optimization problems. Second, extremely efficient solvers can now handle MILPs with
millions of constraints and variables. They therefore have
a wide variety of applications in logistics, telecommunications and beyond. MILP algorithms are exact: they return an
optimal solution, or an optimality gap between the returned
solution and an optimal one.

Lagrangian Relaxation stands among the most efficient approaches for solving Mixed Integer Linear Programs (MILPs) with difficult constraints.
Given any duals for these constraints, called Lagrangian Multipliers (LMs), it returns a bound on
the optimal value of the MILP, and Lagrangian
methods seek the LMs giving the best such bound.
But these methods generally rely on iterative algorithms resembling gradient descent to maximize the concave piecewise linear dual function:
the computational burden grows quickly with the
number of relaxed constraints. We introduce
a deep learning approach that bypasses the descent, effectively amortizing per instance optimization. A probabilistic encoder based on a
graph neural network computes, given a MILP
instance and its Continuous Relaxation (CR) solution, high-dimensional representations of relaxed
constraints, which are turned into LMs by a decoder. We train the encoder and the decoder
jointly by directly optimizing the bound obtained
from the predicted multipliers. Our method is applicable to any problem with a compact MILP formulation, and to any Lagrangian Relaxation providing a tighter bound than CR. Experiments on
two widely known problems, Multi-Commodity
Network Design and Generalized Assignment,
show that our approach closes up to 85 % of
the gap between the continuous relaxation and
the best Lagrangian bound, and provides a highquality warm-start for descent-based Lagrangian
methods.

MILPs are sometimes hard to solve due to a collection of difficult constraints. Typically, a small number of constraints
link together otherwise independent subproblems. For instance, in vehicle routing problems (Golden et al., 2008),
there is one independent problem for each vehicle, except
for the linking constraints that ensure that exactly one vehicle operates each task of interest. Lagrangian relaxation
approaches are popular in such settings as they allow to
unlink the different subproblems.
More formally (Conforti et al., 2014, Chap. 8), let P be a
MILP of the form:
(P )

min w⊤ x

(1a)

Ax ≥ b

(1b)

Cx ≥ d

(1c)

p
x ∈ Rm
+ ×N

(1d)

x

While CR amounts to simply removing the integrity constraints (i.e. (1d) becomes x ∈ Rm+p
), the relaxed La+
grangian problem is obtained by dualizing difficult constraints (1b) and penalizing their violation with Lagrangian
multipliers (LMs) π ≥ 0:

1

Laboratoire d’Informatique de Paris-Nord, Université Sorbonne Paris Nord — CNRS, France 2 CERMICS, École des
Ponts, France. Correspondence to: Francesco Demelas <demelas@lipn.fr>, Joseph Le Roux <leroux@lipn.fr>, Mathieu
Lacroix <lacroix@lipn.fr>.


LR(π)

min w⊤ x + π ⊤ (b − Ax)
x

Cx ≥ d
p
x ∈ Rm
+ ×N

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Standard weak Lagrangian duality ensures that LR(π) is a
lower bound on P . The Lagrangian dual problem aims at
1

