CKGConv: General Graph Convolution with Continuous Kernels

Liheng Ma 1 2 3

†

Soumyasundar Pal 4 Yitian Zhang 1 2 3

†

Jiaming Zhou 4 Yingxue Zhang 4 Mark Coates 1 2 3

Abstract

K

The existing definitions of graph convolution, either from spatial or spectral perspectives, are inflexible and not unified. Defining a general convolution operator in the graph domain is challenging due to the lack of canonical coordinates,
the presence of irregular structures, and the properties of graph symmetries. In this work, we
propose a novel and general graph convolution
framework by parameterizing the kernels as continuous functions of pseudo-coordinates derived
via graph positional encoding. We name this
Continuous Kernel Graph Convolution (CKGConv). Theoretically, we demonstrate that CKGConv is flexible and expressive. CKGConv
encompasses many existing graph convolutions,
and exhibits a stronger expressiveness, as powerful as graph transformers in terms of distinguishing non-isomorphic graphs. Empirically,
we show that CKGConv-based Networks outperform existing graph convolutional networks
and perform comparably to the best graph transformers across a variety of graph datasets. The
code and models are publicly available at https:
//github.com/networkslab/CKGConv.

Graph PE

...
Adjacency Matrix

Pseudo Coordinates
Continuous
Kernel

Figure 1. Continuous Kernel Graph Convolution (CKGConv)

However, several recent ConvNet variants (Liu et al., 2022b;
Woo et al., 2023) achieve performance comparable to that
of ViTs by incorporating innovative designs such as larger
kernels and depthwise convolutions (Chollet, 2017).
In contrast, the appeal of Convolutional Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) seems to be diminishing; Graph Transformers (GTs) demonstrate elevated efficacy on many challenging graph learning tasks (Ying et al., 2021; Rampášek
et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2023). One reason might be that, unlike convolutions in Euclidean space,
most existing definitions of graph convolution are inflexible and not unified. Message-passing Neural Networks
(MPNNs) (Gilmer et al., 2017; Veličković, 2022) are defined in the spatial domain and limited to a one-hop neighborhood; Spectral GNNs (Bruna et al., 2014) are defined
from a graph-frequency perspective and require careful designs (e.g., polynomial approximation (Defferrard et al.,
2016; Wang & Zhang, 2022) or a sophisticated transformerencoder (Bo et al., 2023)) to generalize to unseen graphs.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in applying Transformer architectures in
computer vision ignited a competition with the predominant Convolutional Neural Networks (ConvNets) (He et al.,
2016a; Tan & Le, 2019). This rivalry started when Vision
Transformers (ViTs) (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021; Wang et al.,
2021; Liu et al., 2021; 2022a) exhibited impressive empirical gains over the best ConvNet architectures of the time.

Unlike the general Euclidean convolution operators, there
is no convolution operator for graphs that permits flexible
determination of the support. Defining a general convolution operator in the graph domain is challenging due to the
characteristics of a graph: the lack of canonical coordinates,
the presence of irregular structures, and graph symmetries.
These aspects are fundamentally different from Euclidean
spaces. By addressing the aforementioned challenges, we
generalize the continuous kernel convolution (Romero et al.,
2022) to graph domain, and propose a general convolution

1
Department of ECE, McGill University, Montreal, Canada
Mila - Quebec AI Institute, Montreal, Canada 3 ILLS - International Laboratory on Learning Systems, Montreal, Canada
4
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Montreal, Canada † Work partially done
as interns at Noah’s Ark Lab. Correspondence to: Liheng Ma
<liheng.ma@mail.mcgill.ca>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

