A Probabilistic Approach to Learning the Degree of
Equivariance in Steerable CNNs

Lars Veefkind 1 2 Gabriele Cesa 1 3

Abstract

While incorporating higher degrees of equivariance can
serve as a powerful inductive bias, over-constraining a
model can lead to diminished performance by preventing the
use of potentially significant features (Wang et al., 2022b;
Petrache & Trivedi, 2023). Therefore, it is crucial to select an appropriate transformation group that is neither too
large nor too small when developing a model. The required
degree of equivariance often varies among features, typically correlating with their scale (Fig. 1). In a CNN, with
its hierarchical layers processing features of varying sizes
(receptive fields), selecting the appropriate transformation
group beforehand poses a challenge, demanding substantial
knowledge about the dataset and the layers’ receptive fields.

Steerable convolutional neural networks (SCNNs)
enhance task performance by modelling geometric symmetries through equivariance constraints
on weights. Yet, unknown or varying symmetries
can lead to overconstrained weights and decreased
performance. To address this, this paper introduces a probabilistic method to learn the degree
of equivariance in SCNNs. We parameterise the
degree of equivariance as a likelihood distribution
over the transformation group using Fourier coefficients, offering the option to model layer-wise
and shared equivariance. These likelihood distributions are regularised to ensure an interpretable
degree of equivariance across the network. Advantages include the applicability to many types of
equivariant networks through the flexible framework of SCNNs and the ability to learn equivariance with respect to any subgroup of any compact
group without requiring additional layers. Our
experiments reveal competitive performance on
datasets with mixed symmetries, with learnt likelihood distributions that are representative of the
underlying degree of equivariance.

Figure 1. Coronal CT view of left and right lung (Yang et al., 2023).
Smaller features ⃝ (i.e., textures/components) are orientation
invariant in determining whether the object is a lung, unlike the
task of distinguishing between the two lungs as a whole, as they
are (approximately) mirrored versions of each other.

To address these complexities, various strategies have been
proposed to autonomously learn the relaxation of equivariance constraints on a layer-by-layer basis for Group
CNNs (Cohen & Welling, 2016a). Among these are
Residual Pathway Priors (RPPs) (Finzi et al., 2021), nonstationary GCNNs (van der Ouderaa et al., 2022), and Partial
GCNNs (Romero & Lohit, 2022). We cover these methods in more detail in Sec. 4. Despite the flexibility of the
framework of steerable CNNs (Cohen & Welling, 2016b)
compared to GCNNs, only very few methods are compatible
with this framework. To the best of our knowledge, RSteer
(Wang et al., 2022b) is the only method directly developed
for SCNNs, while RPP provides a generalised method for
modulating equivariance regardless of the network type.
However, with no separate parameterisation describing the
degree of equivariance, such as a likelihood distribution over
the transformation group as proposed by Romero & Lohit
(2022), it is impossible to obtain an interpretable degree

1. Introduction
Natural images and structures often exhibit various geometrical symmetries, such as rotations, translations, and
reflections. Since LeCun et al. (1995) introduced translationequivariant Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), integrating group equivariance properties as a form of inductive
bias into deep learning architectures has been an active area
of research (Weiler et al., 2021; Bronstein et al., 2021).
1

University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands 2 Work done during
internship in QUVA-Lab. All datasets were downloaded/generated
in QUVA-Lab 3 Qualcomm AI Research, an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc. Correspondence to: Lars Veefkind
<larsveefkind@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

