PerceptAnon: Exploring the Human Perception of
Image Anonymization Beyond Pseudonymization for GDPR

Kartik Patwari * † 1 Chen-Nee Chuah 1 Lingjuan Lyu 2 Vivek Sharma * ⋆ 2

Abstract

Original

Current image anonymization techniques, largely
focus on localized pseudonymization, typically
modify identifiable features like faces or full bodies and evaluate anonymity through metrics such
as detection and re-identification rates. However, this approach often overlooks information
present in the entire image post-anonymization
that can compromise privacy, such as specific locations, objects/items, or unique attributes. Acknowledging the pivotal role of human judgment in anonymity, our study conducts a thorough analysis of perceptual anonymization, exploring its spectral nature and its critical implications for image privacy assessment, particularly in light of regulations such as the General
Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). To facilitate this, we curated a dataset specifically tailored for assessing anonymized images. We introduce a learning-based metric, PerceptAnon,
which is tuned to align with the human Perception of Anonymity. PerceptAnon evaluates
both original-anonymized image pairs and solely
anonymized images. Trained using human annotations, our metric encompasses both anonymized
subjects and their contextual backgrounds, thus
providing a comprehensive evaluation of privacy vulnerabilities. We envision this work as
a milestone for understanding and assessing image anonymization, and establishing a foundation for future research. The codes and dataset
are available in https://github.com/
SonyResearch/gdpr_perceptanon.

Pseudonymized

PerceptAnon

Figure 1. Pseudonymization focuses on anonymizing local regions
that can leave privacy-compromising cues in the image. PerceptAnon focuses on identifying and quantifying such cues.

1. Introduction
The vast proliferation of data and digital platforms has
heightened data privacy concerns, necessitating effective
anonymization strategies to protect Personally Identifiable
Information (PII) in images. The General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) distinguishes ‘pseudonymisation’–
modifying personal data to prevent direct attribution to individuals without additional information—with ‘anonymization’, where personal identification becomes unfeasible (EDPS, 2021). Under GDPR, anonymity is achieved
when data is processed such that the subject becomes unidentifiable, with masking cited as the most feasible option for
images (Weitzenboeck et al., 2022; Barta, 2018). Current
image anonymization techniques, such as masking, blurring,
pixelation (Du et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2022), and generation (Li et al., 2021), largely align with pseudonymization,
focusing on modifying identifiable attributes like faces or
full bodies.

*
Equal contribution † Work done while interning at Sony AI ⋆ VS
started and led the project 1 Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, University of California Davis, CA, USA 2 Sony AI.
Correspondence to: Vivek Sharma <viveksharma@sony.com>.

Traditional research in this domain has mostly concentrated
on localized areas within images, using detection and reidentification rates for anonymity assessment. GDPR guidelines mention that “the use of additional information can
lead to the identification of individuals” (EDPS, 2021) like
recognizable items or locations. As shown in Figure 1, addi-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

