Trainable Transformer in Transformer
Abhishek Panigrahi * 1 Sadhika Malladi * 1 Mengzhou Xia 1 Sanjeev Arora 1

Abstract

ing significant advancements in capabilities (Brown et al.,
2020; Chowdhery et al., 2022). These capabilities include
performing in-context learning or following natural language instructions at inference time.

Recent works attribute the capability of in-context
learning (ICL) in large pre-trained language models to implicitly simulating and fine-tuning an internal model (e.g., linear or 2-layer MLP) during
inference. However, such constructions require
large memory overhead, which makes simulation
of more sophisticated internal models intractable.
In this work, we propose a new efficient construction, Transformer in Transformer (in short, T IN T),
that allows a transformer to simulate and finetune more complex models during inference (e.g.,
pre-trained language models). In particular, we
introduce innovative approximation techniques
that allow a T IN T model with less than 2 billion
parameters to simulate and fine-tune a 125 million parameter transformer model within a single
forward pass. T IN T accommodates many common transformer variants and its design ideas also
improve the efficiency of past instantiations of
simple models inside transformers. We conduct
end-to-end experiments to validate the internal
fine-tuning procedure of T IN T on various language modeling and downstream tasks. For example, even with a limited one-step budget, we
observe T IN T for a OPT-125M model improves
performance by 4−16% absolute on average compared to OPT-125M. These findings suggest that
large pre-trained language models are capable of
performing intricate subroutines. To facilitate further work, a modular and extensible codebase for
T IN T is included.

Researchers have tried to understand how these models can
learn new tasks without parameter updates (Garg et al., 2022;
von Oswald et al., 2023; Xie et al., 2022; Nanda et al., 2023).
A popular hypothesis is that in-context learning corresponds
to the transformer (referred to as the simulator from now
on) simulating gradient-based learning of a smaller model
(called auxiliary model) that is embedded within it.
From perspective of AI safety and alignment (Amodei et al.,
2016; Leike et al., 2018; Askell et al., 2021), the ability of
a larger model to use input data (which could be arbitrary
in a deployed setting) to implicitly train an auxiliary model
feels worrisome. This concern felt minor due to efficiency
considerations: previous analyses and experiments required
the auxiliary model to be quite tiny compared to the simulator. For instance, simulating and training an auxiliary model
that is a linear layer requires tens of millions of parameters in the simulator (Akyurek et al., 2022). This scaling is
even more dramatic if the auxiliary model is a multi-layer
fully-connected net (Giannou et al., 2023).
Our primary contribution is an explicit and nontrivial construction of a simulator called T IN T that explicitly adapts
to the context without parameter updates. In particular, we
show that a forward pass through a modestly sized T IN T
can involve gradient-based training of an auxiliary model
that is itself a large transformer. For example, we show that
T IN T with 2B parameters can faithfully simulate fine-tuning
a 125M parameter auxiliary transformer in a single forward
pass. (Prior constructions would have required trillions
of parameters in the simulator for a far simpler auxiliary
model.)

1. Introduction

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science,
Princeton University. Correspondence to: Abhishek Panigrahi <ap34@cs.princeton.edu>, Sadhika Malladi <smalladi@cs.princeton.edu>.

Our main result is described in Theorem 1.1, which details
how the size of T IN T depends on the auxiliary model. Our
construction is generally applicable to diverse variants of
pre-trained language models. The rest of the paper is structured to highlight the key design choices and considerations
in T IN T.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1. Section 2 discusses the overall design decisions required
to make T IN T, including how the simulator can read

Large transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) have brought
about a revolution in language modeling, with scaling yield-

1

