Listenable Maps for Audio Classifiers

Francesco Paissan 1 2 Mirco Ravanelli 3 2 Cem Subakan 4 3 2

Abstract

ity methods (Smilkov et al., 2017; Simonyan et al., 2014;
Parekh et al., 2022), a sub-field within this domain, focus
on generating interpretations for pre-trained machine learning models. These interpretations should ideally remain as
faithful as possible to the pre-trained model while being
easy to understand for humans. Many existing posthoc interpretability methods are primarily designed for computer
vision, where the task often involves classifying objects
against a clean background. In these cases, the interpretation commonly takes the form of a saliency map, which
highlights the regions of the image relevant to model predictions. However, in the audio domain, achieving easily
understandable interpretations poses a much greater challenge. State-of-the-art models for speech and audio processing typically operate on less interpretable inputs, such as
mel-spectrograms, as compared to standard images. Consequently, generating saliency maps on these input features
does not yield straightforward interpretations. A potentially
more promising but relatively underexplored alternative involves generating listenable interpretations, which offer a
more natural and user-friendly way for humans to comprehend the model prediction.

Despite the impressive performance of deep learning models across diverse tasks, their complexity
poses challenges for interpretation. This challenge is particularly evident for audio signals,
where conveying interpretations becomes inherently difficult. To address this issue, we introduce
Listenable Maps for Audio Classifiers (L-MAC),
a posthoc interpretation method that generates
faithful and listenable interpretations. L-MAC utilizes a decoder on top of a pretrained classifier to
generate binary masks that highlight relevant portions of the input audio. We train the decoder with
a loss function that maximizes the confidence of
the classifier decision on the masked-in portion
of the audio while minimizing the probability of
model output for the masked-out portion. Quantitative evaluations on both in-domain and outof-domain data demonstrate that L-MAC consistently produces more faithful interpretations than
several gradient and masking-based methodologies. Furthermore, a user study confirms that, on
average, users prefer the interpretations generated
by the proposed technique.

This paper contributes to this emerging field by introducing
a novel method called Listenable Maps for Audio Classifiers (L-MAC). L-MAC outputs listenable explanations for
pretrained audio classifiers that utilize mel-spectrograms or
any other feature as input. Our approach employs a decoder
that leverages information from the latent representations
of pretrained classifiers to generate binary masks highlighting relevant audio segments. The decoder applies the mask
not directly to the specific input features of the pretrained
classifier but to the magnitude of Short-Time Fourier Transform (STFT) of the original input audio waveform. By
inheriting the phase from the original signal, we can perform the Inverse Short-Time Fourier Transform (ISTFT),
allowing the generation of a listenable waveform as the outcome of the interpretation process. The decoder is trained
with a loss function that maximizes the confidence of the
classifier’s decision on the masked-in portion of the audio
while minimizing the probability of the model output for
the masked-out portion. Our loss term explicitly guides
the interpreter to produce explanations that closely follow
the target source without sacrificing the faithfulness of the
explanations.

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep learning models made significant
strides in a variety of speech/audio applications, including
sound event recognition, sound generation, speech recognition, speech separation, and many more (Ravanelli et al.,
2021). An overwhelming majority of these models remain
opaque concerning the interpretation of their predictions,
as their large number of parameters, non-linearity, and
high dimensionality make them ”black-box” models (Molnar, 2022). Explainable Machine Learning is a research
area that aims to render the models transparent concerning
their decision-making mechanisms. Posthoc interpretabil1

Fondazione Bruno Kessler 2 Mila-Québec AI Institute
Concordia University 4 Laval University. Correspondence to:
Francesco Paissan <fpaissan@fbk.eu>.
3

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

