Enhancing Value Function Estimation through First-Order State-Action
Dynamics in Offline Reinforcement Learning

Yun-Hsuan Lien 1 Ping-Chun Hsieh 1 Tzu-Mao Li 2 Yu-Shuen Wang 1

Abstract

et al., 2019; Fujimoto & Gu, 2021; Wang et al., 2020). The
main issue is that, in training agents, discrete-time RL relies
solely on pre-collected data, which might not capture the
entire scenario comprehensively.

In offline reinforcement learning (RL), updating
the value function with the discrete-time Bellman Equation often encounters challenges due
to the limited scope of available data. This limitation stems from the Bellman Equation, which
cannot accurately predict the value of unvisited
states. To address this issue, we have introduced
an innovative solution that bridges the continuousand discrete-time RL methods, capitalizing on
their advantages. Our method uses a discrete-time
RL algorithm to derive the value function from
a dataset while ensuring that the function’s first
derivative aligns with the local characteristics of
states and actions, as defined by the HamiltonJacobi-Bellman equation in continuous RL. We
provide practical algorithms for both deterministic policy gradient methods and stochastic policy gradient methods. Experiments on the D4RL
dataset show that incorporating the first-order information significantly improves policy performance for offline RL problems.

Compared to the online setting, offline RL has to extrapolate the value function from the dataset, so generalization
becomes a problem (Parag et al., 2022; Xu & Gu, 2020;
Boyan & Moore, 1994). We show an example in Figure
1, where an agent is tasked to reach a target located at the
bottom-left corner. However, due to inaccurate value function estimations of unvisited states, such as the wall area in
this example, the learned value function may erroneously
guide policies towards the left starting from the bottom-right
corner, as shown in panel (b). We posit that incorporating
additional derivative information of the value function with
respect to states and actions (Dong et al., 2021; Vemula
et al., 2019; Czarnecki et al., 2017) can aid in addressing
the extrapolation issues, as depicted in Figure 1(c).
Continuous-time RL incorporates the derivatives of the
value function. Unlike discrete-time methods, the value
function in continuous-time RL is characterized by firstor second-order partial differential equations, known as
the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) Equation (Doya, 2000;
Munos, 2000). The optimal policy is then derived by considering the given reward function and system dynamics
through the HJB equation. However, the direct application
of the HJB equation faces challenges. These methods are
hindered by the curse of dimensionality when solving the
HJB equation (Lutter et al., 2020; Shilova et al., 2023), and
they require explicit knowledge of the reward and system
dynamics.

1. Introduction
In discrete-time reinforcement learning (RL), interactions
between the agent and the environment are discretized into
steps, even in scenarios that are inherently continuous (Mnih
et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2017). This approach updates
the value function by applying the discrete-time form of
the Bellman Equation (Haarnoja et al., 2018; Silver et al.,
2014; Watkins & Dayan, 1992). While it works well in
online settings, its limitations become evident in offline
applications (Kostrikov et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2020; Kumar

Inspired by continuous-time RL, in this paper, we introduce
a novel objective function that assesses the first-order consistency between the learned value function and the first-order
properties of the HJB equation as induced by the dataset.
This approach effectively eliminates the need for explicit
knowledge of both the reward function and system dynamics. We then demonstrate how this loss function can be
integrated with both deterministic (Fujimoto et al., 2018;
Silver et al., 2014) and stochastic policy gradient models
(Haarnoja et al., 2018). We conducted experiments on the
D4RL benchmark dataset (Fu et al., 2020) and compared

1

Department of Computer Science, National Yang Ming
Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan 2 Department of
Computer Science and Engineering, University of California,
San Diego, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Yun-Hsuan Lien
<sophia.yh.lien@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

