Just Cluster It: An Approach for Exploration in High-Dimensions
using Clustering and Pre-Trained Representations

Stefan Sylvius Wagner 1 Stefan Harmeling 2

Abstract

vation where an intrinsic reward signal is created to quantify
novelty. A simple way to do this is by counting states
(Tang et al., 2016). However, simply counting all states
naively is not possible, since counts are very sparse in highdimensional or stochastic settings and the memory requirements to store every distinct count for a given state are very
high. There are several approaches to estimating the state
density: One way is to use some density estimation model
that given an observation assigns a pseudo-count (Bellemare
et al., 2016), where a pseudo-count is an estimated count
for a state given a density model. Other methods are based
on using the prediction error, where the estimate for the
state density is based on whether a model can predict fixed
target features provided by a second model (Pathak et al.,
2017; Burda et al., 2018; Raileanu & Rocktäschel, 2020).
Established methods such as Random Network Distillation
(Burda et al., 2018) show that novelty can be determined
simply by calculating the prediction error of random features. Different states will provide different feature vectors
hence the model learns an indirect density estimate of the
state space. Recent methods such as BYOL-Explore (Guo
et al., 2022) replace random features with trained features,
with great success.

In this paper we adopt a representation-centric
perspective on exploration in reinforcement learning, viewing exploration fundamentally as a density estimation problem. We investigate the effectiveness of clustering representations for exploration in 3-D environments, based on the observation that the importance of pixel changes
between transitions is less pronounced in 3-D environments compared to 2-D environments, where
pixel changes between transitions are typically
distinct and significant. We propose a method that
performs episodic and global clustering on random representations and on pre-trained DINO representations to count states, i.e, estimate pseudocounts. Surprisingly, even random features can
be clustered effectively to count states in 3-D environments, however when these become visually more complex, pre-trained DINO representations are more effective thanks to the pre-trained
inductive biases in the representations. Overall, this presents a pathway for integrating pretrained biases into exploration. We evaluate our
approach on the VizDoom and Habitat environments, demonstrating that our method surpasses
other well-known exploration methods in these
settings.

The need for state aggregation in 3-D vs. 2-D. Due
to its inherent simplicity, counting states for exploration
in non-tabular environments has been studied extensively
(Bellemare et al., 2016; Tang et al., 2016; Ostrovski et al.,
2017). While counting states for exploration works well in
tabular settings, it becomes intractable in high dimensional
settings if every state is counted explicitly. Bellemare et al.
(2016) were among the first to propose the estimation of
pseudo-counts, where the counts are modeled by some density model of the state-space. Essentially, this transforms the
problem of exploration into a density estimation problem of
the state-space. A central property for a density model in
exploration is that the model should be able to distinguish
different states, such that salient transitions can be identified
in the intrinsic reward. In the case of counting states, the
states should be aggregated in a sensible way such that the
counts are not too granular, but also not too coarse (Ostrovski et al., 2017; Ecoffet et al., 2021). We identify a particular phenomenon regarding the importance of pixel changes

1. Introduction
Exploration in reinforcement learning can inherently be seen
as a density estimation problem. Approximating the density of the state-space throughout learning, allows the agent
to determine which parts of the environment it has visited.
This paradigm is at the core of exploration via intrinsic moti1
Department of Computer Science, Heinrich Heine University
Düsseldorf, Germany 2 Department of Computer Science, Technical University Dortmund, Germany. Correspondence to: Stefan
Wagner <stefan.wagner@hhu.de>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

