A Study of First-Order Methods with a Deterministic Relative-Error Gradient
Oracle
Nadav Hallak * 1 Kfir Y. Levy * 2

Abstract

• f : Rn → R is continuously differentiable function;

This paper studies the theoretical guarantees of
the classical projected gradient and conditional
gradient methods applied to constrained optimization problems with biased relative-error gradient
oracles. These oracles are used in various settings, such as distributed optimization systems
or derivative-free optimization, and are particularly common when gradients are compressed,
quantized, or estimated via finite differences computations. Several settings are investigated: Optimization over the box with a coordinate-wise erroneous gradient oracle, optimization over a general
compact convex set, and three more specific scenarios. Convergence guarantees are established
with respect to the relative-error magnitude, and
in particular, we show that the conditional gradient is invariant to relative-error when applied
over the box with a coordinate-wise erroneous
gradient oracle, and the projected gradient maintains its convergence guarantees when optimizing
a nonconvex objective function.

• ∇f : Rn → Rn is Lipschitz continuous, i.e.,
∥∇f (x) − ∇f (y)∥2 ≤ L∥x − y∥2 for any x, y ∈ C;
• C ⊆ Rn is closed, convex, and bounded, inducing
the bounds: R := maxx,y∈C ∥x − y∥2 , fopt :=
minx∈C f (x), and M := maxx∈C ∥∇f (x)∥2 .
In this study, we investigate the performance of the two
classical methodologies, the Conditional Gradient (CG) and
the Projected Gradient (PG), when utilized to solve (P) using
a biased erroneous gradient. We assume that the gradient is
obtained via an Erroneous Oracle (EO), denoted by O(·, ·),
such that for any x ∈ C and ĝ ← O(x, ε)
∥ĝ − ∇f (x)∥ ≤ ε∥∇f (x)∥,

(EO),

(1)

where ε ∈ [0, 1) is the relative-error parameter.

(P)

Condition (1), sometimes referred to as the norm condition (Bollapragada et al., 2018; Conn et al., 2000; Berahas
et al., 2022), was first introduced by (Polyak, 1987; Carter,
1991) in the context of Trust-Region methods, and in recent
years acts as a central assumption in many settings involving
gradient approximation schemes such as gradient compression in distributed optimization (Ajalloeian & Stich, 2020;
Beznosikov et al., 2020; Richtárik et al., 2021; Condat et al.,
2022), derivative-free methods (Cartis & Scheinberg, 2018;
Berahas et al., 2019; 2022), gradient quantization (Chmiel
et al., 2021), generalized finite difference gradient approximations (Cartis & Scheinberg, 2018; Paquette & Scheinberg,
2020), adaptive sampling optimization methods (Byrd et al.,
2012; Bollapragada et al., 2018), and is also used in (Hintermüller & Vicente, 2005) which studies optimal control
for nonlinear partial differential equations.

*
Equal contribution 1 The Faculty of Data and Decision Sciences, The Technion, Haifa, Israel. 2 Viterby Faculty of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, The Technion, Haifa, Israel.. Correspondence to: Nadav Hallak <ndvhllk@technion.ac.il>.

The norm condition (1) defining the EO can sometimes be
refined coordinate-wise to obtain a Coordinate-Wise Erroneous Oracle (CWEO). The CWEO will also be denoted by
O(·, ·), and we will indicate when we assume that the EO
is a CWEO. The CWEO satisfies that for any x ∈ C and
ĝ ← O(x, ε), it holds that

1. Introduction
1.1. Problem formulation
This paper studies the optimization process in which the
goal is to minimize a smooth function over a closed and
convex set using a first-order relative-error erroneous oracle.
Formally, we seek to solve the problem
min f (x)
s.t. x ∈ C,
where

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

|ĝi − ∇f (x)i | ≤ ε|∇f (x)i |,

∀i ∈ [n]

(CWEO) . (2)

The EO and CWEO are formally defined in Section 2.
1

