Improving Robustness to Multiple Spurious Correlations
by Multi-Objective Optimization

Nayeong Kim 1 Juwon Kang 1 Sungsoo Ahn 1 2 Jungseul Ok 1 2 Suha Kwak 1 2

Abstract

Target: classifying high/low cheekbones
GG group (Large)

We study the problem of training an unbiased
and accurate model given a dataset with multiple
biases. This problem is challenging since the multiple biases cause multiple undesirable shortcuts
during training, and even worse, mitigating one
may exacerbate the other. We propose a novel
training method to tackle this challenge. Our
method first groups training data so that different
groups induce different shortcuts, and then optimizes a linear combination of group-wise losses
while adjusting their weights dynamically to alleviate conflicts between the groups in performance;
this approach, rooted in the multi-objective optimization theory, encourages to achieve the minimax Pareto solution. We also present a new benchmark with multiple biases, dubbed MultiCelebA,
for evaluating debiased training methods under
realistic and challenging scenarios. Our method
achieved the best on three datasets with multiple
biases, and also showed superior performance on
conventional single-bias datasets.

Conflicting

Bias type 1: Gender
Guiding

High Cheekbones

Low Cheekbones

CG group (Small)
High Cheekbones

Low Cheekbones

Guiding

Bias type 2: Age

GC group (Small)
High Cb.

Low Cb.

CC (Extr. small)
High Cb.

Low Cb.

Conflicting

Figure 1: A example of grouping training data with two bias
types. Each axis represents each bias type, for which biasguiding samples make up the majority and bias-conflicting
ones hold the minority. In this example, the name of each
group indicates if samples of the group has a guiding attribute (G) or a conflicting attribute (C) for gender and
age, in respective order.

relation is often hard to mitigate since the data collection
procedure itself is biased towards the correlation.

1. Introduction

To resolve this issue, researchers have studied debiased
training algorithm, i.e., algorithms training a model while
mitigating spurious correlations (Arjovsky et al., 2019;
Bahng et al., 2020; Sagawa et al., 2019; Teney et al., 2021;
Tartaglione et al., 2021; Lee et al., 2021; Nam et al., 2020;
Liu et al., 2021a; Kim et al., 2022). They focus on improving performance on bias-conflicting samples (i.e., samples
that disagree with the spurious correlations) to achieve a
balance of bias-conflicting and bias-guiding samples (i.e.,
those agreeing with the spurious correlations). Although
these algorithms have shown promising results, they have
been evaluated in a limited setting where only a single type
of spurious correlation exists in training data.

Empirical risk minimization (ERM) (Vapnik, 1999) is currently the gold standard in supervised learning of deep neural networks. However, recent studies (Sagawa et al., 2019;
Geirhos et al., 2020) revealed that ERM is prone to taking undesirable shortcuts stemming from spurious correlations between the target labels and irrelevant attributes
arising from subgroup imbalance of training data. For example, Sagawa et al. (2019) showed how much a deep neural network trained to classify bird species relies on the
background rather than the bird itself. Such a spurious cor1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
POSTECH, Pohang, Korea 2 Graduate School of Artificial Intelligence, POSTECH, Pohang, Korea. Correspondence to: Suha
Kwak <suha.kwak@postech.ac.kr>.

We advocate that debiased training algorithms should be
evaluated under more realistic scenarios with multiple biases. In such scenarios, some samples may align with one
bias but may conflict with another, which makes mitigating

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

