SyCoCa: Symmetrizing Contrastive Captioners with Attentive Masking for
Multimodal Alignment

Ziping Ma 1 Furong Xu 1 Jian Liu 1 Ming Yang 1 Qingpei Guo 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

In recent years, the dramatic progress of multimodal alignment between vision and language has reshaped computer
vision research in some sense. The availability of largescale datasets and powerful computational resources has led
to many seminal works and impressive results in this field.
Most methods use a contrastive objective to constrain global
representations between modalities as shown in Figure 1
(a), such as CLIP (Radford et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2022a),
ALBEF (Li et al., 2021), mPLUG (Li et al., 2022a; Xu
et al., 2023). BEiT-v3 (Wang et al., 2023a) treats image as a
foreign language and uses a mask-then-predict strategy for
pre-training. This pretraining method requires separate finetuning for each downstream task and the pretrained model
cannot be directly used across tasks. CoCa (Yu et al., 2022a)
combines Image-Text Contrastive (ITC) and Image Caption
(IC), resulting in a pretrained model that can be directly
applied for both retrieval and IC tasks. It is a promising
architecture and works well on multiple vision-language
tasks.

Multimodal alignment between language and vision is the fundamental topic in current visionlanguage model research. Contrastive Captioners
(CoCa), as a representative method, integrates
Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP)
and Image Caption (IC) into a unified framework,
resulting in impressive results. CLIP imposes a
bidirectional constraints on global representations
of entire images and sentences. Although IC conducts an unidirectional image-to-text generation
on local representation, it lacks any constraint on
local text-to-image reconstruction, which limits
the ability to understand images at a fine-grained
level when aligned with texts. To achieve multimodal alignment from both global and local
perspectives, this paper proposes Symmetrizing
Contrastive Captioners (SyCoCa), which introduces bidirectional interactions on images and
texts across the global and local representation
levels. Specifically, we expand a Text-Guided
Masked Image Modeling (TG-MIM) head based
on ITC and IC heads. The improved SyCoCa
further leverages textual cues to reconstruct contextual images and visual cues to predict textual
contents. When implementing bidirectional local interactions, the local contents of images tend
to be cluttered or unrelated to their textual descriptions. Thus, we employ an attentive masking
strategy to select effective image patches for interaction. Extensive experiments on five visionlanguage tasks, including image-text retrieval,
image-captioning, visual question answering, and
zero-shot/finetuned image classification, validate
the effectiveness of our proposed method.

However, in terms of local interaction between image
patches and text tokens, the IC head in CoCa only utilizes the visual cues to generate textual descriptions, yet
disregarding the visual context reconstruction from textual
cues. From vision pre-training works, such as SimMIM
(Xie et al., 2022) and MAE (He et al., 2022), we learn that
the image reconstruction can learn a strong content representation. Therefore, in the multimodal scenario, when the
text cue is introduced into the image reconstruction task and
local interaction is performed, the representation of texts
and images can be unified into one space, thereby further
enhancing multimodal alignment.
In this paper, we propose a novel framework called Symmetrizing Contrastive Captioners (SyCoCa) that incorporates both local image-to-text generation and text-to-image
reconstruction in addition to the global constractive objective. In addition to ITC head and IC head, we introduce a
text-guided masked image modeling (TG-MIM) head. The
difference between CoCa and our method is illustrated in
Figure 1. CoCa only achieved undirectional interaction between image and text as shown in Figure 1 (b). Further, in
Figure 1 (c), our TG-MIM introduces text for image recon-

1
Ant Group. Correspondence to: Qingpei Guo <qingpei.gqp@antgroup.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

