From Vision to Audio and Beyond: A Unified Model for Audio-Visual
Representation and Generation

Kun Su 1 * Xiulong Liu 1 * Eli Shlizerman 1 2

Abstract
Video encompasses both visual and auditory data,
creating a perceptually rich experience where
these two modalities complement each other. As
such, videos are a valuable type of media for
the investigation of the interplay between audio and visual elements. Previous studies of
audio-visual modalities primarily focused on either audio-visual representation learning or generative modeling of a modality conditioned on the
other, creating a disconnect between these two
branches. A unified framework that learns representation and generates modalities has not been
developed yet. In this work, we introduce a novel
framework called Vision to Audio and Beyond
(VAB) to bridge the gap between audio-visual
representation learning and vision-to-audio generation. The key approach of VAB is that rather than
working with raw video frames and audio data,
VAB performs representation learning and generative modeling within latent spaces. In particular,
VAB uses a pre-trained audio tokenizer and an
image encoder to obtain audio tokens and visual
features, respectively. It then performs the pretraining task of visual-conditioned masked audio
token prediction. This training strategy enables
the model to engage in contextual learning and
simultaneous video-to-audio generation. After
the pre-training phase, VAB employs the iterativedecoding approach to rapidly generate audio tokens conditioned on visual features. Since VAB is
a unified model, its backbone can be fine-tuned for
various audio-visual downstream tasks. Our experiments showcase the efficiency of VAB in producing high-quality audio from video, and its capability to acquire semantic audio-visual features,

Figure 1. VAB is a unified audio-visual model capable of supporting various audio-visual tasks within a single framework.

leading to competitive results in audio-visual retrieval and classification.

1. Introduction
When presented with a video which audio has been muted,
we have the ability to mentally hallucinate the corresponding sound based on our knowledge. This mental process
encompasses the association of audio with visual elements
and the creative aspect of sound imagination. In the field
of artificial intelligence, we have witnessed the emergence
of foundational models in the domains of vision and language (Wang et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2022; Alayrac et al.,
2022) which are capable of supporting both the association
and generation of content. In the realm of audio and vision,
however, it remains relatively unexplored whether similar
models can be proposed.

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of ECE, University of Washington, Seattle, United States 2 Department of Applied Math, University of Washington, Seattle, United States. Correspondence to:
Eli Shlizerman <shlizee@uw.edu>.

Creating a general-purpose audio-visual model poses significant challenges. First, raw video and audio signals are
both high-dimensional and time-dependent data, creating
an intricate scenario for comprehension of their joint events
and necessitating extensive training computations. Existing
contrastive learning and masked autoencoder-based audio-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

