Smoothness Adaptive Hypothesis Transfer Learning

Haotian Lin 1 Matthew Reimherr 1

Abstract

samples are scarce, either due to costs or other constraints,
the performance of these algorithms can suffer empirically
and theoretically.

Many existing two-phase kernel-based hypothesis transfer learning algorithms employ the same
kernel regularization across phases and rely on
the known smoothness of functions to obtain optimality. Therefore, they fail to adapt to the varying and unknown smoothness between the target/source and their offset. This paper introduces
Smoothness Adaptive Transfer Learning (SATL),
a two-phase kernel ridge regression (KRR)-based
algorithm to address these limitations. We first
demonstrate that employing a misspecified fixed
bandwidth Gaussian kernel in target-only KRR
learning can achieve minimax optimality when
the true function resides in Sobolev spaces. Leveraging this result, SATL enables the estimators to
provably and universally adapt to the varying and
unknown Sobolev smoothness of the source and
offset functions. We derive the minimax lower
bound of the learning problem in excess risk and
show that SATL achieves a matching upper bound
up to logarithmic factors. The optimal statistical
rate reveals the factors influencing the transfer dynamics and efficacy, including the source sample
size and the relative strength between domains.
The theoretical findings and the effectiveness of
SATL are confirmed by several experiments.

Hypothesis Transfer Learning (HTL) (Li & Bilmes, 2007;
Kuzborskij & Orabona, 2013; Du et al., 2017), which leverages models trained on the source domain and uses samples
from the target domain to learn the model shift to the target
model, is an appealing and promising mechanism. When
the parameters of interest are infinite-dimensional (e.g., nonparametric models), Lin & Reimherr (2024) employed the
reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) norm as a metric
for assessing similarity in functional regression frameworks,
linking the transferred knowledge to the employed RKHS
structure. They leveraged offset transfer learning (OTL),
which is one of the most popular HTL algorithms, to obtain target estimators in a two-phase manner: first, training
a source model on the large sample size source dataset,
then estimating the offset model between the target and
source using the target dataset and trained source model.
However, a noteworthy observation is that both phases of
estimating the source model and offset model utilize the
same RKHS regularization. This goes against the principle that led to OTL’s success, which posits that the offset
should ideally have a simpler structure than the target and
source. A similar limitation also appears in a series of twophase HTL algorithms for finite-dimensional models (e.g.,
multivariate/high-dimensional linear regression) (Bastani,
2021; Li et al., 2022; Tian & Feng, 2022), which typically
utilize the ℓ1 or ℓ2 norm of the offset parameters as the
similarity measure. Since ℓ1 -norm can reflect sparsity and
ℓ2 usually serves to control complexity, using the same
norm regularization across both phases is more robust to
model structure heterogeneous and more defensible in finitedimensional models than in infinite-dimensional ones.

1. Introduction
Nonparametric regression is one of the most prevalent statistical problems studied in many communities in past decades
due to its flexibility in modeling data. A large number of
algorithms have been proposed, such as kernel regression,
local regression, smoothing splines, and regression trees,
to name only a few. However, the effectiveness of all the
algorithms in these existing works is based on having sufficient samples drawn from the same target domain. When

In the realm of nonparametric regression, although OTL has
shown great success in practice, there are only a few studies
that provide theoretical analysis (Wang & Schneider, 2015;
Du et al., 2017), and these works are still limited in terms
of problem settings, estimation procedures, and theoretical
bounds. For example, although Wang & Schneider (2015)
noticed the nature of simple offsets, they didn’t use any
quantity (like Sobolev or Hölder smoothness) to formularize
the difference of target/source models and their offset. Their
KRR-based OTL algorithm also employed the same kernel

1

Department of Statistics, Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, PA, USA. Correspondence to: Haotian Lin
<hzl435@psu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

