Riemannian Accelerated Zeroth-order Algorithm:
Improved Robustness and Lower Query Complexity

Chang He 1 Zhaoye Pan 1 Xiao Wang 1 2 Bo Jiang 1 2 3

1. Introduction

Abstract

Many machine learning problems frequently encounter situations where computing function gradients is costly or
even infeasible. For instance, the tasks such as optimal linear combination prediction (Das et al., 2022) and Bayesian
optimization in robot learning (Jaquier et al., 2018; 2020)
involve objective functions, lacking analytical forms, only
observable through point-wise evaluations. Furthermore, the
design space of interest is also complicated, involving constraints such as the unit sphere, probability simplex, and positive definite matrices. The limited function information and
inherent constraints render these problems challenging to
solve. One potent strategy for dealing with these constraints
is re-expressing them through the lens of Riemannian manifolds (Absil et al., 2009; Boumal, 2023). Mathematically,
we can formulate the problem in consideration as follows:

Optimization problems with access to only zerothorder information of the objective function on Riemannian manifolds arise in various applications,
spanning from statistical learning to robot learning. While various zeroth-order algorithms have
been proposed in Euclidean space, they are not
inherently designed to handle the challenging constraints imposed by Riemannian manifolds. The
proper adaptation of zeroth-order techniques to
Riemannian manifolds remained unknown until
the pioneering work of (Li et al., 2023a). However, zeroth-order algorithms are widely observed
to converge slowly and be unstable in practice. To
alleviate these issues, we propose a Riemannian
accelerated zeroth-order algorithm with improved
robustness. Regarding efficiency, our accelerated algorithm has the function query complexity
of O(ϵ−7/4 d) for finding an ϵ-approximate firstorder stationary point. By introducing a small perturbation, it exhibits a function query complexity
of Õ(ϵ−7/4 d) for seeking a second-order stationary point with a high probability, matching stateof-the-art result in Euclidean space. Moreover, we
further establish the almost sure convergence in
the asymptotic sense through the Stable Manifold
Theorem. Regarding robustness, our algorithm
requires larger smoothing parameters in the order
of Õ(ϵ7/8 d−1/2 ), improving the existing result by
a factor of Õ(ϵ3/4 ).

min

x∈M

f (x),

(1)

where M represents the Riemannian manifold, and f (·) is
a nonconvex objective function with only zeroth-order information (i.e. function value) available. For ease of discussion,
we assume f (·) is lower bounded, i.e. f (x) ≥ flow for all
x ∈ M. Recently, a pioneering work by Li et al. (2023a)
introduced several Riemannian zeroth-order algorithms to
tackle problem (1), relying solely on the query of function
values. It is well known that the function query complexity is a key to measure the efficiency of the zeroth-order
algorithms, whereas these algorithms only exhibit inferior
complexity to the one in Euclidean space. This raises a
natural question: Is it possible to develop a Riemannian accelerated zeroth-order algorithm with lower function query
complexity?
The development of accelerated algorithms is a prominent
and active topic within both machine learning and optimization communities. It traces back to the seminal breakthrough
by Nesterov (1983), which paved the way for subsequent
advancements in acceleration techniques. Since then, numerous fruitful results have emerged in various scenarios,
such as accelerated first-order algorithms (Beck & Teboulle,
2009; Lin et al., 2015; Carmon et al., 2017; 2018; Jin et al.,
2018; Li & Lin, 2022) and accelerated second-order algorithms (Nesterov, 2008; Bubeck et al., 2019; Jiang et al.,

1

School of Information Management and Engineering, Shanghai University of Finance and Economics 2 Key Laboratory of
Interdisciplinary Research of Computation and Economics, Shanghai University of Finance and Economics, Ministry of Education
3
Dishui Lake Advanced Finance Institute, Shanghai University
of Finance and Economics. Correspondence to: Chang He <ischanghe@gmail.com>, Bo Jiang <isyebojiang@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

