Rethinking DP-SGD in Discrete Domain:
Exploring Logistic Distribution in the Realm of SIGN SGD

Jonggyu Jang 1 Seongjin Hwang 1 Hyun Jong Yang 1

Abstract

In response to these privacy challenges, several solutions
have been proposed, including federated learning (FL)
by McMahan et al. (2017), homomorphic encryption (HE)
by Lee et al. (2022)), and differentially private stochastic
gradient descent (DP-SGD) by Abadi et al. (2016). While
HE is hampered by its high complexity, and FL can not prevent data memorization, the DP-SGD algorithm emerges
as a simpler yet efficient method by adding Gaussian noise
for securing trained DNN models. The effectiveness of
DP-SGD is validated by the adoption of differential privacy
(DP) (Dwork et al., 2006), the underlying principle of DPSGD, by major tech companies like Apple, Google, and
Microsoft in their data collection practices (Apple, 2017;
Nguyên et al., 2016).

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have a risk of
remembering sensitive data from their training
datasets, inadvertently leading to substantial information leakage through privacy attacks like
membership inference attacks. DP-SGD is a
simple yet effective defense method that incorporates Gaussian noise into gradient updates to
safeguard sensitive information. With the prevalence of large neural networks, DP- SIGN SGD,
a variant of DP-SGD, has emerged, aiming to
curtail communication load while maintaining security. However, it is noteworthy that most DPSIGN SGD algorithms default to Gaussian noise,
suitable only for DP-SGD, without scant discussion of its appropriateness for SIGN SGD. Our
study delves into an intriguing question: “Can we
find a more efficient substitute for Gaussian noise
to secure privacy in DP- SIGN SGD?” We propose
an answer with a Logistic mechanism, which conforms to SIGN SGD principles and is interestingly
evolved from an exponential mechanism. In this
paper, we provide both theoretical and experimental evidence showing that our method surpasses
DP- SIGN SGD.

Aside from this, another new challenge has arisen: the everincreasing size of deep neural networks in distributed learning frameworks. As a solution, one can adopt SIGN SGD to
compress gradient vectors for efficient node-to-node gradient exchanges (Bernstein et al., 2019). The importance of
gradient compression becomes increasingly pivotal as the
size of neural networks explosively enlarges.
In this paper, we mainly focus on the combining advantages
of SIGN SGD and DP-SGD for reserving communication
efficiency while preserving privacy. Previously, few straightforward approaches have been proposed by Jin et al. (2020);
Lyu (2021)—namely, DP- SIGN SGD. However, a notable
limitation arises in the naive implementation of the DPSIGN SGD algorithm: the use of Gaussian noise, while specialized for DP-SGD, is not ideally suited for SIGN SGD. In
DP, the distribution of additive noise is an important factor,
because the goal of DP research is to maximize utility while
preserving statistical data privacy. At this point, we raise a
fundamental question:

1. Introduction
The realm of machine learning has faced substantial challenges related to data privacy. Notably, deep neural networks
(DNNs) can unintentionally remember sensitive information from the datasets they were trained on (Feldman &
Zhang, 2020). This issue becomes problematic not only
when DNNs are released to the public (Song et al., 2017),
but also when only inference results are made available (Papernot et al., 2017).

“What is a better noise mechanism for SIGN SGD?”
Our solution, DP- SIGN L O SGD, replaces the traditional
Gaussian mechanism with an additive Logistic mechanism. To this end, we revisit the foundational principles
of SIGN SGD, which finds a point in a set {−1, 1}N nearest
to the stochastic gradient—namely, sign sampling problem.
Our initial strategy utilizes an exponential mechanism, a
utility-maximizing mechanism, by setting the utility based

1

Department of Electrical Engineering, Pohang University of
Science and Technology, Pohang, South Korea. Correspondence
to: Hyun Jong Yang <hyunyang@postech.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

