Fault Tolerant ML: Efficient Meta-Aggregation and Synchronous Training

Tehila Dahan 1 Kfir Y. Levy 2

Abstract

distributed ML also propels collaborative learning across
decentralized data sources (Bonawitz et al., 2019), which
often differ in distribution, quality, and volume (Bonawitz
et al., 2019). For example, data from different geographic
locations, devices, or organizations can exhibit considerable variability. This poses a critical challenge: ensuring
the training process is resilient to faults and errors in such
distributed and heterogeneous environments. Fault-tolerant
training becomes imperative to maintain the integrity, accuracy, and reliability of the learned models, especially when
the stakes involve critical decision-making based on ML
predictions.

In this paper, we investigate the challenging
framework of Byzantine-robust training in distributed machine learning (ML) systems, focusing
on enhancing both efficiency and practicality. As
distributed ML systems become integral for complex ML tasks, ensuring resilience against Byzantine failures—where workers may contribute incorrect updates due to malice or error—gains
paramount importance. Our first contribution is
the introduction of the Centered Trimmed Meta
Aggregator (CTMA), an efficient meta-aggregator
that upgrades baseline aggregators to optimal performance levels, while requiring low computational demands. Additionally, we propose harnessing a recently developed gradient estimation
technique based on a double-momentum strategy
within the Byzantine context. Our paper highlights its theoretical and practical advantages for
Byzantine-robust training, especially in simplifying the tuning process and reducing the reliance
on numerous hyperparameters. The effectiveness
of this technique is supported by theoretical insights within the stochastic convex optimization
(SCO) framework and corroborated by empirical
evidence.

The Byzantine model (Lamport et al., 2019; Guerraoui et al.,
2023) provides a robust framework for devising and analyzing fault-tolerant training in distributed ML, due to its
capability of capturing both random and adversarial failures.
It addresses the challenge posed by Byzantine workers, who
may introduce incorrect updates due to unpredictable or malicious behavior, thus risking the training process. Owing to
its generality, the Byzantine setting has been widely adopted
as a framework for devising and analyzing fault-tolerant ML
approaches (Blanchard et al., 2017; Yin et al., 2018).
Addressing Byzantine failures in distributed machine learning (ML) requires robust aggregation rules to mitigate malicious or faulty updates from workers. Various robust aggregation rules have been developed in the past years, including
Coordinate-wise Trimmed Mean (CWTM) (Yin et al., 2018),
Krum (Blanchard et al., 2017), Geometric Median (GM)
(Chen et al., 2017), CWMed (Yin et al., 2018), and Minimum Diameter Averaging (MDA) (Guerraoui et al., 2018).
Each such aggregator brings unique qualities that may better
address different types of Byzantine failures. The diversity
in aggregator designs underscores the necessity of having a
versatile toolbox, as no single method can efficiently handle
all possible Byzantine scenarios.

1. Introduction
In modern machine learning (ML), the paradigm of largescale distributed training systems has emerged as a cornerstone for advancing complex ML tasks. Distributed ML
approaches enable to significantly accelerate the training
process; thus facilitating the practical use of larger, more
sophisticated models (Zhao et al., 2023). However, as these
systems grow in scale and complexity, they become increasingly susceptible to a range of faults and errors. Moreover,

The efficiency and robustness of these aggregators can
be systematically characterized, as shown in Karimireddy
et al. (2020; 2021); Allouah et al. (2023); Farhadkhani
et al. (2022). These studies not only outline the worst-case
strengths of various aggregators but also set benchmarks
for optimal efficiency, providing a comprehensive analysis of existing algorithms. Furthermore, they introduce the
concept of Meta-Aggregators—advanced mechanisms that

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Data and Decision Sciences, Technion, Haifa, Israel 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Technion, Haifa, Israel. Correspondence to:
Tehila Dahan <t.dahan@campus.technion.ac.il>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

