Conditional Common Entropy for Instrumental Variable Testing and Partial
Identification
Ziwei Jiang 1 Murat Kocaoglu 1

Abstract
Instrumental variables (IVs) are widely used for
estimating causal effects. There are two main
challenges when using instrumental variables.
First of all, using IV without additional assumptions such as linearity, the causal effect may still
not be identifiable. Second, when selecting an
IV, the validity of the selected IV is typically not
testable since the causal graph is not identifiable
from observational data. In this paper, we propose a method for bounding the causal effect with
instrumental variables under weak confounding.
In addition, we present a novel criterion to falsify
the IV with side information about the confounder.
We demonstrate the utility of the proposed method
with simulated and real-world datasets.

U

U
Z

X
(a)

Y

Z

X

Y

(b)

Figure 1. (a) shows an invalid IV graph where Z is affected by the
unobserved confounder. (b) shows an invalid IV graph, with direct
effect from Z to Y .

instances where patients do not adhere to their assigned
treatments perfectly, influenced by factors that also affect
the outcome. In this case, the assigned treatment serves as
the instrumental variable for estimating treatment effects.
In epidemiology, Mendelian Randomization (MR) uses genetic variants to identify the causal effects between some
risk factors and disease. Similarly, the public or market
policy can often be used to study the causal effect (Leigh
& Schembri, 2004; Davies et al., 2018). Next, we describe
some challenges of applying IV to estimate the causal effect.

1. Introduction
Instrumental variable is a popular approach for estimating causal effect in various domains, such as education
(Card, 1993), economy (Rosenzweig & Wolpin, 2000), public health (Hirano et al., 2000), public policy (Abadie, 2003)
and, marketing (Blundell et al., 2012). The earliest known
work related to instrumental variables was published by
Virtue (1929). The goal was to study butter’s price elasticity
of supply. The local rainfall condition was chosen as the
instrumental variable because it affects the butter supply
through grass and milk production while not directly related
to the demand and price of butter.

Formally, a variable Z is said to be an instrumental variable
if it satisfies three assumptions. (1) Z is not independent
of treatment variable X (relevence), (2) Z affects outcome
variable Y only through X (exclusion), and (3) Z is independent of the unobserved confounder (exchangeability).
The last two assumptions are in general untestable since
there is no conditional independence condition between Z
and Y in the observational data. Pearl (1995) introduced a
testable condition for IV graphs: instrumental inequality, a
necessary condition for the instrumental variable. Most of
the existing methods provide testable conditions to reject
invalid IV. Selecting suitable instrumental variables remains
a challenging problem. In this paper, we introduce the conditional common entropy and apply it to establish a new
testable condition for valid instrumental variables under the
assumption that unobserved confounders are weak.

Another common scenario for instrumental variables involves natural experiments when a randomized control trial
is infeasible. An example of such a scenario is imperfect
compliance in the randomized experiment (Balke & Pearl,
1994; Imbens & Angrist, 1994). Specifically, in a randomized controlled trial for the treatment effects, there may be
1

Elmore Family School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University. Correspondence to: Ziwei Jiang
<jiang622@purdue.edu>.

Another challenge of using instrumental variables (IV) lies
in addressing non-identifiable causal queries. One type of
approach using regression by making assumptions about
the underlying generating model (Bowden & Turkington,
1990; Hartford et al., 2017; Singh et al., 2019; Puli & Ran-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

