Model-Based RL for Mean-Field Games is not Statistically Harder than
Single-Agent RL

Jiawei Huang 1 Niao He 1 Andreas Krause 1

Abstract

solving for MARL systems with large populations. Yet,
for MARL systems with symmetric agents, such as human crowds or road traffic, one can leverage such special
structure by employing mean-field approximation, leading
to the RL for Mean-Field Games (MFGs) setting (Huang
et al., 2006; Lasry & Lions, 2007). Notably, MFGs offer
a promising framework where the complexity of learning
Nash Equilibrium (NE) needs not depend on the number
of agents (Laurière et al., 2022). It has found successful
applications in various domains, including financial markets (Cardaliaguet & Lehalle, 2018), economics (Gomes &
Pimentel) and energy management (Djehiche et al., 2016).

We study the sample complexity of reinforcement
learning (RL) in Mean-Field Games (MFGs) with
model-based function approximation that requires
strategic exploration to find a Nash Equilibrium
policy. We introduce the Partial Model-Based
Eluder Dimension (P-MBED), a more effective
notion to characterize the model class complexity.
Notably, P-MBED measures the complexity of
the single-agent model class converted from the
given mean-field model class, and potentially,
can be exponentially lower than the MBED
proposed by Huang et al. (2023). We contribute
a model elimination algorithm featuring a
novel exploration strategy and establish sample
complexity results polynomial w.r.t. P-MBED.
Crucially, our results reveal that, under the basic
realizability and Lipschitz continuity assumptions, learning Nash Equilibrium in MFGs is
no more statistically challenging than solving a
logarithmic number of single-agent RL problems.
We further extend our results to Multi-Type
MFGs, generalizing from conventional MFGs
and involving multiple types of agents. This extension implies statistical tractability of a broader
class of Markov Games through the efficacy of
mean-field approximation. Finally, inspired by
our theoretical algorithm, we present a heuristic
approach with improved computational efficiency
and empirically demonstrate its effectiveness.

Similar to single-agent RL (Jiang et al., 2017; Jin et al.,
2018), for MFGs, one of the most important questions is to
understand how many samples are required to explore the
unknown environment and solve the equilibrium, a.k.a. the
sample complexity. Given the complex dynamics of meanfield systems and high cost of generating samples from
large population, designing strategic exploration methods
for sample-efficient learning becomes imperative.
Existing works on learning MFGs primarily focus on modelfree approaches such as Q-learning (Anahtarci et al., 2023;
Guo et al., 2019), policy gradient (Subramanian & Mahajan,
2019; Yardim et al., 2022), fictitious play (Perrin et al., 2020;
Xie et al., 2021), etc. Several recent works further extend
these model-free approaches with value function approximation to handle large state-action space (Mao et al., 2022;
Zhang et al., 2023). However, their sample complexity results ubiquitously rely on strong structural assumptions such
as contractivity (Guo et al., 2019) or monotonicity (Perolat
et al., 2021). Their methods, moreover, are usually specialized and lack generalizability, leaving an open challenge
of efficiently exploring mean-field systems without those
structural assumptions.

1. Introduction
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) has excelled
in modeling cooperative and competitive interactions among
agents in unknown environments. However, the well-known
“curse of multi-agency” poses a challenge in equilibrium

To address this gap, Huang et al. (2023) establish general
sample complexity results for model-based RL in MFGs1 .
They introduce a complexity measure known as ModelBased Eluder Dimension (MBED) to characterize the com-

1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich. Correspondence to: Jiawei Huang <jiawei.huang@inf.ethz.ch>.

1

Model-based RL has also been explored in Mean-Field Control (MFC) setting, where all the agents are cooperative (Huang
et al., 2023; Pasztor et al., 2021).

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

