HelmFluid: Learning Helmholtz Dynamics for Interpretable Fluid Prediction

Lanxiang Xing * 1 Haixu Wu * 1 Yuezhou Ma 1 Jianmin Wang 1 Mingsheng Long 1

Abstract

engineering areas. However, it is quite challenging to capture and predict the intricate high-dimensional non-linear
dynamics within the fluid due to imperfect observations,
coupled multiscale interactions, etc. In this paper, we focus
on a more practical scenario that predicts future states of
fluid from partially observed physical quantities.

Fluid prediction is a long-standing challenge due
to the intrinsic high-dimensional non-linear dynamics. Previous methods usually utilize the nonlinear modeling capability of deep models to directly estimate velocity fields for future prediction.
However, skipping over inherent physical properties but directly learning superficial velocity fields
will overwhelm the model from generating precise or physics-reliable results. In this paper, we
propose the HelmFluid toward an accurate and
interpretable predictor for fluid. Inspired by the
Helmholtz theorem, we design a HelmDynamics
block to learn Helmholtz dynamics, which decomposes fluid dynamics into more solvable curl-free
and divergence-free parts, physically corresponding to potential and stream functions of fluid. By
embedding the HelmDynamics block into a Multiscale Multihead Integral Architecture, HelmFluid
can integrate learned Helmholtz dynamics along
temporal dimension in multiple spatial scales to
yield future fluid. Compared with previous velocity estimating methods, HelmFluid is faithfully derived from Helmholtz theorem and ravels out complex fluid dynamics with physically interpretable
evidence. Experimentally, HelmFluid achieves
consistent state-of-the-art in both numerical simulated and real-world observed benchmarks, even
for scenarios with complex boundaries. Code is
available at https://github.com/thuml/HelmFluid.

Recently, deep models have achieved impressive progress
in solving complex physical systems (Karniadakis et al.,
2021; Wang et al., 2023). One paradigm is learning neural
operators to directly predict the future fluid field based on
past observations (Lu et al., 2021a; Li et al., 2021; Wu et al.,
2023). These methods focus on leveraging the non-linear
modeling capacity of deep models to approximate complex
mappings between past and future fluids. However, directly
learning neural operators may fail to generate interpretable
evidence for prediction results and incur uncontrolled errors.
Another mainstreaming paradigm attempts to estimate the
dynamic fields of fluid with deep models for future prediction. It is notable that the superficial dynamics are actually
driven by underlying physical rules. Directly estimating
the velocity fields regarding less physical properties may
overwhelm the model from generating precise and plausible
prediction results (Sun et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2022). As
shown in Figure 1, it is hard to directly capture the complex
dynamics of fluid, where the learned dynamics will be too
tanglesome to guide the fluid prediction.
To tackle the above challenges, we attempt to capture the
intricate dynamics with physical insights for accurate and
interpretable fluid prediction. In this paper, we dive into the
physical properties of fluid and propose the Helmholtz dynamics as a new paradigm to represent fluid dynamics. Concretely, Helmholtz dynamics is inspired by the Helmholtz
theorem (Bladel, 1959) and attributes the intricate dynamics
to the potential and stream functions of fluid, which are
intrinsic physical quantities of fluid and can directly derive
the curl-free and divergence-free parts of fluid respectively.
Compared with superficial velocity fields, our proposed
Helmholtz dynamics decompose the intricate dynamics into
more solvable components, thereby easing the dynamics
learning process of deep models. Besides, this new dynamics requires the model to learn the inherent properties of
fluid explicitly, which also empowers the prediction with
endogenetic physical interpretability.

1. Introduction
Fluid is one of the basic substances in the physical world. Its
prediction is of immense importance in extensive real-world
applications, such as atmospheric prediction for weather
forecasting and airflow modeling for airfoil design, which
has attracted significant attention from both science and
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua
University. Lanxiang Xing <xlx22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>. Correspondence to: Mingsheng Long <mingsheng@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

