How Does Goal Relabeling Improve Sample Efficiency?

Sirui Zheng 1 Chenjia Bai 2 Zhuoran Yang 3 Zhaoran Wang 1

Abstract

challenges is hindsight experience replay and goal relabeling (Andrychowicz et al., 2017). Such algorithms typically employ a goal-dependent reward. In each iteration,
the agent updates the value function concerning a relabeled
goal rather than the target goal. Numerous empirical studies have demonstrated the effectiveness of hindsight experience replay and goal relabeling in various scenarios
(Andrychowicz et al., 2017; Pong et al., 2018; Fang et al.,
2019; Colas et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020; Pitis et al., 2020;
Zhang et al., 2020).

Hindsight experience replay and goal relabeling are successful in reinforcement learning (RL)
since they enable agents to learn from failures.
Despite their successes, we lack a theoretical understanding, such as (i) why hindsight experience
replay improves sample efficiency and (ii) how to
design a relabeling method that achieves sample
efficiency. To this end, we construct an example to show the information-theoretical improvement in sample efficiency achieved by goal relabeling. Our example reveals that goal relabeling can enhance sample efficiency and exploit the
rich information in observations through better
hypothesis elimination. Based on these insights,
we develop an RL algorithm called GOALIVE.
To analyze the sample complexity of GOALIVE,
we introduce a complexity measure, the goalconditioned Bellman-Eluder (GOAL-BE) dimension, which characterizes the sample complexity of goal-conditioned RL problems. Compared to the Bellman-Eluder dimension, the goalconditioned version offers an exponential improvement in the best case. To the best of our
knowledge, our work provides the first characterization of the theoretical improvement in sample
efficiency achieved by goal relabeling.

Despite its empirical success, the theoretical understanding
of hindsight experience replay and goal relabeling is still
elusive. Empirical studies have employed various methods for these techniques; however, these methods lack theoretical guarantees (Andrychowicz et al., 2017; Pong et al.,
2018; Nair et al., 2018; Pitis et al., 2020). Additionally, the
design of provably efficient algorithms incorporating goal
relabeling remains unclear, as existing research on efficient
exploration (Jiang et al., 2017; Cai et al., 2019; Jin et al.,
2020b) does not incorporate goal relabeling. While prior
research has produced sample-efficient algorithms for multitask RL and reward-free RL (Jin et al., 2020a; Lu et al.,
2022; Cheng et al., 2022), which share similarities with
goal-conditioned RL, these results do not fully capture the
benefits of goal relabeling.
Consequently, we aim to enhance the theoretical understanding of goal relabeling by addressing the following
questions: First, does hindsight experience replay and goal
relabeling provably improve sample efficiency? Second, if
the answer is positive, how does goal relabeling contribute
to this improvement? Third, can we design a principled
goal-conditioned algorithm that provably achieves better
sample efficiency for problems with sparse rewards and
large state spaces? Our contributions address these questions and can be summarized as follows.

1. Introduction
Numerous RL problems encountered in real-world scenarios involve sparse rewards and vast state spaces (Silver
et al., 2017; Savinov et al., 2018; Riedmiller et al., 2018),
making them challenging to solve due to the lack of meaningful feedback. A widely used technique to address these
1
Department of Industrial Engineering and Management
Sciences, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208, USA
2
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 3 Department of Operations Research and Financial Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA.. Correspondence to: Sirui Zheng
<siruizheng2025@u.northwestern.edu>.

• For the first problem, we provide an affirmative answer by constructive proof. We show in §3 that
there exist MDPs for which model-free algorithms
using goal-conditioned value functions achieve polynomial sample complexity. In contrast, all modelfree methods, given a value function class without
multiple goals, incur sample complexity exponential
in the horizon. In other word, we show that using

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

