VNN: Verification-Friendly Neural Networks with Hard Robustness Guarantees

Anahita Baninajjar 1 Ahmed Rezine 2 Amir Aminifar 1

Abstract

art (Katz et al., 2017; Tjeng et al., 2017; Huang et al., 2017;
Singh et al., 2019b). However, the majority of state-of-theart verification techniques suffer from poor scalability. As
a result, there have been several excellent initiatives to improve the scalability of the existing verification frameworks
for DNNs (Katz et al., 2019; Singh et al., 2019a; Baninajjar
et al., 2023).

Machine learning techniques often lack formal correctness guarantees, evidenced by the
widespread adversarial examples that plague most
deep-learning applications. This lack of formal
guarantees resulted in several research efforts that
aim at verifying Deep Neural Networks (DNNs),
with a particular focus on safety-critical applications. However, formal verification techniques
still face major scalability and precision challenges. The over-approximation introduced during the formal verification process to tackle the
scalability challenge often results in inconclusive
analysis. To address this challenge, we propose a
novel framework to generate Verification-Friendly
Neural Networks (VNNs). We present a posttraining optimization framework to achieve a balance between preserving prediction performance
and verification-friendliness. Our proposed framework results in VNNs that are comparable to
the original DNNs in terms of prediction performance, while amenable to formal verification
techniques. This essentially enables us to establish robustness for more VNNs than their DNN
counterparts, in a time-efficient manner.

In contrast to the majority of the state-of-the-art verification
techniques, here, we propose a new generation of DNNs that
are amenable to verification, or simply verification-friendly.
Verification-Friendly Neural Networks (VNNs) allow more
efficiency, in terms of time, and more verified samples,
while maintaining on-par prediction performance with their
DNN counterparts. The key observation is that most verification frameworks are based on over-approximation and
this over-approximation accumulates/amplifies along the
forward pass. To reduce the over-approximation, we define an optimization problem to obtain VNNs by enforcing
sparsity on the DNNs, constrained to satisfy/guarantee performance/robustness requirements. As such, our framework
allows verification tools to establish robustness for a wider
range of samples. While the main goal of VNNs is to be
verification-friendly, our proposed framework also plays a
regularization role, leading to more robust VNNs owing to
their sparsity.
We evaluate our proposed framework based on the classical
MNIST image dataset (LeCun, 1998) and demonstrate that
VNNs are indeed amenable to verification, while maintaining accuracy as their DNN counterparts. The verification
time of VNNs is always less than the original DNNs (up to
one-third in some cases) due to the sparsity of the VNNs. At
the same time, and more importantly, we observe that VNNs
allow verification of up to 76 times more samples, besides
their advantage in terms of verification time efficiency.

1. Introduction
The state-of-the-art machine learning techniques suffer from
lack of formal correctness guarantees. It has been demonstrated by a wide range of “adversarial examples” in the deep
learning domain (Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2016; Kurakin
et al., 2018; Liang et al., 2022) and presents a major challenge in the context of safety-critical applications (Huang
et al., 2020). To address this challenge, several verification
frameworks for DNNs have been proposed in the state of the

To evaluate our framework on real-world safety-critical applications, we consider two datasets from medical domain,
namely, CHB-MIT (Shoeb, 2010), and MIT-BIH (Goldberger et al., 2000), for real-time epileptic seizure detection
and real-time cardiac arrhythmia detection, respectively.
Failure to detect an epileptic seizure or a cardiac arrhythmia
episode in time may have irreversible consequences and
potentially lead to death (Panelli, 2020; Stroobandt et al.,
2019). For such safety-critical applications, we demonstrate

1

Department of Electrical and Information Technology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden, 2 Department of
Computer and Information Science, Linköping University,
Linköping, Sweden. Correspondence to: Anahita Baninajjar
<anahita.baninajjar@eit.lth.se>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

