How to Explore with Belief: State Entropy Maximization in POMDPs

Riccardo Zamboni 1 Duilio Cirino 1 Marcello Restelli 1 Mirco Mutti 2

Abstract

et al., 2019), a data collection strategy for offline RL (Yarats
et al., 2022), experimental design (Tarbouriech & Lazaric,
2019), or transition model estimation (Tarbouriech et al.,
2020; Jin et al., 2020b), and as a surrogate loss for policy
pre-training in reward-free settings (Mutti & Restelli, 2020).

Recent works have studied state entropy maximization in reinforcement learning, in which the
agent’s objective is to learn a policy inducing high
entropy over states visitation (Hazan et al., 2019).
They typically assume full observability of the
state of the system so that the entropy of the observations is maximized. In practice, the agent
may only get partial observations, e.g., a robot
perceiving the state of a physical space through
proximity sensors and cameras. A significant mismatch between the entropy over observations and
true states of the system can arise in those settings.
In this paper, we address the problem of entropy
maximization over the true states with a decision policy conditioned on partial observations
only. The latter is a generalization of POMDPs,
which is intractable in general. We develop a
memory and computationally efficient policy gradient method to address a first-order relaxation of
the objective defined on belief states, providing
various formal characterizations of approximation
gaps, the optimization landscape, and the hallucination problem. This paper aims to generalize
state entropy maximization to more realistic domains that meet the challenges of applications.

While the objective itself is not convex in the policy parameters, it is known to admit a tractable dual formulation (Hazan
et al., 2019), and several practical methods, also in combination with neural policies, have been developed (Mutti et al.,
2021; Liu & Abbeel, 2021b; Seo et al., 2021; Yarats et al.,
2021) as a testament of the promises of the framework for
tangible impact on real-world applications.
All of the previous works on state entropy maximization
assume the state of the environment is fully observable,
such that the agent-environment interaction can be modeled as a Markov Decision Process (MDP, Puterman, 2014).
Under this assumption, maximizing the entropy over the observations collected from the environment is well-founded.
However, the agent may only receive partial observation
from the environment in practice.
Let us think of an autonomous robot for rescue operations
as an illustrative application: The robot is placed in an unknown terrain with the goal of covering every inch of the
ground in order to locate and rescue a wounded human unable to move. The robot cannot access its true position, as
well as the human’s location-; it can only perceive its surroundings with sensors and cameras. Arguably, maximizing
the entropy of the observations, such as changing the camera
angle in every direction, is undesirable for the given task.
Instead, we would like the robot to maximize the entropy of
its position, for which the best policy may entail moving the
camera to probe the surroundings and avoid getting stuck,
but also to step forward to cover the most ground so that the
wounded human can be swiftly located and rescued.

1. Introduction
The state entropy maximization framework, initially proposed in Hazan et al. (2019), is a popular generalization of
the Reinforcement Learning (RL, Bertsekas, 2019) problem
in which an agent aims to maximize, instead of the cumulative reward, a (self-supervised) objective related to the
entropy of the state visitation induced by its policy.

In this paper, we aim to generalize the state entropy maximization framework to scenarios of the kind of the latter, in
which the agent only gets partial, potentially noisy, observations over the true state of the environment. Especially, we
aim to answer:

The entropy objective finds motivation as a standalone tool
for learning to cover the states of the environment (Hazan
1

Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy. 2 Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel. Correspondence to: Riccardo
Zamboni <riccardo.zamboni@polimi.it>.

How do we maximize the entropy of the true states
with a policy conditioned on observations only?

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

First, we model this setting through a Partially Observable
1

