Rethinking the Flat Minima Searching in Federated Learning

Taehwan Lee 1 Sung Whan Yoon 1 2

Abstract

convergence (Li et al., 2020b). To overcome the problem,
researchers have dedicated to developing FL algorithms that
achieve successful aggregation across heterogeneous clients
(Li et al., 2020a; Karimireddy et al., 2020; Acar et al., 2021).
Although such intensive efforts have been made to break the
hurdle of heterogeneity, the agreed rule of thumb methods
and principles have not yet been established.

Albeit the success of federated learning (FL) in decentralized training, bolstering the generalization
of models by overcoming heterogeneity across
clients still remains a huge challenge. To aim at
improved generalization of FL, a group of recent
works pursues flatter minima of models by employing sharpness-aware minimization in the local
training at the client side. However, we observe
that the global model, i.e., the aggregated model,
does not lie on flat minima of the global objective, even with the effort of flatness searching in
local training, which we define as flatness discrepancy. By rethinking and theoretically analyzing
flatness searching in FL through the lens of the
discrepancy problem, we propose a method called
Federated Learning for Global Flatness (FedGF)
that explicitly pursues the flatter minima of the
global models, leading to the relieved flatness discrepancy and remarkable performance gains in
the heterogeneous FL benchmarks.

One of the intriguing recent approaches to enhance the generalization is employing particular optimization methods
that find flatter minima on loss surface, which is widely observed to enhance the generalization of deep models against
the data distribution shifts (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber,
1997; Keskar et al., 2017; Izmailov et al., 2018; Foret et al.,
2021; Cha et al., 2021). The most popular flatness searching
method is Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM), which
incorporates the flatness around the minimum into the cost
function (Foret et al., 2021). Building on the promising optimizer, researchers in the FL field have recently confirmed
the effectiveness of SAM in strengthening the performance
of FL algorithms for heterogeneous settings (Qu et al., 2022;
Caldarola et al., 2022). Their approaches basically employ a
SAM or SAM-variant optimizer at the local training step at
each client to find a flatter local model of the local objective,
which indeed yields considerable performance gains for the
aggregated global model.

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) has drawn great attention as a key
framework for enabling decentralized learning across an
immense number of distributed clients while preserving
data privacy. The essence of FL is keeping local data on
the client side and communicating the gradients or model
parameters between a server and clients, where the server’s
direct access to the local data is prohibited (McMahan et al.,
2017). Nonetheless, there still exist daunting challenges that
remain unsolved. Most importantly, the diversity or heterogeneity of data distribution across clients is shown to hinder the successful aggregation of global model parameters,
leading to deteriorated performance and inhibiting model

Let us then raise a pivotal question to rethink the flatness
searching in FL: “Does the flatness searching in local training truly imply the flatness of the global model for the global
objective?” The answer is “Not for the heterogeneous FL
cases”. When the heterogeneity across clients becomes severe, we observed that the existing FL methods with the flat
minima searching look effective for finding flatter minima
in local training, but the global model does not lie on flatter
minima for the global objective. One of the recent works
initiated a discussion on this issue, but little intention was
paid to elaborate on the formal understanding of it (Sun
et al., 2023a). The issue is raised particularly in the regime
of decentralized training, and it severely degrades the performance of the flatness searching FL methods. We formally
define the issue as flatness discrepancy.

1

Graduate School of Artificial Intelligence, Ulsan National
Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), Ulsan, South
Korea 2 Department of Electrical Engineering, UNIST, Ulsan,
South Korea. Correspondence to: Sung Whan Yoon <shyoon8@unist.ac.kr>.

In this paper, we empirically and theoretically analyze the
relationship between heterogeneity across clients and flatness discrepancy: A strong heterogeneity leads to severe

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

