Optimal Coresets for Low-Dimensional Geometric Median

Peyman Afshani 1 Chris Schwiegelshohn 1

Abstract

loss incurred for point p when evaluated with the query f .
In this case coresets are composable, that given coresets S1
of P1 and S2 of P2 , S1 ∪ S2 is a coreset of P1 ∪ P2 . This
immediately makes a coreset computation embarrassingly
parallel and also yields streaming algorithms with roughly
the space requirements proportional to the size of a coreset
via a reduction by way of the Merge-&-Reduce framework
(Bentley & Saxe, 1980).

We investigate coresets for approximating the cost
with respect to median queries. In this problem,
we are givenPa set of points P ⊂ Rd and median
queries are p∈P ∥p − c∥ for any point c ∈ Rd .
Our goal is to compute a small weighted summary
S ⊂ P such that the cost of any median query
is approximated within a multiplicative (1 ± ε)
factor. We provide matching upper and lower
bounds on the number of
 points contained in S of
the order Θ̃ ε−d/(d+1) .

Among the most studied coreset problems are coresets
for center-based clustering problems. For k-clustering
objectives such as
√ Euclidean k-median, a coreset of size
Õ(k · ε−2 · min( 3 k, ε−1 )) have been recently discovered
(Cohen-Addad et al., 2022b) and this bound is tight up to
polylog factors for certain ranges of k and ε (Huang et al.,
2022). Notably, these coreset sizes are independent of the
number of input points.

1. Introduction
Large data sets pose a considerable challenge for the modern data analyst. Polynomial time algorithms are not automatically considered efficient and space requirements,
previously perhaps of secondary concern, have become
paramount. In addition, many novel computational models have emerged with the goal to design algorithms that
scale to even the most massive data sets. Examples include
streaming, where we read the data set once while storing
a very small fraction of the input, and distributed models
such as the MPC model, where scalability is achieved by
spreading out the computation over multiple servers.

The situation for k = 1, often referred to as the geometric
median and the Fermat-Weber problem, merits special consideration. Here, P is a point set in Rd and a point set S is
an ε-coreset if for all points c ∈ Rd
X
p∈P

∥p − c∥ −

X
p∈S

wp ∥p − c∥ ≤ ε ·

X

∥p − c∥, (1)

p∈P

where ∥.∥ denotes the Euclidean norm and wp is a nonnegative weight associated to p in S. The primary measure
of goodness for a coreset S is the distinct number of points
in S, henceforth called the coreset size.

In this backdrop, coresets have emerged as a preeminent
paradigm for big data analysis. Informally, given a set
of queries f ∈ F, a coreset of a data set P is a small
summary S such that f (P) ≈ε f (S) for all queries f , where
ε denotes the desired precision. If one has the option of
efficiently computing a coreset, all of the issues raised above
can be addressed. Algorithms, when run on the summary
S, become significantly faster, and the coreset by its very
nature has excellent space requirements.

Perhaps surprisingly, despite coreset research being very
active since their inception over 20 years ago, even the
basic geometric median problem is still not fully understood. In high dimensions, a coreset size of Õ(ε−2 ) was
discovered before the extension to k centers was known
(Cohen-Addad et al., 2021). This bound is tight up to logarithmic factors if the coreset points are a subset of the input
points (Cohen-Addad et al., 2021). Subsequently, (Braverman et al., 2022), showed that improvements are possible in
low dimensions. Specifically, they gave a coreset construction consisting of Õ(ε−2d/(d+1) ) points. For the Euclidean
plane, the construction yielded a coreset of size Õ(ε−1.5 ).
This was
√ further improved recently by (Huang et al., 2023)
to Õ( d · ε−1 ). This result recovers the Õ(ε−2 ) bound
of (Cohen-Addad et al., 2021) in high dimensions, as using dimension reduction techniques one can always assume

Moreover, for many problems encountered in machine learning, a query f ∈ F corresponds
to a composable loss funcP
tion, that is f (S) := p∈P L(f, p), where L(f, p) is the
1

Department of Computer Science, Aarhus University, Denmark. Correspondence to: Peyman Afshani <peyman@cs.au.dk>,
Chris Schwiegelshohn <schwiegelshohn@cs.au.dk>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

