Rethinking Guidance Information to Utilize Unlabeled Samples:
A Label Encoding Perspective

Yulong Zhang * 1 2 Yuan Yao * 3 Shuhao Chen 1 Pengrong Jin 1 Yu Zhang 1 Jian Jin 4 Jiangang Lu 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

With abundant high-quality human-annotated samples, deep
learning techniques have achieved remarkable advances in
various applications (LeCun et al., 2015; He et al., 2016;
Vaswani et al., 2017). One key principle behind their success
is the Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM), which adopts
the ground-truth labels of labeled samples to guide their
learning. In practice, however, we often encounter some
label insufficient scenarios (Cui et al., 2020), where the labeled samples are limited or may even be absent altogether.
For the former, we can utilize a large number of unlabeled
samples to assist the learning of labeled samples, which falls
within the scope of semi-supervised learning (Sohn et al.,
2020; Zhang et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022). On the contrary,
for the latter, a popular solution is to borrow the knowledge
from a related label-sufficient domain, i.e., source domain,
for facilitating the learning of unlabeled samples, which
pertains to the field of transfer learning (Pan & Yang, 2010;
Yang et al., 2020). The commonality of those techniques
is to fully utilize unlabeled samples for improving the generalization capability in scenarios with insufficient labeled
samples. Such scenarios are frequently encountered in practical applications. As ERM heavily relies on the guidance
of label information, it fails to fully exploit the potential of
unlabeled samples. Accordingly, it does not achieve good
performance in label insufficient scenarios. Hence, this paper focuses on mining the potential of unlabeled samples to
deal with label insufficient scenarios.

Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) is fragile
in scenarios with insufficient labeled samples. A
vanilla extension of ERM to unlabeled samples is
Entropy Minimization (EntMin), which employs
the soft-labels of unlabeled samples to guide their
learning. However, EntMin emphasizes prediction discriminability while neglecting prediction
diversity. To alleviate this issue, in this paper,
we rethink the guidance information to utilize
unlabeled samples. By analyzing the learning
objective of ERM, we find that the guidance information for labeled samples in a specific category
is the corresponding label encoding. Inspired by
this finding, we propose a Label-Encoding Risk
Minimization (LERM). It first estimates the label encodings through prediction means of unlabeled samples and then aligns them with their
corresponding ground-truth label encodings. As a
result, the LERM ensures both prediction discriminability and diversity, and it can be integrated
into existing methods as a plugin. Theoretically,
we analyze the relationships between LERM and
ERM as well as EntMin. Empirically, we verify
the superiority of the LERM under several label
insufficient scenarios. The codes are available at
https://github.com/zhangyl660/LERM.

To achieve this, a simple and popular approach is the entropy minimization (EntMin) (Grandvalet & Bengio, 2004).
It can be regarded as a direct extension of ERM to unlabeled
samples. Specifically, it utilizes the soft-labels of unlabeled
samples, which are assigned by a learning model during
the training process, for guiding their learning. As a result,
it pushes samples far from the decision boundary, thereby
enhancing the prediction discriminability of unlabeled samples. However, one potential flaw of EntMin is that the
soft-labels assigned by the learning model could be mainly
from majority categories with large numbers of labeled samples, resulting in a decrease in prediction diversity (Cui
et al., 2020) since the unlabeled samples tend to be biased
toward the majority categories. One reason for that lies in

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China 2 College of Control Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China 3 Beijing Teleinfo Technology
Company Ltd., China Academy of Information and Communications Technology, Beijing, China 4 Research Institute of Industrial
Internet of Things, China Academy of Information and Communications Technology, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Yu Zhang
<yu.zhang.ust@gmail.com>, Jian Jin <jin.jian@caict.ac.cn>,
Jiangang Lu <lujg@zju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

