Constrained Exploration via Reflected Replica Exchange
Stochastic Gradient Langevin Dynamics

Haoyang Zheng 1 * Hengrong Du 2 * Qi Feng 3 * Wei Deng 4 Guang Lin 1

Abstract

more efficient exploration of the state space; Hamiltonian
Monte Carlo (HMC) introduces auxiliary momentum variables and simulates the Hamiltonian dynamics to explore the
periodic orbit (Neal, 2012; Campbell et al., 2021; Zou & Gu,
2021; Wang & Wibisono, 2022); Higher-order numerical
techniques offer more efficient simulation by maintaining
the stability using a larger stepsize (Chen et al., 2015; Li
et al., 2019).

Replica exchange stochastic gradient Langevin
dynamics (reSGLD) (Deng et al., 2020a) is an
effective sampler for non-convex learning in
large-scale datasets. However, the simulation
may encounter stagnation issues when the hightemperature chain delves too deeply into the distribution tails. To tackle this issue, we propose
reflected reSGLD (r2SGLD): an algorithm tailored for constrained non-convex exploration by
utilizing reflection steps within a bounded domain.
Theoretically, we observe that reducing the diameter of the domain enhances mixing rates, exhibiting a quadratic behavior. Empirically, we test
its performance through extensive experiments,
including identifying dynamical systems with
physical constraints, simulations of constrained
multi-modal distributions, and image classification tasks. The theoretical and empirical findings
highlight the crucial role of constrained exploration in improving the simulation efficiency.

Although the above samplers effectively address pathological curvatures, they are still susceptible to getting trapped in
local regions during non-convex sampling. To circumvent
this local trap phenomenon, importance samplers (Berg &
Neuhaus, 1992; Wang & Landau, 2001; Deng et al., 2020b;
2022) inspired by statistical physics encourage the particles
to explore the high energy tails of the distribution; simulated tempering (Marinari & Parisi, 1992; Lee et al., 2018)
proposes to escape local optima by adjusting temperatures
to explore various energy levels of the distribution, which
offer viable solutions to these challenges. Building upon
these, replica exchange Langevin dynamics (reLD) (Swendsen & Wang, 1986; Earl & Deem, 2005) and the big data
extensions via reSGLD (Deng et al., 2020a) utilize multiple diffusion processes at diverse temperatures and incorporate swapping during training, thereby enabling hightemperature processes to act as a bridge across various local
modes. Its accelerated convergence has been both theoretically quantified (Dupuis et al., 2012; Dong & Tong, 2022)
and empirically validated (Deng et al., 2020a).

1. Introduction
Stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics (SGLD) (Welling
& Teh, 2011) is the go-to Markov Chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) method in big data. The sampler smoothly transitions from stochastic optimization to sampling as the step
size decreases and the injected noise enables exploration for
posterior sampling. However, the simulation efficiency is
severely affected by the pathological curvature of the energy
landscape. To address these challenges, the Quasi-Newton
Langevin dynamics (Ahn et al., 2012; Şimşekli et al., 2016;
Li et al., 2019) proposes to adapt to the varying curvature for

The naı̈ve reSGLD algorithm, while effectively
Reflection
navigating non-convex
landscapes, still faces
Exploitation
Exploration
over-exploration issues
in
high-temperature
chains, which is often
Swap
out of our interest in the
optimization perspective.
This is partly attributed
Constraints
to non-Arrhenius behavFigure 1. Trajectory of r2SGLD.
ior (Zheng et al., 2007;
Sindhikara et al., 2010), where increasing temperatures do
not linearly translate to improved exploration efficiency.

*
Equal contribution, order determined by coin flip. 1 Purdue
University, West Lafayette, IN 2 Vanderbilt University, Nashville,
TN 3 Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL 4 Machine Learning Research, Morgan Stanley, New York, NY. Correspondence
to: Wei Deng <weideng056@gmail.com>, Guang Lin <guanglin@purdue.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

