State-Constrained Zero-Sum Differential Games with One-Sided Information
Mukesh Ghimire 1 Lei Zhang 1 Zhe Xu 1 Yi Ren 1

Abstract

payoffs of the game. The goal of Player 1 (resp. Player 2)
is to minimize (resp. maximize) the cost. Since violation
of the state constraint results in +∞ penalty to Player 1,
Player 2 resorts to violating the constraints when possible;
and Player 1 resigns when state violation is inevitable. At
the beginning of the game, Nature draws a type from a distribution known to both players and assigns the type only to
Player 1. Initialized as Nature’s distribution, the common
belief about Player 1’s type is updated dynamically during
the game based on observations, and shared between the
players. A stochastic state trajectory is produced based on
the initial state and belief, the deterministic system dynamics, and the behavioral strategies of the two players. The
value of the game, when exists, follows a Hamilton-Jacobi
(HJ) equation and is a function of time, state, and belief.
Importantly, Player 1 may control the release of information
at the equilibrium to manipulate the common belief and take
advantage of information asymmetry.

We study zero-sum differential games with state
constraints and one-sided information, where
the informed player (Player 1) has a categorical
payoff type unknown to the uninformed player
(Player 2). The goal of Player 1 is to minimize his payoff without violating the constraints,
while that of Player 2 is to violate the state constraints if possible, or to maximize the payoff otherwise. One example of the game is a man-to-man
matchup in football. Without state constraints,
Cardaliaguet (2007) showed that the value of such
a game exists and is convex to the common belief of players. Our theoretical contribution is
an extension of this result to games with state
constraints and the derivation of the primal and
dual subdynamic principles necessary for computing behavioral strategies. Different from existing
works that are concerned about the scalability of
no-regret learning in games with discrete dynamics, our study reveals the underlying structure of
strategies for belief manipulation resulting from
information asymmetry and state constraints. This
structure will be necessary for scalable learning
on games with continuous actions and long time
windows. We use a simplified football game to
demonstrate the utility of this work, where we
reveal player positions and belief states in which
the attacker should (or should not) play specific
random deceptive moves to take advantage of information asymmetry, and compute how the defender should respond.

We use Hexner’s game (Hexner, 1979) as a minimal example
to demonstrate information control by Player 1: Consider
two players with linear dynamics
ẋi = Ai xi + Bi ui ,
for i = 1, 2, where xi (t) ∈ Rdx are system states, ui (t) ∈
U are control inputs belonging to the admissible set U,
Ai , Bi ∈ Rdx ×dx . Let θ ∈ {−1, 1} be Player 1’s type
unknown to Player 21 . Let pθ be Nature’s probability distribution of θ. Consider that the game is to be played infinite
many times, the payoff is an expectation over θ:
J(u1 , u2 ) = Eθ

hZ T 


∥u1 ∥2R1 − ∥u2 ∥2R2 dt +

0
i (1)
∥x1 (T ) − zθ∥2K1 (T ) − ∥x2 (T ) − zθ∥2K2 (T ) ,

where z ∈ Rdx , R1 and R2 are positive-definite, continuous
matrix functions, and K1 (T ) and K2 (T ) are positive semidefinite matrices. All parameters are common knowledge
except θ. Essentially Player 1’s goal is to get closer to zθ
than Player 2. Since Player 2 can infer the target based
on Player 1’s control, Player 1 may play a non-revealing
strategy for some time, i.e., as if he also only knows pθ
rather than the actual θ, before he eventually reveals.

1. Introduction
We study fixed-time zero-sum differential games with state
constraints and one-sided information, where Player 1 holds
a private type (e.g., an intent or preference) that defines the
1

Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA. Correspondence to: Yi
Ren <yiren@asu.edu>.

1
Hexner’s analysis is applicable to θ ∈ Rdx , but is not generalizable to games with arbitrary dynamics and payoff functions.
Here we adopt Cardaliaguet’s setting where types are categorical (Cardaliaguet, 2007).

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

