Rethinking Specificity in SBDD:
Leveraging Delta Score and Energy-Guided Diffusion

Bowen Gao * 1 Minsi Ren * 2 3 Yuyan Ni 4 Yanwen Huang 5 Bo Qiang 5
Zhi-Ming Ma 4 Wei-Ying Ma 1 Yanyan Lan 1 6 7

Abstract

particularly those in deep learning-based generative models,
have shown promising results. Studies such as (Luo et al.,
2021; Long et al., 2022; Guan et al., 2023a;b; Peng et al.,
2022) demonstrate the capability of these models to achieve
docking scores that surpass those of reference ligands.

In the field of Structure-based Drug Design
(SBDD), deep learning-based generative models
have achieved outstanding performance in terms
of docking score. However, further study shows
that the existing molecular generative methods
and docking scores both have lacked consideration in terms of specificity, which means that
generated molecules bind to almost every protein
pocket with high affinity. To address this, we introduce the Delta Score, a new metric for evaluating
the specificity of molecular binding. To further incorporate this insight for generation, we develop
an innovative energy-guided approach using contrastive learning, with active compounds as decoys, to direct generative models toward creating
molecules with high specificity. Our empirical
results show that this method not only enhances
the delta score but also maintains or improves traditional docking scores, successfully bridging the
gap between SBDD and real-world needs.

However, a deeper analysis suggests that these accomplishments may not fully reflect practical efficacy. Further investigation of generated molecules with high docking scores
reveals a critical issue: not only do they have a high docking
score with the assigned pocket, but they also achieve high
docking scores with other unintended protein pockets. From
a biological perspective, this observation indicates that current deep learning generative models generate molecules of
low specificity.
Specificity is a crucial aspect of drug design. The efficacy
of a drug is not solely dependent on its ability to bind to the
intended disease-related target but also on its specificity for
not binding to essential proteins. Promiscuous drugs, interacting with multiple biological targets, can potentially cause
serious adverse effects(Harrison, 2016; Lin et al., 2019;
Wong et al., 2019). This lack of specificity contributes
to the development of pan-assay interference compounds
(PAINS), characterized by their undesirable broad biological activity and potential toxicity (Schneider & Schneider,
2016).

1. Introduction
Structure-based drug design (SBDD) has become a pivotal
strategy in creating novel therapeutic agents. This approach
leverages the three-dimensional structural information of target receptors to generate drug-like small molecules that can
bind to these receptors effectively. Recent advancements,

Unfortunately, specificity has been a largely overlooked
factor in benchmarking SBDD previously. Currently, the
most important metric for SBDD is based on docking scores.
Traditional scoring functions merely evaluate the docking
pose’s spatial and electrostatic fit, failing to differentiate between highly specific molecules and promiscuous ones that
bind to multiple targets (Zheng et al., 2022). This limitation
means modifications can artificially boost docking scores,
misleadingly suggesting a compound’s specificity and effectiveness. Thus, there’s a pressing need for new metrics that
accurately assess the specificity of molecule-pocket interactions, moving beyond the generalized interaction probability
that current docking scores offer.

*
Equal contribution 1 Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR),
Tsinghua University. 2 Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy
of Sciences. 3 School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China. 4 Academy
of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences. 5 Department of Pharmaceutical Science, Peking University. 6 Beijing Frontier Research Center for Biological Structure,
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. 7 Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence (BAAI) . Correspondence to: Yanyan Lan
<lanyanyan@air.tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Besides benchmarking, they also fail to explicitly model
the specific binding behavior for the generation. Generally,

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

