D S D M: Model-Aware Dataset Selection with Datamodels
Logan Engstrom 1 Axel Feldmann 1 Aleksander M ˛
adry 1

Abstract

is not actually so straightforward. Indeed, not all data is
equally useful; for example, internet data sources frequently
contain “low quality” data like spam, poor writing, or nonsense text. Therefore, in practice, we tend to filter training
data according to intuitive notions of quality, e.g., choosing documents similar to a “high quality” data source like
Wikipedia or discarding documents with fewer than five sentences. These steps choose (qualitatively) “clean” samples
that should intuitively improve performance. However, do
such samples improve performance in practice too?

When selecting data for training large-scale models, standard practice is to filter for examples that
match human notions of data quality. Such filtering yields qualitatively clean datapoints that intuitively should improve model behavior. However,
in practice the opposite can often happen: we find
that selecting according to similarity with “high
quality” data sources may not increase (and can
even hurt) performance compared to randomly
selecting data. To develop better methods for selecting data, we start by framing dataset selection
as an optimization problem that we can directly
solve for: given target tasks, a learning algorithm,
and candidate data, select the subset that maximizes model performance. This framework thus
avoids handpicked notions of data quality, and instead models explicitly how the learning process
uses train datapoints to predict on the target tasks.
Our resulting method greatly improves language
model (LM) performance on both pre-specified
tasks and previously unseen tasks. Specifically,
choosing target tasks representative of standard
LM problems and evaluating on diverse held-out
benchmarks, our selected datasets provide a 2×
compute multiplier over baseline methods.

Contributions. We find that the opposite can happen: selecting data according to similarity with “high quality” data
sources may not improve (and, in fact, can even hurt)
model performance. Specifically, we train language models
with standard, similarity-based selection methods previously
used to select data for models like PaLM and GPT-3 (Brown
et al., 2020; Xie et al., 2023b), and find these methods do
not outperform (and can even underperform) selecting data
at random (cf. Section 4).
To develop better methods for selecting training data, we
start from first principles. That is, we avoid intuitive notions
of data quality, and instead frame dataset selection as an optimization problem where the goal is to—given target tasks,
a learning algorithm, and a candidate data pool—select the
data that maximizes model performance. However, actually finding the optimal solution to this problem is difficult.
While we can calculate the performance of a specific training set by training a model on that set (and then evaluating),
it is (generally) unclear how to calculate the best possible
training subset without examining every possible subset one
by one, a computationally infeasible procedure.

1. Introduction
Suppose we want to train a large-scale machine learning
model. What data should we train on? The simple answer is:
as much data as possible. For example, we train language
and vision models on vast quantities of text (Radford et al.,
2019) and image-caption (Ramesh et al., 2021) data from
sources like internet crawls. This seemingly straightforward
recipe yields models that generalize remarkably well to a
broad range of tasks.

We instead approximate the optimal subset by (approximately) modeling how the learning algorithm actually uses
training data to predict. Specifically, in Section 2, we model
target task performance as a function of training subset
using datamodels (which efficiently approximate the mapping between training subset and model performance (Ilyas
et al., 2022)), and select the subset that maximizes our estimate. Then, in Section 3, we demonstrate that our resulting
method, dataset selection with datamodels (D S D M), consistently improves language model performance on diverse
target tasks (e.g., SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al., 2016) and LAMBADA (Paperno et al., 2016)), even when existing selection
methods do not.

A closer look, however, reveals that choosing training data
1
MIT. Correspondence
gstrom@mit.edu>.

to:

Logan

Engstrom

<en-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

