RICE: Breaking Through the Training Bottlenecks of Reinforcement Learning
with Explanation

Zelei Cheng * 1 Xian Wu * 1 Jiahao Yu 1 Sabrina Yang 2 Gang Wang 3 Xinyu Xing 1

Abstract

However, training an optimal DRL agent for complex tasks,
particularly in environments with sparse rewards, presents
a significant challenge. Often cases, the training of a DRL
agent can hit a bottleneck without making further process:
its sub-optimal performance becomes evident when it makes
common mistakes or falls short of achieving the final goals.

Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) is playing an
increasingly important role in real-world applications. However, obtaining an optimally performing DRL agent for complex tasks, especially with
sparse rewards, remains a significant challenge.
The training of a DRL agent can be often trapped
in a bottleneck without further progress. In this
paper, we propose RICE, an innovative refining
scheme for reinforcement learning that incorporates explanation methods to break through the
training bottlenecks. The high-level idea of RICE
is to construct a new initial state distribution that
combines both the default initial states and critical states identified through explanation methods,
thereby encouraging the agent to explore from
the mixed initial states. Through careful design,
we can theoretically guarantee that our refining
scheme has a tighter sub-optimality bound. We
evaluate RICE in various popular RL environments and real-world applications. The results
demonstrate that RICE significantly outperforms
existing refining schemes in enhancing agent performance.

When the DRL agent hits its training bottleneck, a refinement strategy can be considered, especially if the agent is
already locally optimal. To refine the locally optimal DRL
agent, one method is to analyze its behavior and patch the
errors it made. A recent work (Cheng et al., 2023) proposes
StateMask to identify critical states of the agent using an explanation method. One utility of StateMask is patching the
agent’s error, which fine-tunes the DRL agent starting from
the identified critical states (denoted as “StateMask-R”).
However, such an approach suffers from two drawbacks.
On the one hand, initializing solely from critical states will
hurt the diversity of initial states, which can cause overfitting
(see Appendix D). On the other hand, fine-tuning alone cannot help the DRL agent jump out of the local optima. These
observations drive us to rethink how to design a proper initial distribution and apply exploration-based techniques to
patch previous errors.
Another reason behind the training bottleneck can be the
poor choice of the training algorithm. Naturally, to improve
performance, the developer needs to select another DRL
training algorithm to re-train the DRL agent. However, for
complex DRL tasks, re-training the agent from scratch is
too costly. For instance, for AlphaStar (Vinyals et al., 2019)
to attain grandmaster-level proficiency in StarCraft, its training period exceeds one month with TPUs. Retraining an
agent of this level can incur a cost amounting to millions of
dollars (Agarwal et al., 2022). Therefore, existing research
has investigated the reuse of previous DRL training (as prior
knowledge) to facilitate re-training (Ho & Ermon, 2016;
Fu et al., 2018; Cai et al., 2022). The most recent example is Jump-Start Reinforcement Learning (JSRL) proposed
by Uchendu et al. (2023) which leverages a pre-trained
policy to design a curriculum to guide the training of a selfimproving exploration policy. However, their selection of
exploration frontiers in the curriculum is random, which
cannot guarantee that the exploration frontiers have positive

1. Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has shown promising
performance in various applications ranging from playing
simulated games (Todorov et al., 2012; Mnih et al., 2013; Oh
et al., 2016; Cai et al., 2023) to completing real-world tasks
such as navigating autonomous vehicles and performing
cybersecurity attacks and defenses (Bar-Zur et al., 2023;
Vyas et al., 2023; Anderson et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2023).
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science,
Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois, USA 2 Presentation
High School, San Jose, California, USA 3 Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Urbana, Illinois, USA. Correspondence to: Xinyu Xing
<xinyu.xing@northwestern.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

