Towards Scalable and Versatile Weight Space Learning

Konstantin Schürholt 1 2 Michael W. Mahoney 2 3 4 Damian Borth 1

Abstract
Learning representations of well-trained neural
network models holds the promise to provide an
understanding of the inner workings of those models. However, previous work has either faced limitations when processing larger networks or was
task-specific to either discriminative or generative
tasks. This paper introduces the SANE approach
to weight-space learning. SANE overcomes previous limitations by learning task-agnostic representations of neural networks that are scalable
to larger models of varying architectures and
that show capabilities beyond a single task. Our
method extends the idea of hyper-representations
towards sequential processing of subsets of neural network weights, thus allowing one to embed larger neural networks as a set of tokens into
the learned representation space. SANE reveals
global model information from layer-wise embeddings, and it can sequentially generate unseen neural network models, which was unattainable with previous hyper-representation learning
methods. Extensive empirical evaluation demonstrates that SANE matches or exceeds state-of-theart performance on several weight representation
learning benchmarks, particularly in initialization
for new tasks and larger ResNet architectures.

Figure 1. Aggregated results of 56 experiments showing (left:)
four discriminative downstream tasks in R2 , and (right:) four generative downstream tasks in accuracy, each evaluated on (bottom:)
CNNs model zoos trained on 4 datasets (NMIST, SVHN, CIFAR10, STL) and (top:) ResNet18 model zoos trained on three
datasets (CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, Tiny-ImageNet). The colors indicate performance of Red: raw NN weights, Orange: weight
statistics from Unterthiner et al. (2020), Green: trained hyperrepresentations from Schürholt et al. (2021; 2022a), and Blue:
SANE (ours). While some methods perform well on specific tasks,
or are restricted by the size of the underlying models, SANE can
deliver excellent performance on all tasks and model sizes.

In the discriminative context, previous works aim to link
weight space properties to properties such as model quality, generalization gap, or hyperparameters, using either the
margin distribution (Yak et al., 2019; Jiang et al., 2019),
graph topology features (Corneanu et al., 2020), or eigenvalue decompositions of weight matrices (Martin & Mahoney, 2019b; 2020; 2021; Martin et al., 2021). Some works
learn classifiers to map between statistics of weights and
model properties (Eilertsen et al., 2020; Unterthiner et al.,
2020), or learn lower-dimensional manifolds to infer NN
model properties (Schürholt et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
The exploration of the “weight space” of neural network
(NN) models, i.e., the high-dimensional space spanned by
the model parameters of a population of trained NNs, allows
us to gain insights into the inner workings of those models.

In the generative context, methods have been proposed
to generate model weights using (Graph) HyperNetworks
(Ha et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2019; Knyazev et al., 2021),
Bayesian HyperNetworks (Deutsch, 2018), HyperGANs
(Ratzlaff & Fuxin, 2019), and HyperTransformers (Zhmoginov et al., 2022). These approaches have been used for tasks
such as neural architecture search, model compression, ensembling, transfer learning, and meta-learning. They have
in common that they derive their learning signal from the
underlying (typically image) dataset. In contrast to these

1
AIML Lab, University of St.Gallen, St. Gallen, Switzerland 2 International Computer Science Institute, Berkeley, CA,
USA 3 Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA,
USA 4 Department of Statistics, University of California at Berkeley, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Konstantin Schürholt <konstantin.schuerholt@unisg.ch>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

