How do Large Language Models Navigate Conflicts
between Honesty and Helpfulness?

Ryan Liu 1 * Theodore R. Sumers 2 * Ishita Dasgupta 3 Thomas L. Griffiths 1 4

Abstract

sources (Nakano et al., 2021; Guu et al., 2020; Menick
et al., 2022). In parallel, helpfulness is loosely defined as
the LLM’s ability to satisfy the user’s query (Askell et al.,
2021). Rather than formalize this concept, most approaches
instead optimize models directly against human preferences
via reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF,
Ouyang et al., 2022; Christiano et al., 2017).

In day-to-day communication, people often approximate the truth — for example, rounding the
time or omitting details — in order to be maximally helpful to the listener. How do large language models (LLMs) handle such nuanced tradeoffs? To address this question, we use psychological models and experiments designed to characterize human behavior to analyze LLMs. We test a
range of LLMs and explore how optimization for
human preferences or inference-time reasoning
affects these trade-offs. We find that reinforcement learning from human feedback improves
both honesty and helpfulness, while chain-ofthought prompting skews LLMs towards helpfulness over honesty. Finally, GPT-4 Turbo demonstrates human-like response patterns including
sensitivity to the conversational framing and listener’s decision context. Our findings reveal the
conversational values internalized by LLMs and
suggest that even these abstract values can, to a
degree, be steered by zero-shot prompting.

By treating these objectives as separate, standard approaches
implicitly assume that honesty and helpfulness are jointly
achievable. In everyday conversation, however, they can
be in tension (Wilson & Sperber, 2002). People regularly
round numerical values including time (Van Der Henst et al.,
2002), distance (Krifka, 2007), and money (Kao et al., 2014),
or endorse false generalizations when they believe these
approximations will help the listener (van Rooij & Schulz,
2020). People also regularly trade literal honesty for other
communicative goals, as implicit in figures of speech like
metaphors (Tendahl & Gibbs Jr, 2008), hyperbole (Carston
& Wearing, 2011) and irony (Popa-Wyatt, 2019).
When LLMs produce language, how do they navigate such
trade-offs? Given that some of these conversational norms
may be implicit in internet training data, it is possible that
LLMs already partially encode and align with our conversational values. However, the trade-offs that people make
between honesty and helpfulness can change with subtle
contextual differences, creating a challenge for alignment:
when asked for the time, people often round to a multiple of five (Van Der Henst et al., 2002), but if the person
asking is tuning a watch, people provide the exact time
instead. Achieving value-aligned conversational agents requires understanding and ultimately steering these tradeoffs (Kasirzadeh & Gabriel, 2023). But how can we formalize and measure these abstract concepts?

1. Introduction
Honesty and helpfulness are two key desiderata for conversational agents (Askell et al., 2021) to ensure safe and useful
real-world deployments (Bommasani et al., 2021; Weidinger
et al., 2022). Honesty, or truthfulness, is a longstanding
concern with LLMs due to their limited data horizon and
proclivity toward hallucination (Ji et al., 2023; Evans et al.,
2021). Approaches to reduce hallucination include augmenting LLMs with access to information repositories and
encouraging them to retrieve and cite information from such

In this paper, we link these concepts to Gricean maxims (Grice, 1975), which have been used extensively in
the cognitive science literature to formalize the rules that
we implicitly follow in everyday communication (Frank
& Goodman, 2012; Benz, 2006; Roberts, 2012). We then
use the signaling bandits experimental paradigm (Sumers
et al., 2023) – a social variant of contextual bandits (Sutton
& Barto, 2018) where participants produce utterances to
inform a human decision-maker. This paradigm allows us to

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science,
Princeton University 2 Anthropic; work performed while
at Princeton University 3 Google DeepMind 4 Department
of Psychology, Princeton University.
Correspondence to:
Ryan Liu <ryanliu@princeton.edu>, Theodore R. Sumers
<ted@anthropic.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

