Profile Reconstruction from Private Sketches
Hao WU 1 Rasmus Pagh 1
interest to approximate the profile f⃗ by a vector ⃗r such that
⃗r − f⃗ has small ℓp norm for some parameter p.

Abstract
Given a multiset of n items from D, the profile reconstruction problem is to estimate, for t = 0, 1, . . . , n,
the fraction f⃗[t] of items in D that appear exactly t
times. We consider differentially private profile estimation in a distributed, space-constrained setting where
we wish to maintain an updatable, private sketch of the
multiset that allows us to compute an approximation
of f⃗ = (f⃗[0], . . . , f⃗[n]). Using a histogram privatized
using discrete Laplace noise, we show how to “reverse”
the noise, using an approach of Dwork et al. (ITCS
’10). We show how to speed up their LP-based technique from polynomial time to O(d + n log n), where
d = |D|, and analyze the achievable error in the ℓ1 ,
ℓ2 and ℓ∞ norms. In
√all cases the dependency of the
error on d is O(1/ d) — we give an informationtheoretic lower bound showing that this dependence
on d is asymptotically optimal among all private, updatable sketches for the profile reconstruction problem
with a high-probability error guarantee.

Streaming algorithms. Datar & Muthukrishnan (2002) considered estimating the profile in a streaming setting, showing
that a small sample of the domain D suffices to ensure small
error (they focus on ℓ1 error, but the technique applies to
general ℓp norms). The sample can be described by a compact hash function, making it suitable for use in distributed
settings. More recently, Chen, Indyk, and Woodruff (2024)
improved the error bound, and showed matching space lower
bounds for streaming algorithms. General estimators for
symmetric functions based on samples were presented and
analyzed by Acharya, Das, Orlitsky, and Suresh (2017).
Differentially private algorithms.
Differential privacy (Dwork et al., 2006) is a leading approach to ensure
that the output of an algorithm, from simple statistics to
machine learning models, does not reveal too much about
the inputs. It is one of the central techniques for enabling
collection of statistics, training of machine learning models,
and other computations on data that may hold sensitive information. We will focus on the privacy of individual elements
in the multiset, that is, our differential privacy guarantee is
defined in terms of pairs of neighboring datasets where the
number of occurrences of a particular element differs by 1,
and that are otherwise identical.

1. Introduction
The profile is a fundamental statistic of a data set. Given
a multiset of n items from a finite domain D, the profile
is a vector f⃗ whose t(th) entry equals the fraction f⃗[t] of
items in D that appear exactly t times. The concept has
arisen in many contexts under various names, including
rarity, incidence, fingerprint, prevalence, collision statistics, anonymous histogram, unattributed histogram, and
histogram of histograms. Besides succinctly summarizing
frequency information in a dataset, for example the degree
distribution in a graph, a profile is sufficient to compute any
symmetric function of the dataset histogram (Chen et al.,
2024).

In the central model of differential privacy (where a trusted
curator holds the input data), privately releasing a profile
with small ℓ2 error was considered by Hay, Li, Miklau, and
Jensen (2009); Hay, Rastogi, Miklau, and Suciu (2010), the
latter focusing on the application of graph degree distributions. Private synthetic graphs with specific degree distribution were also studied by Karwa and Slavkovic (2012).
Motivated by estimating repetitions in password datasets,
Blocki, Datta, and Bonneau (2016) studied differentially
private protocols for profile estimation, focusing on ℓ2 error.

In settings where space, communication or privacy constraints prevents us from computing the exact profile it is of

Suresh (2019) considered an alternative (incomparable) error metric, where the profile is represented in the “verbatim”
form of a vector encoding all frequencies in sorted order.
They presented an algorithm to release verbatim profiles
with a small ℓ1 error. Recently Manurangsi (2022) showed
improved tight upper and lower bounds on the privacy/ℓ1
error trade-off for verbatim profiles.

1

Department of Computer Science, University of Copenhagen,
Denmark. Correspondence to: Hao WU <hawu@di.ku.dk>, Rasmus Pagh <pagh@di.ku.dk>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

