Can AI Assistants Know What They Don’t Know?

Qinyuan Cheng * 1 2 Tianxiang Sun * 1 2 Xiangyang Liu 1 2 Wenwei Zhang 2 Zhangyue Yin 1 Shimin Li 1
Linyang Li 1 2 Zhengfu He 1 Kai Chen 2 Xipeng Qiu 1

Knowns

Known

AI assistants powered by Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive performance in various tasks. However, LLMs
still make factual errors in knowledge-intensive
tasks such as open-domain question answering.
These untruthful responses from AI assistants
can pose significant risks in practical applications. Therefore, in this paper, we ask the question
“Can AI assistants know what they don’t know
and express this awareness through natural
language?” To investigate this, we construct a
model-specific “I don’t know” (Idk) dataset. This
dataset includes Supervised Fine-tuning data and
preference data, categorizing questions based on
whether the assistant knows or does not know the
answers. Then, we align the assistant with its
corresponding Idk dataset using different alignment methods, including Supervised Fine-tuning
and preference optimization. Experimental results
show that, after alignment with the Idk dataset,
the assistant is more capable of declining to answer questions outside its knowledge scope. The
assistant aligned with the Idk dataset shows significantly higher truthfulness than the original assistant.

Unknowns
Known Unknowns:
Things the AI knows it
doesn’t know.

Known Knowns:
Things the AI knows it
knows.

Unknown

Abstract

Unknown Unknowns:
Things the AI doesn’t know
it doesn’t know.

Unknown Knowns:
Things the AI doesn’t know
it knows.

Figure 1. Knowledge quadrants of an AI assistant. “Unknowns”
represents what the AI does not actually know. “Knowns” represents what the AI actually knows. “Known” represents what the
AI believes it knows. “Unknown” represents what the AI believes
it does not know.

intelligence chat assistants built on LLMs have emerged,
capable of assisting users with a variety of tasks in daily life
and providing satisfactory user experiences (Ouyang et al.,
2022; OpenAI, 2022; Anthropic, 2023; Sun et al., 2023;
Baichuan, 2023; Qwen-Team, 2023). However, despite their
frequent interactions with users, these chat assistants are
prone to generating hallucinations (Shuster et al., 2021;
Zhang et al., 2023c; Cheng et al., 2023), such as responses
with factual errors (Wang et al., 2023b) or mimicking human
falsehoods found in their training corpus (Lin et al., 2022a),
some of which are difficult for users to detect. These untruthful responses could potentially harm society and also
diminish the credibility of AI assistants.

1. Introduction
Large language models (Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery
et al., 2023; Zeng et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023) possess
extensive world knowledge and demonstrate capabilities in
numerous natural language tasks, capabilities that smaller
models lack (Wei et al., 2022b). Recently, many artificial

An AI assistant aligned with human values must adhere to
truthfulness (Evans et al., 2021), ensuring its information accurately reflects reality. When an assistant disseminates incorrect facts, it not only reveals a lack of knowledge but also
an inability to acknowledge and communicate its limitations.
A truthful AI, therefore, must recognize and convey its own
knowledge boundaries clearly. It should provide precise
information for what it knows and refrain from answering
what it does not. This paper investigates the capability of AI
assistants to discern their knowledge limits and articulate
this uncertainty in natural language.

*

1
Equal contribution
Department of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China 2 Shanghai
AI Laboratory, Shanghai, China.
Correspondence to:
Qinyuan Cheng <chengqy2019@foxmail.com>, Kai Chen
<chenkai@pjlab.org.cn>, Xipeng Qiu <xpqiu@fudan.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

The AI assistant’s understanding of its own knowledge
1

