Subequivariant Reinforcement Learning
in 3D Multi-Entity Physical Environments

Runfa Chen * 1 Ling Wang * 2 Yu Du 3 1 Tianrui Xue 4 Fuchun Sun 1 5 Jianwei Zhang 6 Wenbing Huang 7 8

Abstract

Task
Assignment

Learning policies for multi-entity systems in 3D
environments is far more complicated against
single-entity scenarios, due to the exponential
expansion of the global state space as the number of entities increases. One potential solution
of alleviating the exponential complexity is dividing the global space into independent local
views that are invariant to transformations including translations and rotations. To this end, this
paper proposes Subequivariant Hierarchical Neural Networks (SHNN) to facilitate multi-entity
policy learning. In particular, SHNN first dynamically decouples the global space into local
entity-level graphs via task assignment. Second,
it leverages subequivariant message passing over
the local entity-level graphs to devise local reference frames, remarkably compressing the representation redundancy, particularly in gravityaffected environments. Furthermore, to overcome
the limitations of existing benchmarks in capturing the subtleties of multi-entity systems under
the Euclidean symmetry, we propose the Multientity Benchmark (M E B EN), a new suite of environments tailored for exploring a wide range of
multi-entity reinforcement learning. Extensive experiments demonstrate significant advancements
of SHNN on the proposed benchmarks compared
to existing methods. Comprehensive ablations are
conducted to verify the indispensability of task
assignment and subequivariance.

𝑔! , 𝑔" ∈ E𝒈 (3)
𝒈

Task
Assignment

LRF
Transform

𝑔! , 𝑔" ∈ E𝒈 (3)

Subequivariance

LRF
Transform

Figure 1. Illustration of the symmetry in our 3D multi-entity physical environments. In this example, there are two agents (red
and blue) navigating towards two objects (grey). To mitigate the
exponential-growth complexity, we conduct task assignment to decouple the whole state space into local views (the orange and green
transparent coordinate frames), where one agent is assigned for
one object. These local views can be represented by local reference
frame (LRF), leading to representations that are independent of any
translation, or rotation around the gravity direction of the global
coordinates of the entities. Such symmetry is called E(3) subequivariance, distinct from conventional E(3) equivariance, accounting
for gravitational effects. In form, subequivariance is encapsulated
by the group E⃗g (3)—translations/rotations/reflections along gravity ⃗
g (a 3D Euclidean subgroup of E(3) in Section 2). Codes are
available on our project page: https://alpc91.github.io/SMERL/.

1. Introduction
Learning to navigate, control, cooperate, and compete in
the 3D physical world is a fundamental task in developing
intelligent agents. Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has
made impressive breakthroughs, particularly in single-entity
systems, with agent policies evolving through environmental interactions (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2016; Mnih
et al., 2016; Schulman et al., 2017; Bansal et al., 2018;
Liu et al., 2018; 2022). However, an intricate challenge
is generalizing across configurations like transformations,
morphologies, and tasks, which are interlinked and complicate the learning process. In particular, multi-entity systems,
which include agents, objects, and other entities defined
in (Spelke, 2022), present considerable challenges compared to single-entity scenarios, partly due to exponential
expansion of global transformations as the number of entities increases (Deng et al., 2023). In Figure 1, for example,
any horizontal rotation of the entities, although producing
different global coordinates and representations, does not
change the essential geometry and their local views of different entities. Such symmetry, defined as subequivariance

*
Equal contribution 1 Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech. , Institute
for AI, BNRist Center, Tsinghua University 2 Dept. of Info. Eng.,
Xi’an Research Institute of High-Tech 3 School of Elec. Eng.,
Naval University of Engineering 4 College of Arts & Sci., New
York Unviersity 5 THU-Bosch JCML Center 6 TAMS, Dept. of
Informatics, University of Hamburg 7 Gaoling School of Artificial
Intelligence, Renmin University of China 8 Beijing Key Laboratory
of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods. Correspondence
to: Fuchun Sun <fcsun@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn>, Wenbing Huang
<hwenbing@126.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

