Discrete Diffusion Modeling by Estimating the Ratios of the Data Distribution

Aaron Lou 1 Chenlin Meng 1 2 Stefano Ermon 1

Abstract

The crucial part for any deep generative model is the probabilistic modeling technique. For discrete data such as
natural language, autoregressive modeling (Yule, 1971)–
arguably the simplest modeling type since it derives from
the probabilistic chain rule–has remained the only competitive method for decades. Although modern autoregressive transformers have produced stunning results (Vaswani
et al., 2017; Radford et al., 2019), there are limits. For example, the sequential sampling of tokens is slow, hard to
control, and often degrades without distribution annealing
techniques like nucleus sampling (Holtzman et al., 2019).

Despite their groundbreaking performance for
many generative modeling tasks, diffusion models have fallen short on discrete data domains
such as natural language. Crucially, standard diffusion models rely on the well-established theory of score matching, but efforts to generalize
this to discrete structures have not yielded the
same empirical gains. In this work, we bridge
this gap by proposing score entropy, a novel loss
that naturally extends score matching to discrete
spaces, integrates seamlessly to build discrete diffusion models, and significantly boosts performance. Experimentally, we test our Score Entropy
Discrete Diffusion models (SEDD) on standard
language modeling tasks. For comparable model
sizes, SEDD beats existing language diffusion
paradigms (reducing perplexity by 25-75%) and
is competitive with autoregressive models, in particular outperforming GPT-2. Furthermore, compared to autoregressive mdoels, SEDD generates
faithful text without requiring distribution annealing techniques like temperature scaling (around 68× better generative perplexity than un-annealed
GPT-2), can trade compute and quality (similar
quality with 32× fewer network evaluations), and
enables controllable infilling (matching nucleus
sampling quality while enabling other strategies
besides left to right prompting).

To alleviate these issues, researchers have sought alternative
approaches to generating text data. In particular, inspired
by their success in the image domain, many works have
extended diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho
et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021c) to language domains (Li
et al., 2022; Austin et al., 2021). Yet, despite considerable
effort, no such approach yet rivals autoregressive modeling,
as they are not competitive on likelihoods, are slower to sample from, and do not generate comparable samples without
resorting to heavy annealing and empirical alterations.
In our work, we challenge the longstanding dominance of
autoregressive models by introducing Score Entropy Discrete Diffusion models (SEDD). SEDD parameterizes a
reverse discrete diffusion process using the ratios of the
data distribution. These are learned using score entropy, a
novel loss that is analogous to score matching for standard
diffusion models (Hyvärinen, 2005; Song & Ermon, 2019)
and results in several empirical benefits:
1. On core language modeling tasks, SEDD outperforms
all existing language diffusion models (Li et al., 2022;
Austin et al., 2021; Gulrajani & Hashimoto, 2023; He
et al., 2022) by large margins and is competitive with
autoregressive models of the same size (beating GPT-2
on its zero-shot perplexity tasks (Radford et al., 2019)).

1. Introduction
Many recent advances in deep learning have centered around
generative modeling. Here, a model learns how to generate
novel samples from unstructured data. With the powerful
capabilities of modern neural networks, these “generative
AI” systems have developed unparalleled capabilities, such
as creating images given only text (Ramesh et al., 2022) and
answering complex questions (Brown et al., 2020).

2. SEDD generates high quality unconditional samples
and enables one to naturally trade off compute for quality. When measuring the generative perplexity (given
by large models) of unconditional and un-annealed
samples from similarly sized models, SEDD beats

1

Stanford University 2 Pika Labs. Correspondence to: Aaron
Lou <aaronlou@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

We open source our code at github.com/louaaron/ScoreEntropy-Discrete-Diffusion

1

