ACM-MILP: Adaptive Constraint Modification via Grouping and Selection
for Hardness-Preserving MILP Instance Generation

Ziao Guo 1 Yang Li 1 Chang Liu 1 Wenli Ouyang 2 Junchi Yan 1

Abstract

narios including planning (da Silva et al., 2006), scheduling (Muckstadt & Wilson, 1968), routing (Dong et al., 2014),
etc. Beyond traditional branch-and-bound solvers (Gurobi
Optimization, LLC, 2023; Cplex, 2009; Bestuzheva et al.,
2021a;b), recent trends have led to a proliferation of machine
learning (ML) approaches in a data-driven paradigm, generally assisting traditional solvers in solving process (Paulus
et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023b; Li et al., 2023b; 2024;
Zhang et al., 2023a). These approaches hold promise for
enhancing both speed and quality in problem-solving.

Data plays a pivotal role in the development
of both classic and learning-based methods
for Mixed-Integer Linear Programming (MILP).
However, the scarcity of data in real-world applications underscores the necessity for MILP
instance generation methods. Currently, these
methods primarily rely on iterating random singleconstraint modifications, disregarding the underlying problem structure with constraint interrelations, thereby leading to compromised quality
and solvability. In this paper, we propose ACMMILP, a framework for MILP instance generation,
to achieve adaptive constraint modification and
constraint interrelation modeling. It employs an
adaptive constraint selection mechanism based
on probability estimation within the latent space
to preserve instance characteristics. Meanwhile,
it detects and groups strongly related constraints
through community detection, enabling collective
modifications that account for constraint dependencies. Experimental results show significant
improvements in problem-solving hardness similarity under our framework. Additionally, in the
downstream task, we showcase the efficacy of our
generated instances for hyperparameter tuning.
Source code is available: https://github.
com/Thinklab-SJTU/ACM-MILP.

In particular, the pivotal role of high-quality instances has
become increasingly prominent. The process of testing and
tuning solver hyperparameters (Hutter et al., 2010), which
is crucial for solver efficiency and accuracy, often heavily
relies on comprehensive datasets that faithfully reflect the
diversity and complexity of real-world scenarios (Li et al.,
2023a). Meanwhile, the effectiveness of data-driven ML approaches naturally depends on the availability of extensive
and representative data (Bengio et al., 2021). However, due
to the complexity and specificity of MILP, as well as data privacy and proprietary constraints (Roling et al., 2008; Freund
& Naor, 2004; Sakuma & Kobayashi, 2007), available realworld data are rather scarce (Gleixner et al., 2021), which
poses obstacles to both classic and ML-based MILP solvers
and heightens the need for efficient instance generation.
Efforts have been made to address this data bottleneck, primarily stemming from two lines toward instance generation.
Hand-crafted instance generation methods either leverage
specialized strategies to generate instances of specific problems that can be readily reduced to MILP (Bergman et al.,
2016; Balas & Ho, 1980; Leyton-Brown et al., 2000), or generate new instances by sampling in an encoding space while
controlling a few specific statistics (Smith-Miles & Bowly,
2015; Bowly, 2019). These methods heavily rely on expert
knowledge and manual efforts, failing to adaptively unravel
specific data characteristics and maintain general applicability. In comparison, learning-based generation methods
leveraging deep neural networks can naturally accommodate
the capture of global instance features through data-driven
training. This line of work is still in its early stage, which
primarily encompasses G2MILP (Geng et al., 2023), the
first learning-based MILP generation model with a masked

1. Introduction
Mixed-integer linear programming (MILP), as a significant
Combinatorial Optimization (CO) problem, is of central
importance in operation research and computer science
and serves broad applications in various real-world sce1
School of Artificial Intelligence & Department of Computer
Science and Engineering & MoE Lab of AI, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China 2 AI Lab, Lenovo Research, Beijing,
China. Correspondence to: Junchi Yan <yanjunchi@sjtu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

