An LLM Compiler for Parallel Function Calling

Sehoon Kim * 1 Suhong Moon * 1 Ryan Tabrizi 1 Nicholas Lee 1 Michael W. Mahoney 1 2 3
Kurt Keutzer 1 Amir Gholami 1 2

Abstract

Kojima et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023b; Wei et al., 2022;
Yang et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2023b; Zhou et al., 2023b);
and recent works have also shown how this reasoning capability can be helpful in improving accuracy for solving
complex and logical tasks. The reasoning capability has also
allowed function (i.e., tool) calling capability, where LLMs
can invoke provided functions and use the function outputs
to help complete their tasks. These functions range from a
simple calculator that can invoke arithmetic operations to
more complex LLM-based functions.

The reasoning capabilities of the recent LLMs
enable them to execute external function calls
to overcome their inherent limitations, such as
knowledge cutoffs, poor arithmetic skills, or lack
of access to private data. This development has
allowed LLMs to select and coordinate multiple
functions based on the context to tackle more
complex problems. However, current methods
for function calling often require sequential
reasoning and acting for each function which
can result in high latency, cost, and sometimes
inaccurate behavior. To address this, we introduce
LLMCompiler, which executes functions in parallel to efficiently orchestrate multiple function
calls. Drawing inspiration from the principles of
classical compilers, LLMCompiler enables parallel function calling with three components: (i) a
Function Calling Planner, formulating execution
plans for function calling; (ii) a Task Fetching
Unit, dispatching function calling tasks; and (iii)
an Executor, executing these tasks in parallel.
LLMCompiler automatically generates an optimized orchestration for the function calls and can
be used with both open-source and closed-source
models. We have benchmarked LLMCompiler
on a range of tasks with different patterns of
function calling. We observe consistent latency
speedup of up to 3.7×, cost savings of up
to 6.7×, and accuracy improvement of up to
∼9% compared to ReAct. Our code is available at
https://github.com/SqueezeAILab/LLMCompiler.

The ability of LLMs to integrate various tools and function
calls could enable a fundamental shift in how we develop
LLM-based software. However, this brings up an important
challenge: what is the most effective approach to incorporate multiple function calls? A notable approach has been
introduced in ReAct (Yao et al., 2022), where the LLM calls
a function, analyzes the outcomes, and then reasons about
the next action, which involves a subsequent function call.
For a simple example illustrated in Fig. 1 (Left), where the
LLM is asked if Scott Derrickson and Ed Wood have the
same nationality, ReAct initially analyzes the query and decides to use a search tool to search for Scott Derrickson. The
result of this search (i.e., observation) is then concatenated
back to the original prompt for the LLM to reason about
the next action, which invokes another search tool to gather
information about Ed Wood.
ReAct has been a pioneering work in enabling function
calling, and it has been integrated into several frameworks (Langchain; Liu, 2022). However, scaling this approach for more complex applications requires considerable
optimizations. This is due to the sequential nature of ReAct, where it executes function calls and reasons about their
observations one after the other. This approach, along with
the agent systems that extend ReAct (Khot et al., 2023; Qin
et al., 2023; Ruan et al., 2023b; Sumers et al., 2023; Yao
et al., 2023b), may lead to inefficiencies in latency and cost,
due to the sequential function calling and repetitive LLM
invocations for each reasoning and action step. Furthermore,
while dynamic reasoning about the observations has benefits
in certain cases, concatenating the outcomes of intermediate function calls could disrupt the LLM’s execution flow,
potentially reducing accuracy (Xu et al., 2023). Common
failure cases include repetitive invocation of the same func-

1. Introduction
Recent advances in the reasoning capability of Large Language Models (LLMs) have expanded the applicability of
LLMs beyond content generation to solving complex problems (Besta et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023b; Gao et al., 2022;
*
Equal contribution 1 UC Berkeley 2 ICSI 3 LBNL. Correspondence to: Amir Gholami <amirgh@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

