Interpreting and Improving Large Language Models in Arithmetic Calculation

Wei Zhang * 1 2 Chaoqun Wan 2 Yonggang Zhang † 3 Yiu-ming Cheung 3 Xinmei Tian 1 4 Xu Shen † 2
Jieping Ye 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have experienced rapid
advancements and shown impressive language understanding capabilities (Devlin et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020;
Chowdhery et al., 2022). Notably, LLMs exhibit emergent abilities (Wei et al., 2022b) that enable them to solve
intricate reasoning tasks akin to humans, such as mathematical computations (Frieder et al., 2023; Jie et al., 2022),
chain-of-thought reasoning (Wei et al., 2022c; Kojima et al.,
2022), few-shot prompting (Brown et al., 2020; Alayrac
et al., 2022), etc. Despite these impressive characteristics,
the complex inner processes governing LLMs’ functionality
have yet to be fully illuminated, due to the complex and
intricate non-linear interactions within densely-connected
layers. Comprehending these underlying mechanisms could
contribute to predicting how the LLMs behave beyond their
training data (Mu & Andreas, 2020), gaining insights into
the emergence of certain behaviors (Nanda & Lieberum,
2022; Barak et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022a), as well as identifying and rectifying errors present in the specific models
(Hernandez et al., 2021; Vig et al., 2020).

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable potential across numerous applications and have shown an emergent ability to
tackle complex reasoning tasks, such as mathematical computations. However, even for the simplest arithmetic calculations, the intrinsic mechanisms behind LLMs remains mysterious, making
it challenging to ensure reliability. In this work,
we delve into uncovering a specific mechanism by
which LLMs execute calculations. Through comprehensive experiments, we find that LLMs frequently involve a small fraction (< 5%) of attention heads, which play a pivotal role in focusing
on operands and operators during calculation processes. Subsequently, the information from these
operands is processed through multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs), progressively leading to the final
solution. These pivotal heads/MLPs, though identified on a specific dataset, exhibit transferability
across different datasets and even distinct tasks.
This insight prompted us to investigate the potential benefits of selectively fine-tuning these essential heads/MLPs to boost the LLMs’ computational performance. We empirically find that such
precise tuning can yield notable enhancements
on mathematical prowess, without compromising
the performance on non-mathematical tasks. Our
work serves as a preliminary exploration into the
arithmetic calculation abilities inherent in LLMs,
laying a solid foundation to reveal more intricate
mathematical tasks.

In this work, we take the first attempt to interpret the inner
process of LLMs through the lens of mathematical computation problems, which are conducted on publicly available
LLMs (e.g., LLaMA2 series (Touvron et al., 2023b)). Unlike typical language comprehension tasks, mathematical
computation tasks involve concise problem statements with
definitive correct answers, requiring a process of reasoning and calculation rather than direct copying to derive the
solutions. These characteristics enable us to gain insights
into the models’ reasoning capabilities without interference
from unrelated factors. Specifically, we focus on tasks involving the arithmetic calculation with two operands, i.e.,
addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division, which are
fundamentals of mathematical computation. To this end, we
create datasets of various types of sentences that involve the
calculation logic, such as “The addition of 3 and 5 equals to
” in Figure 1. The LLMs could provide answers with high
confidence scores of over 80% on average.

*
This work was done when the author was visiting Alibaba
Cloud as a research intern. 1 University of Science and Technology
of China 2 Alibaba Cloud 3 Hong Kong Baptist University 4 Institute
of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science
Center. Correspondence to: Xu Shen† <shenxu.sx@alibabainc.com>, Yonggang Zhang† <csygzhang@comp.hkbu.edu.hk>.

To unveil how these models correctly complete the task
(e.g., “3 + 5 = 8”), we begin by identifying the taskrelated internal components in LLMs. We do a hard in-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

