Controlling Behavioral Diversity in Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Matteo Bettini 1 Ryan Kortvelesy 1 Amanda Prorok 1

Abstract

understudied, with the field still in its infancy. In particular,
one question that remains unanswered is how to control a
system’s diversity to an exact, quantified value. This is the
focus of this work.

The study of behavioral diversity in Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning (MARL) is a nascent
yet promising field. In this context, the present
work deals with the question of how to control
the diversity of a multi-agent system. With no
existing approaches to control diversity to a set
value, current solutions focus on blindly promoting it via intrinsic rewards or additional loss functions, effectively changing the learning objective
and lacking a principled measure for it. To address this, we introduce Diversity Control (DiCo),
a method able to control diversity to an exact
value of a given metric by representing policies
as the sum of a parameter-shared component and
dynamically scaled per-agent components. By
applying constraints directly to the policy architecture, DiCo leaves the learning objective unchanged, enabling its applicability to any actorcritic MARL algorithm. We theoretically prove
that DiCo achieves the desired diversity, and we
provide several experiments, both in cooperative
and competitive tasks, that show how DiCo can be
employed as a novel paradigm to increase performance and sample efficiency in MARL. Multimedia results are available on the paper’s website1 .

Behavioral diversity in MARL is intrinsically tied to the concept of policy parameter sharing (Christianos et al., 2021).
When agents share policy parameters, they obtain higher
sample efficiency, but learn a single homogeneous policy.
When agents do not share parameters, they are able to learn
heterogeneous policies, but achieve lower sample efficiency.
Following the latter paradigm, several methods have been
proposed to promote behavioral diversity, showing its utility
in many MARL problems (Jiang & Lu, 2021; Chenghao
et al., 2021; Mahajan et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2020). These
approaches aim to boost diversity by employing information
theoretical objectives, such as additional intrinsic rewards
or secondary losses. In doing so, they effectively change
the learning objective, without being able to measure the
resulting diversity. In contrast, rather than than boosting
diversity, we propose a novel problem formulation that aims
to control diversity to the exact value of a given metric, leaving the learning objective unchanged. This paradigm opens
new avenues for the control and study of diversity in MARL,
presenting a novel tool that researchers can use to constrain
agents to different diversity levels, aiding in the discovery
of emergent strategies that leverage the benefits of diversity.
We propose Diversity Control (DiCo), the first method to
control behavioral diversity in MARL to a desired value,
applicable to any actor-critic algorithm with stochastic or
deterministic continuous actions. Bypassing issues (mentioned above) that change the structure of the learning objective, DiCo finds a new approach to diversity control. It
represents policies as the sum of a parameter-shared (homogeneous) component and individual (heterogeneous) components, which are dynamically scaled according the the
current and desired value of a given diversity metric. We provide theoretical proofs that DiCo achieves the desired diversity and demonstrate it empirically in a didactic case-study
(i.e., Multi-Agent Navigation). Whereas previous works
lacked tools to inspect the learned policies, we present novel
visualizations of the policies’ diversity distribution, which
enable to analyze how the agent policies learn to distribute
the diversity dictated by DiCo over the observation space.

1. Introduction
Diversity is key to collective intelligence (Woolley et al.,
2015) and commonplace in natural systems (Kellert, 1997).
Just as biologists and ecologists have demonstrated the role
of functional diversity in ecosystem survival (Cadotte et al.,
2011), it has also been shown to provide important performance benefits in Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
(MARL) (Bettini et al., 2023b; Chenghao et al., 2021). Despite this, methods that leverage diversity in MARL are
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. Correspondence to: Matteo Bettini
<mb2389@cl.cam.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
https://sites.google.com/view/dico-marl

1

