Structure-based drug design by denoising voxel grids

Pedro O. Pinheiro 1 Arian Jamasb 1 Omar Mahmood 1 Vishnu Sresht 1 Saeed Saremi 1

Abstract
We present VoxBind, a new score-based generative model for 3D molecules conditioned
on protein structures. Our approach represents
molecules as 3D atomic density grids and leverages a 3D voxel-denoising network for learning and generation. We extend the neural empirical Bayes formalism (Saremi & Hyvärinen,
2019) to the conditional setting and generate
structure-conditioned molecules with a two-step
procedure: (i) sample noisy molecules from the
Gaussian-smoothed conditional distribution with
underdamped Langevin MCMC using the learned
score function and (ii) estimate clean molecules
from the noisy samples with single-step denoising.
Compared to the current state of the art, our model
is simpler to train, significantly faster to sample
from, and achieves better results on extensive in
silico benchmarks—the generated molecules are
more diverse, exhibit fewer steric clashes, and
bind with higher affinity to protein pockets.

Figure 1. We are interested in sampling from p(x|ξ), the distribution of ligands given pocket ξ. This is challenging due to the
high-dimensionality of the data. Therefore, instead of (a) sampling
directly from this distribution, we generate ligands in a two-step
procedure: (b) sample y from the Gaussian-smoothed distribution
p(y|ξ) and (c) estimate the ligand x̂ from y and ξ.

(i.e., ligands) conditioned on 3D protein binding sites (i.e.,
pockets). Generative models have the promise of exploring
the chemical space more efficiently and effectively than
search-based approaches.
SBDD generative models typically represent molecules as
discrete voxel grids or atomic point clouds. Voxel-based
approaches (Wang et al., 2022a; Ragoza et al., 2022; Wang
et al., 2022b) represent atoms (or electron densities) as continuous densities and molecules as a discretization of 3D
space into voxel grids (a voxel is a discrete unit of volume). Point-cloud based approaches (e.g., Luo et al. (2021);
Schneuing et al. (2022)) treat atoms as points in 3D Euclidean space and rely on graph neural network (GNN)
architectures. Current state of the art methods in data-driven
SBDD (Guan et al., 2023a;b) operate on point clouds and
are based on E(3) equivariant diffusion models (Hoogeboom et al., 2022) conditioned on protein pockets: they
sample points from a Gaussian prior and iteratively apply
the learned reverse conditional diffusion process (over continuous coordinates and discrete atom types and bonds) to
generate molecules.

1. Introduction
The goal of structure-based drug design (SBDD) (Blundell, 1996; Anderson, 2003) is to generate molecules that
bind with high affinity to specific 3D structures of target
biomolecules. Traditional computational approaches, such
as virtual screening, search over a library of molecules and
score them to identify the best binders for a given target
of interest (Lyu et al., 2019). However, random search is
arguably very inefficient as the chemical space grows exponentially with molecular size (Fink et al., 2005).
Recently, many generative modeling methods have been
proposed as alternatives to search-based SBDD (see Thomas
et al. (2023) for a review). In this setting, the goal is to
develop data-driven approaches that generate molecules
1

Prescient Design, Genentech. Correspondence to: Pedro O. Pinheiro <pedro@opinheiro.com>, Saeed Saremi
<saremis@gene.com>.

There is a clear trade-off between the two data representation choices. On one hand, GNNs can leverage SE(3)equivariance inductive bias more easily than architectures
that operate on voxels (Geiger & Smidt, 2022; Weiler et al.,
2018). On the other hand, they are known to be less expres-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

