Gradient-based Visual Explanation for Transformer-based CLIP

Chenyang Zhao 1 2 Kun Wang 2 Xingyu Zeng 2 Rui Zhao 2 Antoni B. Chan 1

Abstract
Significant progress has been achieved on the
improvement and downstream usages of the
Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP)
vision-language model, while less attention is
paid to the interpretation of CLIP. We propose
a Gradient-based visual Explanation method for
CLIP (Grad-ECLIP), which interprets the matching result of CLIP for specific input image-text
pair. By decomposing the architecture of the encoder and discovering the relationship between
the matching similarity and intermediate spatial
features, Grad-ECLIP produces effective heat
maps that show the influence of image regions
or words on the CLIP results. Different from
the previous Transformer interpretation methods that focus on the utilization of self-attention
maps, which are typically extremely sparse in
CLIP, we produce high-quality visual explanations by applying channel and spatial weights
on token features. Qualitative and quantitative
evaluations verify the superiority of Grad-ECLIP
compared with the state-of-the-art methods. A
series of analysis are conducted based on our visual explanation results, from which we explore
the working mechanism of image-text matching,
and the strengths and limitations in attribution
identification of CLIP. Codes are available here:
https://github.com/Cyang-Zhao/Grad-Eclip.

Text: “A dog is
playing with frisbee”

(a) raw attention

(b) Rollout

(c) GAME

(d) MaskCLIP

(e) CLIPSurgery

(f) M2IB

(g) RISE

(h) Grad-CAM

(i) Grad-ECLIP (Ours)

CLIP similarity: 0.36

Figure 1: A visual explanation of CLIP for the image with the text
“A dog is playing with frisbee” using (a) raw attention in the last
layer; (b) Rollout; (c) GAME; (d) MaskCLIP; (e) CLIPSurgery; (f)
M2IB; (g) RISE; (h) Grad-CAM; and (i) Our method Grad-ECLIP.

language processing and computer vision. CLIP significantly improves the performance on various downstream
tasks, such as classification (Changpinyo et al., 2021; Cha
et al., 2022), retrieval (Luo et al., 2022) and segmentation
(Wang et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2022), with zero-shot and finetuning methodologies. Inspired from CLIP, multi-modal
pre-training has been further developed by exploring different perspectives, including unifying vision-language understanding and generation (Yu et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022a),
prompt design (Zhou et al., 2022b; Chen et al., 2022), and
region-aware enhancement (Li et al., 2020; Wang et al.,
2023; Zhong et al., 2022). Although researchers devote
many efforts into improving multi-modal pre-training or
exploring the usages in downstream tasks, less attention has
been focused on the interpretation or explanation of CLIP.

1. Introduction
Recently, by learning the representations for matching
caption text and its corresponding image, the Contrastive
Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP) model (Radford et al.,
2021) has introduced a simple and effective dual-encoder
pre-training paradigm for the interaction between natural

Previous visual explanation works have considered interpreting the transformer architecture used by CLIP. Attention
Rollout (Abnar & Zuidema, 2020) generates explanations
by aggregating attention maps computed along the forward
pass of the model. Relevance-based methods (Chefer et al.,
2021b;a) apply Layer-wise Relevance Propagation (LRP)
(Bach et al., 2015) and also rely on the attention mechanism in the model architecture. Since Rollout and many
LRP variants are class-agnostic, Transformer interpretability
(Chefer et al., 2021b) and Generic Attention-Model Explainability (GAME) (Chefer et al., 2021a) build class-specific
relevance-based explanations using the self-attention or co-

1
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong
Kong, HongKong 2 SenseTime Group Ltd. Correspondence to:
Chenyang Zhao <chenyzhao9-c@my.cityu.edu.hk>, Antoni B.
Chan <abchan@cityu.edu.hk>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

