Weisfeiler Leman for Euclidean Equivariant Machine Learning

Snir Hordan 1 Tal Amir 1 Nadav Dym 1 2

Abstract

that respect symmetries of the Lornentz (Bogatskiy et al.,
2020) or Special Linear group (Lawrence & Harris, 2023).
Equivariant models are well-known to be empirically robust
(Cohen & Welling, 2016) and lead to improved generalization (Petrache & Trivedi, 2023).

The k-Weisfeiler-Leman (k-WL) graph isomorphism test hierarchy is a common method for
assessing the expressive power of graph neural
networks (GNNs). Recently, GNNs whose expressive power is equivalent to the 2-WL test were
proven to be universal on weighted graphs which
encode 3D point cloud data, yet this result is limited to invariant continuous functions on point
clouds. In this paper, we extend this result in
three ways: Firstly, we show that PPGN (Maron
et al., 2019a) can simulate 2-WL uniformly on all
point clouds with low complexity. Secondly, we
show that 2-WL tests can be extended to point
clouds which include both positions and velocities, a scenario often encountered in applications. Finally, we provide a general framework
for proving equivariant universality and leverage
it to prove that a simple modification of this invariant PPGN architecture can be used to obtain
a universal equivariant architecture that can approximate all continuous equivariant functions
uniformly. Building on our results, we develop
our WeLNet architecture, which sets new state-ofthe-art results on the N-Body dynamics task and
the GEOM-QM9 molecular conformation generation task.

In this paper, our focus will be on ML models for point
clouds. A point cloud is a finite collection of points, usually
in R3 , with the natural symmetry of invariance to permutation. Point clouds are flexible objects which are used
to represent discretized surfaces, molecules, and particles
(Cvrtila & Rot, 2022).
In many of these settings, point clouds have an additional
natural symmetry to the actions of rotations, reflections, and
translation, which generate the Euclidean group, which is
the group of isometries of Euclidean space. Due to their
applications in chemo-informatics (Pozdnyakov & Ceriotti,
2023), particle dynamics (Schütt et al., 2017), and computer
vision (Qi et al., 2017), point cloud networks that respect
Euclidean symmetries have attracted considerable attention
in recent years (Thomas et al., 2018; Victor Garcia Satorras,
2021; Deng et al., 2021; Du et al., 2022).
An emerging paradigm for constructing equivariant networks for point clouds goes through the observation that
an ordered set of points in Euclidean space is determined,
up to Euclidean symmetry, by the set’s pairwise distance
matrix. Each such matrix can be identified with a complete
weighted graph. Using this identification, point-cloud neural
networks can be constructed by applying standard GNNs to
a point cloud’s distance matrix (Lim et al., 2023), as GNNs
enforce permutation invariance.

1. Introduction
Machine learning (ML) models that are equivariant to group
symmetries of data have been at the focal point of recent
research. Examples of equivariant models range from Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) that respect the translation symmetry of images, through graph neural networks
(GNNs) that enforce permutation invariance to account for
the invariance of the order of a node’s neighbors, to models

To address the theoretical potential and limitations of
these graph-based equivariant models, a recent line of research (Pozdnyakov & Ceriotti, 2022; Hordan et al., 2024;
Delle Rose et al., 2023) seeks to assess their expressive
power via k-WL tests (Weisfeiler & Leman, 1968), a hierarchy of graph isomorphism tests with strictly increasing
distinguishing power as one goes up the hierarchy (Cai et al.,
1992). This hierarchy has shown to be useful in assessing
the expressive power of GNNs on combinatorial graphs
(Morris et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2019).

1
Faculty of Mathematics, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel 2 Faculty of Computer Science, Technion - Israel
Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel. Correspondence to: Snir
Hordan <snirhordan@campus.technion.ac.il>.

For GNNs applied to point clouds, (Pozdnyakov & Ceriotti,
2022) showed that there exist pairs of non-isometric point

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

