Hyperbolic Geometric Latent Diffusion Model for Graph Generation

Xingcheng Fu 1 Yisen Gao 2 1 Yuecen Wei 3 Qingyun Sun 4 Hao Peng 4 Jianxin Li 4 Xianxian Li 1

Abstract

small-worlds, hierarchies, fractal structures, etc. Traditional random graph models based on graph theory, such as
Erdos-Renyi (Erdős et al., 1960), Watts-Strogatz (Watts
& Strogatz, 1998) and Barabasi-Albert (Barabási & Albert, 1999), etc., need artificial heuristics to build the algorithms for single nature topologies and lack the flexibility
to model various complex graphs. Therefore, many deep
learning models have been developed for graph generation,
such as Variational Graph Auto-Encoder (VGAE) (Kipf
& Welling, 2016), Graph Generative Adversarial Networks(GraphGAN) (Wang et al., 2018a), and other technologies. Recently, the Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic
Model(DDPM) (Ho et al., 2020) have demonstrated great
power and potential in image generation, attracting huge
attention from the community of graph learning.

Diffusion models have made significant contributions to computer vision, sparking a growing interest in the community recently regarding the application of them to graph generation. Existing discrete graph diffusion models exhibit heightened
computational complexity and diminished training efficiency. A preferable and natural way is to
directly diffuse the graph within the latent space.
However, due to the non-Euclidean structure of
graphs is not isotropic in the latent space, the existing latent diffusion models effectively make it
difficult to capture and preserve the topological
information of graphs. To address the above challenges, we propose a novel geometrically latent
diffusion framework HypDiff. Specifically, we
first establish a geometrically latent space with
interpretability measures based on hyperbolic geometry, to define anisotropic latent diffusion processes for graphs. Then, we propose a geometrically latent diffusion process that is constrained
by both radial and angular geometric properties,
thereby ensuring the preservation of the original
topological properties in the generative graphs.
Extensive experimental results demonstrate the
superior effectiveness of HypDiff for graph generation with various topologies.

For graph generation, a straightforward idea involves designing discretized diffusion methods for the graph structural
information. (Vignac et al., 2022; Jo et al., 2022; Luo et al.,
2022), and the other way is to develop advanced graph encoders to preserve structural information throughout the
diffusion process within a continuous potential space (Xu
et al., 2021; 2023). However, because of the irregular and
non-Euclidean structure of graph data, the realization of
the diffusion model for graphs still has two main limitations: (1) High computational complexity. The core to
graph generation is to handle the discreteness, sparsity and
other topological properties of the non-Euclidean structure.
Since the Gaussian noise perturbation used in the vanilla
diffusion model is not suitable for discrete data, the discrete graph diffusion model usually has high time and space
complexity due to the problem of structural sparsity. Moreover, the discrete graph diffusion model relies on a continuous Gaussian noise process to create fully connected,
noisy graphs (Zhang et al., 2023; Ingraham et al., 2019)
which loses structural information and underlying topological properties. (2) Anisotropy of non-Euclidean structure.
Different from the regular structure data (e.g. pixel matrix
or grid structure), the “irregular” non-Euclidean structure
embeddings of graph data are anisotropic in continuous latent space (Elhag et al., 2022). As shown in Figure 1(b), the
node embeddings of a graph in Euclidean space exhibit significant anisotropy in several specific directions. Recently,
some studies (Yang et al., 2023) have shown that isotropic
diffusion of the node embedding of the graph in the latent

1. Introduction
Graphs in the real world contain variety and important
of topologies, and these topological properties often reflect physical laws and growth patterns, such as rich-clubs,
1

Key Lab of Education Blockchain and Intelligent Technology,
Ministry of Education, Guangxi Normal University, Guilin, China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University, Beijing,
China 3 School of Software, Beihang University, Beijing, China
4
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data and Brain Computing, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang
University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Xingcheng Fu
<fuxc@gxnu.edu.cn>, Jianxin Li <lijx@act.buaa.edu.cn>, Xianxian Li <lixx@gxnu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

