Learning to Intervene on Concept Bottlenecks

David Steinmann 1 Wolfgang Stammer 1 2 Felix Friedrich 1 2 Kristian Kersting 1 2 3 4

Abstract

their decision processes (Adadi & Berrada, 2018; Cambria et al., 2023; Saeed & Omlin, 2023) and interact with
them (Schramowski et al., 2020; Teso et al., 2023). To
address these issues, one recent branch within explainable
artificial intelligence focuses on the potential of concept bottleneck models (CBMs) (Koh et al., 2020; Stammer et al.,
2021). These are designed to be partially interpretable
and perform inference (such as bird image classification
cf. Fig. 1 top) by transforming the initial raw input into a
set of human-understandable concepts (e.g., wing shape or
color) with a bottleneck network. Subsequently, a predictor
network provides a final task prediction based on the activation of these concepts. These concept activations serve as
an inherent explanation of the model’s decision (Teso et al.,
2023). Arguably even more valuable, these activations can
be used by humans to perform interventional interactions,
e.g., for querying further explanations (Abid et al., 2022) or
correcting concept predictions (Koh et al., 2020).

While deep learning models often lack interpretability, concept bottleneck models (CBMs)
provide inherent explanations via their concept
representations. Moreover, they allow users to perform interventional interactions on these concepts
by updating the concept values and thus correcting the predictive output of the model. Up to this
point, these interventions were typically applied
to the model just once and then discarded. To
rectify this, we present concept bottleneck memory models (CB2Ms), which keep a memory of
past interventions. Specifically, CB2Ms leverage
a two-fold memory to generalize interventions to
appropriate novel situations, enabling the model
to identify errors and reapply previous interventions. This way, a CB2M learns to automatically
improve model performance from a few initially
obtained interventions. If no prior human interventions are available, a CB2M can detect potential mistakes of the CBM bottleneck and request
targeted interventions. Our experimental evaluations on challenging scenarios like handling distribution shifts and confounded data demonstrate
that CB2Ms are able to successfully generalize interventions to unseen data and can indeed identify
wrongly inferred concepts. Hence, CB2Ms are a
valuable tool for users to provide interactive feedback on CBMs, by guiding a user’s interaction
and requiring fewer interventions.

In fact, a recent surge of research has focused on the benefits
of leveraging interactions in AI models in general (Ouyang
et al., 2022; Miller, 2019), and also CBMs in particular (Teso et al., 2023). Multiple such approaches focus
on leveraging interactions for mitigating errors of the predictor network (Bontempelli et al., 2021; Stammer et al.,
2021). So far, little work has focused on mitigating errors
in the initial bottleneck network. Moreover, although interventional interactions on a CBM’s concept activations
are a natural tool for this purpose, they have received little
attention since their introduction by Koh et al. (2020). One
likely reason for this is that interventions according to (Koh
et al., 2020) represent a singular-use tool for updating model
performance by adding human-provided concept labels to
an increasing number of randomly selected concepts. For
sustainably improving a model’s performance, however, this
approach is inefficient and potentially demands a large number of repetitive user interactions. Providing such repeated
feedback has been identified to lead to a loss in focus of
human users (Amershi et al., 2014) if not infeasible at all.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models are often deemed black-box models that make it difficult for human users to understand
1
Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning Group, TU
Darmstadt, Germany 2 Hessian Center for Artificial Intelligence
(hessian.AI), Darmstadt, Germany 3 Centre for Cognitive Science, TU Darmstadt, Germany 4 German Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI). Correspondence to: David Steinmann
<david.steinmann@tu-darmstadt.de>.

In this work, we therefore argue to harvest the rich information present in previously collected interventions in a
multi-use approach. Specifically, let us suppose a user corrects a model’s inferred concepts through a targeted intervention. In that case, the intervention carries information
on where the model did not perform well. As shown in

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

