Towards Modular LLMs by Building and Reusing a Library of LoRAs

Edoardo Maria Ponti

5

Oleksiy Ostapenko * 1 2 3 Zhan Su * 2 4
Laurent Charlin 2 6 7 Nicolas Le Roux 1 2 3 7 Lucas Caccia * 1 Alessandro Sordoni * 1 2 3

Abstract
Given the increasing number of parameter-efficient adapters of large language models (LLMs),
how can we reuse them to improve LLM performance on new tasks? We study how to best build
a library of adapters given multi-task data and devise techniques for both zero-shot and supervised
task generalization through routing in such library.
We benchmark existing approaches to build this library and introduce model-based clustering, MBC,
a method that groups tasks based on the similarity
of their adapter parameters, indirectly optimizing for transfer across tasks. In order to reuse
the library, we present a novel zero-shot routing
mechanism, Arrow, which enables dynamic selection of the most relevant adapters for new inputs
without the need for retraining. We experiment
with several LLMs, such as Phi-2 and Mistral,
on a wide array of held-out tasks, verifying that
MBC-based adapters and Arrow routing lead to
superior generalization to new tasks. Thus, we
make steps towards creating modular, adaptable
LLMs that can match or outperform traditional
joint training.

Figure 1. How to coordinate a library of adapters (e.g., LoRAs)
for zero-shot generalization to new tasks? To build this library
(top), we propose MBC, a novel method that clusters tasks based
on the similarity of the parameters of corresponding LoRAs. To
reuse a library (either private or MBC, bottom), we route hidden
states to trained LoRAs via Arrow, which leverages the SVD
decomposition of each LoRA.

LLM adapters are increasingly available as part of online
hubs (Beck et al., 2021; Mangrulkar et al., 2022). These
adapters are developed independently and asynchronously
by users across the globe. Hence, they implicitly constitute
a library built on top of multi-task data (Pfeiffer et al., 2023).
Prior works show that mixtures of pretrained adapters can facilitate few-shot adaptation of LLMs to unseen tasks (Ponti
et al., 2023; Vu et al., 2021; Huang et al., 2024). Reusing
pre-existing adapters in a zero-shot fashion remains less
explored (Jang et al., 2023; Belofsky, 2023). In contrast to
standard mixture-of-experts approaches (Fedus et al., 2022),
in this setting, new inputs must be routed to independently
trained experts without requiring joint training of the routing
mechanism and expert parameters.

1. Introduction
Tailoring large language models (LLMs) towards downstream tasks, domains, or user profiles is of paramount
importance given the recent democratization of their usage,
catalyzed by the release of open-source LLMs (Zhang et al.,
2023b; Microsoft Research, 2023, inter alia). This process
often relies on an adapter, such as LoRA (Hu et al., 2022),
a parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) of a pre-trained
LLM (Hu et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022; Li & Liang, 2021).
*

Equal contribution 1 Microsoft Research 2 Mila — Quebec AI Institute 3 Université de Montréal 4 University of Copenhagen 5 University of Edinburgh 6 HEC Montréal 7 Canada CIFAR AI Chair. Correspondence to: A. Sordoni <alsordon@microsoft.com>.

This leads to the question: how to create a modular LLM
end-to-end by first building and then reusing a library of
adapters for supervised adaptation and zero-shot generalization? First, given a base LLM, such as Phi-2 (Microsoft Research, 2023) or Mistral (Jiang et al., 2023), we investigate
building a library of adapters by leveraging 256 tasks from

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

