Revitalizing Multivariate Time Series Forecasting: Learnable Decomposition
with Inter-Series Dependencies and Intra-Series Variations Modeling

Guoqi Yu 1 2 * Jing Zou 3 Xiaowei Hu 4 Angelica I. Aviles-Rivero 5 Jing Qin 3 Shujun Wang 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

The rising demands in diverse real-world domains have
generated an urgent requirement for precise multivariate
time series forecasting methodologies, as demonstrated in
fields like energy management (Dong et al., 2023; Wu et al.,
2024; Yi et al., 2023a), weather forecasting (Anonymous,
2024b;c;a), disease control (Yi et al., 2023b; Liu et al.,
2023; Zhou et al., 2022b; Ni et al., 2023), and traffic planning (Rangapuram et al., 2018; Zhao et al., 2017; Shao et al.,
2022). The foundation of precise forecasting models lies
in effectively identifying and modeling intricate patterns
embedded in multivariate time series. Two primary patterns (Figure 1(a)) emerge as inter-series dependencies and
intra-series variations (Zhang & Yan, 2023). The former
delineates the intricate interplay and correlations among distinct variables, while the latter encapsulates both enduring
and ephemeral fluctuations within each specific time series.

Predicting multivariate time series is crucial, demanding precise modeling of intricate patterns, including inter-series dependencies and intra-series
variations. Distinctive trend characteristics in
each time series pose challenges, and existing
methods, relying on basic moving average kernels, may struggle with the non-linear structure
and complex trends in real-world data. Given that,
we introduce a learnable decomposition strategy
to capture dynamic trend information more reasonably. Additionally, we propose a dual attention module tailored to capture inter-series dependencies and intra-series variations simultaneously
for better time series forecasting, which is implemented by channel-wise self-attention and autoregressive self-attention. To evaluate the effectiveness of our method, we conducted experiments
across eight open-source datasets and compared
it with the state-of-the-art methods. Through
the comparison results, our Leddam (LEarnable
Decomposition and Dual Attention Module) not
only demonstrates significant advancements in
predictive performance but also the proposed decomposition strategy can be plugged into other
methods with a large performance-boosting, from
11.87% to 48.56% MSE error degradation. Code
is available at this link: https://github.com/LeviAckman/Leddam.

However, the time series of each constituent variable in multivariate time series data often displays distinctive variations
in its trends. Such discrepancies inherent in raw time series may complicate the modeling of inter-series dependencies (Liu et al., 2024). Furthermore, time series in the real
world are continually susceptible to distributional shifts induced by the evolution of their trends—a distinctive attribute
that adds complexity to modeling the dynamic intra-series
variation patterns within the sequences (Taylor & Letham,
2018; Liu et al., 2022b). Therefore, a robust forecasting
method should be capable of addressing the following two
challenges: (1) How to precisely unravel patterns within
raw time series under the interference of trend components.
(2) How to efficiently model inter-series dependencies and
intra-series variations.

*
Work done as an intern in PolyU. 1 Department of Biomedical
Engineering, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
SAR, China 2 University of Electronic Science and Technology of
China, Sichuan, China 3 School of Nursing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong SAR, China 4 Shanghai Artificial
Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai, China 5 DAMTP, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. Correspondence to: Shujun Wang
<shu-jun.wang@polyu.edu.hk>.

Certain studies (Wu et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2022c; Wang
et al., 2023; Zeng et al., 2023) aim to address the first challenge by conducting trend-seasonal decomposition of the
original time series using Moving Average kernel (MOV).
However, such an untrainable procedure along with moving
average kernels leads to a lack of robustness. Moreover, the
uniform assignment of weights to each data point within the
sliding window may impede their ability to discern specific
patterns. Such limitation becomes apparent when dealing
with intricate time series data (RAW data), particularly those

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

