Learning Decision Trees and Forests with Algorithmic Recourse

Kentaro Kanamori 1 Takuya Takagi 1 Ken Kobayashi 2 Yuichi Ike 3

Abstract

provides a perturbation a that flips the prediction result into
the desired class, i.e., h(x+a) = y ∗ , with a minimum effort
measured by some cost function c. The user can regard the
perturbation a as a recourse action for obtaining the desired
outcome y ∗ from the classifier h (Karimi et al., 2022).

This paper proposes a new algorithm for learning accurate tree-based models while ensuring the
existence of recourse actions. Algorithmic Recourse (AR) aims to provide a recourse action for
altering the undesired prediction result given by a
model. Typical AR methods provide a reasonable
action by solving an optimization task of minimizing the required effort among executable actions.
In practice, however, such actions do not always
exist for models optimized only for predictive performance. To alleviate this issue, we formulate
the task of learning an accurate classification tree
under the constraint of ensuring the existence of
reasonable actions for as many instances as possible. Then, we propose an efficient top-down
greedy algorithm by leveraging the adversarial
training techniques. We also show that our proposed algorithm can be applied to the random
forest, which is known as a popular framework
for learning tree ensembles. Experimental results
demonstrated that our method successfully provided reasonable actions to more instances than
the baselines without significantly degrading accuracy and computational efficiency.

To provide affected individuals with recourse certainly, we
need to guarantee the existence of actions a that are executable with small costs. In general, however, such reasonable actions do not always exist (Ross et al., 2021). Figure 1
demonstrates this observation on a synthetic loan approval
task. Consider a situation where a user x in Figure 1(a) is
denied one’s loan application by classification trees h0 and
h1 in Figures 1(b) and 1(c). By changing “#ExistingLoans,”
the user can get the loan approved by h0 . In contrast, for the
case of h1 , the user must change “Purpose” or “Education,”
which are inappropriate recourse actions because changing
these features is difficult in practice. It suggests that the user
x cannot get one’s loan approved as long as h1 is deployed,
and that h0 is more desirable as it can ensure a reasonable
action for the user x (Sullivan & Verreault-Julien, 2022;
Venkatasubramanian & Alfano, 2020).
In this paper, we aim to learn a classifier h that ensures
the existence of executable actions a for input instances
x with high probability while keeping accuracy. Specifically, we focus on the tree-based models, such as decision
trees (Breiman et al., 1984) and random forests (Breiman,
2001). Recently, Ross et al. (2021) proposed a gradientbased method for learning differentiable classifiers such as
deep neural networks while guaranteeing the existence of
actions. However, their method cannot be directly applied
to the tree-based models because these models are not differentiable. Tree-based models are known to perform well
on tabular datasets (Grinsztajn et al., 2022), which often
appear in the areas where AR is required (e.g., finance and
justice) (Verma et al., 2020). Therefore, we need a new
learning algorithm designed for tree-based models while
ensuring the existence of recourse actions.

1. Introduction
Algorithmic decision-making with machine learning models
has been applied to various tasks in the real world, such as
loan approvals. In such critical tasks, the predictions made
by a model might have a significant impact on individual
users (Rudin, 2019). Consequently, decision-makers need
to explain how individuals should act to alter the undesired
decisions (Miller, 2019; Wachter et al., 2018). Algorithmic
Recourse (AR) aims to provide such information (Ustun
et al., 2019). For a classifier h : X → Y, a desired class
y ∗ ∈ Y, and an instance x ∈ X such that h(x) ̸= y ∗ , AR

1.1. Our Contributions

1

Fujitsu Limited, Japan 2 Tokyo Institute of Technology, Japan
Kyushu University, Japan. Correspondence to: Kentaro Kanamori
<k.kanamori@fujitsu.com>.

3

In this paper, we propose Recourse-Aware Classification
Tree (RACT), a new framework for learning tree-based classifiers that make accurate predictions and guarantee recourse
actions. Our contributions are summarized as follows:

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

