Graph Neural Network Explanations are Fragile

Jiate Li 1 2 Meng Pang 1 Yun Dong 3 Jinyuan Jia 4 Binghui Wang 2 5

Abstract
Explainable Graph Neural Network (GNN) has
emerged recently to foster the trust of using GNNs.
Existing GNN explainers are developed from various perspectives to enhance the explanation performance. We take the first step to study GNN explainers under adversarial attack—We found that
an adversary slightly perturbing graph structure
can ensure GNN model makes correct predictions,
but the GNN explainer yields a drastically different explanation on the perturbed graph. Specifically, we first formulate the attack problem under
a practical threat model (i.e., the adversary has
limited knowledge about the GNN explainer and
a restricted perturbation budget). We then design
two methods (i.e., one is loss-based and the other
is deduction-based) to realize the attack. We evaluate our attacks on various GNN explainers and
the results show these explainers are fragile.1

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. GNN explanation for (a) node classification and (b) graph
classification—It identifies the subgraph that ensures the best prediction for the target node and target graph, respectively.

predicted (node/graph) label by a GNN model, explainable
GNNs aim to determine the subgraph (include edges and the
connected nodes) from the graph that ensures the best predictability about the label (see Figure 1 an example). This
subgraph is also called explanatory subgraph. To achieve
the goal, various GNN explainers from different perspectives (Ying et al., 2019; Luo et al., 2020; Yuan et al., 2021;
Zhang et al., 2022; Wang & Shen, 2023) have been proposed. Among them, perturbation-based explainers (Ying
et al., 2019; Luo et al., 2020; Schlichtkrull et al., 2021;
Funke et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2021b; Yuan et al., 2021;
Zhang et al., 2022) are widely studied and show promising
explanation performance (more details are in Section 2).

1. Introduction
Graph Neural Network (GNN) (Scarselli et al., 2008; Kipf &
Welling, 2017; Hamilton et al., 2017; Velickovic et al., 2018;
Xu et al., 2019) is the mainstream paradigm for learning
graph data: it takes a graph as input and learns node or graph
representations to capture the relation among nodes or graph
structural information. GNNs have achieved state-of-theart performance in graph-related tasks such as node/graph
classification and link prediction (Wu et al., 2020).

In this paper, instead of enhancing the explanation performance, we focus on understanding the robustness of GNN
explainers when facing adversaries. Particularly, we study
the research problem: Given a graph, a well-trained GNN
model, and a GNN explainer, can an adversary manipulate
the graph structure such that the GNN predictions are still
accurate, but the explanation result of the GNN explainer
is drastically changed?2 We emphasize this problem has
serious security implications in real applications. Lets take
GNN-based malicious user detection in social networks
as an instance. Assume a Facebook user is predicted as
malicious by a GNN. When applying a GNN explainer, a
reasonable explanation would be that the user has connected
with other users that also exhibit malicious activities. Now
assume an adversary has carefully added connections between the user and certain normal users. If the user is still
predicted as malicious, the explainer may wrongly interpret
this is because the user has connections with those normal
users, and suggest flagging them as malicious users.

Explainable GNN has emerged in recent years and has wide
applications including molecular property prediction (Wu
et al., 2023), disease diagnosis (Pfeifer et al., 2022), drug
analysis (Yang et al., 2022), and fake news spreader prediction (Rath et al., 2021). Concretely, given a graph and a
1
Nanchang University, China 2 Illinois Institute of Technology, USA 3 Milwaukee School of Engineering, USA 4 The Pennsylvania State University, USA 5 Jiate did this research as an
intern in Wang’s lab. Correspondence to: Meng Pang <mengpang@ncu.edu.cn>, Binghui Wang <bwang70@iit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
Code is at: https://github.com/JetRichardLee/Attack-XGNN

2

Many existing studies propose to attack GNNs for the classification purpose. Their goal is different from ours and more detailed
discussions about the differences are shown in Appendix E.

1

