Convergence of Online Learning Algorithm for a Mixture
of Multiple Linear Regressions

Yujing Liu 1 2 Zhixin Liu 1 2 Lei Guo 1 2

Abstract

utilizing a combination of multiple linear sub-models (Kong
et al., 2020; Diamandis et al., 2021; Pal et al., 2022). It
was first proposed as a generalization of “switching regression” (Quandt, 1972), and has found broad applications in
real-world scenarios including musical perception (Cohen,
1980), trajectory clustering (Gaffney & Smyth, 1999), market segmentation (Wedel & Kamakura, 2000) and healthcare
analysis (Deb & Holmes, 2000). In MLR, each input-output
data is generated from one of the unknown linear regression models and the label of data, i.e., which sub-model the
data comes from, is also unknown. Developing algorithms
to learn the unknown parameters based on the observed
data and categorize the new data into the correct cluster are
crucial for the learning and prediction of MLR.

Mixed linear regression (MLR) is a powerful
model to characterize nonlinear relationships
among observed data while still being simple and
computationally efficient. This paper investigates
the online learning and data clustering problem
for MLR model with an arbitrary number of submodels and arbitrary mixing weights. Previous
investigations mainly focus on offline learning
algorithms, and the convergence results are established under the independent and identically
distributed (i.i.d.) input data assumption. To overcome these fundamental limitations, we propose
a novel online learning algorithm for parameter
estimation based on the EM principle. By using Ljung’s ODE method and Lyapunov stability
theorem, we first establish the almost sure convergence results of the proposed algorithm without
the traditional i.i.d. assumption on the input data.
Furthermore, by using the stochastic Lyapunov
function method, we also provide its convergence
rate analysis for the first time. Finally, we analyze
the performance of online data clustering based on
the parameter estimates, which is asymptotically
the same as that in the case of known parameters.

Related Works. The learning problem for MLR has attracted much attention of researchers from various fields
including statistical learning (Balakrishnan et al., 2017),
computer science (Ingrassia et al., 2014) and biological
analysis (Sun et al., 2022), although it is acknowledged
to be NP-hard in the absence of statistical assumptions on
the observed data (Yi et al., 2014). Among the existing
research, tensor-based and expectation maximization (EM)based methods are two commonly used approaches to design
learning algorithms for MLR models, and their convergence
results are mostly established under the i.i.d. standard Gaussian assumption on the input data.
The tensor-based method, first proposed by Anandkumar
et al. (2014), transfers the parameter learning problem to
an orthogonal decomposition of a symmetric tensor derived
from the moments. By the tensor-based method, the exact
recovery guarantee for MLR with multiple sub-models has
been established under some specific structural assumptions,
such as linearly independence or near orthonormality of the
sub-model parameters (Chaganty & Liang, 2013; Yi et al.,
2016). However, the tensor-based method suffers from high
sample and computational complexity, making it difficult
to apply in practice. In addition, the statistical error of the
estimator exhibits a scaling behavior relative to the norm of
the sub-model parameters.

1. Introduction
Learning the input-output relationship based on the observed
data is a fundamental issue in various fields including statistical learning, system identification, and computer science
(Hastie et al., 2009; Bishop & Nasrabadi, 2006). The mixed
linear regression (MLR) model is a powerful technique for
characterizing the nonlinear input-output relationship by
1

The Key Laboratory of Systems and Control, Academy of
Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing, China 2 School of Mathematical Sciences, University of
Chinese Academy of Sciences,Beijing, China. Correspondence to:
Zhixin Liu <lzx@amss.ac.cn>.

The EM algorithm, consisting of E-step and M-step, is a
general technique for parameter learning of latent variable
models (Dempster et al., 1977). The E-step is used to com-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

