I NSTRUCT Z ERO: Efficient Instruction Optimization
for Black-Box Large Language Models

Lichang Chen * 1 Jiuhai Chen * 1 Tom Goldstein 1 Heng Huang 1 Tianyi Zhou 1

Abstract

can be generalized.
Instruction-following capability is essential to LLMs when
used as an interface between humans and AI models, i.e.,
human users can instruct LLMs to solve complicated tasks
by providing in-context instructions. “Prompt engineering” (Brown et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2023) usually relies
on human experts’ experience to craft instructions through
a costly trial-and-error process. Hence, how to automate
the instruction search or optimization for any given task
is a critical open challenge. Unlike soft prompts, instruction is composed of discrete words or sentences that are
difficult to optimize in a continuous space. To create a
human-interpretable and task-relevant instruction, we have
to address combinatorial optimization with complex structural constraints. Moreover, the most powerful instructionfollowing LLMs, e.g., ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2023a) and GPT4 (OpenAI, 2023b), are black boxes. Given their APIs only,
it is infeasible to develop gradient-based optimization that
requires back-propagation through these models.

Large language models (LLMs) are instruction
followers but the performance varies under different instructions. It is challenging to create the
best instruction, especially for black-box LLMs
on which backpropagation is forbidden. Instead
of directly optimizing the discrete instruction, we
optimize a low-dimensional soft prompt applied
to an open-source LLM to generate the instruction for the black-box LLM. In each optimization
step of the proposed method I NSTRUCT Z ERO, a
soft prompt is converted into an instruction by the
open-source LLM, which is then submitted to the
black-box LLM for zero-shot evaluation, whose
result is sent to Bayesian optimization to produce
new soft prompts improving the zero-shot performance. We evaluate I NSTRUCT Z ERO on different
combinations of open-source LLMs and APIs including Vicuna and ChatGPT. I NSTRUCT Z ERO
outperforms SOTA auto-instruction methods
across a variety of downstream tasks. Our
code is available: https://github.com/
Lichang-Chen/InstructZero.

In this paper, we propose an effective and efficient approach
“I NSTRUCT Z ERO” to tackle the zeroth-order combinatorial optimization of instructions to API LLMs (Chen et al.,
2017; Wang et al., 2018; Schrijver et al., 2003; Wolsey
& Nemhauser, 1999). Instead of directly optimizing the
instruction, I NSTRUCT Z ERO optimizes a soft prompt appended to a few exemplars of the target task, steering an
open-source LLM (e.g., LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023),
Stanford Alpaca, Vicuna), to generate a human-readable
and task-relevant instruction in an in-context learning manner. The instruction is then submitted to the black-box LLM
for zero-shot evaluation on the target task, whose performance is used to guide the optimization of the soft prompt
toward generating better instructions.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) (OpenAI, 2023a;b;
Chowdhery et al., 2022) have recently gained widespread
attention due to their remarkable capabilities in following
instructions under both zero-shot and few-shot settings
(Brown et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023a).
However, their performance is sensitive to the choice of
instructions (Zhou et al., 2022; Honovich et al., 2022). For
example, even paraphrasing a good instruction can lead
to the failure of LLMs on certain tasks. It is still not clear
when and how the instruction-following capability of LLMs

We formulate the soft prompt optimization as a form of
latent space Bayesian Optimization (BO), which aims to
maximize the zero-shot performance as a black box function. It estimates the black-box objective using each explored soft prompt and its zero-shot performance as an
input-output sample, with a kernel relating all samples. The
mean and variance of the estimation controls the explorationexploitation of the soft prompts. To align the soft prompt optimization with the search in instruction space, we develop

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park. Correspondence to: Lichang Chen
<bobchen@cs.umd.edu>, Jiuhai Chen <jchen169@umd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

