Exploiting Human-AI Dependence for Learning to Defer

Zixi Wei 1 Yuzhou Cao 2 Lei Feng 3

Abstract

Learning to Defer (L2D) (Madras et al., 2018; Charusaie
et al., 2022; Mozannar et al., 2022; 2023; Straitouri et al.,
2022; De et al., 2021; Narasimhan et al., 2022; Mao et al.,
2024; Hemmer et al., 2023; Joshi et al., 2021; Liu et al.,
2024; Alves et al., 2024; Lykouris & Weng, 2024) aims to
avoid critical mispredictions of models by facilitating the
collaboration between human experts and machine learning
models. Specifically, L2D aims to defer the prediction to
an expert when the expert is more likely to be correct than
the model. For medical diagnosis, a CT image may involve
complex anatomical structures or potential abnormalities.
Such complexity could lead to a lack of confidence in the diagnostic prediction of a model. Then the model could defer
the prediction and transfer the CT images to a radiologist.
When faced with straightforward cases, the model can make
diagnostic predictions by itself without a radiologist.

The learning to defer (L2D) framework allows
models to defer their decisions to human experts.
For L2D, the Bayes optimality is the basic requirement of theoretical guarantees for the design of consistent surrogate loss functions, which
requires the minimizer (i.e., learned classifier)
by the surrogate loss to be the Bayes optimality.
However, we find that the original form of Bayes
optimality fails to consider the dependence between the model and the expert, and such a dependence could be further exploited to design a better
consistent loss for L2D. In this paper, we provide
a new formulation for the Bayes optimality called
dependent Bayes optimality, which reveals the
dependence pattern in determining whether to defer. Based on the dependent Bayes optimality, we
further present a deferral principle for L2D. Following the guidance of the deferral principle, we
propose a novel consistent surrogate loss. Comprehensive experimental results on both synthetic
and real-world datasets demonstrate the superiority of our proposed method.

L2D can be formulated as a risk-minimization problem,
where the 0-1-deferral risk (Mozannar & Sontag, 2020)
needs to be minimized. The 0-1-deferral loss involves a cost
of 1 when the model makes an incorrect decision without
an expert or defers to a wrong decision made by an expert
and involves a cost of 0 otherwise. Due to the discontinuous
and non-convex properties of the 0-1-deferral loss, the riskminimization problem is NP-hard even in simple settings
(Mozannar et al., 2023). To make the optimization problem
solvable, one commonly used strategy is to design a continuous surrogate loss that holds statistical consistency w.r.t. the
0-1-deferral loss. Concretely, we say a surrogate loss holds
consistency if and only if the minimizer of the surrogate
risk is the minimizer of the 0-1-deferral risk. This implies
that a model trained with the surrogate loss is expected to
converge to the optimal model for the 0-1-deferral loss.

1. Introduction
With the increasing deployment of machine learning models
in risk-critical domains such as medical diagnosis (Zoabi
et al., 2021), criminal justice (Chalkidis et al., 2019), and
autonomous driving (Grigorescu et al., 2020), the reliability
and safety issues of these models are getting crucially important. These risk-critical domains heighten the urgency to
prevent critical mispredictions of models. To address this
challenge, one approach is to incorporate a mechanism that
allows models to defer to human experts when confronted
with challenging or high-stakes decisions.

Mozannar & Sontag (2020) showed the Bayes optimality
for the 0-1-deferral risk (we provide a detailed description
in Section 2), which states that the model should defer to
an expert if the expert has a larger confidence in making
the right decision than the optimal model, otherwise we
should accept the decision made by the model. The Bayes
optimality plays a crucial role in the design of surrogate
losses, influencing the formulation of many consistent surrogate loss functions, where the consistency means that the
optimal model for the surrogate risk meets the Bayes optimality. Thus a well-formulated Bayes optimality can guide
the design of a superior consistent surrogate loss.

1

College of Computer Science, Chongqing University, China
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 3 Information Systems Technology
Design Pillar, Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore. Correspondence to: Lei Feng <feng lei@sutd.edu.sg>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

