A Unified Adaptive Testing System Enabled by
Hierarchical Structure Search
Junhao Yu 1 Yan Zhuang 1 Zhenya Huang 1 2 Qi Liu 1 2 Xin Li 1 Rui Li 3 Enhong Chen 1
𝜽𝒕

Abstract
Adaptive Testing System (ATS) is a promising
testing mode, extensively utilized in standardized
tests like the GRE. It offers a personalized ability
assessment by dynamically adjusting questions
based on individual ability levels. Compared to
traditional exams, ATS can improve the accuracy
of ability estimates while simultaneously reducing the number of questions required. Despite
the diverse ATS testing formats, tailored to different adaptability requirements in various testing
scenarios, there is a notable absence of a unified
framework to model them. In this paper, we introduce a unified data-driven ATS framework that
conceptualizes the various testing formats as a
hierarchical test structure search problem. It can
learn directly from data to solve optimal questions
for each student, eliminating the need for manual test design. The proposed solution algorithm
comes with theoretical guarantees for the estimation error and convergence. Empirical results
show that our framework maintains assessment
accuracy while reducing question count by 20%
on average and improving training stability.

Selection
Algorithm

T steps of
question selection

×/√

Item Response
Theory

𝑸𝒕+𝟏

Figure 1. A traditional process of ATS: At step t, IRT estimates the
current ability θt based on the previous t steps of records. Then the
selection algorithm selects the next set of questions Qt+1 based
on the current estimated ability θt .

the precision of the assessment but also reduces the number of questions required, thereby enhancing testing efficiency. The adoption of ATS in high-stakes exams such as
the Duolingo Test, GRE, TOEFL, and GMAT.
ATS is an interactive process between students and the system. As illustrated in Figure 1, at each test step, cognitive
diagnosis models(Wang et al., 2023a) like Item Response
Theory (IRT) (Embretson & Reise, 2013), a user model
based on psychometrics, first estimates the student’s ability
by analyzing previous responses. Then, the Selection Algorithm selects the next questions from the pool based on
Reinforcement Learning (Zhuang et al., 2022) or specific
informativeness metrics (Chang & Ying, 1996; Bi et al.,
2020), which typically aim to match question difficulty with
the student’s estimated ability (Lord, 2012). This iterative
cycle continues until a stopping rule is satisfied. ATS’s core
is to optimize accuracy in estimating student ability with
the fewest questions necessary.

1. Introduction
Adaptive Testing System (ATS) is a pioneering application
of intelligent education, providing a personalized and efficient assessment experience (Chen et al., 2015; Vie et al.,
2017). Moving beyond the traditional paper-and-pencil
tests, which uniformly present the same questions to all
examinees, ATS dynamically adapts the questions to the
individual’s ability level. This approach not only enhances

Current ATS can be categorized into two research domains
based on the test format: Computerized Adaptive Testing
(CAT) and Multistage Testing (MST). A recent comprehensive survey (Liu et al., 2024) thoroughly discussed these two
approaches: CAT selects one question at each step, requiring students to complete one question before progressing to
the next (Van der Linden & Pashley, 2009), whereas MST
selects a set of questions (a testlet) at each step. These
testlets are predefined by experts and typically contain questions of similar difficulty and a diverse range of content
(Sari et al., 2016). CAT is known for its precise estimation
due to its granular approach, whereas MST can incorporate

1

State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence, University of
Science and Technology of China 2 Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center 3 School of
Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University. Correspondence to: Enhong Chen <cheneh@ustc.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

