Dynamic Memory Compression: Retrofitting LLMs for Accelerated Inference

Piotr Nawrot * Q V Adrian Łańcucki * Q K Marcin Chochowski Q David Tarjan Q Edoardo M. Ponti V
Q

NVIDIA

K

University of Wrocław

Abstract

V

University of Edinburgh

Key-value
cache

Transformers have emerged as the backbone of
large language models (LLMs). However, generation remains inefficient due to the need to store in
memory a cache of key–value representations for
past tokens, whose size scales linearly with the
input sequence length and batch size. As a solution, we propose Dynamic Memory Compression
(DMC), a method for on-line key–value cache
compression at inference time. Most importantly,
the model learns to apply different compression ratios in different heads and layers. We retrofit pretrained LLMs such as Llama 2 (7B, 13B and 70B)
into DMC Transformers, achieving up to ~3.7×
throughput increase during auto-regressive inference on an NVIDIA H100 GPU. DMC is applied
via continued pre-training on a negligible percentage of the original data without adding any extra
parameters. We find that DMC preserves the original downstream performance with up to 4× cache
compression, outperforming up-trained groupedquery attention (GQA) and key–value eviction
policies (H2 O, TOVA). GQA and DMC can be
even combined to obtain compounded gains. As a
result DMC fits longer contexts and larger batches
within any given memory budget. We release the
DMC code and models at https://github.com/
NVIDIA/Megatron-LM/tree/DMC.

(append)
kvt

(a) Regular key–value cache with items kvi depicted as boxes.
New items are always appended.
Key-value
cache

αt=0 (append)
kvt
αt=1 (accumulate)
kvt

weighted
average

(b) Dynamic Memory Compression (DMC) chooses whether to
accumulate or append current items, resulting in a smaller key–
value cache.

Figure 1: Key–value cache update mechanisms.

et al., 2015; Vaswani et al., 2017): during generation, Transformers store the keys and values of past tokens in memory
to avoid recomputing them multiple times. Since this key–
value (KV) cache grows linearly with the sequence length
and batch size, generation with Transformers quickly becomes prohibitive due to the excessive memory load. This
issue emerges even more clearly with long-context generation (e.g., in dialogues and stories) or when serving large
numbers of user queries.
A widespread solution to increase the memory efficiency of
Transformers during inference is Grouped Query Attention
(GQA; Ainslie et al., 2023; Shazeer, 2019), which uses a
number of key and value heads inferior to the number of
query heads through parameter sharing. As an alternative,
the number of tokens in memory can be reduced through
token merging (Zhang et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2018; Bolya
et al., 2023) or cache eviction policies (Zhang et al., 2023;
Oren et al., 2024). Nevertheless, these methods often pay the
price of a severe degradation in downstream performance.
On the other hand, hardware/IO-aware (Dao et al., 2022;
Kwon et al., 2023) and sub-quadratic algorithms for attention (Beltagy et al., 2020; Choromanski et al., 2021) do not
alleviate the memory load of the KV cache.

1. Introduction
Transformer Large Language Models (LLMs) are the state
of the art in generative and conversational AI (Touvron et al.,
2023; Jiang et al., 2023). Their deployment, however, is
curtailed in part by their inefficiency. This is not only due
to the quadratic complexity of attention layers (Bahdanau
*
Equal contribution . Correspondence to: Piotr Nawrot
<piotr.nawrot@ed.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

