Drug Discovery with Dynamic Goal-aware Fragments

Seul Lee 1 Seanie Lee 1 Kenji Kawaguchi 2 Sung Ju Hwang 1 3

Abstract

discovery (FBDD) has been considered an effective strategy in recent decades as a means of exploring the chemical
space and has led to the discovery of many potent compounds against various targets (Li, 2020). Inspired by the
effectiveness of FBDD, many molecular generative models
have also adopted it to narrow down the search space and
simplify the generation process, resulting in meaningful
success (Jin et al., 2018; 2020a;b; Xie et al., 2020; Maziarz
et al., 2022; Kong et al., 2022; Geng et al., 2023).

Fragment-based drug discovery is an effective
strategy for discovering drug candidates in the
vast chemical space, and has been widely employed in molecular generative models. However, many existing fragment extraction methods
in such models do not take the target chemical
properties into account or rely on heuristic rules.
Additionally, the existing fragment-based generative models cannot update the fragment vocabulary with goal-aware fragments newly discovered
during the generation. To this end, we propose a
molecular generative framework for drug discovery, named Goal-aware fragment Extraction, Assembly, and Modification (GEAM). GEAM consists of three modules, each responsible for goalaware fragment extraction, fragment assembly,
and fragment modification. The fragment extraction module identifies important fragments contributing to the desired target properties with the
information bottleneck principle, thereby constructing an effective goal-aware fragment vocabulary. Moreover, GEAM can explore beyond the initial vocabulary with the fragment
modification module, and the exploration is further enhanced through the dynamic goal-aware
vocabulary update. We experimentally demonstrate that GEAM effectively discovers drug candidates through the generative cycle of the three
modules in various drug discovery tasks. Our
code is available at https://github.com/
SeulLee05/GEAM.

The first step of FBDD, fragment library construction,
directly impacts the final generation results (Shi & von
Itzstein, 2019) as the constructed fragments are used in
the entire generation process. However, existing fragment
extraction or motif mining methods suffer from two limitations: they (1) do not take the target chemical properties of drug discovery problems into account and/or (2)
rely on heuristic fragment selection rules. For example, it
is a common strategy to randomly select fragments (Yang
et al., 2021) or extract fragments based on frequency (Kong
et al., 2022; Geng et al., 2023) without considering the target properties. Jin et al. (2020b) proposed to find molecular
substructures that satisfy the given properties, but the extraction process is computationally very expensive and the
substructures cannot be assembled together.
To this end, we first propose a novel deep learningbased goal-aware fragment extraction method, namely,
Fragment-wise Graph Information Bottleneck (FGIB, Figure 1(a)). There is a strong connection between molecular
structures and their activity, referred to as structure-activity
relationship (SAR) (Crum-Brown & Fraser, 1865; Bohacek
et al., 1996). Inspired by SAR, FGIB utilizes the graph
information bottleneck (GIB) theory to identify important
subgraphs in the given molecular graphs for predicting
the target chemical property. These identified subgraphs
serve as building blocks in the subsequent generation. As
shown in Figure 1(b), using the proposed goal-aware fragments extracted by FGIB significantly improves the optimization performance and outperforms existing FBDD
methods. Furthermore, we theoretically analyze how FGIB
helps in identifying high-quality and novel graphs.

1. Introduction
Drug discovery aims to find molecules with desired properties within the vast chemical space. Fragment-based drug
1

KAIST 2 National University of Singapore 3 DeepAuto.ai.
Correspondence to: Seul Lee <seul.lee@kaist.ac.kr>, Sung Ju
Hwang <sjhwang82@kaist.ac.kr>.

To effectively utilize the extracted fragments in molecular
generation, we next construct a generative model consisting of a fragment assembly module and a fragment modi-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

