Fully-Dynamic Approximate Decision Trees
With Worst-Case Update Time Guarantees

Marco Bressan 1 Mauro Sozio 2

Abstract

to frequent updates over time. In those cases, any decision
tree may quickly become obsolete and need to be replaced.
This has led to the study of algorithms for maintaining decision trees in dynamic models, where the input is given
as a stream of examples, and the algorithm can update the
tree after each example is read from the stream. Many such
algorithms have been developed, and have proved to deliver
high performance with respect to both quality and running
time (Domingos & Hulten, 2000; Hulten et al., 2001; Gama
et al., 2003; Manapragada et al., 2018; Das et al., 2019;
Sun et al., 2020; Haug et al., 2022; Jin & Agrawal, 2003;
Rutkowski et al., 2013). All those algorithms, however,
have two major limitations. The first one is that they are
purely incremental: they assume the examples are added
to the dataset, and that no example is ever removed. The
second one is that they ensure trees of good quality only if
the streamed examples are drawn independently from some
distribution; for an arbitrary stream, they give no guarantee.

We study the problem of maintaining a decision tree in the fully-dynamic setting, where the
dataset is updated by an adversarial sequence of
insertions and deletions. We present the first algorithm with strong guarantees on both the quality
of the tree and the worst-case update time (the
maximum number of operations the algorithm performs between two dataset updates). For instance,
we can maintain a tree where each node has Gini
gain within β of the optimum, while
 guaranteeing
an update time O d β −3 log4 n , where d is the
number of features and n the maximum size of
the dataset. This is optimal up to polylogarithmic
factors, as any dynamic algorithm must have update time in Ω(d). Similar guarantees hold for the
variance and information gain, for classification
and regression, as well as for boosted trees. This
shows that many popular decision trees such as
ID3 or C4.5 can be efficiently made dynamic, answering an open question of Bressan, Damay, and
Sozio (2023). We also show that, under the 3SUM
conjecture or the Orthogonal Vectors Hypothesis,
the update time must be polynomial in β −1 .

In this work we study the problem of maintaining decision
trees in the fully dynamic model. This model assumes arbitrary streams of insertions and deletions, and is extensively
studied in machine learning and related areas (Cohen-Addad
et al., 2019; Henzinger & Kale, 2020; Lattanzi et al., 2020;
Duetting et al., 2023). Let X be any domain (say, X = Rd )
and Y = {0, 1}. Any x ∈ X is an unlabeled example, and
any (x, y) ∈ X × Y is a labeled example. In the fully dynamic model, the algorithm starts with some initial multiset
S0 of labeled examples, which we call a dataset.1 Then, at
discrete time steps i = 1, 2, . . ., an adversary updates Si−1
to Si by inserting or deleting a labeled example (xi , yi ).
The goal of the algorithm is to maintain, at every time i, a
decision tree Ti that is close to the offline tree that some
reference algorithm (say, C4.5) would compute from Si
(we discuss this notion of “closeness” below). The computational performance of the algorithm is measured by the
update time and the query time. The update time, tu , is the
maximum time spent by the algorithm to compute Ti from
Ti−1 . The query time, tq , is the maximum time spent by the
algorithm to compute the label Ti (x) predicted by Ti on any
given x ∈ X. The ideal goal is tu = O(d poly log n) and

1. Introduction
Decision trees are among the most successful tools in machine learning and data mining (Shalev-Shwartz & BenDavid, 2014; Wu et al., 2008). In the standard offline model,
decision trees are constructed by feeding a training set of
labeled examples to a decision tree construction algorithm.
The most popular such algorithms, such as ID3 (Quinlan,
1986) or C4.5 (Quinlan, 1993), work in this way. In many
cases, however, one deals with training data that is subject
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Milan, Italy.
Institut Polytechnique de Paris, Telecom Paris. Correspondence
to: Marco Bressan <marco.bressan@unimi.it>, Mauro Sozio
<sozio@telecom-paris.fr>.
2

1
We use “dataset” as a term for both “multiset” and “sequence”,
depending on the use we make of them.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

