Let Go of Your Labels with Unsupervised Transfer

Artyom Gadetsky * 1 Yulun Jiang * 1 Maria Brbić 1

Abstract

Early transfer learning approaches relied on supervised finetuning of the entire model to solve a downstream task of
interest (Kolesnikov et al., 2020). Recent works (He et al.,
2022; Li et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2022; Oquab et al., 2023;
Darcet et al., 2024) have shown that fine-tuning an entire
model during transfer brings only marginal gains compared
to training a linear classifier on top of the frozen pre-trained
backbone (i.e., linear probe). Although these approaches
eliminated the need for task-specific fine-tuning of representations, they still require at least a few labeled examples per
class to achieve human-level performance on downstream
tasks.

Foundation vision-language models have enabled
remarkable zero-shot transferability of the pretrained representations to a wide range of downstream tasks. However, to solve a new task, zeroshot transfer still necessitates human guidance to
define visual categories that appear in the data.
Here, we show that fully unsupervised transfer
emerges when searching for the labeling of a
dataset that induces maximal margin classifiers
in representation spaces of different foundation
models. We present TURTLE, a fully unsupervised method that effectively employs this guiding
principle to uncover the underlying labeling of a
downstream dataset without any supervision and
task-specific representation learning. We evaluate TURTLE on a diverse benchmark suite of 26
datasets and show that it achieves new state-ofthe-art unsupervised performance. Furthermore,
TURTLE, although being fully unsupervised, outperforms zero-shot transfer baselines on a wide
range of datasets. In particular, TURTLE matches
the average performance of CLIP zero-shot on
26 datasets by employing the same representation
space, spanning a wide range of architectures and
model sizes. By guiding the search for the underlying labeling using the representation spaces
of two foundation models, TURTLE surpasses
zero-shot transfer and unsupervised prompt tuning baselines, demonstrating the surprising power
and effectiveness of unsupervised transfer.

Recently, foundation models (Bommasani et al., 2022) have
emerged, approaching human-level intelligence on a variety of tasks in the zero-shot setting. In particular, Radford
et al. (2021) proposed CLIP, which trains representations
by aligning images and their corresponding captions in the
joint embedding space. After pre-training, a zero-shot classifier is constructed by embedding the descriptions of visual
categories that appear in the data. Subsequent works have
successfully adopted this representation learning principle
to enable zero-shot transfer in other domains, such as audio signal processing (Elizalde et al., 2023a;b), biomedicine
(Lin et al., 2023; Robinson et al., 2023) and symbolic regression (Meidani et al., 2024). Despite the remarkable success
of foundation models, zero-shot transfer still requires human
instructions to solve a new task. But, can the representations
of foundation models be utilized to solve a new task in a
fully unsupervised manner?
The simplest approach for unsupervised transfer would be
to apply off-the-shelf clustering methods (MacQueen, 1967)
on top of the pre-trained representations. However, this strategy inevitably leads to a drastic decrease in performance
compared to (weakly) supervised and zero-shot transfer
(Zhou et al., 2022; Oquab et al., 2023). Recently, Gadetsky & Brbić (2023) introduced HUME, an unsupervised
learning framework for inferring the underlying human labeling of a given dataset from pre-trained representations.
While HUME has achieved superior performance compared
to unsupervised baselines, it still requires task-specific representation learning and does not close the gap between
unsupervised and zero-shot transfer.

1. Introduction
Transfer learning is a fundamental machine learning
paradigm that leverages large-scale pre-training of deep
neural networks to improve model performance on downstream tasks with limited resources (Pan & Yang, 2009).
*
Equal contribution 1 EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Maria Brbić <mbrbic@epfl.ch>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Here, we present TURTLE, a method that enables unsuper-

1

