Model Assessment and Selection under Temporal Distribution Shift

Elise Han 1 Chengpiao Huang 2 Kaizheng Wang 2 3

Abstract

have to work with limited data from the current time period
and abundant historical data, whose distributions may vary
significantly.

We investigate model assessment and selection in
a changing environment, by synthesizing datasets
from both the current time period and historical
epochs. To tackle unknown and potentially arbitrary temporal distribution shift, we develop an
adaptive rolling window approach to estimate the
generalization error of a given model. This strategy also facilitates the comparison between any
two candidate models by estimating the difference
of their generalization errors. We further integrate
pairwise comparisons into a single-elimination
tournament, achieving near-optimal model selection from a collection of candidates. Theoretical
analyses and empirical experiments underscore
the adaptivity of our proposed methods to the nonstationarity in data.

Main contributions. In this paper, we develop principled
approaches to model assessment and model selection under
temporal distribution shift.
• (Model assessment) We propose a rolling window strategy that adaptively selects historical data to estimate a
model’s generalization error.
• (Model selection) We then use the method above to
compare any pair of models by applying it to the difference between their generalization errors. Based on this,
we develop a single-elimination tournament procedure
for selecting the best model from a pool of candidates.
Furthermore, we provide theoretical analyses and numericals experiments to show that our algorithms adapt to the
unknown temporal distribution shift.

1. Introduction
Traditionally, statistical learning theory assumes that models are trained and tested under the same data distribution.
However, when practitioners train a model and deploy it into
real environment, the environment often changes over time.
Such temporal distribution shift may lead to serious decline
in the model’s quality. It is important to assess the model’s
performance in real time and detect possible degradation.

Related works. Model assessment and selection are classical problems in statistical learning (Hastie et al., 2009).
Hold-out and cross-validation are arguably the most popular
methods in practice. However, in the presence of distribution shift, the validation data may no longer accurately represent the test cases. This challenge has attracted considerable
attention over the past two decades (Quinonero-Candela
et al., 2022). Existing works mostly focused on the static
scenario where the validation data consists of independent
samples from a fixed distribution. These methods do not
apply when the environment is continuously changing over
time. Rolling windows offer a practical solution to this issue
and have been widely adopted for learning under temporal changes (Bifet & Gavalda, 2007; Hanneke et al., 2015;
Mohri & Muñoz Medina, 2012; Mazzetto & Upfal, 2023;
Mazzetto et al., 2023; Huang & Wang, 2023). Our method
automatically selects a window tailored to the underlying
non-stationarity near a given time. The strategy is inspired
by the Goldenshluger-Lepski method for bandwidth selection in non-parametric estimation (Goldenshluger & Lepski,
2008).

Moreover, one often needs to choose among multiple candidate models that result from different learning algorithms
(e.g., linear regression, random forests, neural networks)
and hyperparameters (e.g., penalty parameter, step size, time
window for training). Temporal distribution shift poses a
major challenge to model selection, as past performance
may not reliably predict future outcomes. Learners usually
Author names are sorted alphabetically. 1 Department of
Computer Science, Columbia University, New York, NY,
United States 2 Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research, Columbia University, New York, NY, United
States 3 Data Science Institute, Columbia University, New York,
NY, United States. Correspondence to: Kaizheng Wang
<kaizheng.wang@columbia.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Adaptation to a non-stationary environment has recently
gained popularity in online learning, where the goal is to
1

