Latent Logic Tree Extraction for Event Sequence Explanation from LLMs

Zitao Song 1 Chao Yang 2 Chaojie Wang 3 Bo An 3 1 Shuang Li 2

Abstract

Last Event Type Prediction (w/ semantic vs w/o semantic)
0.35

GPT-4 w/ semantic
GPT-4 w/o semantic
GPT-3.5-Turbo w semantic
GPT-3.5-Turbo w/o semantic

0.30

Modern high-stakes systems, such as healthcare
or robotics, often generate vast streaming event
sequences. Our goal is to design an efficient, plugand-play tool to elicit logic tree-based explanations from Large Language Models (LLMs) to
provide customized insights into each observed
event sequence. Built on the temporal point process model for events, our method employs the
likelihood function as a score to evaluate generated logic trees. We propose an amortized
Expectation-Maximization (EM) learning framework and treat the logic tree as latent variables. In
the E-step, we evaluate the posterior distribution
over the latent logic trees using an LLM prior and
the likelihood of the observed event sequences.
LLM provides a high-quality prior for the latent
logic trees, however, since the posterior is built
over a discrete combinatorial space, we cannot
get the closed-form solution. We propose to generate logic tree samples from the posterior using a
learnable GFlowNet, which is a diversity-seeking
generator for structured discrete variables. The
M-step employs the generated logic rules to approximate marginalization over the posterior, facilitating the learning of model parameters and
refining the tunable LLM prior parameters. In
the online setting, our locally built, lightweight
model will iteratively extract the most relevant
rules from LLMs for each sequence using only a
few iterations. Empirical demonstrations showcase the promising performance and adaptability
of our framework.

Accuracy

0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00

MIMIC-3

Epic-100

Figure 1. GPT can help last event type prediction. We found replacing the semantic meaningful event names by numerical event
ids in event history degrades the performance of event prediction.

1. Introduction
Modern systems, such as healthcare, finance, and social media, produce voluminous data that are represented as discrete
events with irregular timestamps. Generating concise and
human-readable knowledge to explain this intricate event
data is of great scientific and practical value. The distilled
knowledge can be generalized to other contexts (Ullman
et al., 2012; Campero et al., 2018).
For example, in healthcare, electronic health records (EHRs)
are often represented as discrete event sequences, containing fine-grained time and type information on doctors’ treatments, patients’ measurements, and symptoms. It is desirable to generate concise medical knowledge such as the
disease phenotypes and therapies, to shed light on these
messy events. This will facilitate a deeper understanding of
each patient’s unique health journey and medical decisions,
ultimately leading to more effective and individualized care.
However, the heterogeneity observed in each patient’s data
poses a challenge – each event sequence may exhibit diverse natures of medical histories, treatments, and conditions (Henrich & McElreath, 2003; Laland, 2004). Generating the most relevant and accurate knowledge to explain
such heterogeneous data requires sophisticated methods.

1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 2 School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China 3 Skywork AI, Singapore. Correspondence to: Shuang Li <lishuang@cuhk.edu.cn>.

Recently, Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated promising human-like reasoning abilities as fewshot learners (Brown et al., 2020). When prompted with
step-wise explanations of reasoning, these models excel
in logical reasoning (Pan et al., 2023), abstract pattern in-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

