Is In-Context Learning in Large Language Models Bayesian?
A Martingale Perspective

Fabian Falck * 1 Ziyu Wang * 1 Chris Holmes 1

Abstract

(Brown et al., 2020; Dong et al., 2022): Given a pretrained language model pM and an observed dataset D :=
{(x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xn , yn )} = z1:n of samples, LLMs capture the distribution of the underlying random variables
X and Y in this in-context dataset. This allows them produce a new sample (xn+1 , yn+1 ) using the predictive distribution pM (Xn+1 , Yn+1 |Z1:n = z1:n ), or if xn+1 is observed infer the predictive distribution pM (Yn+1 |Xn+1 =
xn+1 , Z1:n = z1:n ), without retraining or fine-tuning pM .

In-context learning (ICL) has emerged as a particularly remarkable characteristic of Large Language Models (LLM): given a pretrained LLM
and an observed dataset, LLMs can make predictions for new data points from the same distribution without fine-tuning. Numerous works
have postulated ICL as approximately Bayesian
inference, rendering this a natural hypothesis. In
this work, we analyse this hypothesis from a new
angle through the martingale property, a fundamental requirement of a Bayesian learning system for exchangeable data. We show that the
martingale property is a necessary condition for
unambiguous predictions in such scenarios, and
enables a principled, decomposed notion of uncertainty vital in trustworthy, safety-critical systems.
We derive actionable checks with corresponding
theory and test statistics which must hold if the
martingale property is satisfied. We also examine
if uncertainty in LLMs decreases as expected in
Bayesian learning when more data is observed. In
three experiments, we provide evidence for violations of the martingale property, and deviations
from a Bayesian scaling behaviour of uncertainty,
falsifying the hypothesis that ICL is Bayesian.

Few-shot learning via ICL (Brown et al., 2020) has produced numerous breakthroughs in LLM research (Dong
et al., 2022), such as in supervised learning (Min et al.,
2021) or chain-of-thought prompting (Wei et al., 2022). In
spite of the remarkable empirical success of ICL, we lack
a unified understanding of the algorithm and the properties
of conditioning LLMs on in-context data. In this work, we
are interested in characterising the type of learning that occurs in ICL. Specifically, we aim to answer the question:
is in-context learning for LLMs on exchangeable data
(approximately) Bayesian?
In contrast to prior work, our analysis focuses on one fundamental property of Bayesian learning systems for exchangeable data: the martingale property. In a nutshell, the
martingale property describes the invariance of a model’s
predictive distribution with respect to missing data from a
population. We will formally define and extensively explain
the martingale property in §2, but begin by intuitively describing two important and desirable consequences of it with
an example, highlighting its relevance. These consequences
are: (i) the martingale property is a necessary condition
for rendering predictions unambiguous in an exchangeable
data setting, and (ii) it establishes a principled notion of the
model’s uncertainty.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) are autoregressive generative models trained on vast amounts of data, exhibiting
extraordinary performance across a wide array of tasks
(Zhao et al., 2023). A particularly remarkable characteristic of LLMs is so-called in-context learning (ICL)

Consider a drug company exploring the efficacy of a new
medication for headaches. The company runs a two-arm
Randomised Control Trial (RCT) with 100 patients, 50 in
each arm, comparing the new treatment with the current
standard of care (in this case ibuprofen), and records the outcome Y ∈ {0, 1} whether patients are symptom-free four
hours after treatment. It is important to note that in this setting, the distribution of outcomes is independent of the order
in which the patients are observed, a property known as ex-

*

1
Equal contribution
Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. Correspondence to:
Fabian
Falck
<fabian.falck@stats.ox.ac.uk>,
Ziyu
Wang
<ziyu.wang@stats.ox.ac.uk>,
Chris
Holmes
<cholmes@stats.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

