A Federated Stochastic Multi-Level Compositional Minimax Algorithm
for Deep AUC Maximization

Xinwen Zhang 1 Ali Payani 2 Myungjin Lee 2 Richard Souvenir 1 Hongchang Gao 1

Abstract

distribution is imbalanced.

AUC maximization is an effective approach to address the imbalanced data classification problem
in federated learning. In the past few years, a couple of federated AUC maximization approaches
have been developed based on the minimax optimization. However, directly solving a minimax
optimization problem to maximize the AUC score
cannot achieve satisfactory performance. To address this issue, we propose to maximize AUC
via optimizing a federated multi-level compositional minimax problem. Specifically, we develop
a novel federated multi-level compositional minimax algorithm with rigorous theoretical guarantees to solve this new learning paradigm in both
algorithmic design and theoretical analysis. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first work studying the multi-level minimax optimization problem.
Additionally, extensive empirical evaluations confirm the efficacy of our proposed approach.

The traditional AUC maximization approach on a single
machine depends on the sum of pairwise losses between
examples from different classes, which requires storing all
training data, making it impractical for large-scale online
learning. To address this scalability issue, (Ying et al., 2016)
successfully reformulated the original problem into a minimax decomposable formulation, allowing for stochastic
algorithms based on mini-batch data without explicitly creating the pairs. Based on this minimax learning paradigm,
(Guo et al., 2020) developed the federated AUC maximization approach by updating the primal-dual variables locally
and averaging the global variable periodically. However,
directly optimizing AUC can result in suboptimal results.
Particularly in the early stages of training, updating the
AUC loss cannot always lead to effective feature extraction
when compared to updating the traditional cross-entropy
loss (Yuan et al., 2021c). To overcome this limitation, (Yuan
et al., 2021a) designed an end-to-end deep AUC maximization with the compositional framework, ensuring not only
robust feature learning of lower layers through the minimization of the standard cross-entropy loss, but also robust
classifier learning through the optimization of an AUC loss.
Furthermore, (Zhang et al., 2023) developed a federated
compositional gradient descent ascent algorithm to enable
this compositional framework for federated learning, which
has demonstrated superior performance over traditional federated AUC maximization approaches (Guo et al., 2020;
Yuan et al., 2021b; Sharma et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Federated AUC maximization has attracted increasing attention in federated learning (FL) due to its efficacy in handling
imbalanced data classification. In FL, data are distributed
across various devices, and information is periodically exchanged with a central server. Unlike most traditional heterogeneous federated learning approaches, which assume
that the local data distribution is imbalanced but the
global one is balanced, e.g., Scaffold (Karimireddy et al.,
2020), federated AUC maximization approaches can handle
the case where both local and global data distributions
are imbalanced. Thus, federated AUC maximization approaches have demonstrated superior performance in practical applications, such as disease prediction, where the global

AUC

However, one limitation of 0.90
(Zhang et al., 2023) is that it 0.85
can only handle the two-level 0.80
compositional optimization 0.75
LocalSCGDAM
problem, whose performance 0.70
LocalSMCGDAM
is not satisfactory. In partic- 0.65 0 20 40 60 80 100
Epoch
ular, our preliminary study
Figure 1. The test AUC
depicted in Figure 1 shows
score of CATvsDOG. The
that a multi-level composiimbalance ratio is 0.05, the
tional learning paradigm,
number of devices is eight,
i.e., LocalSMCGDAM in Aland the communication
gorithm 1, where the weights
period is four.
of the backbone neural network are updated multiple times

1

Department of Computer and Information Sciences, Temple
University, Philadelphia, USA 2 Cisco Systems Inc.. Correspondence to: Hongchang Gao <hongchang.gao@temple.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

