Graph Out-of-Distribution Detection Goes Neighborhood Shaping

Tianyi Bao 1 Qitian Wu 1 Zetian Jiang 1 Yiting Chen 1 Jiawei Sun 1 Junchi Yan 1

Abstract

noisy inputs (Wang et al., 2023), demonstrating the lack of
adequate robustness to uncertain outliers.

Despite the rich line of research works on outof-distribution (OOD) detection on images, the
literature on OOD detection for interdependent
data, e.g., graphs, is still relatively limited. To
fill this gap, we introduce TopoOOD as a principled approach that accommodates graph topology and neighborhood context for detecting OOD
node instances on graphs. Meanwhile, we enrich
the experiment settings by splitting in-distribution
(ID) and OOD data based on distinct topological
distributions, which presents new benchmarks for
a more comprehensive analysis of graph-based
OOD detection. The latter is designed to thoroughly assess the performance of these discriminators under distribution shifts involving structural information, providing a rigorous evaluation
of methods in the emerging area of OOD detection on graphs. Our experimental results show
the competitiveness of the proposed model across
multiple datasets, as evidenced by up to a 15%
increase in the AUROC and a 50% decrease in the
FPR compared to existing state-of-the-art methods.

A similar challenge is also critical yet relatively underexplored when it comes to graph-structured data. Graph
Neural Networks (GNNs) typically operate under the assumption that training and testing datasets share the same
distribution, which does not mirror real-world scenarios
where distribution shifts of various types widely exist (Koh
et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2022; Zhu et al., 2021; Yang et al.,
2022). More importantly, this assumption causes the classifiers to provide over-confidence predictions for OOD samples and hampers the reliability of GNN models. Simultaneously, compared to other types of data, the difficulty of OOD
detection for graphs at the node level is further exacerbated
by the interdependence within the neighborhood.
The current methods for node-level OOD detection either
model uncertainty predominantly on the predicted categorical distribution but sideline the node feature embeddings (Hasanzadeh et al., 2020; Rong et al., 2020; Stadler
et al., 2021; Zhao et al., 2020) or over-rely on the features of
individual nodes, concurrently operating under the assumption that connected nodes predominantly tend to be sampled
from similar distributions (Wu et al., 2023). Yet, while
IDs and OODs intermingle in the neighborhood, GNNSafe
fails to provide a discriminative energy score, as illustrated
via the toy example given in Fig. 1. Such unsatisfactory
performance highlights that, unlike vision data, node OOD
detection requires the appropriate assessment of each node’s
neighborhood information.

1. Introduction
Recognizing out-of-distribution (OOD) input perturbations
to improve the robustness of machine learning models is crucial for real-world applications, particularly in safety-critical
and high-stakes domains. Currently, the susceptibility to
OOD samples remains a pivotal concern in developing reliable AI systems. For example, for large language models,
plenty of work has been attempted to evaluate model robustness under the threats of confusing synonyms as well
as typographical errors in prompts (Zhu et al., 2023), adversarial contents (Nie et al., 2019; Zhuo et al., 2023), and

In this paper, we start from the neighborhood topology,
combining it with interdependent node features to develop
a robust OOD detector, TopoOOD, for graph structural data.
Inspired by the well-established Dirichlet energy (Zhou
& Schölkopf, 2005), we adopt a comprehensive outlook,
introducing a generalized node-wise Dirichlet energy as the
confidence score. We further propose new experimental
benchmarks by partitioning ID and OOD instances based
on different topological distributions to enrich the limited
dataset collection. In summary, the contributions are:

1
School of Artificial Intelligence & Department of Computer
Science and Engineering & MoE Lab of AI, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Junchi Yan
<yanjunchi@sjtu.edu.cn>.

1) An Innovative Detection Metric: We design the nodewise k-hop Dirichlet energy (raw kHDE) to measure the
level of turbulence in a node’s neighborhood and quantify
it as the confidence score. We demonstrate the superiority

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

