Position: Fundamental Limitations of LLM Censorship
Necessitate New Approaches

David Glukhov 1 Ilia Shumailov 2 Yarin Gal 2 Nicolas Papernot 1 Vardan Papyan 1

Abstract

tion following (Brown et al., 2020; OpenAI, 2023; Google,
2023), driven by advances in prompt engineering and the application of Reinforcement Learning with Human Feedback
(RLHF) (Ziegler et al., 2020; Ouyang et al., 2022). The
recent integration of LLMs with external tools and applications, including APIs, web retrieval access, and code interpreters, further expanded their capabilities (Schick et al.,
2023; Nakano et al., 2022; Parisi et al., 2022; Cai et al.,
2023; Qin et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2023; Mialon et al., 2023).

Large language models (LLMs) have exhibited
impressive capabilities in comprehending complex instructions. However, their blind adherence
to provided instructions has led to concerns regarding risks of malicious use. Existing defence
mechanisms, such as model fine-tuning or output
censorship methods have proven to be fallible at
ensuring that LLMs do not return semantically
impermissible responses. We present fundamental limitations of verifying the semantic properties
of LLM outputs and identifying compositional
threats, illustrating inherent challenges of current
approaches to censoring LLM outputs. Specifically, we demonstrate that semantic censorship
can be perceived as an undecidable problem, and
semantic properties of LLM outputs can become
impossible to verify when the LLM is capable of
providing "encrypted" outputs. We further show
challenges of censorship can extend beyond just
semantic censorship, as attackers can reconstruct
impermissible outputs from a collection of permissible ones. Consequently, we call for a reevaluation of the problem of censorship and its
goals, stressing the need for new definitions and
approaches to censorship. In addition, we provide an initial attempt toward achieving this goal
through syntactic censorship, drawing from a security perspective to design censorship methods
that can provide guarantees.

However, concerns have arisen regarding the safety and security risks of LLMs, particularly with regards to potential
misuse from malicious users. These risks encompass a wide
range of issues, such as social engineering and data exfiltration (Greshake et al., 2023; Weidinger et al., 2022), to
safety-critical risks of lowering barriers to entry of biological, chemical, radiological, or cyber weaponry and other
threats to national security and public safety.
These concerns led to the development of methods to mitigate such risks by regulating LLM outputs. Such methods range from fine-tuning LLMs (OpenAI, 2023) to make
them more aligned with human values, to employing external censorship mechanisms to detect and filter impermissible inputs or outputs (Markov et al., 2023; Rebedea
et al., 2023; Greshake et al., 2023; Cao et al., 2023; Kumar
et al., 2023). However, extant defences have been empirically bypassed (Perez et al., 2022b;a; Kang et al., 2023;
Liu et al., 2023; Rao et al., 2023; Carlini et al., 2023c; Wei
et al., 2023; Zou et al., 2023b), and theoretical work (Wolf
et al., 2023) suggests that there will exist inputs to LLMs
that elicit misaligned behaviour.
The unreliability of LLMs to self-censor indicates that external censorship mechanisms, such as LLM classifiers, may
be a more reliable approach to regulate outputs and mitigate
risks. However, limitations of external censorship mechanisms remain unclear; Kang et al. (2023) demonstrated that
currently deployed censorship mechanisms can be bypassed
by leveraging the instruction following nature of LLMs.
We show such attacks are just special cases of fundamental
limitations of semantic censorship of models possessing
advanced instruction following capabilities, and argue that
the goals for censorship need to be reevaluated

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) made remarkable improvements in text generation, problem solving, and instruc1

University of Toronto & Vector Institute 2 University
of Oxford.
Correspondence to:
David Glukhov
<david.glukhov@mail.utoront.ca>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

