Balancing Feature Similarity and Label Variability for Optimal Size-Aware
One-shot Subset Selection
Abhinab Acharya 1 Dayou Yu 1 Qi Yu 1 Xumin Liu 1

Abstract

Tan & Le, 2019; Chen et al., 2020) comes at the cost of
large amounts of data and increased resource consumption
(Schwartz et al., 2020; Strubell et al., 2019). Subset or coreset selection aims to find candidate data points from a large
pool of data such that the model trained on the subset has
comparable performance to that of the model trained on the
full set (Feldman, 2020), which in turn helps decrease the
resources consumed by training on large amounts of data.

Subset or core-set selection offers a data-efficient
way for training deep learning models. One-shot
subset selection poses additional challenges as
subset selection is only performed once and full
set data become unavailable after the selection.
However, most existing methods tend to choose
either diverse or difficult data samples, which fail
to faithfully represent the joint data distribution
that is comprised of both feature and label information. The selection is also performed independently from the subset size, which plays
an essential role in choosing what types of samples. To address this critical gap, we propose
to conduct Feature similarity and Label variability Balanced One-shot Subset Selection (BOSS),
aiming to construct an optimal size-aware subset
for data-efficient deep learning. We show that a
novel balanced core-set loss bound theoretically
justifies the need to simultaneously consider both
diversity and difficulty to form an optimal subset.
It also reveals how the subset size influences the
bound. We further connect the inaccessible bound
to a practical surrogate target which is tailored
to subset sizes and varying levels of overall difficulty. We design a novel Beta-scoring importance
function to delicately control the optimal balance
of diversity and difficulty. Comprehensive experiments conducted on both synthetic and real data
justify the important theoretical properties and
demonstrate the superior performance of BOSS
as compared with the competitive baselines.

Intuitively, subsets can be chosen dynamically during each
training epoch (Mirzasoleiman et al., 2020; Killamsetty
et al., 2021b;a; Pooladzandi et al., 2022). However, the
selection algorithm is usually time-consuming and can significantly increase the overall training duration (Shin et al.,
2023). Such a process also requires a forward pass through
the entire dataset each time a subset is chosen, which incurs
a high cost for a large dataset. Additionally, there are some
important applications such as continual learning (Nguyen
et al., 2018), where the full set data is only available once
such that the dynamic subset selection is not possible. Thus,
contrary to the dynamic selection, one-shot subset selection
only picks the subset once and uses that subset for the entire
training process (Zheng et al., 2023; Paul et al., 2021; Feldman & Zhang, 2020; Sorscher et al., 2022). While it may
still be essential to initialize a model using the full dataset
for a few epochs to obtain the training dynamics employed
for subset selection, one-shot subset selection offers the advantage that the time required for this selection is accounted
for only once. Furthermore, we are not required to store the
large full-set data after selecting the subset.
Subset selection have been used for classical problems such
as regression (Madigan et al., 2002), classification (Tsang
et al., 2005), and clustering (Har-Peled & Kushal, 2005).
Recent works have started exploring applications of coreset selection for data-efficient deep learning (Guo et al.,
2022; Wan et al., 2022; Killamsetty et al., 2021c). Two
categories of methods have been explored to incorporate the
most important examples into the selected subset, including
1) diversity based, which selects a diverse set of samples to
cover the entire feature (or gradient) space (Mirzasoleiman
et al., 2020; Killamsetty et al., 2021a;b; Pooladzandi et al.,
2022; Shin et al., 2023; Welling, 2009; Agarwal et al., 2020;
Sener & Savarese, 2018), and 2) difficulty-based, which
selects the most difficult samples to best characterize the

1. Introduction
The success of deep learning (Brown et al., 2020; Liu
et al., 2019; Ramesh et al., 2021; Dosovitskiy et al., 2021;
1
Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Xumin Liu <xumin.liu@rit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

