HALC: Object Hallucination Reduction via Adaptive Focal-Contrast Decoding

Zhaorun Chen * 1 Zhuokai Zhao * 1 Hongyin Luo 2 Huaxiu Yao 3 Bo Li 1 4 Jiawei Zhou 5

Abstract

descriptions within their outputs (Rohrbach et al., 2018).
Based on the different parts of the sentences that are being
hallucinated, OH can be categorized into three types: object
existence, attribute, and relationship hallucinations (Gunjal
et al., 2023; Zhai et al., 2023).

While large vision-language models (LVLMs)
have demonstrated impressive capabilities in interpreting multi-modal contexts, they invariably
suffer from object hallucinations (OH). We introduce HALC, a novel decoding algorithm designed to mitigate OH in LVLMs. HALC leverages distinct fine-grained optimal visual information in vision-language tasks and operates on
both local and global contexts simultaneously.
Specifically, HALC integrates a robust auto-focal
grounding mechanism (locally) to correct hallucinated tokens on the fly, and a specialized beam
search algorithm (globally) to significantly reduce OH while preserving text generation quality. Additionally, HALC can be integrated into
any LVLMs as a plug-and-play module without
extra training. Extensive experimental studies
demonstrate the effectiveness of HALC in reducing OH, outperforming state-of-the-arts across
four benchmarks. Code is released at https:
//github.com/BillChan226/HALC.

1

OH has been a persistent challenge since the earlier stages
of the VLM development (Rohrbach et al., 2018). And it
has been gaining increased attention, especially when recent
research indicates that even the much more sophisticated
and capable large vision-language models (LVLMs) are not
immune to it (Dai et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023; Guan et al.,
2023). Numerous efforts have been devoted to mitigating
OH in the context of LVLMs, including a post-hoc approach
that corrects the LVLM output after completion (Zhou et al.,
2023), a self-correction pipeline for OH mitigation (Yin
et al., 2023), and various decoding strategies that are tailored towards reducing OH via better textual or visual priors
utilization (Huang et al., 2023; Leng et al., 2023).
Despite the efforts, these approaches are not yet fully satisfying in terms of eliminating OH. More importantly, they
mainly focus on mitigating object existence hallucination,
while assuming the attribute- and relationship-level hallucinations can be consequently corrected through autoregressive decoding. Furthermore, their reliance on more
powerful external LVLMs (Yin et al., 2023), repeated processing (Zhou et al., 2023) or additional data (Gunjal et al.,
2023) complicates their adaptations to existing LVLMs and
restricts their use cases. The importance of OH reduction
combined with the limitations in existing methods underscore the urgent need for developing novel approaches.

Introduction

The confluence of natural language processing (NLP) and
computer vision (CV) has undergone a transformative shift
over the past years with the introduction of vision-language
models (VLMs) (Zhu et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023b; Zhang
et al., 2024). Although VLMs have shown exceptional proficiency in integrating and interpreting intricate data across
both textual and visual modalities, a significant challenge
emerged as the phenomenon of object hallucination (OH),
where VLMs erroneously generate hallucinated objects and

To this end, we introduce Object Hallucination Reduction
through Adaptive FocaL-Contrast decoding (HALC), a
novel decoding strategy designed to effectively counter OH
and can be easily integrated into any open-source LVLMs
such as MiniGPT-4 (Chen et al., 2023), LLaVA (Liu et al.,
2023b) and mPLUG-Owl2 (Ye et al., 2023). HALC addresses all three types of OH (existence, attribute, and relationship) while preserving generation quality in both local
and global levels; locally, it employs an adaptive focalcontrast grounding mechanism to locate the fine-grained
optimal visual information to correct each generated token
that might be hallucinating; and globally, it incorporates a
matching-based beam search that utilizes a visual matching

*

Equal contribution 1 University of Chicago, Chicago IL, USA
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Boston MA, USA 3 UNCChapel Hill, Chapel Hill NC, USA 4 University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Champaign IL, USA 5 Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago, Chicago IL, USA. Correspondence
to: Zhaorun Chen, Zhuokai Zhao, Bo Li <{zhaorun, zhuokai,
bol}@uchicago.edu>, Jiawei Zhou <jzhou@ttic.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

