Towards Unified Multi-granularity Text Detection with Interactive Attention

Xingyu Wan 1 Chengquan Zhang † 1 Pengyuan Lyu 1 Sen Fan 1 Zihan Ni 1 Kun Yao 1 Errui Ding 1
Jingdong Wang 1

Abstract
Existing OCR engines or document image analysis systems typically rely on training separate
models for text detection in varying scenarios and
granularities, leading to significant computational
complexity and resource demands. In this paper, we introduce “Detect Any Text” (DAT), an
advanced paradigm that seamlessly unifies scene
text detection, layout analysis, and document page
detection into a cohesive, end-to-end model. This
design enables DAT to efficiently manage text instances at different granularities, including word,
line, paragraph and page. A pivotal innovation
in DAT is the across-granularity interactive attention module, which significantly enhances the
representation learning of text instances at varying granularities by correlating structural information across different text queries. As a result,
it enables the model to achieve mutually beneficial detection performances across multiple text
granularities. Additionally, a prompt-based segmentation module refines detection outcomes for
texts of arbitrary curvature and complex layouts,
thereby improving DAT’s accuracy and expanding its real-world applicability. Experimental results demonstrate that DAT achieves state-of-theart performances across a variety of text-related
benchmarks, including multi-oriented/arbitrarilyshaped scene text detection, document layout analysis and page detection tasks.

Figure 1. Illustration of the structural correlations among multigranularity text instances, i.e., word(annotated with yellow
polygons), text-line(annotated with green polygons), paragraph(annotated with brown polygons) and page(annotated with
magenta contours). The blurred small text instances are ignored.

separate modules, such as scene text detection, document
layout analysis, and document page detection. Within this
context, scene text detection focuses on localizing individual text instances, which may be multi-oriented (Karatzas
et al., 2015; Yao et al., 2012) or arbitrarily-shaped (Ch’ng
et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2019), and primarily involves detecting elements at the word-level or text line-level. Document
layout analysis delves into examining geometric structures
at the paragraph-level. It involves classifying fine-grained
categories within these structures, but does not extend to analyzing their sub-level elements. Document page detection
addresses the identification of the most salient page body
in natural scenes, typically utilizing image segmentation
techniques (Chen et al., 2018; Kirillov et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
Text detection serves as the cornerstone for parsing and
understanding the content of texts in natural scenes and
electronic documents. Existing document image analysis
systems typically categorize text-related detection tasks into

To achieve state-of-the-art (SOTA) results in the aforementioned tasks, current methods necessitate training separate
models for each task using diverse datasets, which leads
to considerable computational complexity and resource demands. Moreover, while these tasks involve representation learning at varying text granularities, there is often a
lack of attention to the intrinsic correlations among these
multi-granularity text instances, as illustrated in Figure 1.

1
Baidu, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Chengquan Zhang
<zhangchengquan@baidu.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

