GistScore: Learning Better Representations for
In-Context Example Selection with Gist Bottlenecks

Shivanshu Gupta 1 † Clemens Rosenbaum † Ethan R. Elenberg 2 †

Abstract

Training
...

...

Instruction

Example Input

...

In-Context Learning (ICL) is the ability of Large
Language Models (LLMs) to perform new tasks
when conditioned on prompts comprising a few
task examples. However, ICL performance can
be critically sensitive to the choice of examples.
To dynamically select the best examples for every
test input, we propose Example Gisting, a novel
approach for training example encoders through
supervised finetuning with an attention bottleneck
between the inputs and outputs. These gist models
form the basis for GistScore, a novel metric for
scoring and selecting informative examples. Further, we experiment with two variations: (1) finetuning gist models for each dataset and (2) multitask training a single model on a large collection of datasets. The latter can be used for new
tasks out-of-the-box, enabling a training-free ICL
pipeline. Evaluations with 21 datasets spanning 9
tasks and 8 diverse LLMs show that our fine-tuned
models get state-of-the-art ICL performance with
over 20% absolute gain over off-the-shelf retrievers and 5% over the best prior methods. Further, our multi-task model generalizes well to new
tasks, datasets, and prompt templates. Selection
using this model matches or outperforms prior
methods while being three orders of magnitude
faster than the strongest training-free baseline.1

Gist
Bottleneck
Output

Evaluation / Retrieval
...

...

Candidate Example 1

Test Example

...

Candidate Example 2

...

Solid lines
represent
self-attention
Dotted lines
represent
GistScore
computation

...

Candidate Example k
Top k

Figure 1. Top Example Gisting involves supervised training with
an attention masking bottleneck. Here, gist tokens (red) may
attend to example inputs (black) and the task instruction (yellow,
optional), however, the output (blue) may only attend to the gist
tokens. Training with such a bottleneck encourages concise, taskspecifc encodings of salient aspects of inputs. Further, with multitask training the model can be applied to new tasks out-of-thebox. Bottom Retrieval of the candidate examples with the highest
GistScore with the test input (Task instruction omitted for brevity).

1. Introduction
ing them on a prompt comprising a few task demonstrations.
In contrast to traditional supervised finetuning, the trainingfree approach allows a single model to instantly switch
between an arbitrary number of tasks with improved generalization (Anil et al., 2022; Qiu et al., 2022; Drozdov et al.,
2023; Wei et al., 2022b) and reasoning skills (Wei et al.,
2022b). Unfortunately, its performance is highly sensitive
to the choice of examples placed in the prompt (Zhao et al.,
2021; Liu et al., 2022b; Lu et al., 2022; Rubin et al., 2022;
Schick & Schütze, 2021).

In-Context Learning (ICL) (Brown et al., 2020) is a few-shot
inference paradigm that leverages increasingly powerful
large language models (LLMs) for new tasks by condition†

Work done at ASAPP 1 University of California, Irvine, CA,
USA 2 Permanence AI, New York, NY, USA. Correspondence to:
Shivanshu Gupta <shivag5@uci.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
Code and models available at https://github.com/S
hivanshu-Gupta/gist-icl.

Despite extensive prior work on better example selection
1

