Kepler Codebook

Junrong Lian * 1 Ziyue Dong * 2 Pengxu Wei 1 Wei Ke 2 Chang Liu 3 Qixiang Ye 4 Xiangyang Ji 3 Liang Lin 1 5

Abstract
A codebook designed for learning discrete distributions in latent space has demonstrated state-ofthe-art results on generation tasks. This inspires
us to explore what distribution of codebook is
better. Following the spirit of Kepler’s Conjecture, we cast the codebook training as solving the
sphere packing problem and derive a Kepler codebook with a compact and structured distribution
to obtain a codebook for image representations.
Furthermore, we implement the Kepler codebook
training by simply employing this derived distribution as regularization and using the codebook partition method. We conduct extensive experiments
to evaluate our trained codebook for image reconstruction and generation on natural and human
face datasets, respectively, achieving significant
performance improvement. Besides, our Kepler
codebook has demonstrated superior performance
when evaluated across datasets and even for reconstructing images with different resolutions.
Codes and pre-trained weights are available at
https://github.com/banianrong/KeplerCodebook.

(a) Initialization

(b) VQGAN

(c) Reg-VQ

(d) Ours

Figure 1. Codebook distribution. Tokens are denoted by dots. The
codebook is initialized with uniform distribution (a). After training,
VAGAN and Reg-VQ maintain unordered in (b) and (c), impairing
their performance in reconstructing and generating images. Our
Kepler codebook with an ordered and compact distribution (d).

of codebook collapse (Yu et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2023;
Ramesh et al., 2021a), indicating that a large portion of
tokens in a learned codebook have not been fully used with
a rather low codebook usage1 (Yu et al., 2021; Zhang et al.,
2023), e.g., 35.9% for VQGAN, shown in Fig. 2. This raises
an issue: for a learned codebook, its low codebook usage is
bad for image reconstruction. Subsequently, several methods have been proposed to address this issue. One effective
method is the application of Gumbel-Softmax (Jang et al.,
2016; Ramesh et al., 2021b), which employs stochastic
quantization by random sampling to select a token from a
predicted token distribution. Reg-VQ (Zhang et al., 2023)
uses a stochastic mask regularization to balance VQGAN
and Gumbel-VQ quantization method. However, this apparent improvement in codebook usage is affected by stochastic
quantization, which essentially leads to unreliable training
with limited quality of reconstructed images and generalization of image representation. This raises another issue:
higher codebook usage does not promise an excellent reconstruction capability. For instance, in Fig. 2, Reg-VQ has a
higher codebook usage, but its active frequency variance2 , is

1. Introduction
Vector quantization (VQ) (Gray, 1984) is a foundational
algorithm in the field of machine learning, extensively utilized in deep learning for various domains including audio (Baevski et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2020),
language (Roy & Grangier, 2019; Chen et al., 2023) and
vision tasks (Van Den Oord et al., 2017; Razavi et al., 2019;
Esser et al., 2021). Among these, its application in image
generation/synthesis has been particularly notable in recent
years, especially with the prevalence of pre-quantizing images into discrete latent variables and modeling them autoregressively, e.g., VQVAE (Van Den Oord et al., 2017), DALLE (Ramesh et al., 2021a), VQGAN (Esser et al., 2021), and
ViT-VQGAN (Yu et al., 2021). Those approaches follow a
two-stage generation routine, including a codebook learning
by image quantization for image reconstruction in the first
stage and vector-quantized image modeling based on the
learned codebook for image generation in the second stage.

*
.Equal contribution 1 School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China 2 School of
Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
3
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
4
School of Electronic, Electrical and Communication Engineering,
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 5 Peng
Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to: Pengxu
Wei <weipx3@mail.sysu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1. “Codebook usage” means the percentage of how many tokens
in a codebook are used for image reconstruction.
2. Active frequency variance measures the difference indicator

Nevertheless, codebook learning always bears the brunt
1

