Improving Generalization in Offline Reinforcement Learning
via Adversarial Data Splitting

Da Wang 1 Lin Li 1 Wei Wei 1 Qixian Yu 1 Jianye Hao 2 Jiye Liang 1

Abstract

{

Offline Reinforcement Learning (RL) commonly
suffers from the out-of-distribution (OOD) overestimation issue due to the distribution shift. Prior
work gradually shifts their focus from suppressing
OOD overestimation to avoiding overly conservative learning from suboptimal behavior policies
to improve generalization. However, most approaches explicitly delimit boundaries for OOD
actions based on the support in the dataset, which
can potentially impede the data near these boundaries from acquiring realistic estimates. This
paper investigates how to loosen the rigid demarcation of OOD boundaries, adaptively extracting knowledge from empirical data to implicitly improve the model’s generalization to
nearby unseen data. We introduce an adversarial data splitting (ADS) framework that enforces
the model to generalize the distribution shifts simulated from the train/validation subsets splitting
of the dataset. Specifically, ADS is modeled as a
min-max optimization problem inspired by metalearning and solved by iterating over the following two steps. First, we train the model on the
train-subset to minimize its loss on the validationsubset. Then, we adversarially generate the “hardest” train/validation subsets with the maximum
distribution shift, making the model incapable of
generalization at that splitting. We derive a generalization error bound for theoretically understanding ADS and verify the effectiveness with extensive experiments. Code is available at https:
//github.com/DkING-lv6/ADS.

} = Data support
Unknown
Known (with boundary)

Near the boundary

Figure 1: Abstract representation of our work. We aim to
train the model capable of effectively generalizing the data
near the boundary.

1. Introduction
Offline Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Levine et al., 2020)
aims to learn a policy from a static dataset collected by
unknown behavior policies. It saves resources and reduces
risk by eliminating the need for environmental interaction
during training, which has attracted significant interest from
the research community. One of the fundamental challenges
of offline RL is the distribution shift of state-action visitation frequency between the learned policy and the behavior
policy. The inability to continuously correct the current policy’s Q-value estimation for state-action pairs through exploration leads to a severe overestimation of out-of-distribution
(OOD) actions (Fujimoto et al., 2019). This issue is further
exacerbated through bootstrapping (Kumar et al., 2019). To
tackle this issue, prior approaches deal with OOD actions
based on conservative principles. The associated techniques
can broadly be categorized as learning underestimated or
conservative values (Kumar et al., 2020; Kostrikov et al.,
2021; Ma et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022), constraining policies (Fakoor et al., 2021; Fujimoto & Gu, 2021; Wu et al.,
2022; Li et al., 2023), and uncertainty estimating (An et al.,
2021; Bai et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2021).
Unfortunately, overly pessimistic conservatism hinders possible generalization and leads to the limited performance of
the learned policy, especially when the behavior policy in
the dataset used for constraint could be suboptimal. Existing research mitigates conservatism by incorporating policy
regularization techniques, such as support constraint (Lyu
et al., 2022; Mao et al., 2023) or nearest neighbor restriction (Ran et al., 2023). In practice, considering the continuous state-action space, the trained model (i.e., the neural

*

Equal contribution 1 Key Laboratory of Computational Intelligence and Chinese Information Processing of Ministry of Education, School of Computer and Information Technology, Shanxi
University, Taiyuan, China. 2 College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China. Correspondence to: Wei
Wei <weiwei@sxu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

