In-Context Freeze-Thaw Bayesian Optimization
for Hyperparameter Optimization

Herilalaina Rakotoarison * 1 Steven Adriaensen * 1 Neeratyoy Mallik * 1
Samir Garibov 1 Edward Bergman 1 Frank Hutter 1 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

Hyperparameters are essential in deep learning (DL) to
achieve strong model performance. However, due to the
increasing complexity of these models, it is becoming more
challenging to find promising hyperparameter settings, even
with the help of hyperparameter optimization (HPO, Section 3.1) tools (Feurer & Hutter, 2019; Bischl et al., 2023).
Traditional HPO techniques using Bayesian Optimization
(BO) are unsuitable for modern DL because they treat the
problem as a black box, making it computationally expensive, requiring a full model training for each evaluation.

With the increasing computational costs associated with deep learning, automated hyperparameter optimization methods, strongly relying
on black-box Bayesian optimization (BO), face
limitations. Freeze-thaw BO offers a promising grey-box alternative, strategically allocating
scarce resources incrementally to different configurations. However, the frequent surrogate
model updates inherent to this approach pose
challenges for existing methods, requiring retraining or fine-tuning their neural network surrogates online, introducing overhead, instability,
and hyper-hyperparameters. In this work, we
propose FT-PFN, a novel surrogate for Freezethaw style BO. FT-PFN is a prior-data fitted
network (PFN) that leverages the transformers’
in-context learning ability to efficiently and reliably do Bayesian learning curve extrapolation
in a single forward pass. Our empirical analysis
across three benchmark suites shows that the predictions made by FT-PFN are more accurate and
10-100 times faster than those of the deep Gaussian process and deep ensemble surrogates used
in previous work. Furthermore, we show that,
when combined with our novel acquisition mechanism (MFPI-random), the resulting in-context
freeze-thaw BO method (ifBO), yields new stateof-the-art performance in the same three families
of deep learning HPO benchmarks considered in
prior work.

Recent research in HPO has shifted towards multi-fidelity
methods (Li et al., 2017; 2020a; Falkner et al., 2018; Klein
et al., 2020; Li et al., 2020b; Awad et al., 2021), utilizing
lower fidelity proxies (e.g., training for fewer steps, using
less data, smaller models) and only evaluating the most
promising hyperparameter settings at the full fidelity. While
these methods have potential, they often use coarse-grained
fidelity spaces and rely on the rank correlation of performances across fidelities. Moreover, they do not always fully
utilize the anytime nature of algorithms such as checkpointing, continuation, and extrapolation. As a result, these methods struggle to allocate computational resources efficiently,
leading to suboptimal performance in many scenarios.
The freeze-thaw BO method (Section 3.2), originally proposed by Swersky et al. (2014), is a promising approach to
efficiently allocate computational resources by pausing and
resuming the evaluation of different hyperparameter configurations. This method is an improvement over traditional
grey-box methods as it dynamically manages resources, and
recent implementations (Wistuba et al., 2022; Kadra et al.,
2023) hold the state-of-the-art in the low-budget regime (∼
20 full function evaluations). However, these contemporary
implementations have limitations. In particular, they rely on
online learning to update the surrogate model at each step
which can lead high computational overhead, instability, and
complexity in managing additional hyper-hyperparameters.
Moreover, they also suffer from strong assumptions about
learning curves, which may not be applicable in all scenarios, resulting in overly confident incorrect predictions.

*

Equal contribution 1 Machine Learning Lab, University of
Freiburg, Germany 2 ELLIS Institute Tübingen. Correspondence to:
Herilalaina Rakotoarison <rakotoah@cs.uni-freiburg.de>, Steven
Adriaensen <adriaens@cs.uni-freiburg.de>, Neeratyoy Mallik
<mallik@cs.uni-freiburg.de>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

