MVMoE: Multi-Task Vehicle Routing Solver with Mixture-of-Experts

Jianan Zhou 1 Zhiguang Cao 2 Yaoxin Wu 3 Wen Song 4 Yining Ma 1 Jie Zhang 1 Chi Xu 1 5

Abstract

applications in logistics (Cattaruzza et al., 2017), transportation (Wu et al., 2023), and manufacturing (Zhang et al.,
2023). The intrinsic NP-hard nature makes VRPs exponentially expensive to be solved by exact solvers. As an
alternative, heuristic solvers deliver suboptimal solutions
within reasonable time, but need substantial domain expertise to be designed for each problem. Recently, learning
to solve VRPs has received much attention (Bengio et al.,
2021; Bogyrbayeva et al., 2024), with fruitful neural solvers
being developed. Most of them apply deep neural networks
to learn solution construction policies via various training
paradigms (e.g., reinforcement learning (RL)). Besides gaining decent performance, they are characterized by less computational overhead and domain expertise than conventional
solvers. However, prevailing neural solvers still need network structures tailored and trained independently for each
specific VRP, instigating prohibitive training overhead and
less practicality when facing multiple VRPs.

Learning to solve vehicle routing problems
(VRPs) has garnered much attention. However,
most neural solvers are only structured and trained
independently on a specific problem, making
them less generic and practical. In this paper,
we aim to develop a unified neural solver that
can cope with a range of VRP variants simultaneously. Specifically, we propose a multi-task
vehicle routing solver with mixture-of-experts
(MVMoE), which greatly enhances the model
capacity without a proportional increase in computation. We further develop a hierarchical gating mechanism for the MVMoE, delivering a
good trade-off between empirical performance
and computational complexity. Experimentally,
our method significantly promotes zero-shot generalization performance on 10 unseen VRP variants, and showcases decent results on the fewshot setting and real-world benchmark instances.
We further conduct extensive studies on the effect of MoE configurations in solving VRPs,
and observe the superiority of hierarchical gating
when facing out-of-distribution data. The source
code is available at: https://github.com/
RoyalSkye/Routing-MVMoE.

In this paper, we aim to develop a unified neural solver,
which can be trained for solving a range of VRP variants simultaneously, and has decent zero-shot generalization capability on unseen VRPs. A few recent works explore similar
problem settings. Wang & Yu (2023) applies multi-armed
bandits to solve multiple VRPs, while Lin et al. (2024)
adapts the model pretrained on one base VRP to target
VRPs by efficient fine-tuning. They fail to achieve zero-shot
generalization to unseen VRPs due to the dependence on networks structured for predetermined problem variants. Liu
et al. (2024) empowers the neural solver with such generalizability by the compositional zero-shot learning (Ruis et al.,
2021), which treats VRP variants as different combinations
of a set of underlying attributes and uses a shared network
to learn their representations. However, it still leverages existing network structure proposed for simple VRPs, which
is limited by its model capacity and empirical performance.

1. Introduction
Vehicle routing problems (VRPs) are a class of canonical
combinatorial optimization problems (COPs) in operation
research and computer science, with a wide spectrum of
1

College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 2 School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore Management University, Singapore
3
Department of Information Systems, Eindhoven University of
Technology, The Netherlands 4 Institute of Marine Science and
Technology, Shandong University, China 5 Singapore Institute of
Manufacturing Technology (SIMTech), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore. Correspondence to:
Yaoxin Wu <y.wu2@tue.nl>.

Motivated by the recent advance of large language models (LLMs) (Kaplan et al., 2020; Floridi & Chiriatti, 2020;
Touvron et al., 2023), we propose a multi-task VRP solver
with mixture-of-experts (MVMoE). Typically, a mixture-ofexpert (MoE) layer replaces a feed-forward network (FFN)
with several "experts" in a Transformer-based model, which
are a group of FFNs with respective trainable parameters.
An input to the MoE layer is routed to specific expert(s) by
a gating network, and only parameters in selected expert(s)

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

