Position: The Reasonable Person Standard for AI
Sunayana Rane 1 2

Abstract

emulating?

As AI systems are increasingly incorporated into
domains where human behavior has set the norm,
a challenge for AI governance and AI alignment
research is to regulate their behavior in a way
that is useful and constructive for society. One
way to answer this question is to ask: how do
we govern the human behavior that the models
are emulating? To evaluate human behavior, the
American legal system often uses the “Reasonable
Person Standard.” The idea of “reasonable” behavior comes up in nearly every area of law. The
legal system often judges the actions of parties
with respect to what a reasonable person would
have done under similar circumstances. This paper argues that the reasonable person standard
provides useful guidelines for the type of behavior we should develop, probe, and stress-test in
models. It explains how reasonableness is defined
and used in key areas of the law using illustrative
cases, how the reasonable person standard could
apply to AI behavior in each of these areas and
contexts, and how our societal understanding of
“reasonable” behavior provides useful technical
goals for AI researchers.

One way to govern AI behavior (and define what kind of
behavior we ought to optimize for as AI researchers) is to
see what kind of behavior we expect of human counterparts,
and how this behavior is regulated. Currently, AI models
are understood to display behavior that is wildly out of the
scope of normal human behavior (NYTimes, 2021; NPR,
2019). But what if we could expect of a model, at the
very least, exactly what we expect of reasonable human
behavior in the same domain?
The notion of “reasonable” behavior seems fuzzy and as
researchers in a quantitative domain, we may justifiably be
initially skeptical that “reasonable” behavior can be defined,
measured, and optimized for in a model. After all, human
(and model) behavior is known to be unpredictable. However, we have a very good reason to believe that reasonable
behavior can and should be a target for models – the legal
rules constraining human conduct in the United States are
are built heavily on the assumption that we can recognize,
and keep our own conduct within, the bounds of a collective
societal understanding of reasonable behavior. This position paper argues that the reasonable person standard
should be an explicit goal of the AI research community,
and an integral part of truly effective, practical AI safety
measures.
The idea of a collective, societal notion of reasonable behavior among humans has a long, storied foundation in every
aspect of the American legal system. It can help us understand what society at large expects of an AGI’s behavior, and
how we can build those expectations into current models.
Importantly, intelligent behavior and reasonable behavior
are measured along two different axes in humans, and you
can have people who exhibit one but not the other. Ideally,
we want both. As most recent AI research has focused on
creating increasingly intelligent behavior, our metrics overly
focus on this. Instead, it is arguably not just the number of
mistakes made but the type of mistake that is important to
study and shape. Was it a “reasonable” mistake? Would a
human be able to understand, work around, and mitigate the
damage of such a mistake?

1. Introduction
AI governance and AI alignment research (Christian, 2020)
share the common goal of working towards safer, more
reliable, and continually innovative AI. In recent years,
breakthroughs in foundation models (Radford et al., 2021;
Ramesh et al., 2021; Saharia et al., 2022; OpenAI, 2022)
have surprised us by revealing capabilities hitherto thought
of as only human. While these models have a long way to
go, their increasing prevalence in human domains begs the
question: how do we govern the human behavior they are
1
Department of Computer Science, Princeton University,
Princeton, NJ, USA 2 University of Chicago Law School,
Chicago, IL, USA. Correspondence to: Sunayana Rane
<srane@princeton.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

