Open Ad Hoc Teamwork with Cooperative Game Theory

Jianhong Wang 1 Yang Li 1 Yuan Zhang 2 Wei Pan 1 Samuel Kaski 1 3

Abstract

agents are controllable and even prior coordination may not
be possible. For example, in search and rescue, a robot
must collaborate with other robots it has not seen before
(e.g., manufactured by various companies without a common coordination protocol) or humans to rescue survivors
(Barrett & Stone, 2015). Similar situations occur in AI that
helps trading markets (Albrecht & Ramamoorthy, 2013),
as well as in the human-machine and machine-machine
collaboration emerging from the prevailing embodied AI
settings (Smith & Gasser, 2005; Duan et al., 2022) and large
language models (Brown et al., 2020; Zhao et al., 2023).

Ad hoc teamwork poses a challenging problem, requiring the design of an agent to collaborate with
teammates without prior coordination or joint
training. Open ad hoc teamwork (OAHT) further
complicates this challenge by considering environments with a changing number of teammates,
referred to as open teams. One promising solution
in practice to this problem is leveraging the generalizability of graph neural networks to handle an
unrestricted number of agents with various agenttypes, named graph-based policy learning (GPL).
However, its joint Q-value representation over a
coordination graph lacks convincing explanations.
In this paper, we establish a new theory to understand the representation of the joint Q-value for
OAHT and its learning paradigm, through the lens
of cooperative game theory. Building on our theory, we propose a novel algorithm named CIAO,
based on GPL’s framework, with additional provable implementation tricks that can facilitate
learning. The demos of experimental results
are available on https://sites.google.
com/view/ciao2024, and the code of experiments is published on https://github.
com/hsvgbkhgbv/CIAO.

To tackle the ad hoc teamwork problem, we explore a scenario where one agent, referred to as the learner, operates
under our control and seeks to collaborate without prior
coordination with teammates which have unknown types
and policies (Stone et al., 2010). When dealing with teams
of dynamic sizes, commonly termed open teams, the research problem addressed in this paper is often referred to as
open ad hoc teamwork (OAHT) (Mirsky et al., 2022). One
promising solution for OAHT in practice is graph-based policy learning (GPL) (Rahman et al., 2021). GPL presents a
three-fold framework, encompassing a type inference model,
a joint action value model and an agent model. Although
GPL reaps the success of performance due to the generalizability of graph neural networks to handle an unrestricted
number of agents with various agent-types, its weakness is
that the representation of the joint Q-value over a coordination graph lacks convincing explanations. This restricts its
applicability to real-world problems requiring trustworthy
algorithms (Bhat & Alqahtani, 2021; Wang et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has achieved
partial success on multiple tasks including playing strategy
games (Rashid et al., 2020), power system operation (Wang
et al., 2021), and dynamic algorithm configuration (Xue
et al., 2022). These tasks fit to the training paradigm of
MARL, which requires all agents to be controllable and to
be coordinated during training. However, with this paradigm
it is difficult to tackle many real-world tasks where not all

We propose to describe OAHT using a game model from cooperative game theory, namely the coalitional affinity game
(CAG) (Brânzei & Larson, 2009). Specifically, we extend
the CAG by incorporating Bayesian games (Harsanyi, 1967)
to depict uncertain agent-types and stochastic games (Shapley, 1953) to represent the long-horizon goal. The resulting
game is termed the open stochastic Bayesian coalitional
affinity game (OSB-CAG). In this game, the learner aims
to influence other teammates (via its actions) to collaborate
in achieving a shared goal. To formalize this, we extend the
standard cooperative game theory notion of strict core to a
novel solution concept which we call dynamic variational
strict core (DVSC). The DVSC transforms collaboration in
a temporary team into the task of forming a stable temporary

1
Center for AI Fundamentals, University of Manchester, UK
Neurorobotics Lab, University of Freiburg, Germany 3 Aalto
University, Finland. Correspondence to: Jianhong Wang <jianhong.wang@manchester.ac.uk>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

