Exploring the LLM Journey from Cognition to Expression with Linear
Representations

Yuzi Yan 1 2 Jialian Li 1 Yipin Zhang 1 Dong Yan 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) are profoundly transforming the way we work and live. To train these models, computational power worth billions is used daily in the three-phase
paradigm of Pretraining, Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT), and
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF).
However, the specific roles of these three stages are only
broadly understood: Pretraining primarily encodes knowledge, SFT aligns question-answer formats, and RLHF refines outputs via human feedback (Achiam et al., 2023).
Evidently, this understanding is on the level of behavioral
patterns and does not aid in comprehending LLMs from a
capability perspective, nor does it guide us on how to refine the training process to enhance and control the model’s
proficiency in various tasks.

This paper presents an in-depth examination of
the evolution and interplay of cognitive and expressive capabilities in large language models
(LLMs), with a specific focus on Baichuan-7B
and Baichuan-33B, an advanced bilingual (Chinese and English) LLM series. We define and
explore the model’s cognitive and expressive capabilities through linear representations across
three critical phases: Pretraining, Supervised FineTuning (SFT), and Reinforcement Learning from
Human Feedback (RLHF). Cognitive capability
is defined as the quantity and quality of information conveyed by the neuron output vectors within
the network, similar to the neural signal processing in human cognition. Expressive capability is
defined as the model’s capability to produce wordlevel output. Our findings unveil a sequential development pattern, where cognitive abilities are
largely established during Pretraining, whereas
expressive abilities predominantly advance during SFT and RLHF. Statistical analyses confirm a
significant correlation between the two capabilities, suggesting that cognitive capacity may limit
expressive potential. The paper also explores the
theoretical underpinnings of these divergent developmental trajectories and their connection to the
LLMs’ architectural design. Moreover, we evaluate various optimization-independent strategies,
such as few-shot learning and repeated sampling,
which bridge the gap between cognitive and expressive capabilities. This research reveals the
potential connection between the hidden space
and the output space, contributing valuable insights into the interpretability and controllability
of their training processes.

To analyze the three-phase training paradigm from a capability perspective, researchers have introduced the concept
of Alignment Tax to articulate the discrepancy between
the model’s inherent capabilities and its outward performance (Lightman et al., 2023; Ouyang et al., 2022; Askell
et al., 2021). Beside the training paradigm, prompt engineering also significantly influences the performance exhibited
by the model. These pieces of evidence point towards a
hypothesis that sometimes LLMs internally comprehend
and encode the answer to a question in the internal representations but struggles to output it effectively.
Prior research in interpretability has culminated in considerable breakthroughs, aiding in demystifying the internal
processes of LLMs. In Zou et al. (2023), the authors propose
representation engineering (RepE) as an advanced method to
improve AI transparency. Meanwhile, in Park et al. (2023),
the study suggests the possibility of a linear space structure
within neuron-level representations. Additionally, probingbased explanation techniques offer novel insights into the
abstract abilities of LLMs, as explored in Zhao et al. (2023).
In this paper, we define and quantify the cognitive capability and the expressive capability of a LLM and explore
the establishment process of them. The cognitive capability is defined by the quantity and quality of information
conveyed by the neuron output vectors within the network,
similar to the neural signal processing in human cognition.

1 Baichuan AI 2 Tsinghua University. Correspondence to: Dong
Yan <sproblvem@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

