Learning Multiple Secrets in Mastermind

Milind Prabhu * 1 David Woodruff * 2

Abstract

to learn the pattern while making as few guesses as possible.
The work of (Knuth, 1977) showed that the original Mastermind game has an optimal strategy that uses 5 queries in the
worst case. The obvious generalization of the Mastermind
game to n pegs and k colors was studied in (Chvátal, 1983)
which gave an optimal strategy up to constant factors when
k ≤ n1−ε for any fixed constant ε > 0 and n arbitrarily
large. Better strategies for the regime when k ≥ n were
proposed in (Chen et al., 1996) and subsequently improved
in (Goodrich, 2009).

In the Generalized Mastermind problem, there is
an unknown subset H of the hypercube {0, 1}d
containing n points. The goal is to learn H by
making a few queries to an oracle which given a
point q in {0, 1}d , returns the point in H nearest
to q. We give a two-round adaptive algorithm
for this problem
√ that learns H while making at
most exp( e
O( d log n)) queries. Furthermore,
we show that any r-round adaptive randomized
algorithm that learns H with constant probability
−(r−1)
must make exp(Ω(d3
)) queries even when
the input has poly(d) points; thus, any poly(d)
query algorithm must necessarily use Ω(log log d)
rounds of adaptivity. We give optimal query complexity bounds for the variant of the problem
where queries are allowed to be from {0, 1, 2}d .
We also study a continuous variant of the problem in which H is a subset of unit vectors in Rd ,
and one can query unit vectors in Rd . For this
setting, we give an O(n⌊d/2⌋ ) query deterministic
algorithm to learn the hidden set of points.

In this paper, we study variants of the Mastermind problem
in which the codemaker chooses not one hidden point but a
set H of n hidden points. The codebreaker operates under
a certain query model and has to learn all the points in H
while minimizing the number of queries they make. Specifically, we consider three variants of this problem, each of
which is defined by the space from which H is chosen and
the query model under which the codebreaker operates. In
the first variant, we consider the setting of the problem when
the hidden points and queries lie in the hypercube.
Problem 1. The hidden set H is a subset of {0, 1}d
of size n. The codebreaker queries q ∈ {0, 1}d and
learns argminx∈H dist(x, q), i.e., the point in H with
the least Hamming distance to q.

1. Introduction
Mastermind is a classic codebreaking board game that originated in 1970 and over the past few decades has inspired
several lines of research in theoretical computer science.
The game is played by two players one of whom is a codemaker who chooses a secret sequence of four code pegs
each of which has one of six colors; the second player is
the codebreaker who wishes to determine the sequence by
guessing various four peg patterns. For each pattern the
codebreaker guesses, they learn the number of pegs in their
guess that are of the correct color and appear in the correct
position, as well as the number of pegs that are of the correct
color but are in the wrong position. The codebreaker wishes
*

Next, we consider a continuous variant of the problem.
Problem 2. The hidden set H is an n point subset
of S d−1 , the unit sphere in d dimensions. In each
query, the codebreaker picks q ∈ S d−1 and learns
argminx∈H ∥x − q∥2 , i.e., the point in H that has the
least Euclidean distance to q.
We also study the hypercube version of the problem with a
stronger query model.
Problem 3. The hidden set H is a subset of {0, 1}d
of size n. The codebreaker queries q ∈ {0, 1, 2}d and
learns minx∈H dist(x, q), i.e., the Hamming distance
of q to the point in H nearest to it.

1

Equal contribution Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, University of Michigan 2 Department of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence
to: Milind Prabhu <milindpr@umich.edu>, David Woodruff
<dwoodruf@cs.cmu.edu>.

One motivation for the study of such a query model with
extra characters is the work of (Hu et al., 2022). They
study the problem in which a secret binary string in {0, 1}d
has to be recovered via access to distance oracles for non-

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

