Efficient Precision and Recall Metrics for Assessing Generative Models
using Hubness-aware Sampling

Yuanbang Liang 1 Jing Wu 1 Yu-Kun Lai 1 Yipeng Qin 1

Abstract

model leveraged LAION-400M’s 400 million text-image
pairs (Rombach et al., 2022a). Stable Diffusion pushed this
even further, training its models on LAION-5B’s 5 billion
pairs (Schuhmann et al., 2022). Despite their impressive results, the massive scale of datasets used to train modern deep
generative models presents challenges for evaluation. As
dataset size increases, some of the most effective evaluation
metrics (Salimans et al., 2016; Heusel et al., 2017; Sajjadi
et al., 2018; Simon et al., 2019; Kynkäänniemi et al., 2019),
which compare generated and real image distributions, may
become computationally infeasible for commodity GPUs
and ordinary research institutions. To continue advancing
the state of the art (SOTA), developing more efficient evaluation metrics becomes critical.

Despite impressive results, deep generative models require massive datasets for training. As
dataset size increases, effective evaluation metrics
like precision and recall (P&R) become computationally infeasible on commodity hardware. In
this paper, we address this challenge by proposing efficient P&R (eP&R) metrics that give almost identical results as the original P&R but
with much lower computational costs. Specifically, we identify two redundancies in the original
P&R: i) redundancy in ratio computation and ii)
redundancy in manifold inside/outside identification. We find both can be effectively removed
via hubness-aware sampling, which extracts representative elements from synthetic/real image
samples based on their hubness values, i.e., the
number of times a sample becomes a k-nearest
neighbor to others in the feature space. Thanks
to the insensitivity of hubness-aware sampling
to exact k-nearest neighbor (k-NN) results, we
further improve the efficiency of our eP&R metrics by using approximate k-NN methods. Extensive experiments show that our eP&R matches
the original P&R but is far more efficient in time
and space. Our code is available at: https://github.
com/Byronliang8/Hubness Precision Recall

Among the most effective evaluation metrics, Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) (Heusel et al., 2017) and Inception
Score (IS) (Salimans et al., 2016) are relatively computationally efficient. Let n be the number of samples, they have
linear time and space complexity of O(n), as they rely on
simple statistics of extracted features. Specifically, the feature extraction takes O(n) time and space while the statistics
(e.g., mean) computation also takes linear time O(n) for a
given feature extractor like Inception v3 (Szegedy et al.,
2015) with fixed feature dimensions. However, both FID
and IS are single scores that cannot distinguish between
different failure modes. Addressing this issue, the precision and recall (P&R) metrics (Sajjadi et al., 2018; Simon
et al., 2019; Kynkäänniemi et al., 2019) were employed.
Intuitively, precision measures the quality of synthesized
images while recall measures their diversity. Although effective, the SOTA version of P&R (Kynkäänniemi et al.,
2019) requires costly pairwise distance calculations (e.g., in
k-nearest neighbor algorithm) between extracted features of
samples and sorting, consuming O(n2 logn) time and space,
thus becoming computationally infeasible when evaluating
deep generative models trained on large-scale datasets.

1. Introduction
Deep generative models have achieved great success by combining deep learning with generative modeling. However,
they have also inherited the data-hungry nature of deep learning, requiring massive datasets for training. For instance,
the FFHQ dataset used to train StyleGAN contains 70 thousand images (Karras et al., 2019), while the Latent Diffusion

In this work, we address the high computational costs of precision and recall (P&R) metrics with a novel solution based
on hubness-aware sampling. Specifically, we have identified two important types of redundancies in the computation
of P&R: i) redundancy in the P&R ratio computation and
ii) redundancy in identifying whether a sample is within or

1

School of Computer Science and Informatics, Cardiff University, Cardiff, CF24 4AG, UK. Correspondence to: Yipeng Qin
<qiny16@cardiff.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

