Why Larger Language Models Do In-context Learning Differently?

Zhenmei Shi 1 Junyi Wei 1 Zhuoyan Xu 1 Yingyu Liang 1 2

Abstract

before evaluating some new input. More specifically, ICL is
a few-shot (Brown et al., 2020) evaluation method without
updating parameters in LLM. Surprisingly, people find that,
through ICL, LLM can perform well on tasks that have never
been seen before, even without any finetuning. It means
LLM can adapt to wide-ranging downstream tasks under
efficient sample and computation complexity. The mechanism of ICL is different from traditional machine learning,
such as supervised learning and unsupervised learning. For
example, in neural networks, learning usually occurs in gradient updates, whereas there is only a forward inference
in ICL and no gradient updates. Several recent works, trying to answer why LLM can learn in-context, argue that
LLM secretly performs or simulates gradient descent as
meta-optimizers with just a forward pass during ICL empirically (Dai et al., 2022; Von Oswald et al., 2023; Malladi
et al., 2023) and theoretically (Zhang et al., 2023b; Ahn
et al., 2023; Mahankali et al., 2023; Cheng et al., 2023; Bai
et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023b; Guo et al.,
2024; Wu et al., 2024). Although some insights have been
obtained, the mechanism of ICL deserves further research
to gain a better understanding.

Large language models (LLM) have emerged as
a powerful tool for AI, with the key ability of incontext learning (ICL), where they can perform
well on unseen tasks based on a brief series of task
examples without necessitating any adjustments
to the model parameters. One recent interesting
mysterious observation is that models of different
scales may have different ICL behaviors: larger
models tend to be more sensitive to noise in the
test context. This work studies this observation
theoretically aiming to improve the understanding
of LLM and ICL. We analyze two stylized settings: (1) linear regression with one-layer singlehead linear transformers and (2) parity classification with two-layer multiple attention heads transformers (non-linear data and non-linear model).
In both settings, we give closed-form optimal solutions and find that smaller models emphasize
important hidden features while larger ones cover
more hidden features; thus, smaller models are
more robust to noise while larger ones are more
easily distracted, leading to different ICL behaviors. This sheds light on where transformers pay
attention to and how that affects ICL. Preliminary experimental results on large base and chat
models provide positive support for our analysis.

Recently, there have been some important and surprising
observations (Min et al., 2022; Pan et al., 2023; Wei et al.,
2023b; Shi et al., 2023a) that cannot be fully explained by
existing studies. In particular, Shi et al. (2023a) finds that
LLM is not robust during ICL and can be easily distracted
by an irrelevant context. Furthermore, Wei et al. (2023b)
shows that when we inject noise into the prompts, the larger
language models may have a worse ICL ability than the
small language models, and conjectures that the larger language models may overfit into the prompts and forget the
prior knowledge from pretraining, while small models tend
to follow the prior knowledge. On the other hand, Min et al.
(2022); Pan et al. (2023) demonstrate that injecting noise
does not affect the in-context learning that much for smaller
models, which have a more strong pretraining knowledge
bias. To improve the understanding of the ICL mechanism,
to shed light on the properties and inner workings of LLMs,
and to inspire efficient and safe use of ICL, we are interested
in the following question:

1. Introduction
As large language models (LLM), e.g., ChatGPT (OpenAI,
2022) and GPT4 (OpenAI, 2023), are transforming AI development with potentially profound impact on our societies,
it is critical to understand their mechanism for safe and
efficient deployment. An important emergent ability (Wei
et al., 2022b; An et al., 2023), which makes LLM successful, is in-context learning (ICL), where models are given
a few exemplars of input–label pairs as part of the prompt
1

University of Wisconsin-Madison, 2 The University of Hong
Kong. Correspondence to: Zhenmei Shi, Yingyu Liang <zhmeishi,
yliang@cs.wisc.edu, yingyul@hku.hk>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Why do larger language models do in-context learning
differently?
1

