Subgoal-based Demonstration Learning for Formal Theorem Proving

Xueliang Zhao 1 Wenda Li 2 Lingpeng Kong 1

Abstract

In this context, we pay particular attention to the problem
of formal theorem proving (Polu & Sutskever, 2020). Not
only due to its extensive applications in various scientific
domains, such as software verification (Klein et al., 2009)
and research-level mathematics (Castelvecchi et al., 2021),
but also stems from its advantage of leveraging interactive
proof assistants (Paulson, 2000) to automatically validate
proofs generated by models, thereby eliminating the need
for human proof checking. This significantly facilitates the
generation of machine-verifiable proofs via LLMs.

Large language models (LLMs) present a promising pathway for advancing the domain of formal
theorem proving. In this paper, we aim to improve
the performance of LLMs in formal theorem proving by thoroughly examining the structure and
organization of demonstrative in-context examples. We introduce a subgoal-based demonstration learning framework, specifically designed to
enhance the efficiency of proof search in LLMs.
First, drawing upon the insights of subgoal learning from reinforcement learning and robotics, we
propose the construction of distinct subgoals for
each demonstration example and refine these subgoals in accordance with the pertinent theories of
subgoal learning. Second, we build upon recent
advances in diffusion models to predict the optimal organization, simultaneously addressing two
intricate issues that persist within the domain of
demonstration organization: subset selection and
order determination. Our integration of subgoalbased learning has notably increased proof accuracy from 38.9% to 44.1% on the miniF2F benchmark. Furthermore, the adoption of diffusion
models for demonstration organization can lead to
an additional enhancement in accuracy to 45.5%,
or a 5× improvement in sampling efficiency compared to previously established methods.

The complexity of automated theorem proving comes from
the necessity of searching through a vast space of possible
logical statements and proof methods, to determine the truthvalue of a given theorem. LLMs reduce the difficulty of the
searching problem by factorizing the formal proof automation task into two in-context learning (§5.2) problems (Wu
et al., 2022a; Jiang et al., 2023; First et al., 2023). Given a
mathematical statement, an LLM first generates its informal
proof as a draft. It then generates a formal sketch based
on this draft, which is ready for an off-the-shelf prover to
verify its correctness automatically.1 In both of these steps,
the quality of the demonstrative in-context examples either
written by humans or generated by machines is the key to
the performance of the system.
In this paper, we seek to improve the efficacy of LLMs in
formal theorem proving by delving deeper into the format
and the organization of these demonstrative in-context examples. We present a subgoal-based demonstration learning
framework, comprising two main components. First, we
restructure an informal proof into a subgoal-based proof
(Figure 1(a)), drawing upon the insights of subgoal learning
from reinforcement learning and robotics, where studies
show that breaking down complex tasks into smaller yet
more uniformed subgoals enhances the learning efficiency
of the agents (Eysenbach et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2021).
To construct subgoal-based proofs that can be easily processed and handled by LLMs, we start with human-written
informal proofs and then iteratively refine them through
interaction with ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2022), guided by the
subgoal learning theory (§2.1). Second, a recent study (Wu
et al., 2022b) points out that the selection and the ordering of

1. Introduction
With the ongoing investigation into the complex reasoning
abilities of large language models (LLMs), there has been
a surge of interest in employing them for mathematical
problem solving. This has led to an expanding body of
research that underscores the remarkable potential of LLMs
in this domain (Lewkowycz et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2022a;
Jiang et al., 2023).
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 University of Edinburgh. Correspondence to: Xueliang Zhao <xlzhao22@connect.hku.hk>.

1

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

In practice, the informal proof often serves as inline comments
in the formal sketch to better guide the generation procedure.

1

