Reflected Flow Matching

Tianyu Xie∗ 1 Yu Zhu∗ 2 3 Longlin Yu∗ 1 Tong Yang 4 5 Ziheng Cheng 1
Shiyue Zhang 1 Xiangyu Zhang 5 Cheng Zhang 1 6

Abstract

image synthesis (Arjovsky et al., 2017; Ho et al., 2020;
Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Song et al., 2023), text generation (Devlin et al., 2018; Brown et al., 2020; Zhang et al.,
2022), and molecular design (Jin et al., 2018; Xu et al.,
2021; Hoogeboom et al., 2022). While the recent advances
in this domain are mostly driven by diffusion models (Ho
et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020b), a powerful alternative is
flow-based model (Rezende & Mohamed, 2015), which
works by learning a flow, i.e., a function that transforms
samples from a simple prior distribution into samples distributed similarly to the target data distribution. Flows can
also be implicitly defined via ordinary differential equations
(ODEs), which lead to a general framework called continuous normalizing flows (CNFs) (Chen et al., 2018). Despite
their flexibility, classical maximum likelihood training of
CNFs can be inefficient as it requires expensive numerical
ODE simulations.

Continuous normalizing flows (CNFs) learn an
ordinary differential equation to transform prior
samples into data. Flow matching (FM) has recently emerged as a simulation-free approach for
training CNFs by regressing a velocity model towards the conditional velocity field. However, on
constrained domains, the learned velocity model
may lead to undesirable flows that result in highly
unnatural samples, e.g., oversaturated images, due
to both flow matching error and simulation error.
To address this, we add a boundary constraint term
to CNFs, which leads to reflected CNFs that keep
trajectories within the constrained domains. We
propose reflected flow matching (RFM) to train
the velocity model in reflected CNFs by matching
the conditional velocity fields in a simulation-free
manner, similar to the vanilla FM. Moreover, the
analytical form of conditional velocity fields in
RFM avoids potentially biased approximations,
making it superior to existing score-based generative models on constrained domains. We demonstrate that RFM achieves comparable or better
results on standard image benchmarks and produces high-quality class-conditioned samples under high guidance weight.

Alternatively, flow matching (FM) (Lipman et al., 2023)
presents an efficient and scalable training method for CNFs
by regressing a learnable velocity model to the target velocity field (i.e., the drift term in ODE) that generates the
data distribution. Inspired by denoising score matching
(DSM) (Vincent, 2011), FM decomposes the intractable target velocity field into a mixture of analytical conditional
velocity fields, leading to a regression objective that is computationally stable and simulation-free. A typical example
of conditional velocity fields is the optimal transport (OT)
conditional velocity field, which has a constant speed along
the straight line from a prior sample to a data point (i.e., its
condition). FM has also been extended to equivariance modeling (Klein et al., 2023), Bayesian inference (Wildberger
et al., 2023), and dynamic optimal transport (Tong et al.,
2023), etc.

1. Introduction
Deep generative models, which are deep learning models designed to generate new data samples that resemble a given
data set, find applications in various domains including
*

Equal contribution. This work was done during an internship
at Megvii Technology Inc. 1 School of Mathematical Sciences,
Peking University, Beijing, China 2 Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 3 Beijing Academy
of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing, China 4 School of Computer
Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China 5 Megvii Technology Inc., Beijing, China 6 Center for Statistical Science, Peking
University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Cheng Zhang
<chengzhang@math.pku.edu.cn>.

Despite the superiority of FM, the learned velocity model
may cause unreasonable flows, due to both the inherent flow
matching error (i.e., the difference between the learned velocity model and the true velocity field) and compounded
simulation error (i.e., the error introduced by discretizing
the ODE during sampling), which can generate highly unnatural samples, especially for complex data distributions
on constrained domains. For example, an RGB image is
constrained to a domain [0, 255]d (d is the number of digits), and a boundary violation may result in collapsed and

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

