Offline Multi-Objective Optimization

Ke Xue * 1 2 Rong-Xi Tan * 1 2 Xiaobin Huang 1 2 Chao Qian 1 2

Abstract

such as real-world engineering design (Tanabe & Ishibuchi,
2020), protein design (Khan et al., 2023), and molecule
design (Stanton et al., 2022). Many methods generate new
designs by iteratively querying an unknown objective function that maps a design to its property score. However, in
real-world situations, evaluating the objective function can
be time-consuming, costly, or even dangerous (Dara et al.,
2022). To optimize for the next candidate design based
on accumulated data, a rational approach prefers to build
a model, use it to guide the search, and select a suitable
candidate for the evaluation. This approach is known as
offline model-based optimization (Trabucco et al., 2022).

Offline optimization aims to maximize a blackbox objective function with a static dataset and
has wide applications. In addition to the objective function being black-box and expensive to
evaluate, numerous complex real-world problems
entail optimizing multiple conflicting objectives,
i.e., multi-objective optimization (MOO). Nevertheless, offline MOO has not progressed as much
as offline single-objective optimization (SOO),
mainly due to the lack of benchmarks like DesignBench for SOO. To bridge this gap, we propose
a first benchmark for offline MOO, covering a
range of problems from synthetic to real-world
tasks. This benchmark provides tasks, datasets,
and open-source examples, which can serve as a
foundation for method comparisons and advancements in offline MOO. Furthermore, we analyze
how the current related methods can be adapted
to offline MOO from four fundamental perspectives, including data, model architecture, learning algorithm, and search algorithm. Empirical
results show improvements over the best value
of the training set, demonstrating the effectiveness of offline MOO methods. As no particular
method stands out significantly, there is still an
open challenge in further enhancing the effectiveness of offline MOO. We finally discuss future
challenges for offline MOO, with the hope of
shedding some light on this emerging field. Our
code is available at https://github.com/
lamda-bbo/offline-moo.

Offline model-based optimization solely permits access to
an offline dataset and does not permit iterative online evaluation (i.e., only one batch of real evaluations), which presents
notable challenges in comparison to more commonly studied online optimization. A common approach is to train a
deep neural network (DNN) model fθ (·) on a static dataset
and use the trained DNN as a proxy (also known as a surrogate model). The DNN proxy enables gradient descent on
existing designs, which can result in an improved solution
that is even better than the previously seen best one sometimes. However, this approach has a drawback: the trained
proxy is prone to out-of-distribution problems, i.e., it makes
inaccurate predictions when applied to data points that deviate significantly from the training distribution. Besides, in
some cases, the learned proxy has a non-smooth landscape,
posing challenges to optimize in it. Many recent studies
try to address these issues from different perspectives, e.g.,
COMs (Trabucco et al., 2021) uses adversarial training to
create a smooth proxy; RoMA (Yu et al., 2021) employs a
local smoothness prior to alleviate the fragility of the proxy
and achieves robust estimation by model adaptation; TriMentoring (Chen et al., 2023a) effectively utilizes weak
ranking supervision signals among proxies and achieves
a robust ensemble of proxies by an adaptive soft-labeling
module; just to name a few.

1. Introduction
Creating new designs to optimize specific properties is
a widespread challenge, encompassing various domains

In addition to the objective function being black-box and
the evaluations being costly, numerous complex real-world
problems entail optimizing multiple objectives, frequently
with conflicting requirements, which can be formulated as
multi-objective optimization (MOO) problems (Miettinen,
1998; Ehrgott, 2005). The goal of MOO is to find a set
of solutions that represent the optimal trade-offs among

*

Equal contribution 1 National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China 2 School of Artificial
Intelligence, Nanjing University, China. Correspondence to: Chao
Qian <qianc@nju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

