Transformers Implement Functional Gradient Descent
to Learn Non-Linear Functions In Context
Xiang Cheng 1 Yuxin Chen 2 Suvrit Sra 3

Abstract

parameter configuration under which the Transformer implements gradient descent. Subsequently, (Ahn et al., 2023;
Zhang et al., 2023; Mahankali et al., 2023) verified the local
and global optimality of similar parameter configurations,
and Zhang et al. (2023) also showed convergence to this
parameter configuration when training the Transformer with
gradient descent.

Many neural network architectures are known
to be Turing Complete, and can thus, in principle implement arbitrary algorithms. However,
Transformers are unique in that they can implement gradient-based learning algorithms under
simple parameter configurations. This paper provides theoretical and empirical evidence that (nonlinear) Transformers naturally learn to implement
gradient descent in function space, which in turn
enable them to learn non-linear functions in context. Our results apply to a broad class of combinations of non-linear architectures and non-linear
in-context learning tasks. Additionally, we show
that the optimal choice of non-linear activation
depends in a natural way on the class of functions
that need to be learned.

The above works provide a convincing explanation of how
linear Transformers learn linear functions in context; their
theoretical conclusions are also well supported by experiments (von Oswald et al., 2023a; Ahn et al., 2023). An
important aspect of this setting is that linear Transformers
are very well suited to learning linear functions—by simply
setting the Query and Key matrices to the identity matrix, a
single linear attention can implement one step of gradient
descent for the least squares loss.
But in real Transformers, emphnon-linear activations such
as softmax are very important; moreover, the training data
are more likely generated by complicated non-linear functions. It is unclear whether there exists a similarly elegant
construction for non-linear Transformers that explains how
they could learn non-linear functions in context. These
observations raise two central motivating questions:

1. Introduction
Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) have been observed to
produce the correct output based on contextual demonstrations provided in the prompt alone, a phenomenon commonly known as in-context learning (ICL) (Brown et al.,
2020). Understanding ICL and its underlying mechanism
may hold the key to explaining the success of the Transformer architecture, and has thus attracted great attention.

(Q1) What learning algorithms are implemented by
Transformers with non-linear activations?
(Q2) Can Transformers learn non-linear functions
of data in context?

A promising conjecture is that Transformers learn in-context
by implementing algorithms in their forward pass (Akyürek
et al., 2022; von Oswald et al., 2023a; Ahn et al., 2023;
Zhang et al., 2023; Mahankali et al., 2023; von Oswald
et al., 2023b; Lin et al., 2023; Bai et al., 2023). A subset
of this work focuses on ICL for linear functions using linear Transformers (i.e., the attention module contains no
nonlinear activations). In this setting, there exists a simple

This paper aims to answer both questions, so as to shed light
on the inner workings of Transformers, and in turn explain
why Transformers are such powerful learners.
More specifically, we simultaneously consider both nonlinear architectures—Attention modules with arbitrary nonlinear activations h̃ (e.g., softmax or ReLU) and non-linear
data—where labels are sampled from a non-linear process
(e.g., a Gaussian Process, or certain more general processes,
to be clarified later) conditioned on the covariates. Surprisingly, we show that the answers to questions (Q1) and (Q2)
are deeply intertwined: there exists a simple parameter configuration that makes Transformers implement gradient

1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2 University of California, Davis 3 Technical University of Munich. Correspondence to:
Xiang Cheng <x.cheng@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

