Prismatic VLMs: Investigating the Design Space of
Visually-Conditioned Language Models

Siddharth Karamcheti 1 2 Suraj Nair 2 Ashwin Balakrishna 2 Percy Liang 1 Thomas Kollar 2 † Dorsa Sadigh 1 †
¡ github.com/TRI-ML/vlm-evaluation

§ github.com/TRI-ML/prismatic-vlms

Abstract
Visually-conditioned language models (VLMs)
have seen growing adoption in applications such
as visual dialogue, scene understanding, and
robotic task planning; adoption that has fueled
a wealth of new models such as LLaVa, InstructBLIP, and PaLI-3. Despite the volume of new releases, key design decisions around image preprocessing, architecture, and optimization are underexplored, making it challenging to understand
what factors account for model performance – a
challenge further complicated by the lack of objective, consistent evaluations. To address these gaps,
we first compile a suite of standardized evaluations spanning visual question answering, object
localization, and challenge sets that probe properties such as hallucination; evaluations that provide
fine-grained insight VLM capabilities. Second,
we rigorously investigate VLMs along key design
axes, including pretrained visual representations
and training from base vs. instruct-tuned language
models, amongst others. We couple our analysis
with three resource contributions: (1) a unified
framework for evaluating VLMs, (2) optimized,
flexible training code, and (3) checkpoints for all
models, including a family of VLMs at the 7-13B
scale that strictly outperform InstructBLIP and
LLaVa v1.5, the state-of-the-art in open VLMs.

Figure 1. Prismatic VLMs.* Through rigorous experiments exploring the design space of visually-conditioned language models
(VLMs), we identify insights that improve training. When controlling for data and scale, our models (orange) outperform the
state-of-the-art LLaVa v1.5 (gray; Liu et al., 2023b) across 12
diverse tasks, while saving more than 30% the training compute.

Visually-conditioned language models (VLMs) generate natural language responses from image input and text prompts,
providing a general, expressive interface for a growing spectrum of applications – grounded chat (Li et al., 2023c; Gong
et al., 2023), visual programming (Sur’is et al., 2023; Subramanian et al., 2023), robotic control (Driess et al., 2023;
Brohan et al., 2023), etc. This broad adoption is fueled
by a recent paradigm shift in how we develop VLMs; eschewing the complex architectures and training objectives

1. Introduction
If you have built castles in the air, your work need not be lost; that
is where they should be. Now put the foundations under them.
— H ENRY DAVID T HOREAU
†
Equal Advising 1 Department of Computer Science, Stanford
University, Stanford, CA, USA 2 Toyota Research Institute, Los
Altos, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Siddharth Karamcheti
<skaramcheti@cs.stanford.edu>.

* Prismatic (adj) – relating to or having the form of a prism.
Like a geometric prism, our VLMs share a common structure, but
are characterized by different “faces” – the individual design axes
we explore in this work.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

