Diffuse, Sample, Project: Plug-And-Play Controllable Graph Generation

Kartik Sharma 1 Srijan Kumar 1 Rakshit S Trivedi 2

Abstract

Original (unconditional)

Diffusion models lend transformative capabilities
to the graph generation task, yet controlling the
properties of the generated graphs remains challenging. Recent approaches augment support for
controlling soft, differentiable properties but they
fail to handle user-specified hard constraints that
are non-differentiable. This often results in vague
control, unsuitable for applications like drug discovery that demand satisfaction of precise constraints, e.g., the maximum number of bonds. To
address this, we formalize the problem of controlled graph generation and introduce PRODIGY
(PROjected DIffusion for controlled Graph Generation), an innovative plug-and-play approach
enabling the generation of graphs with precise
control, from any pre-trained diffusion model.
PRODIGY employs a novel operator to project the
samples at each diffusion step onto the specified
constrained space. For a large class of practical
constraints and a variety of graphs, our extensive
experiments demonstrate that PRODIGY empowers state-of-the-art continuous and discrete diffusion models to produce graphs meeting specific,
hard constraints. Our approach achieves up to
100% constraint satisfaction for non-attributed
and molecular graphs, under a variety of constraints, marking a significant step forward in
precise, interpretable graph generation. Code
is provided on the project webpage: https:
//prodigy-diffusion.github.io.

≥ 1 N atoms

Diffusion
Model

≤ 12 bonds

≥ 1 N atoms
≤ 12 bonds
No control on the generation at test time

I want a molecule with

Conditional

≥ 1 N atoms
p (y | G)

≤ 12 bonds
≥ 1 N atoms
≤ 12 bonds

Non- differentiable control

Diffusion
Model

p (G | y)

Requires retraining

Cannot handle user-defined hard constraints

Drug

PRODIGY (ours)

Designer

Pre-trained
≥ 1 N atoms

Diffusion
Model

≤ 12 bonds
Constraint C

Projection
Operation

≥ 1 N atoms
≤ 12 bonds

Enables hard user-defined constraints on the generation

Figure 1. Comparison of the existing methods (unconditional and
conditional) with PRODIGY for the problem of plug-and-play
controllable graph generation. While unconditional models (Jo
et al., 2022; Vignac et al., 2022) do not allow test-time control on
generation, conditional models cannot handle hard constraints as
they either require retraining (Xu et al., 2023) or assume differentiability (Vignac et al., 2022). PRODIGY enables controllable
graph generation from any pre-trained diffusion model.

Liu et al., 2019). Recently, diffusion-based models (Niu
et al., 2020; Vignac et al., 2022; Jo et al., 2022; 2023) have
shown impressive performance in generating graphs in an
efficient manner and achieving distributional realism that
outperforms most of its contemporary autoregressive and
adversarial learning frameworks. The ultimate objective of
the graph generation research field is to enable the simulation of large-scale networks that can help make tangible
progress in domains such as network optimization (Xie et al.,
2019), social network analysis (Grover et al., 2019), and
drug design (Yang et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Deep generative models serve as an effective approach
to learn the underlying distribution of graph-structured
data (You et al., 2018; Jo et al., 2022; Martinkus et al., 2022;

While demonstrating excellent performance in terms of
matching the data generating distribution on benchmark
graphs datasets, current diffusion-based approaches suffer
from a key limitation that keeps them away from use in
practice: inability to support meaningful, precise control
of properties of the generated graphs. This limits their
application in domains such as drug discovery and mate-

1
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA.
Correspondence to: Kartik Sharma <ksartik@gatech.edu>, Rakshit Trivedi <rstrivedi@csail.mit.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

