Offline Training of Language Model Agents with Functions as Learnable Weights

Shaokun Zhang * 1 Jieyu Zhang * 2 Jiale Liu 1 Linxin Song 3 Chi Wang 4 Ranjay Krishna 2 Qingyun Wu 1

Abstract

Model Training

Researchers and practitioners have recently reframed powerful Large Language Models (LLMs)
as agents, enabling them to automate complex
tasks largely via the use of specialized functions.
To facilitate the development of LLM agents, we
present a novel paradigm of training LLM agents
without modifying the LLM weights, which is
particularly useful when the LLMs are difficult or
inaccessible for modifications. Inspired by how
humans continuously forge tools to adapt to realworld tasks, rather than change our biological
structure to fit a static set of tools, we propose
to progressively forge agent’s functions to better
solve the downstream tasks instead of modifying
the LLM weights. By treating the functions as
learnable ‘agent parameters’ and leveraging the
fundamental idea of model training in artificial
intelligence, we develop AgentOptimizer that employs the LLM to update agents’ functions and
devise an agent training algorithm with two strategies, roll-back, and early-stop, to streamline the
training process. With extensive experiments, we
showcase that the agent training paradigm could
significantly improve the performance of representative LLM agents in various downstream tasks.
We also study the behavior of the agent training regarding aspects like the learning curve and
domain transferability. We have integrated our
method into AutoGen library.

Loss
Update
Parameters

Numerical
Optimizer

Tra
ini
ng
set

ML Model

Agent Training
History

AgentOptimizer

Update
Functions

Tra
inin
g se
t

LLM Agent

Figure 1. The comparison between model training and agent training. In model training, numerical optimizers (Ruder, 2016) such as
SGD and Adam optimize the model weights according to the loss
on the training set. In contrast, agent training iteratively updates
the agents’ functions according to the execution history using the
proposed AgentOptimizer.

tasks (Xi et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023b; Yao et al., 2023;
Wang et al., 2023a; Humphreys et al., 2022; Shridhar et al.,
2021). For example, LLM agents, armed with a function to
‘search over Wikipedia’ can answer knowledge questions;
agents with the ability to ‘issue SQL queries’ can search
large databases. Functions allow LLMs to access external
knowledge sources (Peng et al., 2023), offload numerical
computation (Wu et al., 2023b), search the internet (Shi
et al., 2017), and much more (Qin et al., 2023).
To enable LLM agents with useful functions, users need to
first manually create functions that would be helpful for specific downstream tasks. This curation process may require
many iterations and, therefore, be time-consuming. Since
LLMs are black boxes, researchers have found that LLMs
unexpectedly fail to utilize certain kinds of functions (Qin
et al., 2023). In response, researchers have tried to improve
the underlying LLM’s capability of using existing functions
by finetuning the LLM with ground truth function calls (Qin
et al., 2024; Zeng et al., 2023a). This finetuning process
requires large computing resources. Worse, it limits which
LLMs can be used since many LLM models are proprietary.

1. Introduction
Reframing Large Language Models (LLMs) as agents has
ushered in a new paradigm of automation—one where
LLMs can utilize existing functions 1 to accomplish complex
*
1
Equal contribution
Pennsylvania State University
University of Washington 3 University of Southern California 4 Microsoft Research. Correspondence to: Qingyun Wu
<qingyun.wu@psu.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
Note that the literature has used the term ‘functions’ to sometimes refer to tools or other actions.

Inspired by the fact that human-made tools become an extension of the human user (Botvinick & Cohen, 1998) and
how humans forge tools to best adapt to real-world tasks,
rather than change the biological structure of the human
1

