Impact of Decentralized Learning on Player Utilities in Stackelberg Games

Kate Donahue * 1 Nicole Immorlica * 2 Meena Jagadeesan * 3 Brendan Lucier * 2 Aleksandrs Slivkins * 2

Abstract

their own preferences over content (Example A.2). As another example, a chatbot such as ChatGPT—during a chat
session—can iteratively refine its generated content to the
user’s stylistic preferences, while the user (or prompt engineering agent) simultaneously learns how to best interact
with the chatbot (Example A.1).

When deployed in the world, a learning agent
such as a recommender system or a chatbot often
repeatedly interacts with another learning agent
(such as a user) over time. In many such twoagent systems, each agent learns separately and
the rewards of the two agents are not perfectly
aligned. To better understand such cases, we examine the learning dynamics of the two-agent
system and the implications for each agent’s objective. We model these systems as Stackelberg
games with decentralized learning and show that
standard regret benchmarks (such as Stackelberg
equilibrium payoffs) result in worst-case linear
regret for at least one player. To better capture these systems, we construct a relaxed regret benchmark that is tolerant to small learning errors by agents. We show that standard
learning algorithms fail to provide sublinear regret, and we develop algorithms to achieve nearoptimal O(T 2/3 ) regret for both players with respect to these benchmarks. We further design relaxed
√ environments under which faster learning
(O( T )) is possible. Altogether, our results take
a step towards assessing how two-agent interactions in sequential and decentralized learning environments affect the utility of both agents.1

These two-agent systems—among many others—share the
following structural features. The environments are decentralized (both agents operate autonomously, without central
coordination of their actions). Furthermore, the environments are sequential (one agent always chooses their action first2 ) and misaligned (the agents can obtain different
utilities for the same pair of actions3 ). Finally, the environments exhibit learning (both agents learn from repeated
interactions about which actions to take). For such twoagent environments, core questions of interest include: how
quickly does this two-agent system learn, and what are the
implications for each agent’s objective?
In the absence of learning, the interaction between misaligned agents taking sequential actions is formalized by
Stackelberg games. In this setting, the leader chooses an
action first and the follower chooses an action to respond.
The two agents are allowed to have distinct utility functions
over pairs of actions. The standard benchmark is the Stackelberg equilibrium, where the leader picks the best action
they can, assuming that the follower will pick their own
best response. However, this classical solution concept is
tailored to the full-information setting where both players
know their own utilities and the leader knows how the follower will best respond; in fact, the static Stackelberg game
framework breaks down when agents instead must learn
these utilities from noisy feedback.

1. Introduction
When learning agents such as recommender systems or
chatbots are deployed into the world, these learning agents
often repeatedly interact with other learning agents (such as
humans). For example, a recommender system—through
repeated interactions with a user—learns which content to
suggest to the user, while the user simultaneously learns

Our focus is on a decentralized Stackelberg learning environment. In this setting, the leader and the follower repeatedly interact and each make decisions about which actions
to take, where each agent only observes their own realized stochastic rewards. In this environment, it is natural
to model each player’s learning process as a multi-armed

*

Authors in alphabetical order 1 Cornell University 2 Microsoft
Research 3 University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to:
Kate Donahue <kdonahue@cs.cornell.edu>, Meena Jagadeesan
<mjagadeesan@berkeley.edu>.

2
E.g., a recommender system recommends a slate of items and
the user picks among them; in a chatbot session, the user picks a
prompt that the LLM responds to.
3
Misalignment could arise from fundamental differences in
agent preferences or from misspecification.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).
1
Full version: arxiv.org/abs/2403.00188.

1

