On Convergence of Incremental Gradient for Non-Convex Smooth Functions

Anastasia Koloskova 1 Nikita Doikov 1 Sebastian U. Stich 2 Martin Jaggi 1

Abstract

(or a subset of indices) is selected upon which a gradient
step is performed:

In machine learning and neural network optimization, algorithms like incremental gradient, and
shuffle SGD are popular due to minimizing the
number of cache misses and good practical convergence behavior. However, their optimization
properties in theory, especially for non-convex
smooth functions, remain incompletely explored.

xt+1 = xt − γ∇fit (xt ),

(2)

where γ > 0 is a step size. Defining how the index it is
selected in (2) is crucial for the performance of this algorithm. The standard theoretical analysis often assumes that
the index it ∼ [n] is chosen uniformly at random (a variant
we refer to as SGD in this paper). However, in practice, a
specific order of selecting the gradients can be predefined
by a configuration of the system. For example, many standard frameworks use dataloaders that process data in epochs.
Within each epoch, we access all indices in a permutation.
The permutation can vary across epochs, or fixed at once
in the beginning. The latter is one of the most popular approaches in practice due to simplicity of its implementation
and high efficacy of memory usage, minimizing the number
of cache misses. From the optimization perspective, this
means that after performing the gradient step (2) for a certain
index it , the next time we access the function fit again is
exactly after n iterations. Despite being widely approved by
the technical and engineering needs, these variations of SGD
present one of the most challenging scenario for the analysis,
because of mutual dependencies between consecutive steps.

This paper delves into the convergence properties
of SGD algorithms with arbitrary data ordering,
within a broad framework for non-convex smooth
functions. Our findings show enhanced convergence guarantees for incremental gradient and
single shuffle SGD. Particularly if n is the training set size, we improve n times the optimization
term of convergence guarantee to reach accuracy
ε from O (n/ε) to O (1/ε).

1. Introduction
In this paper we study the problem of minimizing the finitesum objective:
h
i
Pn
minx∈Rd f (x) := n1 i=1 fi (x) .
(1)

In this paper, our goal is to understand the convergence properties of algorithm (2) with a predefined selection of indices
shared within one epoch. An important particular case is
called the incremental gradient descent (IG) algorithm. In
recent decades, it has received significant attention in the
optimization literature (Bertsekas, 2011). The basic version
of this method simply substitutes

We denote by n the number of functions fi : Rd → R. Every
function fi is assumed to be smooth and can be non-convex.
This optimization problem arises in many practical applications. For example, in the training of machine learning
models with n being the training set size and each fi (x)
being the loss of the model on the i-th datapoint, while x is
the vector of the model parameters.

it

A common method for solving optimization problems of the
form (1) is the Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) algorithm
and its various modifications (Lan, 2020). During each iteration t ≥ 0 of the method, an index it ∈ [n] := {1, . . . , n}

:= t mod n + 1

(3)

into algorithm (2). Note that when the initial order of functions in (1) is randomly permuted once in the beginning,
this selection rule is equivalent to the so-called Single Shuffle (SS) method, as opposed to Random Reshuffle (RR),
which permutes the functions after every epoch. Even when
putting aside cache efficiency in practical implementations,
both SS and RR show good practical behavior often surpassing classic SGD with uniform sampling (see e.g. Fig. 1).
This makes them popular in the machine learning and optimization community (Mishchenko et al., 2020; Lu et al.,
2022b) and very often these are the methods of choice that

1
Machine Learning and Optimization Laboratory (MLO),
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland 2 CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security, Saarbrücken, Germany. Correspondence to:
Anastasia Koloskova <anastasia.koloskova@epfl.ch>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

