Lie Neurons: Adjoint-Equivariant Neural Networks for Semisimple Lie Algebras

Tzu-Yuan Lin * 1 Minghan Zhu * 1 Maani Ghaffari 1

Abstract
This paper proposes an equivariant neural network
that takes data in any finite-dimensional semisimple Lie algebra as input. The corresponding
group acts on the Lie algebra as adjoint operations,
making our proposed network adjoint-equivariant.
Our framework generalizes the Vector Neurons, a
simple SO(3)-equivariant network, from 3-D Euclidean space to Lie algebra spaces, building upon
the invariance property of the Killing form. Furthermore, we propose novel Lie bracket layers and
geometric channel mixing layers that extend the
modeling capacity. Experiments are conducted
for the so(3), sl(3), and sp(4) Lie algebras on various tasks, including fitting equivariant and invariant functions, learning system dynamics, point
cloud registration, and homography-based shape
classification. Our proposed equivariant network
shows wide applicability and competitive performance in various domains.

(a)

(b)

(c)

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Lie Neurons can be applied in learning dynamics. In
this example, we learn the dynamics of a simulated free-rotation
International Space Station, which we pose as an initial value
problem in the Neural ODE framework. This figure shows the
estimated trajectories and the learned vector field from the Lie
Neurons. Detail descriptions can be found in Section 5.2.2.

For geometric problems in control theory, robotics, computer vision and graphics, Lie group methods provide the
machinery to study continuous symmetries inherent to the
problem (Murray et al., 1994; Liu et al., 2010; Lynch &
Park, 2017; Barrau & Bonnabel, 2017; van Goor et al., 2020;
Yang et al., 2021; Lin et al., 2022; Ghaffari et al., 2022). Lie
algebras are vector spaces that locally preserve the group
structure, enabling efficient computation (Teng et al., 2022;
Lin et al., 2023b). The standard group representation (linear
group action) on Lie algebras is given by conjugation or
adjoint action (Hall, 2013).

the group actions. Therefore, it reduces the sampling complexity in learning and improves the robustness and transparency facing input variations. Equivariant models have
gained success in various domains, including but not limited
to the modeling of molecules (Thomas et al., 2018), physical systems (Finzi et al., 2020), social networks (Maron
et al., 2018), images (Worrall et al., 2017), and point clouds
(Zhu et al., 2023b). Convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
are translation-equivariant, enabling stable image features
regardless of the pixel positions in the image plane. Typical
extensions include rotation (Cohen et al., 2017) and scale
(Worrall & Welling, 2019) equivariance, while more general
extensions are also explored (MacDonald et al., 2022).

The equivariance property preserves the symmetry group
structure, often a Lie group, such that the feature map commutes with the group representation. An equivariant model,
by construction, generalizes over the variations caused by
*
Equal contribution 1 University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI,
USA. Correspondence to: Tzu-Yuan Lin <tzuyuan@umich.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

In this paper, we propose a new type of equivariant model
1

