Tilt and Average : Geometric Adjustment of the Last Layer for Recalibration

Gyusang Cho 1 Chan-Hyun Youn 1

Abstract

primary focus is on improving the calibration performance
of the model while maintaining accuracy as learned during
the original training. The methods introduced in conventional works for recalibration are more focused on fitting a
calibration map of the neural network. The calibration map
is an additionally designed function that takes the logit of
the predicted probability as the input, and outputs calibrated
results(Guo et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2020; Tomani et al.,
2022).

After the revelation that neural networks tend to
produce overconfident predictions, the problem
of calibration, which aims to align confidence
with accuracy to enhance the reliability of predictions, has gained significant importance. Several
solutions based on calibration maps have been
proposed to address the problem of recalibrating
a trained classifier using additional datasets. In
this paper, we offer an algorithm that transforms
the weights of the last layer of the classifier, distinct from the calibration-map-based approach.
We concentrate on the geometry of the final linear
layer, specifically its angular aspect, and adjust
the weights of the corresponding layer. We name
the method Tilt and Average(T NA), and validate
the calibration effect empirically and theoretically.
Through this, we demonstrate that our approach,
in addition to the existing calibration-map-based
techniques, can yield improved calibration performance. Code available : URL.

In this paper, we adopt a slightly different perspective, opting to modify the weights of the final linear layer rather than
creating a new calibration map. Exploiting the neural network as a feature extractor, the last linear layer transforms
high-dimensional deep features into class-specific scores
for probability estimation. In this process, we propose techniques that leverage the geometry of the feature space where
this transformation occurs. As a result, the proposed algorithm, when combined with traditional calibration-map
methods, exhibits superior calibration performance compared to conventional approaches. In summary, we make
the following contributions to this work :
• We propose a recalibration algorithm leveraging the
geometry of the last linear layer, deviating from the previously suggested calibration-map approach. Due to
the orthogonality of this method, it can seamlessly integrate with existing techniques for recalibration problems, and achieve better calibration performance
than using the conventional approach alone.

1. Introduction
As neural networks demonstrate their powerful performance
across various fields, their reliability has become a significant concern. The fact that neural networks are miscalibrated(Guo et al., 2017) and are possible to assign high
confidence to wrong predictions, is a notable issue in diverse applications, especially in scenarios that are safetycritical(medical usage(Litjens et al., 2017), autonomousdriving(Yurtsever et al., 2020)), or high-stake and costeffective(satelite(Moskolaı̈ et al., 2021)). To resolve this
issue, model calibration is studied to reflect reliable confidence estimates to quantify the uncertainty of the prediction.

• We provide theoretical or experimental background
based on the geometric interpretation of the feature
space and linear layer. We also verify data efficiency
and algorithmic integrity through ablation studies.

2. Background & Related Works

We target the recalibration problem for a model trained on
a training set, using an additional dataset. Therefore, the

2.1. Background
Notation. We consider the classification task with the labeled dataset. Let the input data X ∈ X and the corresponding label Y ∈ Y denote the data-label pair, with
C := |Y| classes. Let the model M = (f, h) trained on the
training split of the data, consists of the feature extractor
f : X → Rn , and the last classifier function h : Rn → RC .
Then the prediction Ŷ and the confidence P̂ of a single

1

Department of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon,
Republic of Korea.
Correspondence to: Gyusang Cho
<cks1463@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

