Don’t be so Negative!
Score-based Generative Modeling with Oracle-assisted Guidance

Saeid Naderiparizi * 1 2 Xiaoxuan Liang * 1 2 Setareh Cohan 1 Berend Zwartsenberg 2 Frank Wood 1 2 3

Abstract

generated samples fall into the category of “bad” samples.
Here we consider the problem of generative modeling where
in addition to the conventional training dataset of good samples, we are also given access to constraints in the form
of an oracle, which provides insights into whether a given
sample is considered bad. Such oracles are ubiquitous in
practice and are often a simple function implemented by
domain experts.

Score-based diffusion models are a powerful class
of generative models, widely utilized across diverse domains. Despite significant advancements
in large-scale tasks such as text-to-image generation, their application to constrained domains has
received considerably less attention. This work
addresses model learning in a setting where, in
addition to the training dataset, there further exists side-information in the form of an oracle that
can label samples as being outside the support of
the true data generating distribution. Specifically
we develop a new denoising diffusion probabilistic modeling methodology, Gen-neG, that leverages this additional side-information. Gen-neG
builds on classifier guidance in diffusion models to guide the generation process towards the
positive support region indicated by the oracle.
We empirically establish the utility of Gen-neG
in applications including collision avoidance in
self-driving simulators and safety-guarded human
motion generation.

Modern deep generative models are sufficiently parameterized that they can effectively be trained to result in a model
placing a mixture of Dirac measures directly on the training data (Somepalli et al., 2023a;b; Carlini et al., 2023).
However, training such models on large amounts of data
(Rombach et al., 2022) or imposing regularization (such as
smaller architectures or fewer integration steps) ensures that
they generalize rather than memorize (Arpit et al., 2017;
Zhang et al., 2021). This also results in these models placing mass in the invalid part of the support (Hanneke et al.,
2018). In this paper, we assume a modeling regime where
the model generalizes effectively. Within this context, our
objective is to reduce the probability mass assigned to invalid outputs while avoiding overfitting. Consequently, our
contribution can be viewed as a method for controlling the
specific type of the model’s generalization.

1. Introduction

The simplest way to use an oracle is to deploy the model
with a rejection sampling loop in which the oracle is used
to filter the output and return the constraint-satisfying samples (Kim et al., 2023). Depending on circumstances this
may constitute an acceptable final “generative model”, but
this solution comes at a (potentially unacceptable) computational cost. Consider the concrete example of real-time
autonomous vehicle path planning and model predictive
control (Zhong et al., 2022). This task involves generating
the next control action for an autonomous vehicle based the
past and current state of itself and its surroundings. The
generated action must avoid collisions and other types of invalid behavior, collectively referred to as “infractions.” This
is an extremely challenging task that requires low latency
and high success rates. To guarantee low latency, it is essential to generate a sufficiently large number of parallel
samples to ensure obtaining at least one valid sample with
high probability. Assume that a generative model trained

What should we do when we train a generative model that
generates samples known to be invalid within the constraints
of the data domain? For instance, when generating traffic
scenes, road users cannot overlap each other. Likewise, in
robotics, adherence to numerous physics-based constraints
is essential for maintaining the appropriate motion and configuration of the robot. Typically, generative models are
only trained to maximize the likelihood of a set of “good”
training data samples. Nevertheless, when sampling from
a fully trained, highly expressive model, some fraction of
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada 2 Inverted AI, Vancouver, Canada 3 Montréal Institute for Learning Algorithms (MILA).
Correspondence to: Saeid Naderiparizi <saeidnp@cs.ubc.ca>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

