Lookbehind-SAM: k Steps Back, 1 Step Forward

Gonçalo Mordido 1 2 Pranshu Malviya 1 2 Aristide Baratin 3 Sarath Chandar 1 2 4

Abstract

the empirical risk using stochastic gradient descent (SGD).
Particularly, sharpness-aware minimization (SAM) (Foret
et al., 2021) was recently proposed as an effective means
to simultaneously minimize both loss value and loss sharpness during training. Given a neural network with parameters ϕ, some loss function L(ϕ), SAM seeks parameters in
flat regions using a minimax optimization:

Sharpness-aware minimization (SAM) methods
have gained increasing popularity by formulating the problem of minimizing both loss value
and loss sharpness as a minimax objective. In
this work, we increase the efficiency of the maximization and minimization parts of SAM’s objective to achieve a better loss-sharpness tradeoff. By taking inspiration from the Lookahead
optimizer, which uses multiple descent steps
ahead, we propose Lookbehind, which performs
multiple ascent steps behind to enhance the maximization step of SAM and find a worst-case perturbation with higher loss. Then, to mitigate the
variance in the descent step arising from the gathered gradients across the multiple ascent steps,
we employ linear interpolation to refine the minimization step. Lookbehind leads to a myriad
of benefits across a variety of tasks. Particularly, we show increased generalization performance, greater robustness against noisy weights,
as well as improved learning and less catastrophic forgetting in lifelong learning settings.
Our code is available at https://github.
com/chandar-lab/Lookbehind-SAM.

min max L(ϕ + ϵ) ,
ϕ

∥ϵ∥2 ≤ρ

(1)

where worst-case perturbations ϵ are applied to parameters
ϕ, with the distance between original and perturbed parameters being controlled by ρ. SAM approximates the maximization step by first performing a single gradient ascent
step and then using the gradient of the loss to do a single
descent step from the original solution. This leads to finding a low-loss parameter configuration ϕ such that the loss
is also low in the neighborhood ρ which will lead to flatter
solutions. Several follow-up methods have emerged to further enhance its performance (Kwon et al., 2021; Zhuang
et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2022) and reduce its computation
overhead (Du et al., 2022a;b; Liu et al., 2022a).
Despite the recent success, improving upon SAM requires a
delicate balance between loss value and sharpness. Ideally,
the optimization process would converge towards minima
that offer a favorable compromise between these two aspects, thereby leading to high generalization performance.
However, naively increasing the neighborhood size ρ used
to find the perturbed solutions in SAM leads to a considerable increase in training loss, despite improving sharpness
(Figure 1, full circles). In other words, putting too much
emphasis on finding the worst-case perturbation is expected
to bias convergence to flat but high-loss regions and negatively impact generalization performance.

1. Introduction
Improving the optimization methods used in deep learning
is a crucial step to enhance the performance of current models. Notably, building upon the long-recognized connection
between the flatness of the loss landscape and generalization (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1994; Keskar et al., 2016;
Dziugaite & Roy, 2017; Neyshabur et al., 2017; Izmailov
et al., 2018), sharpness-aware training methods have gained
recent popularity due to their ability to significantly improve generalization performance compared to minimizing

Instead of performing a single ascent step akin to SAM,
performing multiple ascent steps is a promising way of
increasing the neighborhood region to find perturbed solutions, further reducing sharpness. However, this is not
what is observed empirically (Figure 1, empty circles). In
fact, previous works (Foret et al., 2021; Andriushchenko
& Flammarion, 2022) have shown that such a multistep
variant may hurt performance. A possible cause is the increased gradient instability originating from moving farther
away from our original solution (Liu et al., 2022b). Note

1
Mila - Quebec AI Institute 2 Polytechnique Montreal
Samsung SAIT AI Lab Montreal 4 Canada CIFAR AI
Chair. Correspondence to: Gonçalo Mordido <goncalomordido@gmail.com>.
3

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

