WARM: On the Benefits of Weight Averaged Reward Models

Alexandre Ramé 1 Nino Vieillard 1 Léonard Hussenot 1 Robert Dadashi 1 Geoffrey Cideron 1 Olivier Bachem 1
Johan Ferret 1

Abstract

et al., 2022a), and ultimately, reinforcement learning (RL)
to maximize a reward encapsulating the desired behaviors
(Ouyang et al., 2022). However, defining such rewards
for real-world tasks is non-trivial (McKinney et al., 2023).
In reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF,
Christiano et al., 2017; Ziegler et al., 2019; Stiennon et al.,
2020), rewards are reward models (RMs), trained on binary
preference datasets to emulate human judgment. The enhancement of LLM capabilities from RL is strongly tied to
the quality of the RMs (Touvron et al., 2023).

Aligning large language models (LLMs) with
human preferences through reinforcement learning (RLHF) can lead to reward hacking, where
LLMs exploit failures in the reward model (RM)
to achieve seemingly high rewards without meeting the underlying objectives. We identify two
primary challenges when designing RMs to mitigate reward hacking: distribution shifts during
the RL process and inconsistencies in human
preferences. As a solution, we propose Weight
Averaged Reward Models (WARM), first finetuning multiple RMs, then averaging them in the
weight space. This strategy follows the observation that fine-tuned weights remain linearly connected when sharing the same pre-training. By
averaging weights, WARM improves efficiency
compared to the traditional ensembling of predictions, while improving reliability under distribution shifts and robustness to preference inconsistencies. Our experiments on summarization
tasks, using best-of-N and RL methods, shows
that WARM improves the quality and alignment of
LLM predictions; for example, a policy RL finetuned with WARM has a 79.4% win rate against a
policy RL fine-tuned with a single RM.

Reward hacking. Particularly insidious in RLHF (Gao
et al., 2023; Casper et al., 2023) is the reward hacking
(a.k.a. reward overoptimization, Amodei et al., 2016; Clark
& Amodei, 2016; Askell et al., 2021) arising from reward
misspecification (Pan et al., 2022) between the proxy RM
and actual human preferences. While optimizing the proxy
RM initially provides improvements, in later stages the policy (i.e., the LLM being trained) actually exploits loopholes
in the proxy RM, as illustrated in Figure 1(b). This reward hacking phenomenon poses numerous issues. First, it
degrades performances, manifesting for example as linguistically flawed (Lewis et al., 2017) or unnecessarily verbose
(Singhal et al., 2023) outputs. Second, it complicates checkpoint selection, echoing Goodhart’s Law (Strathern, 1997):
“when a measure becomes a target, it ceases to be a good
measure”. Third, misalignment (Taylor et al., 2016; Ngo
et al., 2022) can escalate into safety risks (Amodei et al.,
2016; Hendrycks & Mazeika, 2022), especially given the
rapid integration of LLMs in critical decision-making. Such
concerns underscore the need to mitigate reward hacking to
ensure beneficial and safe deployment of LLMs.

1. Introduction
Reward modeling. Conversational assistants such as Gemini (Gemini Team, 2023) or GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023) have
revolutionized the AI community and beyond. These LLMs
are capable of completing novel and intricate tasks, including mathematics, coding, and tool use (Bubeck et al., 2023).
These advancements are underpinned by a systematic three
stage training procedure: pre-training by next token prediction (Radford et al., 2018; Devlin et al., 2019), supervised fine-tuning (SFT) to learn to follow instructions (Wei

Challenges. Two primary challenges underlie reward hacking. The first major issue are the distribution shifts encountered by the RM. Indeed, the generations from the policy
might deviate substantially from those in the offline preference dataset, posing an out-of-distribution (OOD) challenge.
Moreover, those distribution shifts are accentuated by the
policy drift during the RL procedure: the policy moves away
from its SFT initialization, continually altering the distribution of predictions the RM needs to interpret reliably.
Second, preferences are inconsistent: the binary labels in
the preference dataset are noisy. Indeed, human labelers
often rely on simpler criteria (length, bullet points, polite-

1
Google DeepMind. Correspondence to: Alexandre Ramé
<alexandrerame@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

