diff History for Neural Language Agents

Ulyana Piterbarg 1

Lerrel Pinto 1

Abstract

Rob Fergus 1

supervised learning for sequential decision-making, the picture is more murky: in certain domains, model improvement
has been shown to scale log-linearly and sub log-linearly
with task-specific demonstration count (Tuyls et al., 2023;
Piterbarg et al., 2023). Sequential decision-making data
is cumbersome and expensive to collect for most domains,
especially for real-world problems, rendering sheer data
scaling an untenable solution to improving neural agents.

Neural Language Models (LMs) offer an exciting
solution for general-purpose embodied control.
However, a key technical issue arises when using
an LM-based controller: environment observations must be converted to text, which coupled
with history, results in long and verbose textual
prompts. As a result, prior work in LM agents
is limited to restricted domains with small observation size as well as minimal needs for interaction history or instruction finetuning. In
this paper, we introduce diff history, a simple
and highly effective solution to these issues. By
applying the Unix diff command on consecutive text observations in the interaction histories
used to prompt LM policies, we can both abstract away redundant information and focus the
content of textual inputs on the salient changes
in the environment. On NetHack, an unsolved
video game that requires long-horizon reasoning for decision-making, LMs tuned with diff
history match state-of-the-art performance for
neural agents while needing 1800× fewer training examples compared to prior work. Even
on the simpler BabyAI-Text environment with
concise text observations, we find that although
diff history increases the length of prompts,
the representation it provides offers a 25% improvement in the efficiency of low-sample instruction finetuning. Further, we show that diff history scales favorably across different finetuning
dataset sizes. We open-source our code and data
to https://diffhistory.github.io.

From the cognitive science literature, we know that humans and animals leverage abstraction to rapidly master
new behaviors from limited demonstrations and interactions
(Gopnik et al., 2004; Tenenbaum et al., 2011; Allen et al.,
2020). Many recent works including “Scratchpad,” “Chainof-Thought,” and “Tree-of-Thought” have looked to abstraction as a means of improving the downstream generalization
of neural language models (LMs) on complex tasks (Nye
et al., 2021; Wei et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2023; Besta et al.,
2023; Wu et al., 2023). However, the abstractions behind
these works are task-specific.
We propose diff history, a method that introduces a highly
effective and task-agnostic abstraction into LM prompts in
order to improve the quality of text generation for sequential
decision-making. When finetuning LMs on demonstrations
of interaction sequences consisting of interleaved environment observations and expert actions, we substitute full-text
natural language observations for symbolically annotated
but human-interpretable delta observations. We refer to
such an interaction demonstration sequence as a diff history. Computing a diff history is easy: just run the Unix
command diff (Kernighan & Pike, 1984) between consecutive pairs of past full-text observations. During inference,
we iteratively prompt LMs to generate natural language actions conditioned on recent diff history at each timestep
of environment interaction.
We conduct a series of experiments testing instruction finetuning with diff history in two different environments:
the low-dimensional, multi-task BabyAI-Text environment
(Carta et al., 2023) and the high-dimensional, as-of-yet unsolved video game NetHack (Küttler et al., 2020). Both
of these environments are procedurally-generated, enabling
us to directly probe the generalization of neural language
agents in our study. We find that diff history has several
benefits:

1. Introduction
Scale is a key driver of performance in classical supervised
learning (Kaplan et al., 2020). However, when it comes to
1
Dept of Computer Science, Courant Institute, NYU. Correspondence to: Ulyana Piterbarg <up2021@cims.nyu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

