RoboDreamer: Learning Compositional World Models for Robot Imagination

Siyuan Zhou 1 Yilun Du 2 Jiaben Chen 3 Yandong Li 4 Dit-Yan Yeung 1 Chuang Gan 5
https://robovideo.github.io/

Task Instruction: "move pepsi can near plastic bottle"

Abstract
Text-to-video models have demonstrated substantial potential in robotic decision-making, enabling
the imagination of realistic plans of future actions as well as accurate environment simulation.
However, one major issue in such models is generalization – models are limited to synthesizing
videos subject to language instructions similar to
those seen at training time. This is heavily limiting in decision-making, where we seek a powerful
world model to synthesize plans of unseen combinations of objects and actions in order to solve
previously unseen tasks in new environments. To
resolve this issue, we introduce RoboDreamer, an
innovative approach for learning a compositional
world model by factorizing the video generation.
We leverage the natural compositionality of language to parse instructions into a set of lowerlevel primitives, which we condition a set of models on to generate videos. We illustrate how this
factorization naturally enables compositional generalization, by allowing us to formulate a new
natural language instruction as a combination of
previously seen components. We further show
how such a factorization enables us to add additional multimodal goals, allowing us to specify
a video we wish to generate given both natural
language instructions and a goal image. Our approach can successfully synthesize video plans
on unseen goals in the RT-X, enables successful
robot execution in simulation, and substantially
outperforms monolithic baseline approaches to
video generation.

AVDC

RoboDreamer

Figure 1: Compositional Action Specification. When existing text-to-video models (AVDC (Ko et al., 2023)) are
given unusual combinations of language instructions, they
are unable to synthesize videos that align accurately with
these descriptions. RoboDreamer factorizes the generation
compositionally, enabling generalization to novel combinations of language.

1. Introduction
Text-to-video models(Ho et al., 2022; Singer et al., 2022;
Villegas et al., 2022) have seen extensive development in the
setting of AI content generation, where models can generate
high-quality videos given short text descriptions of motions.
Such models have recently been applied in robotics, demonstrating significant potential in the development of policies,
dynamic models, and planners (Du et al., 2023b; Ajay et al.,
2023; Yang et al., 2023b). However, while natural language
commands found in content generation typically focus on
the global motion of a scene, natural language actions in
robotics revolve around precise spatial rearrangements between objects.
Such commands, such as “move pepsi can near plastic bottle.” remain challenging for existing models. As shown in
Fig. 1, existing methods generate a video where pepsi can
is placed near green can, failing to accurately capture the
specified object relationship. Furthermore, these challenges
become even more pronounced in scenarios where language
instructions deviate from those encountered during training
time, especially in reinforcement learning datasets where

1

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 3 University of California, San Diego 4 University of Central Florida 5 University of
Massachusetts Amherst. Correspondence to: Chuang Gan
<ganchuang1990@gmail.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

