Multi-group Learning for Hierarchical Groups

Samuel Deng 1 Daniel Hsu 1

Abstract

tematically err on rarer cancers to achieve a higher average
accuracy, leading to possibly life-threatening predictions
on individuals with the rare cancer (Oakden-Rayner et al.,
2020). Similar demands for group-wise accuracy appear in
domains as varied as medical imaging (Bissoto et al., 2019;
Oakden-Rayner et al., 2020; DeGrave et al., 2021), facial
recognition (Buolamwini & Gebru, 2018; Kuehlkamp et al.,
2017), object recognition (De Vries et al., 2019), and NLP
(Orr et al., 2020; Varma et al., 2021; Borkan et al., 2019).
A common theme is that these high error subgroups come
from some hierarchical group structure. Demographic subgroups in fairness-aware scenarios naturally arrange via, say,
race, gender, and age (Borkan et al., 2019) or subgroups of
face images in facial recognition naturally arrange via, say,
gender, facial expression, and hair color (Liu et al., 2015).

The multi-group learning model formalizes the
learning scenario in which a single predictor must
generalize well on multiple, possibly overlapping
subgroups of interest. We extend the study of
multi-group learning to the natural case where the
groups are hierarchically structured. We design
an algorithm for this setting that outputs an interpretable and deterministic decision tree predictor
with near-optimal sample complexity. We then
conduct an empirical evaluation of our algorithm
and find that it achieves attractive generalization
properties on real datasets with hierarchical group
structure.

Motivated by these concerns, we study the multi-group (agnostic PAC) learning model first proposed by Rothblum &
Yona (2021). In multi-group learning, there is a collection
of groups G comprised of possibly overlapping subsets of
the input space and a benchmark hypothesis class H of predictors. The objective in multi-group learning is to construct
a predictor f whose accuracy is not much worse than the
best (possibly different) predictor hg ∈ H for each group
g ∈ G simultaneously. This generalizes the traditional (onaverage) statistical learning setting when G contains the
entire input space. Rothblum & Yona (2021) gives an initial
boosting-based algorithm that achieves multi-group learning, and Tosh & Hsu (2022) provide simpler algorithms
with improved sample complexity. These results all assume
no further structure on G. In this paper, we study the natural
special case in which G has hierarchical structure.

1. Introduction
In the classical statistical learning setup, the goal is to construct a predictor with high average accuracy. However, in
many practical learning scenarios, an aggregate, on-average
measure of performance is insufficient. In general, averagecase performance can obscure performance for subgroups
of examples — a predictor that boasts 95% accuracy on
average might only be 50% accurate on an important subgroup comprising 10% of the population. Such a subgroup
might be difficult for a predictor trained for aggregate performance because it is not represented well during training
(Oakden-Rayner et al., 2020) or it admits spurious correlations (Borkan et al., 2019).
Recent work has shown that, in various learning domains,
constructing a predictor that performs well on multiple subgroups is crucial. For instance, when fairness is a concern,
a natural desideratum is that a predictor be accurate not
only on average, but also conditional on possibly intersecting subgroups such as race and gender (Hardt et al., 2016;
Diana et al., 2021). In medical imaging, a model might sys-

To this end, we present two main contributions. First, we
identify a mathematically natural structural property for
groups — namely, hierarchical structure — that permits
a simple and efficient algorithm that achieves multi-group
learning with near-optimal group-wise error rates. Second,
we conduct an extensive empirical evaluation of this algorithm against other baselines for multi-group learning
on several real datasets with hierarchical group structure.
This partially addresses a question posed by Tosh & Hsu
(2022) to design a learning algorithm that outputs a simple,
deterministic predictor like their Prepend algorithm enjoys near-optimal error rates. The empirical results show
our algorithm indeed achieves multi-group generalization

*
1
Equal contribution
Department of Computer Science, Columbia University.
Correspondence to: Samuel
Deng
<samdeng@cs.columbia.edu>,
Daniel
Hsu
<djhsu@cs.columbia.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

