A Linear Time and Space Local Point Cloud Geometry Encoder
via Vectorized Kernel Mixture (VecKM)

Dehao Yuan 1 Cornelia Fermüller 1 Tahseen Rabbani 1 Furong Huang 1 Yiannis Aloimonos 1
Cluster of Raw VecKM Encodings

Abstract

Computational Graphs: Others v.s. VecKM
Input Point Cloud
Existing Encoders
time and space

We propose VecKM, a local point cloud geometry encoder that is descriptive and efficient to
compute. VecKM leverages a unique approach by
vectorizing a kernel mixture to represent the local
point cloud. Such representation’s descriptiveness
is supported by two theorems that validate its ability to reconstruct and preserve the similarity of
the local shape. Unlike existing encoders downsampling the local point cloud, VecKM constructs
the local geometry encoding using all neighboring points, producing a more descriptive encoding. Moreover, VecKM is efficient to compute
and scalable to large point cloud inputs: VecKM
reduces the memory cost from (n2 + nKd) to
(nd + np); and reduces the major runtime cost
from computing nK MLPs to n MLPs, where
n is the size of the point cloud, K is the neighborhood size, d is the encoding dimension, and
p is a marginal factor. The efficiency is due to
VecKM’s unique factorizable property that eliminates the need of explicitly grouping points into
neighbors. In the normal estimation task, VecKM
demonstrates not only 100x faster inference speed
but also highest accuracy and strongest robustness.
In classification and segmentation tasks, integrating VecKM as a preprocessing module achieves
consistently better performance than the PointNet,
PointNet++, and point transformer baselines, and
runs consistently faster by up to 10 times.

VecKM
time and space

compute mutual distance

Mutual Distance
for each point:
* extract neighboring points
* sample points from its neighbor
* centerize

Hermitian
MatMul

Local Neighbors
MLP

max(dim=1)

Conv

MatMul

division
MLP

Similarity of VecKM Encodings
under Difference Noise Levels

Runtime (ms)

Computational Cost of VecKM

Input Point Cloud Size

Figure 1. Our VecKM encoding is descriptive, robust to noise, and
efficient in runtime and memory cost. Upper Left: Raw VecKM
encodings, without any training, already capture rich geometric features such as orientations and shapes. Lower Left: Under varying
levels of noise, VecKM encodings remain highly consistent. Upper Right: Existing encoders face memory costs of (n2 + nKd),
while VecKM costs only (nd + np) memory. Existing encoders
compute nK MLPs, whereas VecKM only computes n MLPs.
Lower Right: VecKM is 10x∼100x faster than existing encoders
in wall-clock time and scalable to large point cloud inputs.

2023), robotics (Zampogiannis et al., 2019), and remote
sensing (Lu et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2022).
In point cloud analysis, encoding local geometry is a fundamental step. In both low-level tasks such as feature matching and normal estimation, and high-level tasks such as
classification, segmentation, and detection, encoding local
geometry is usually required before passing the point cloud
into any deep network. Much effort has been placed into
the design of local geometry encoders, which can be loosely
divided into two categories: hand-crafted features and learnable encoders. Hand-crafted features (Han et al., 2023)
are manually defined features based on domain expertise,
and learnable encoders require computationally expensive
processing through trainable structures such as multi-layer
perceptrons (MLP) (Qi et al., 2017a; Ma et al., 2022) or
convolutions (Li et al., 2018; Thomas et al., 2019).

1. Introduction
The ubiquity and low cost of 3D sensors have drawn increased interest in the usage of three-dimensional point
clouds for tasks such as autonomous driving (Sen et al.,
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park, USA. Correspondence to: Dehao Yuan
<dhyuan@umd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

