Adapting Static Fairness to Sequential Decision-Making: Bias Mitigation
Strategies towards Equal Long-term Benefit Rate

Yuancheng Xu * 1 Chenghao Deng * 1 Yanchao Sun 1 Ruijie Zheng 1 Xiyao Wang 1
Jieyu Zhao 2 Furong Huang 1
immediate but also long-term effects. For instance, excessively denying loans to disadvantaged individuals can
worsen their future financial standing, thereby further exacerbating disparities.

Abstract
Decisions made by machine learning models can
have lasting impacts, making long-term fairness
a critical consideration. It has been observed that
ignoring the long-term effect and directly applying fairness criterion in static settings can actually worsen bias over time. To address biases in
sequential decision-making, we introduce a longterm fairness concept named Equal Long-term
BEnefit RaTe (ELBERT). This concept is seamlessly integrated into a Markov Decision Process
(MDP) to consider the future effects of actions
on long-term fairness, thus providing a unified
framework for fair sequential decision-making
problems. ELBERT effectively addresses the temporal discrimination issues found in previous longterm fairness notions. Additionally, we demonstrate that the policy gradient of Long-term Benefit Rate can be analytically simplified to standard policy gradients. This simplification makes
conventional policy optimization methods viable
for reducing bias, leading to our bias mitigation
approach ELBERT-PO. Extensive experiments
across various diverse sequential decision-making
environments consistently reveal that ELBERTPO significantly diminishes bias while maintaining high utility. Code is available at https://
github.com/umd-huang-lab/ELBERT.

It has been shown that directly imposing static fairness constraints1 without considering future effects of the current
action/decision can actually exacerbate bias in the long run
(Liu et al., 2018; D’Amour et al., 2020). To explicitly address fairness in sequential decision-making settings, recent
efforts (Yin et al., 2023; Wen et al., 2021; Chi et al., 2021)
formulate the long-term effects of actions/decisions in each
time step, in terms of both utility and fairness, using the
framework of Markov Decision Process (MDP).
A predominant long-term fairness notion (Yin et al., 2023;
Chi et al., 2021) models long-term bias by estimating the
accumulation of step-wise biases in the future. Specifically,
this is a ratio-before-aggregation fairness notion, which
aggregates bias of ratios at each time step. An illustrative
example of this can be seen in Figure 1, concerning a loan
application scenario where the bank aims to maximize profit
while ensuring demographic parity. At time t, the bank’s
negative decisions predominantly discouraged the red group,
in contrast to the blue group which experienced significantly
less discouragement. The ratio-before-aggregation notion is
0 2
100
1 2
) +( 100
instantiated in Yin et al. (2023) as ( 01 −100
− 1 ) =
0
0
100
1
0, and in Chi et al. (2021) as 1 − 100 + 100 − 1 = 0. In
both cases, the result suggests unbiased sequential decisions.
Although adopting MDP to model the long-term effects of
actions is a significant step towards achieving long-term
fairness, the prior concept of ratio-before-aggregation inadvertently leads to temporal discrimination. This occurs
within the same group, where decisions made for individuals at different time steps carry unequal importance in terms
of characterizing the long-term unfairness. For instance,
within the red group, when characterizing the long-term
unfairness, each individual is assigned a weight of 1/100 for
rejection at time t, but a weight of 1 for acceptance at time
t + 1. This implies that each rejected individual at time t is

1. Introduction
The growing use of machine learning in decision-making
systems has raised concerns regarding potential biases affecting different sub-populations, stemming not only from
*
Equal contribution 1 University of Maryland, College
Park 2 University of Southern California. Correspondence
to:
Yuancheng Xu <ycxu@umd.edu>, Furong Huang
<furongh@umd.edu>.

1

An example of static group fairness is demographic parity
(DP) (Dwork et al., 2012).

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

