Boundary Exploration for Bayesian Optimization With Unknown Physical
Constraints
Yunsheng Tian 1 Ane Zuniga 1 Xinwei Zhang 2 Johannes P. Dürholt 3 Payel Das 2 Jie Chen 2
Wojciech Matusik 1 Mina Konaković Luković 1

Abstract

order of weeks or months per single experiment. Thus, the
total number of evaluations that can be conducted is limited.
In this scenario, Bayesian optimization (BO) (Jones et al.,
1998; Shahriari et al., 2016) has proven to be a successful
approach that guides the search for an optimal solution by
iteratively proposing which experiment to evaluate that may
lead to the highest performance increase.

Bayesian optimization has been successfully applied to optimize black-box functions where the
number of evaluations is severely limited. However, in many real-world applications, it is hard
or impossible to know in advance which designs
are feasible due to some physical or system limitations. These issues lead to an even more challenging problem of optimizing an unknown function with unknown constraints. In this paper,
we observe that in such scenarios optimal solution typically lies on the boundary between feasible and infeasible regions of the design space,
making it considerably more difficult than that
with interior optima. Inspired by this observation, we propose BE-CBO, a new Bayesian optimization method that efficiently explores the
boundary between feasible and infeasible designs. To identify the boundary, we learn the
constraints with an ensemble of neural networks
that outperform the standard Gaussian Processes
for capturing complex boundaries. Our method
demonstrates superior performance against stateof-the-art methods through comprehensive experiments on synthetic and real-world benchmarks.
Code available at: https://github.com/
yunshengtian/BE-CBO

In addition to optimizing unknown functions, many practical problems include unknown constraints. For untested
samples, it is impossible to determine if a particular combination of design parameters will lead to feasible or infeasible
design. In such cases, infeasible regions are typically discovered when pushing the limits of what is physically possible,
and the optimal solution lies on the boundary of feasible
regions.
For example, consider the problem of designing an airplane
wing. The goal is to make it as lightweight as possible
while also being durable and structurally strong to sustain
the forces. Hence, the optimization needs to reduce the
amount of used material until the wing starts breaking under
applied forces. The optimal design will be found just before
we step into the infeasible range. Similarly, imagine the
task of moving a linear stage to a desired position by applying an acceleration followed by deceleration. To optimize
this process, the optimizer might progressively increase the
voltage applied to achieve faster and more efficient movement. However, if the voltage is continuously increased
without considering the motor’s limitations, it can lead to
excessive heat generation, effectively burning the motor and
causing performance degradation or failure. Comparable
examples can be found in chemistry and materials science,
especially in formulation development where often certain
amounts/combinations of ingredients are needed to yield
feasible materials, and the actual properties of interest can
be measured only for feasible materials. This leads to a
situation in which the optimizer is proposing a candidate for
which no performance feedback can be obtained, resulting
in a BO iteration in which no new information is retrieved.
Indeed, while analyzing many real-world benchmark problems, we observe that all these problems have the optimal
solution on the boundary between feasible and infeasible
designs (further details in Section 5.1).

1. Introduction
Many optimization problems involve the need to optimize
black-box functions, where the performance of a sample
can only be determined through physical experimentation
or time-expensive simulation, which may take even on the
1
MIT CSAIL, USA 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research,
USA 3 Evonik Operations GmbH, Germany. Correspondence
to: Yunsheng Tian <yunsheng@csail.mit.edu>, Mina Konaković
Luković <minakl@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

