Converting Transformers to Polynomial Form for Secure Inference Over
Homomorphic Encryption

Itamar Zimerman

12

Moran Baruch

13

Nir Drucker

1

Gilad Ezov

1

Omri Soceanu

1

Lior Wolf

2

Abstract
Designing privacy-preserving DL solutions is a
major challenge within the AI community. Homomorphic Encryption (HE) has emerged as one
of the most promising approaches in this realm,
enabling the decoupling of knowledge between
a model owner and a data owner. Despite extensive research and application of this technology,
primarily in CNNs, applying HE on transformer
models has been challenging because of the difficulties in converting these models into a polynomial form. We break new ground by introducing the first polynomial transformer, providing
the first demonstration of secure inference over
HE with full transformers. This includes a transformer architecture tailored for HE, alongside a
novel method for converting operators to their
polynomial equivalent. This innovation enables
us to perform secure inference on LMs and ViTs
with several datasts and tasks. Our techniques
yield results comparable to traditional models,
bridging the performance gap with transformers
of similar scale and underscoring the viability of
HE for state-of-the-art applications. Finally, we
assess the stability of our models and conduct a
series of ablations to quantify the contribution
of each model component. Our code is publicly
available.

Figure 1: Schematic Overview of Secure Inference Using
HE: The diagram depicts the sequence of steps where the
data owner sends an encrypted sensitive data sample, to the
model owner or an untrusted environment. Within this environment, an HE framework (SDK) employs the polynomial
transformer to process encrypted data, ensuring no access to
the sensitive information, doing so in a non-interactive way.
After computation, the encrypted result, is returned to the
data owner, who decrypts it to retrieve the final classification
outcomes. As such, the privacy of the underlying data is
maintained. As such, the privacy of the underlying data is
maintained throughout the entire process.

to compute on encrypted data in a non-interactive manner,
thereby safeguarding sensitive information during local analysis. However, modern HE schemes such as CKKS (Cheon
et al., 2017) support computation over encrypted input only
when the computations are represented by polynomial functions. This limitation poses a unique challenge for DL
applications. For example, GELU and Softmax are nonpolynomial and, therefore, must be adapted into an equivalent polynomial form. Understanding the theoretical limitation is important when considering applications of HE in
real-world scenarios.

https://github.com/IBM/PolyTransformer

1. Introduction
Privacy-Preserving Machine Learning (PPML) has become
a prominent field, ensuring that valuable insights can be
inferred from data without compromising individual privacy.
HE stands out within this domain, offering the capability

Fig. 1 depict a typical HE scenario: A model owner provides
a trained model. A data owner encrypts its data using HE
and sends it to the model owner for inference. The model
owner processes the encrypted data, where the input and
output remain confidential and cannot be learned by the
model owner. The encrypted result is then returned to the
data owner for decryption and interpretation.

1

IBM Research, Israel 2 Tel-Aviv University 3 Bar-Ilan
University.
Correspondence to: Itamar Zimerman <Itamar.Zimerman@ibm.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

As of now, the adaptation process to align NNs with the
HE requirements has been primarily focused on polyno1

