Position: LLMs Can’t Plan,
But Can Help Planning in LLM-Modulo Frameworks

Subbarao Kambhampati 1 Karthik Valmeekam 1 Lin Guan 1 Mudit Verma 1 Kaya Stechly 1
Siddhant Bhambri 1 Lucas Saldyt 1 Anil Murthy 1

Abstract

with System 2 competency. On the face of it, this doesn’t
seem to ring true, as both by training and operation, LLMs
are best seen as a giant pseudo System 1 (Kahneman, 2011)
(see Figure 1). Even from a pure engineering perspective,
a system that takes constant time to produce the next token
cannot possibly be doing principled reasoning on its own.1
Not surprisingly, initial excitement based on anecdotal performance of LLMs on reasoning tasks (Bubeck et al., 2023)
has been dissipated to some extent by the recent spate of
studies, including our own, questioning the robustness of
such behaviors–be they planning (Valmeekam et al., 2023c;
Kambhampati, 2024), simple arithmetic and logic (Dziri
et al., 2023), theory of mind (Ullman, 2023; Verma et al.,
2024b), or general mathematical and abstract benchmarks
(McCoy et al., 2023; Gendron et al., 2023). Despite this, a
steady stream of claims continue to be made in the literature about the planning and reasoning capabilities of LLMs.
In light of questions about their planning capabilities, the
head-long rush into agentic LLMs should be particularly
concerning. After all, acting without the ability to plan is
surely a recipe for unpleasant consequences!

We argue that auto-regressive LLMs cannot,
by themselves, do planning or self-verification
(which is after all a form of reasoning), and shed
some light on the reasons for misunderstandings
in the literature. We also argue that LLMs should
be viewed as universal approximate knowledge
sources that have much more meaningful roles
to play in planning/reasoning tasks beyond simple front-end/back-end format translators. We
present a vision of LLM-Modulo Frameworks
that combines the strengths of LLMs with external
model-based verifiers in a tighter bi-directional
interaction regime. We will show how the models
driving the external verifiers themselves can be acquired with the help of LLMs. We will also argue
that rather than simply pipelining LLMs and symbolic components, this LLM-Modulo Framework
provides a better neuro-symbolic approach that
offers tighter integration between LLMs and symbolic components, extending the scope of modelbased planning/reasoning regimes towards more
flexible knowledge, problem and preference specifications.

In an ironic juxtaposition to this unwarranted optimism
about the planning and reasoning abilities of LLMs, there
is also unwarranted pessimism about the roles LLMs can
play in planning/reasoning tasks. Several efforts (e.g. (Liu
et al., 2023; Pan et al., 2023; Xie et al., 2023)) advocate
using LLMs only as glorified translators–converting reasoning problems embedded in textual format to symbolic
representations, and pawning them off to external classical
symbolic solvers (with all their attendant expressivity and
search complexity challenges (Doyle & Patil, 1991)).2

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs), essentially n-gram models
on steroids which have been pre-trained on web-scale language corpora (or, effectively, our collective consciousness),
have caught the imagination of the AI research community
with linguistic capabilities that no one expected text completion systems to possess. Their seeming versatility has
led many researchers to wonder whether they can also do
well on planning and reasoning tasks typically associated

In truth, LLMs can be a whole lot more than machine trans1
Think of asking an LLM an yes/no question–is this theorem
logically entailed by this first-order logic knowledge-base. This
is well-known to be a semi-decidable problem. Ask yourself if
the LLM will take longer in answering the question. (If you are
thinking Chain-of-thought prompts or training with step-by-step
data, consider that you are essentially changing the nature of the
original prompt/training).
2
In some circles, this unidirectional pipeline has been given the
undeserved badge of neuro-symbolic architecture.

1

School of Computing and AI, Arizona State University,
Tempe, AZ, USA. Correspondence to: Subbarao Kambhampati
<rao@asu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

