Auto-Regressive Next-Token Predictors are Universal Learners

Eran Malach 1

Abstract

tive seems extremely simplistic, auto-regressive next-token
predictors trained on rich enough data are able to solve strikingly complex tasks (Bubeck et al., 2023). This raises the
question of whether such next-token predictors are merely
“glorified” autocomplete models, which happened to memorize the entire internet, or are they truly performing novel
logical reasoning. To this end, it has been shown that the
ability of language models to compute complex functions
can be greatly enhanced by using Chain-of-Thought (CoT)
and scratchpad techniques (Wei et al., 2022b; Kojima et al.,
2022; Lightman et al., 2023; Nye et al., 2021), allowing the
models to perform unrestricted intermediate computations
before arriving at a final answer.

Large language models display remarkable capabilities in logical and mathematical reasoning,
allowing them to solve complex tasks. Interestingly, these abilities emerge in networks trained
on the simple task of next-token prediction. In
this work, we present a theoretical framework
for studying auto-regressive next-token predictors.
We demonstrate that even simple models such as
linear next-token predictors, trained on Chain-ofThought (CoT) data, can approximate any function efficiently computed by a Turing machine.
We introduce a new complexity measure—length
complexity—which measures the number of intermediate tokens in a CoT sequence required
to approximate some target function, and analyze
the interplay between length complexity and other
notions of complexity. Finally, we show experimentally that simple next-token predictors, such
as linear networks and shallow Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs), display non-trivial performance
on text generation and arithmetic tasks. Our results demonstrate that the power of today’s LLMs
can be attributed, to a great extent, to the autoregressive next-token training scheme, and not
necessarily to a particular choice of architecture.

In this work, we introduce a theoretical framework for studying auto-regressive next-token predictors. We demonstrate
that much of the power of today’s language models in logical reasoning can be attributed to the nature of the autoregressive learning, and not to a particular choice of architecture. We show theoretically that very simple models
trained to only predict the next token in an auto-regressive
fashion can be used to solve extremely complex tasks when
utilizing CoT techniques. In particular, we show that even
linear predictors—models where the next-token probability
is a linear function of the input sequence—are already powerful enough to compute any Turing computable function.
The main theoretical result in the paper is captured in the
following informal statement:
Theorem 1.1 (informal). For any function f that can be
efficiently computed using a Turing machine, there exists a
dataset D such that training a (linear) next-token predictor
on D results in a predictor that approximates f .

1. Introduction
Large language models have achieved tremendous progress
in various NLP tasks, such as machine translation, logical reasoning, coding and natural language understanding.
These models, like GPT-3, GPT-4 and LaMDA (Brown et al.,
2020; OpenAI, 2023; Thoppilan et al., 2022), are trained
on massive amounts of text data and learn to generate coherent and contextually relevant responses to input prompts.
Amazingly, such language models are mostly trained with a
single objective: predicting the next token. While this objec-

That is, any computer program or intelligent agent that can
be simulated by a computer, can be learned, given the right
dataset, by a simple next-token predictor.
To understand the power of auto-regressive learning, observe that a result equivalent to Theorem 1.1 is not possible in the classical supervised learning setting, where the
learner is given access only to the input sequence and the
target label. It is well-known that no learning algorithm
can efficiently learn the class of all (efficient) Turing computable functions (Valiant, 1984), given only the input and
the output of the function (without access to intermediate
supervision). In fact, in classical supervised learning, there

1

Harvard University, Kempner Institute for the Study of Natural and Artificial Intelligence. Correspondence to: Eran Malach
<emalach@fas.harvard.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

