Why Do Animals Need Shaping?
A Theory of Task Composition and Curriculum Learning

Jin Hwa Lee 1 Stefano Sarao Mannelli 1 Andrew Saxe 1

Abstract

teaching a complex task directly, shaping aims to gradually
teach components of the complex task. Imagine a mouse in
a laboratory learning a decision-making task to get water
rewards. To learn this task, the mouse needs to learn many
sub-tasks often through reinforcement, for example, how to
interact with a reward port, or how a light bulb predicts rewards. Depending on what shaping procedures are applied,
the animals might learn faster, slower or even completely
fail to learn a given task. Indeed, many studies in neuroscience exploit shaping stages for behavioural training of
animals (Mushiake et al., 2001; Aguillon-Rodriguez et al.,
2021; Grossman et al., 2022; Makino, 2023). In humans,
studies similarly show that curriculum—the order in which
tasks are trained—is important for generalisation (Elio &
Anderson, 1984; Clerkin et al., 2017; Pashler & Mozer,
2013; Eckstein & Collins, 2021; Dekker et al., 2022). Nevertheless, we do not have a theory that can quantitatively
explain the role of shaping and how it changes the learning
dynamics of intelligent systems which could give us deeper
insights into these procedures and guide design choices in
experiments.

Diverse studies in systems neuroscience begin
with extended periods of curriculum training
known as ‘shaping’ procedures. These involve
progressively studying component parts of more
complex tasks, and can make the difference between learning a task quickly, slowly or not at all.
Despite the importance of shaping to the acquisition of complex tasks, there is as yet no theory
that can help guide the design of shaping procedures, or more fundamentally, provide insight
into its key role in learning. Modern deep reinforcement learning systems might implicitly learn
compositional primitives within their multilayer
policy networks. Inspired by these models, we
propose and analyse a model of deep policy gradient learning of simple compositional reinforcement learning tasks. Using the tools of statistical
physics, we solve for exact learning dynamics and
characterise different learning strategies including
primitives pre-training, in which task primitives
are studied individually before learning compositional tasks. We find a complex interplay between
task complexity and the efficacy of shaping strategies. Overall, our theory provides an analytical
understanding of the benefits of shaping in a class
of compositional tasks and a quantitative account
of how training protocols can disclose useful task
primitives, ultimately yielding faster and more
robust learning.

One crucial feature of shaping is compositionality. Shaping
stages involve breaking down complex tasks into simpler
components and learning them individually before animal
learns to integrate those primitive tasks in the right context to
complete the higher level tasks (Schulz et al., 2017; Hupkes
et al., 2020). In other words, shaping is a form of curriculum
learning, leveraging the compositional structure of complex
tasks. Many real world tasks require mastering different
skills and combining them in the right way. This property
is often referred to as systematic compositionality, which
enables us to flexibly reuse previously acquired primitives
by combining them (Chomsky, 2014; Smolensky, 1990;
Lake et al., 2019; Dehaene et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Shaping is critical for effective learning in animals and humans (Skinner, 2019; Pavlov & Anrep, 1927). Rather than

On the other hand, the recent success of deep reinforcement
learning (RL) in highly complex tasks motivates using these
models to study compositional task and curriculum learning.
Many empirical studies indicate that multilayer policy networks might implicitly learn compositional primitives if not
explicitly (Baker et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020; Nachum
et al., 2018; Andreas et al., 2017; Barreto et al., 2020). This
motivates using a deep policy network model of composi-

1
Sainsbury Wellcome Centre for Neural Circuits and Behaviour
& Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit, University College
London, London, UK
. Correspondence to: Jin Hwa Lee <jin.lee.22@ucl.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

