Locally Differentially Private Decentralized Stochastic Bilevel Optimization with
Guaranteed Convergence Accuracy

Ziqin Chen 1 Yongqiang Wang 1

Abstract

stochastic bilevel-optimization algorithms have been proposed (Ghadimi & Wang, 2018; Khanduri et al., 2021; Ji
et al., 2021; Hong et al., 2023). Recently, with the increasingly pressing need to parallelize learning algorithms in order to handle the enormous growth in data and model sizes,
the following decentralized stochastic bilevel-optimization
(DSBO) problem is gaining increased traction (Lu et al.,
2022; Yang et al., 2022; Gao et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023;
Zhang et al., 2023; Dong et al., 2023; Kong et al., 2024):

Decentralized bilevel optimization based machine
learning techniques are achieving remarkable success in a wide variety of domains. However,
the intensive exchange of information (involving nested-loops of consensus or communication iterations) in existing decentralized bileveloptimization algorithms leads to a great challenge
to ensure rigorous differential privacy, which,
however, is necessary to bring the benefits of machine learning to domains where involved data
are sensitive. By proposing a new decentralized
stochastic bilevel-optimization algorithm which
avoids nested-loops of information-exchange iterations, we achieve, for the first time, both differential privacy and accurate convergence in decentralized bilevel optimization. This is significant
since even for single-level decentralized optimization and learning, existing differential-privacy solutions have to sacrifice convergence accuracy
for privacy. Besides characterizing the convergence rate under nonconvex/convex/strongly convex conditions, we also rigorously quantify the
price of differential privacy in the convergence
rate. Experimental results on machine learning
models confirm the efficacy of our algorithm.

m

minp F (x),

x∈R

F (x) =

1 X
fi (x, y ∗ (x)),
m i=1
m

(1)

1 X
s.t. y (x) = argminy∈Rq g(x, y) :=
gi (x, y),
m i=1
∗

where x ∈ Rp and y ∈ Rq represent the optimization parameters and m denotes the number of agents. Each agent
i only has access to its local upper-level objective function
fi and lower-level objective function gi , which, in machine
learning applications, are usually given by
fi (x, y) = Eφi [h(x, y; φi )],
gi (x, y) = Eξi [l(x, y; ξi )].

(2)

In (2), φi and ξi represent random data samples which usually follow unknown and heterogeneous distributions across
different agents.

1. Introduction

All above DSBO algorithms require participating agents
to explicitly share model updates in every iteration, which
raises severe privacy concerns when involved data are sensitive. In fact, recent studies (Zhu et al., 2019; Triastcyn
& Faltings, 2020) have shown that even though raw data
are not shared, exploiting information shared in decentralized optimization, external adversaries can still precisely
recover the raw data used for training (pixel-wise accurate
for images and token-wise matching for texts). As differential privacy is evolving as the de facto standard for privacy
preservation due to its rigorous mathematical foundations
yet implementation simplicity and post-processing immunity (Dwork et al., 2010; 2014), it is of great interest to
achieve differential privacy in DSBO. However, given that
existing DSBO algorithms all involve nested-loops of com-

Bilevel stochastic optimization is evolving as an effective
tool for solving many machine learning problems having
a nested structure, with typical examples including metalearning (Bertinetto et al., 2019; Rajeswaran et al., 2019),
hyperparameter optimization (Franceschi et al., 2018), imitation learning (Arora et al., 2020), and neural architecture search (Liu et al., 2018). So far, numerous centralized
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Clemson
University, Clemson, SC, 29634, United States. Correspondence
to: Yongqiang Wang <yongqiw@clemson.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

