Posterior Sampling-Based Bayesian Optimization
with Tighter Bayesian Regret Bounds

Shion Takeno 1 2 Yu Inatsu 3 Masayuki Karasuyama 3 Ichiro Takeuchi 1 2

Abstract

2016).
Gaussian process upper confidence bound (GP-UCB) (Kushner, 1962; Srinivas et al., 2010) is a seminal work of the
regret analysis in BO literature. GP-UCB achieves sublinear Bayesian cumulative regret (BCR) bounds by sequentially evaluating the maximizer of the UCB, whose width
is controlled by the confidence parameter βt . However,
the theoretical choice of the confidence parameter can be
huge. Therefore, GP-UCB practically requires manually
tuning the confidence parameter, which strongly affects the
optimization performance. Furthermore, GP-UCB with a
manually tuned confidence parameter is no longer theoretically guaranteed.

Among various acquisition functions (AFs) in
Bayesian optimization (BO), Gaussian process upper confidence bound (GP-UCB) and Thompson
sampling (TS) are well-known options with established theoretical properties regarding Bayesian
cumulative regret (BCR). Recently, it has been
shown that a randomized variant of GP-UCB
achieves a tighter BCR bound compared with GPUCB, which we call the tighter BCR bound for
brevity. Inspired by this study, this paper first
shows that TS achieves the tighter BCR bound.
On the other hand, GP-UCB and TS often practically suffer from manual hyperparameter tuning
and over-exploration issues, respectively. Therefore, we analyze yet another AF called a probability of improvement from the maximum of a
sample path (PIMS). We show that PIMS achieves
the tighter BCR bound and avoids the hyperparameter tuning, unlike GP-UCB. Furthermore, we
demonstrate a wide range of experiments, focusing on the effectiveness of PIMS that mitigates
the practical issues of GP-UCB and TS.

Another well-known theoretically guaranteed BO method is
Thompson sampling (TS) (Thompson, 1933), whose same
BCR bound as that of GP-UCB has been shown (Russo &
Van Roy, 2014). TS is a randomized algorithm that sequentially evaluates the optimal solution of a sample path from
a posterior. Therefore, TS does not have hyperparameters
like the confidence parameter for the AF, except for those
for GPs. Hence, TS does not require any manual hyperparameter tuning regarding AF. However, it is frequently
discussed that TS suffers from over-exploration, particularly
in higher-dimensional optimization problem (e.g., Shahriari
et al., 2016; Takeno et al., 2023).

1. Introduction

Recently, Takeno et al. (2023) showed improved randomized GP-UCB (IRGP-UCB) achieves tighter BCR bounds
for a finite input domain compared with TS and GP-UCB.
In particular, it is shown that there is no need to increase the
confidence parameter in proportion to the iterations. However, the theoretical confidence parameter still depends on
the cardinality of the finite input domain. Since the cardinality of the finite input domain can be huge, manual
tuning of the confidence parameter can be required even in
IRGP-UCB.

Bayesian optimization (BO) (Mockus et al., 1978) has become a popular tool for an expensive-to-evaluate black-box
function optimization problem. BO aims to optimize with
fewer function evaluations by adaptively evaluating the objective function based on the Bayesian model and acquisition functions (AF). Due to its effectiveness, BO has been
applied to a wide range of problems, including drug discovery (Korovina et al., 2020), AutoML (Klein et al., 2017;
Falkner et al., 2018), and materials informatics (Ueno et al.,
1
Department of Engineering, Nagoya University, Aichi, Japan
RIKEN AIP, Tokyo, Japan 3 Department of Computer Science,
Nagoya Institute of Technology, Aichi, Japan. Correspondence to:
Shion Takeno <takeno.shion.m6@f.mail.nagoya-u.ac.jp>.

This study provides the same BCR bound of TS as IRGPUCB, inspired by the analysis of IRGP-UCB, in which randomness plays a key role. Furthermore, against the practical
issues of GP-UCB-based methods and TS, we analyze a
probability of improvement from a maximum of sample-path
(PIMS). PIMS, as the name suggests, is a randomized algo-

2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

