Q-A LIGN: Teaching LMMs for Visual Scoring via Discrete Text-Defined Levels

Haoning Wu ♠ ♡ 1 Zicheng Zhang ♠ 2 Weixia Zhang 2 Chaofeng Chen 1
Liang Liao 1 Chunyi Li 2 Yixuan Gao 1 2 Annan Wang 1 Erli Zhang 1
Wenxiu Sun 3 Qiong Yan 3 Xiongkuo Min 2 Guangtao Zhai ♢ 2 Weisi Lin ♢ 1

Abstract
The explosion of visual content available online
underscores the requirement for an accurate machine assessor to robustly evaluate scores across
diverse types of visual contents. While recent
studies have demonstrated the exceptional potentials of large multi-modality models (LMMs) on
a wide range of related fields, in this work, we
explore how to teach them for visual rating aligning with human opinions. Observing that human
raters only learn and judge discrete text-defined
levels in subjective studies, we propose to emulate this subjective process and teach LMMs
with text-defined rating levels instead of scores.
The proposed Q-A LIGN achieves state-of-theart accuracy on image quality assessment (IQA),
image aesthetic assessment (IAA), as well as
video quality assessment (VQA) under the original LMM structure. With the syllabus, we further
unify the three tasks into one model, termed the
O NE A LIGN. Our experiments demonstrate the
advantage of discrete levels over direct scores on
training, and that LMMs can learn beyond the
discrete levels and provide effective finer-grained
evaluations. Code and weights will be released.

Figure 1. The Q-A LIGN (training LMMs with text-defined levels)
in comparison with its baseline (training LMMs with scores) and
existing state-of-the-arts, showing exceptional improvements especially on cross-set settings. Metrics are (SRCC+PLCC)/2.

tent remains an indispensable need to the computer vision
field. To address this need, from handcraft approaches (Mittal et al., 2013; 2012) to deep-neural-network-based methods (Talebi & Milanfar, 2018; Zhang et al., 2020; Ke et al.,
2021), the endeavor to improve the accuracies of visual
evaluators never stops. Nevertheless, while existing methods can already achieve remarkable accuracies on specific
datasets by regressing from the mean opinion scores (MOS),
the complicated factors that affect the final score in contrast
with the limited capacity of these methods have resulted in
their poor out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization abilities.
This makes them struggle to accurately score novel types of
content. Moreover, they usually experience compromised
performance while handling different scoring scenarios (e.g.
mixing multiple datasets) together, making it challenging to
train a unified model for different situations.

1. Introduction
There is always a need to score an image. From the early
focus on factors related to compression, transmission, and
image processing (Sheikh et al., 2005), to directly addressing user-generated content (Tu et al., 2021a) (e.g. photos
and videos taken with smartphones (Fang et al., 2020)), and
moving on to the recently popular AI-generated content (Li
et al., 2023), at every stage, accurately evaluating visual con-

In contrast, recently emerging large multi-modality models
(LMMs) have shown very strong background knowledge
on a wide range of visual and language disciplines. They
can well understand high-level visual contents (Liu et al.,
2023a; Ye et al., 2023a), and effectively perceive low-level
visual attributes (Zhang et al., 2023a), and more importantly
possess reasoning ability benefited from their strong language decoder (Liu et al., 2023c). While these abilities are
proved fundamental to a more accurate and robust visual

♠
Equal contribution.♡ Project Lead. 1 Nanyang Technological
University 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3 Sensetime Research.
Correspondence to: Guangtao Zhai <zhaiguangtao@sjtu.edu.cn>,
Weisi Lin <wslin@ntu.edu.sg>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

