Data Engineering for Scaling Language Models to 128K Context

Yao Fu 1 Rameswar Panda 2 Xinyao Niu 3 Xiang Yue 4 Hannaneh Hajishirzi 5 Yoon Kim 6 Hao Peng 7

Abstract

ing (Caciularu et al., 2023), repository-level code understanding (Bairi et al., 2023), long-history dialog modeling (Mazumder & Liu, 2024), and language model-powered
autonomous agents (Weng, 2023). A popular testbed for
whether models can actually utilize long context length
is the recent Needle-in-a-Haystack test (Kamradt, 2023),
which asks the model to precisely recite the information
in a given sentence where the sentence (the “needle”) is
placed in an arbitrary location of a 128K long document (the
“haystack”). In the open-source space, although works like
LongLoRA (Chen et al., 2023b) and YaRN-Mistral (Peng
et al., 2023) theoretically support 100K context, they are
not able to pass this test at such context lengths, as shown
in Fig. 1. Currently, only closed-source frontier models like
GPT-4 128K have demonstrated strong performance on the
Needle-in-a-Haystack test.

We study the continual pretraining recipe for scaling language models’ context lengths to 128K,
with a focus on data engineering. We hypothesize that long context modeling, in particular
the ability to utilize information at arbitrary input locations, is a capability that is mostly already acquired through large-scale pretraining,
and that this capability can be readily extended
to contexts substantially longer than seen during
training (e.g., 4K to 128K) through lightweight
continual pretraining on appropriate data mixture. We investigate the quantity and quality of
the data for continual pretraining: (1) for quantity, we show that 500 million to 5 billion tokens are enough to enable the model to retrieve
information anywhere within the 128K context;
(2) for quality, our results equally emphasize domain balance and length upsampling. Concretely,
we find that naı̈vely upsampling longer data on
certain domains like books, a common practice
of existing work, gives suboptimal performance,
and that a balanced domain mixture is important. We demonstrate that continual pretraining
of the full model on 1B-5B tokens of such data
is an effective and affordable strategy for scaling
the context length of language models to 128K.
Our recipe outperforms strong open-source longcontext models and closes the gap to frontier models like GPT-4 128K.

This work investigates data engineering methods for scaling
language models’ context lengths. Our objective is to continue pretraining the language model on appropriate data
mixtures such that it can pass the Needle-in-a-Haystack test
at 128K length. Given that most existing models are trained
on less than 4K context length (Touvron et al., 2023a) and
that attention has quadratic complexity, continual pretraining with full attention on much longer context lengths (we
train on 64K-80K context lengths) may seem prohibitively
costly at a first glance. However, we show that this is feasible under academic-level resources (see Table 2). We use
LLaMA-2 7B and 13B as our base models. We do not make
any significant change to model architecture other than adjusting the base of RoPE, as in Xiong et al. (2023). Our
major focus is the data recipe: what and how much data is
able to well-adapt a model to pass the Needle-in-a-Haystack
test at 128K context length.

1. Introduction

We hypothesize that the capability to utilize information at
arbitrary locations within long context length is (mostly)
already acquired during pretraining, even for models pretrained on substantially shorter 4K contexts. This hypothesis is in contrast to existing works like Xiong et al. (2023);
XVerse (2024), which perform continual pretraining on a
large amount of data (400B tokens) to inject long-contextmodeling capabilities; in this strategy, the cost can be as
high as pre-training from scratch. In this work we show
that continual pretraining on a small amount of long-context
data, in our case, 1-5B tokens, can “unlock” a 7B model’s

A context window of 128K tokens enables large language
models to perform tasks that significantly beyond existing paradigm, such as multi-document question answer1

University Edinburgh 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab 3 University
of Melbourne 4 CMU 5 University of Washington 6 Massachusetts Institute of Technology 7 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
Correspondence to: Yao Fu <yao.fu@ed.ac.uk>, Yoon Kim
<yoonkim@mit.edu>, Hao Peng <haopeng@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

