Can We Remove the Square-Root in Adaptive Gradient Methods?
A Second-Order Perspective
Wu Lin 1 Felix Dangel 1 Runa Eschenhagen 2 Juhan Bae 3 Richard E. Turner 2 Alireza Makhzani 1 3

Abstract

Despite their success on architectures like transformers,
adaptive methods tend to generalize worse than stochastic gradient descent (SGD) on convolutional architectures
(Wilson et al., 2017). Our understanding of this discrepancy
is limited. Balles & Hennig (2018) dissect Adam into two
concepts, sign descent and adaptive step sizes, and hypothesize that the connection to sign descent causes the gap with
SGD on CNNs. Similarly, Kunstner et al. (2023); Chen
et al. (2023) argue that adaptive methods outperform SGD
on transformers due to their connection to sign descent.

Adaptive gradient optimizers like Adam(W) are
the default training algorithms for many deep
learning architectures, such as transformers. Their
diagonal preconditioner is based on the gradient outer product which is incorporated into
the parameter update via a square root. While
these methods are often motivated as approximate
second-order methods, the square root represents
a fundamental difference. In this work, we investigate how the behavior of adaptive methods
changes when we remove the root, i.e. strengthen
their second-order motivation. Surprisingly, we
find that such square-root-free adaptive methods
close the generalization gap to SGD on convolutional architectures, while maintaining their rootbased counterpart’s performance on transformers. The second-order perspective also has practical benefits for the development of non-diagonal
adaptive methods through the concept of preconditioner invariance. In contrast to root-based methods like Shampoo, the root-free counterparts do
not require numerically unstable matrix root decompositions and inversions, thus work well in
half precision. Our findings provide new insights
into the development of adaptive methods and
raise important questions regarding the currently
overlooked role of adaptivity for their success.

It is challenging to isolate the sign descent component of
adaptive methods like Adam or RMSProp (Tieleman & Hinton, 2012), as they typically introduce a square root to the
preconditioner, which conflates the sign and adaptivity aspects and hinders our comprehension of the role of the
adaptivity. The root is motivated by reports of improved
performance (Tieleman & Hinton, 2012) and to stabilize
convergence near the optimum (Kingma & Ba, 2015; Kunstner et al., 2019; Martens, 2020). However, it conflicts
with the motivation of adaptive methods as approximate
second-order methods based on the empirical Fisher, which
is also commonly mentioned in works introducing adaptive
methods (e.g. Kingma & Ba, 2015).
Here, we investigate how the behavior of adaptive methods
changes when we remove the root. Our idea is to strengthen
the often-mentioned link to second-order methods that is
weakened by the root. Conceptually, this cleanly disentangles the aforementioned adaptivity aspect from the sign
aspect. Practically, it provides an opportunity to revisit the
root’s role in the context of modern training strategies, like
non-constant learning rate schedules (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2016) and hyperparameter tuning schemes (Choi et al.,
2019), that differ from the original pipelines in which the
square root was introduced. Computationally, removing the
root is beneficial for bridging the computation gap (Figure 3)
between diagonal and non-diagonal matrix adaptive methods and lowering the per-iteration cost of matrix methods
by removing matrix root decompositions that need to be
carried out in high precision to avoid numerical instabilities
(Gupta et al., 2018; Anil et al., 2020).

1. Introduction
Adaptive gradient-based methods like Adam (Kingma & Ba,
2015) play a significant role in training modern deep learning models such as transformers. A better understanding
of these methods allows us to address their shortcomings
and develop new adaptive methods to reduce training time
and improve performance. This is essential as deep learning
models become increasingly large and complex to train.
1
Vector Institute, Canada 2 Cambridge University, United Kingdom 3 University of Toronto, Canada. Correspondence to: Wu Lin
<yorker.lin@gmail.com >.

There are some challenges to establishing a rigorous secondorder perspective on adaptive methods; one cannot just remove the root. We overcome those challenges and make the

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

