On Stronger Computational Separations Between
Multimodal and Unimodal Machine Learning

Ari Karchmer 1

Abstract

way...”).

Recently, multimodal machine learning has enjoyed huge empirical success (e.g. GPT-4). Motivated to develop theoretical justification for this
empirical success, Lu (NeurIPS ’23, ALT ’24)
introduces a theory of multimodal learning, and
considers possible separations between theoretical models of multimodal and unimodal learning.
In particular, Lu (ALT ’24) shows a computational separation, which is relevant to worst-case
instances of the learning task. In this paper, we
give a stronger average-case computational separation, where for “typical” instances of the learning task, unimodal learning is computationally
hard, but multimodal learning is easy. We then
question how “natural” the average-case separation is. Would it be encountered in practice? To
this end, we prove that under basic conditions, any
given computational separation between averagecase unimodal and multimodal learning tasks implies a corresponding cryptographic key agreement protocol. We suggest to interpret this as evidence that very strong computational advantages
of multimodal learning may arise infrequently in
practice, since they exist only for the “pathological” case of inherently cryptographic distributions.
However, this does not apply to possible (superpolynomial) statistical advantages.

Empirical triumphs of Machine Learning from multimodal
data such as GPT-4 (Achiam et al., 2023), Gemini (Team
et al., 2023), and Gato (Reed et al., 2022) suggest that multimodal perception is also really useful for some machine
learning tasks. Lu (2023b;a) introduces a formal study
of multimodal versus unimodal machine learning tasks, in
order to develop theoretical justification for the empirical
results (see also Huang et al. (2021) and others; we elaborate
on related work in Section 1.2). However, the theory of multimodal learning is still in its infancy. The main theoretical
question is:
Is multimodal data truly (provably) more useful
than unimodal data, or is it a mirage?
To attack this question, Lu (2023b) first shows a statistical
separation: that there exist machine learning tasks that do
require asymptotically more samples to complete when the
data is expressed unimodally as opposed to multimodally.
Second, Lu (2023a) shows that not only is there a statistical separation, but there also exist machine learning tasks
that might be computationally easier when given access to
bimodal data (two modes), rather than just unimodal data.
The computational separation of Lu (2023a) identifies a machine learning task that is possible in polynomial time with
bimodal data, but not with unimodal data, for it’s worstcase instance. This means that the unimodal learning task
could still possibly be easy on most or “typical” instances.
Of course, Lu’s separation requires a relatively weak assumption of computational hardness: that a certain NP-hard
problem is not also in P.

1. Introduction
For humans, multimodal perception—the ability to interpret
the same or similar information expressed in multiple ways
(e.g. text and image)—is absolutely critical to learning. We
hold it as self-evident that access to multiple representations
of the same idea can ease the process of forming a mental
model applicable to new situations (“when you put it that

In this work, we continue to develop a theory of multimodal
learning, in pursuit of the truth about how useful multimodal
data is (when compared to unimodal data). In particular, we
study the existence of stronger computational separations,
which apply to the average-case instances of learning tasks.
An average-case computational separation can inform the
practice of multimodal learning more comprehensively than
a worst-case separation, since it would apply with high
probability over a randomized process that determines the
learning task.

1
Department of Computer Science, Boston University, Boston,
MA, USA. Correspondence to: Ari Karchmer <arika@bu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

