Random Exploration in Bayesian Optimization: Order-Optimal Regret and
Computational Efficiency

Sudeep Salgia 1 Sattar Vakili 2 Qing Zhao 3
points {xt }Tt=1 chosen sequentially in time. In addition to
the convergence of {xt }Tt=1 to x∗ , an online measure of the
learning efficiency is the cumulative regret

Abstract
We consider Bayesian optimization using Gaussian Process models, also referred to as kernelbased bandit optimization. We study the methodology of exploring the domain using random samples drawn from a distribution. We show that this
random exploration approach achieves the optimal error rates. Our analysis is based on novel
concentration bounds in an infinite dimensional
Hilbert space established in this work, which may
be of independent interest. We further develop
an algorithm based on random exploration with
domain shrinking and establish its order-optimal
regret guarantees under both noise-free and noisy
settings. In the noise-free setting, our analysis
closes the existing gap in regret performance under a mild assumption on the underlying function and thereby partially resolves a COLT open
problem. The proposed algorithm also enjoys a
computational advantage over prevailing methods
due to the random exploration that obviates the
expensive optimization of a non-convex acquisition function for choosing the query points at each
iteration.

R(T ) =

T
X

[f (x∗ ) − f (xt )] .

(1)

t=1

The above problem finds a wide range of applications including hyperparameter optimization (Li et al., 2016), experimental design (Greenhill et al., 2020), recommendation
systems (Vanchinathan et al., 2014) and robotics (Lizotte
et al., 2007). An approach that has proven to be particularly
effective is Bayesian Optimization (BO) using Gaussian
Process (GP) models (a.k.a. kernel-based bandit optimization). The unknown objective function f is assumed to live
in a Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS) associated
with a known kernel. Within the GP-based BO framework,
f is viewed as a realization of a Gaussian process over X .
With each new query xt , the learner sharpens the posterior
distribution and uses it as a proxy for f for subsequent optimization. We point out that such a Bayesian approach is
equally applicable to a frequentist formulation where f is
deterministic as considered in this work. In this case, the
GP model of f is fictitious and internal to the algorithm.
Under the assumption of noise-free query feedback,
BO techniques were used for optimization as early as
1964 (Kushner, 1964). GP-based BO was popularized
through the work of Močkus et al. (1978). Since then, a
number of approaches have been developed and analyzed
over the years, often under certain conditions on the kernels and functional characteristics around x∗ (see Sec. 1.3
for a detailed discussion). Surprisingly, despite the long
history, an algorithm with guaranteed order-optimal regret
performance remains open as discussed in Vakili (2022).

1. Introduction
1.1. GP-based Bayesian Optimization
We consider the problem of sequential optimization of an
unknown, possibly non-convex, function f : X → R. The
learner sequentially chooses a query point xt ∈ X at each
time t and observes the function value (potentially subject to
noise) at xt . The learning objective is to approach a global
maximizer x∗ of the function through a sequence of query

GP-based BO under noisy query was studied much more
recently, following the pioneering work by Srinivas et al.
(2010) where they proposed the celebrated GP-UCB algorithm. Extensive studies since then have fully characterized the achievable learning performance, both in terms of
information-theoretic lower bounds (Scarlett et al., 2017)
and the design of algorithms such as SupKernel-UCB (Valko
et al., 2013), GP-ThreDS (Salgia et al., 2021), BPE (Li

1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie
Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA 2 MediaTek Research,
Cambridge, UK 3 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA. Correspondence to:
Sudeep Salgia <ssalgia@andrew.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

