Perturb-and-Project: Differentially Private Similarities and Marginals

Vincent Cohen-Addad * 1 Tommaso d’Orsi * 1 2 Alessandro Epasto * 1 Vahab Mirrokni * 1 Peilin Zhong * 1

Abstract

rithms such as stochastic gradient descent (SGD) are central
algorithms in modern machine learning. However, making
these algorithms differentially private is particularly challenging (Chaudhuri et al., 2011); repeated noise addition is
necessary, leading to an accumulation of noise that can significantly degrade the final solution’s quality. Furthermore,
precisely quantifying the required noise at each iteration is
often difficult, potentially resulting in overly conservative
noise addition.

We revisit the input perturbations framework for
differential privacy where noise is added to the
input A ∈ S and the result is then projected back
to the space of admissible datasets S. Through
this framework, we first design novel efficient
algorithms to privately release pair-wise cosine
similarities. Second, we derive a novel algorithm
to compute k-way marginal queries over n features. Prior work could achieve comparable guarantees only for k even. Furthermore, we extend
our results to t-sparse datasets, where our efficient algorithms yields novel, stronger guarantees
whenever t ⩽ n5/6 / log n . Finally, we provide
a theoretical perspective on why fast input perturbation algorithms works well in practice. The
key technical ingredients behind our results are
tight sum-of-squares certificates upper bounding
the Gaussian complexity of sets of solutions.

Another widely-used approach to ERM problems is objective perturbation (Chaudhuri & Monteleoni, 2008; Chaudhuri et al., 2011; Iyengar et al., 2019; Kifer et al., 2012),
which involves perturbing the objective function so that optimizing the perturbed objective ensures that the output is
private. One very generic way of achieving objective perturbation is through input perturbation which consists in
adding noise to the input dataset to obtain a private perturbed
input. This permits the use of any non-DP algorithms on the
perturbed input and hence simplifies practical implementation. One benefit over perturbing the objective is that the
properties (e.g., convexity) of the objective are unchanged
and so the state-of-the-art non-DP optimizers can be used.
Experimentation with various non-DP algorithms becomes
possible, and privacy guarantees are immediate. A crucial
research direction is thus to investigate input perturbation
methods that preserve the intrinsic properties of the data
that are beneficial for the downstream task.

1. Introduction
Differential privacy (DP) (Dwork et al., 2014) has become
the golden standard to define how much information an algorithm leaks about users’ data. Thus, designing differentially
private algorithms is a central problem in modern machine
learning. One of the key considerations in designing DP
algorithms is to determine the minimum amount of noise
needed to ensure privacy to maximize the accuracy of the
output: Insufficient noise may result in a non-private algorithm while excessive noise can significantly degrade the
algorithm’s output quality. It is thus key to quantify how
much a worst-case user impacts (Dwork et al., 2006) the
final output of the algorithm to add the appropriate noise.

Our Contribution In this work, we study input perturbation techniques from a theoretical perspective. We focus
on the problem of designing differentially private projection functions (such as e.g., dimensionality reduction techniques). We observe that, quite surprisingly, input perturbations yield the best known (and conjecturally optimal)
guarantees for a large class of projection functions. This
challenges the expectation that a general approach might
incur sub-optimal utility loss. Our analysis reveals that the
algorithm’s utility guarantees are contingent upon the “richness” (metric entropy) of the target set (the set into which
the input is projected). Inspired by (d’Orsi et al., 2023),
we use sum-of-squares to obtain tight bounds on the Gaussian complexity of set of solutions. To further improve, we
introduce new sum-of-square certificates (e.g. for sparse
injective tensor norms). Finally, while our sum-of-squares

An interesting example is the case of empirical risk minimization (ERM) problems. Iterative optimization algo*
1
Equal contribution
Google Research 2 BIDSA,
Bocconi.
Correspondence to:
Tommaso d’Orsi
<tommaso.dorsi@unibocconi.it>,
Alessandro
Epasto
<aepasto@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

