Editing Partially Observable Networks via Graph Diffusion Models

Puja Trivedi 1 Ryan A. Rossi 2 David Arbour 2 Tong Yu 2 Franck Dernoncourt 2 Sungchul Kim 2
Nedim Lipka 2 Namyong Park 3 Nesreen K. Ahmed 4 Danai Koutra 1

Abstract

graph can be corrupted in different ways, it is important to
jointly support all these editing tasks, but existing methods
usually only support some of them. For instance, link prediction methods (Zhang & Chen, 2018; Zhang et al., 2020)
are able to recover missing edges, but cannot remove noisy
edges. Likewise, graph generative adversarial networks
(GANs) (Cao & Kipf, 2018; Liao et al., 2019; Wang et al.,
2018; Martinkus et al., 2022) can be used to generate candidate subgraphs that maximize a given property by using
RL (Cao & Kipf, 2018; Zhu et al., 2022), but it can be difficult to enforce that certain desired subgraphs are preserved
in the generated graph (i.e., conditional generation).

Most real-world networks are noisy and incomplete samples from an unknown target distribution. Refining them by correcting corruptions or
inferring unobserved regions typically improves
downstream performance. Inspired by the impressive generative capabilities that have been
used to correct corruptions in images, and the
similarities between “in-painting” and filling in
missing nodes and edges conditioned on the observed graph, we propose a novel graph generative
framework, SGDM, which is based on subgraph
diffusion. Our framework not only improves the
scalability and fidelity of graph diffusion models,
but also leverages the reverse process to perform
novel, conditional generation tasks. In particular, through extensive empirical analysis and a
set of novel metrics, we demonstrate that our proposed model effectively supports the following
refinement tasks for partially observable networks:
(T1) denoising extraneous subgraphs, (T2) expanding existing subgraphs and (T3) performing
“style” transfer by regenerating a particular subgraph to match the characteristics of a different
node or subgraph.

Recently, in computer vision, large-scale diffusion models
(DMs) (Ho et al., 2020; Hoogeboom et al., 2023; SohlDickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2022) have revolutionized
image generation and correction of corrupted images due to
(1) their ability to generate extremely high-quality samples
while capturing many modes of the underlying data distribution, (2) their ability to easily support powerful conditional generation and editing tasks, such as in-painting, colorization, panorama generation and artifact removal (Lugmayr et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022a; Zhang et al., 2023;
Ramesh et al., 2021; Saharia et al., 2022b; Kawar et al.,
2022; Nie et al., 2022), and (3) their relative ease of training (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021). Given their success in
generating images, there has been significant recent effort in
developing graph denoising diffusion models (GDDMs) that
accommodate discrete, structured graph data (Austin et al.,
2021; Vignac et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023; Jo et al., 2022),
but there is limited work on supporting or even defining
analogous graph-based editing tasks.

1. Introduction
Real-world networks are typically partially observed and
noisy (Eliassi-Rad et al., 2019; Kim & Leskovec, 2011;
Hanneke & Xing, 2009), posing challenges in downstream
tasks (e.g., node classification). Refining a corrupted graph
can significantly improve downstream performance but includes a variety of editing tasks with different requirements
such as: denoising (removing extraneous edges), expansion
(recovering missing edges), and attribute editing (correcting
erroneous or missing node attributes). Since the observed

Inspired by the conceptual similarities between “in-painting”
(i.e., filling in masked regions of an image) and filling in
missing nodes and edges conditioned on the observed graph,
we observe that the distributional modeling capacity of
a trained GDDM could be used to refine parts of an observed training graph that may be corrupted or incomplete.
However, refining a single corrupted network raises additional challenges that preclude the applicability of existing
GDDMs; these models assume that they are trained on a
large set of clean graphs, and have quadratic complexity
over the number of nodes preventing them from scaling to
more than a few hundred nodes (Jo et al., 2022; Vignac et al.,

1

CSE Dept, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor 2 Adobe Research Inc 3 Carnegie Mellon University 4 Intel AI Research. Correspondence to: Puja Trivedi <pujat@umich.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

