Boosting Reinforcement Learning with Strongly Delayed Feedback
Through Auxiliary Short Delays

Qingyuan Wu 1 Simon Sinong Zhan 2 Yixuan Wang 2 Yuhui Wang 3
Chung-Wei Lin 4 Chen Lv 5 Qi Zhu 2 Jürgen Schmidhuber 3 6 Chao Huang 1 7

Abstract

that the agent can always execute commands without delay and gather feedback from the environment right away.
However, the persistent presence of delays in real-world
applications significantly hampers agents’ efficiency, performance, and safety if not handled properly (e.g., introducing
estimation error (Hwangbo et al., 2017) and losing reproducibility (Mahmood et al., 2018) in practical robotic tasks).
Delay also needs to be considered in many stochastic settings such as financial markets (Hasbrouck & Saar, 2013)
and weather forecasting (Fathi et al., 2022). Thus, addressing delays in RL algorithms is crucial for their deployment
in real-world timing-sensitive tasks.

Reinforcement learning (RL) is challenging in
the common case of delays between events and
their sensory perceptions. State-of-the-art (SOTA)
state augmentation techniques either suffer from
state space explosion or performance degeneration in stochastic environments. To address these
challenges, we present a novel Auxiliary-Delayed
Reinforcement Learning (AD-RL) method that
leverages auxiliary tasks involving short delays to
accelerate RL with long delays, without compromising performance in stochastic environments.
Specifically, AD-RL learns a value function for
short delays and uses bootstrapping and policy
improvement techniques to adjust it for long delays. We theoretically show that this can greatly
reduce the sample complexity. On deterministic
and stochastic benchmarks, our method significantly outperforms the SOTAs in both sample efficiency and policy performance. Code is available
at https://github.com/QingyuanWuNothing/ADRL.

Delays in RL can be primarily divided into three categories:
observation delay, action delay, and reward delay (Firoiu
et al., 2018), depending on where the delay occurs. Among
them, observation delay receives considerable attention due
to the application-wise generality and the technique-wise
challenge: it has been proved to be a superset of action delay (Katsikopoulos & Engelbrecht, 2003; Nath et al., 2021),
and unlike well-studied reward delay (Han et al., 2022; Kim
& Lee, 2020), it disrupts the Markovian property of systems
(i.e., the underlying dynamics depend on an unobserved
state and the sequence of actions). In this work, we focus
on non-anonymous and constant observation delay under
finite Markov Decision Process (MDP) settings, where the
delay is known to the agent and always a constant number of time steps (details in Section 3), as in most existing
works (Schuitema et al., 2010; Chen et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has already proved its mettle
in complex tasks such as Backgammon (Tesauro, 1994),
Go (Silver et al., 2018), MOBA Game (Berner et al., 2019),
building control (Xu et al., 2021; 2022), and various cyberphysical systems (Wang et al., 2023a;b; Zhan et al., 2024).
Most of the above RL settings assume that the agent’s interaction with the environment is instantaneous, which means

Promising augmentation-based approaches (Altman & Nain,
1992; Katsikopoulos & Engelbrecht, 2003) transform the
delayed RL problem into an MDP by augmenting the latest
observed state with a sequence of actions related to the delay,
also known as the information state (Bertsekas, 2012). After
retrieving the Markovian property, the augmentation-based
methods adopt classical RL methods to solve the delayed
RL problem properly, such as augmented Q-learning (AQL) (Nath et al., 2021). However, existing augmentationbased methods are plagued by the curse of dimensionality, shown by our toy examples in Fig. 1. Under a deterministic MDP setting (Fig. 1(a)), the original augmented
state space grows exponentially with the delays, causing

1
The University of Liverpool 2 Northwestern University 3 AI
Initiative, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology 4 National Taiwan University 5 Nanyang Technological
University 6 The Swiss AI Lab IDSIA/USI/SUPSI 7 The University of Southampton. Correspondence to: Chao Huang
<chao.huang@soton.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

