Position: Bayesian Deep Learning is Needed in the Age of Large-Scale AI

Theodore Papamarkou 1 Maria Skoularidou 2 Konstantina Palla 3 Laurence Aitchison 4 Julyan Arbel 5
David Dunson 6 Maurizio Filippone 7 Vincent Fortuin 8 9 10 Philipp Hennig 11 José Miguel Hernández-Lobato 12
Aliaksandr Hubin 13 14 Alexander Immer 15 Theofanis Karaletsos 16 Mohammad Emtiyaz Khan 17
Agustinus Kristiadi 18 Yingzhen Li 19 Stephan Mandt 20 Christopher Nemeth 21 Michael A. Osborne 22
Tim G. J. Rudner 23 David Rügamer 10 24 Yee Whye Teh 25 26 Max Welling 27 Andrew Gordon Wilson 28
Ruqi Zhang 29
uncertainty, active and continual learning, and scientific data, that demand attention. Bayesian deep
learning (BDL) constitutes a promising avenue,
offering advantages across these diverse settings.
This paper posits that BDL can elevate the capabilities of deep learning. It revisits the strengths
of BDL, acknowledges existing challenges, and
highlights some exciting research avenues aimed
at addressing these obstacles. Looking ahead, the
discussion focuses on possible ways to combine
large-scale foundation models with BDL to unlock their full potential.

Abstract
In the current landscape of deep learning research,
there is a predominant emphasis on achieving high
predictive accuracy in supervised tasks involving
large image and language datasets. However, a
broader perspective reveals a multitude of overlooked metrics, tasks, and data types, such as
1

Department of Mathematics, The University of Manchester,
Manchester, UK. 2 Eric and Wendy Schmidt Center, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, USA. 3 Spotify, London,
UK. 4 Computational Neuroscience Unit, University of Bristol,
Bristol, UK. 5 Centre Inria de l’Université Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble, France. 6 Department of Statistical Science, Duke University,
USA. 7 Statistics Program, KAUST, Saudi Arabia. 8 Helmholtz AI,
Munich, Germany. 9 Department of Computer Science, Technical
University of Munich, Munich, Germany. 10 Munich Center for Machine Learning, Munich, Germany. 11 Tübingen AI Center, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. 12 Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. 13 Department of
Mathematics, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. 14 Bioinformatics
and Applied Statistics, Norwegian University of Life Sciences,
Ås, Norway. 15 Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich,
Switzerland. 16 Chan Zuckerberg Initiative, California, USA.
17
Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, RIKEN, Tokyo, Japan.
18
Vector Institute, Toronto, Canada. 19 Department of Computing, Imperial College London, London, UK. 20 Department of
Computer Science, UC Irvine, Irvine, USA. 21 Department of
Mathematics and Statistics, Lancaster University, Lancaster, UK.
22
Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. 23 Center for Data Science, New York University, New
York, USA. 24 Department of Statistics, LMU Munich, Munich,
Germany. 25 DeepMind, London, UK. 26 Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. 27 Informatics Institute,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands. 28 Courant
Institute of Mathematical Sciences and Center for Data Science, Computer Science Department, New York University, New
York, USA. 29 Department of Computer Science, Purdue University, West Lafayette, USA. Correspondence to: Theodore Papamarkou <theo.papamarkou@manchester.ac.uk>, Maria Skoularidou <mskoular@broadinstitute.org>, Konstantina Palla <konstantinap@spotify.com>.

1. Introduction
The roots of Bayesian inference can be traced back to the
eighteenth century, with the foundational work of Thomas
Bayes in the field of probability theory. Bayes’ theorem,
formulated posthumously in the 1760s (Bayes, 1763), laid
the groundwork for a probabilistic approach to statistical
reasoning. At a high level, Bayes’ theorem describes how to
update a belief given some evidence. Formally, Bayes’ theorem states the posterior probability density function p(θ|D)
evaluated at a parameter value θ ∈ Rν given some evidence
(training dataset) D as a function of three probability density
functions, namely the prior p(θ) of θ before evidence D
is considered, the likelihood p(D|θ) of evidence D given
the parameter value θ, and the marginal probability density
function of evidence D under any parameter value:
p(θ|D) =

p(D|θ) p(θ)
.
p(D)

Over the centuries, Bayesian methods have made a profound impact across various scientific disciplines, offering
a principled framework for updating beliefs based on new
evidence and accommodating uncertainty in model parameters. From Bayesian statistics in the early twentieth century
to the Bayesian revolution in its second half (Jaynes, 2003),
the approach has evolved, influencing fields ranging from
physics to medicine and artificial intelligence (AI).

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

