Promptbreeder: Self-Referential Self-Improvement via Prompt Evolution

Chrisantha Fernando 1 Dylan Banarse 1 Henryk Michalewski 1 Simon Osindero 1 Tim Rocktäschel 1

Abstract

et al., 2023). Furthermore, prompting can improve model
distillation (Wang et al., 2023c; Hsieh et al., 2023) and
it can be used to simulate agentic behavior (Wang et al.,
2023a; Park et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023). However, these
prompt strategies are manually engineered. Since the specific way a prompt is phrased can have a dramatic effect
on its utility (Madaan & Yazdanbakhsh, 2022), it raises the
question of whether prompt engineering can be automated.
Automatic Prompt Engineer (APE, Zhou et al., 2023) attempts to address this by generating an initial distribution
of prompts using another prompt that infers the problem
from a number of input-output examples from the dataset.
However, Zhou et al. found “diminishing returns to further
selection rounds as the quality seems to stabilize after three
rounds”, and consequently abandoned the use of an iterative
APE. We propose a solution to the problem of diminishing
returns via a diversity maintaining evolutionary algorithm
for self-referential self-improvement of prompts for LLMs.
Schmidhuber (1990) notes that the “program of a neural
network is its weight matrix”. Consequently, this “program”
can be changed in a self-referential way by the neural network itself (Schmidhuber, 1993; Irie et al., 2022). Such a
neural network that improves itself, as well as improving
the way it improves itself, might be an important stepping
stone towards open-ended self-referential self-improvement
of AIs (Schmidhuber, 2003). However, self-improvement
via self-referential weight matrices is costly as it requires
additional parameters that modify all of the model’s parameters. Since behaviors and capabilities of LLMs are
significantly influenced by the prompts that we provide to
them, we can similarly think of prompts as the program
of an LLM (Zhou et al., 2023). In this view, changing a
prompt strategy such as the Scratchpad method (Nye et al.,
2021) or Chain-of-Thought Prompting (Wei et al., 2022)
corresponds to changing the “program” of the LLM. Taking
this analogy further, we can use the LLM itself to change its
prompts, as well as the way it changes these prompts, moving us towards fully self-referential self-improving systems
grounded in LLMs.

Popular prompt strategies like Chain-of-Thought
Prompting can dramatically improve the reasoning abilities of Large Language Models (LLMs)
in various domains. However, such hand-crafted
prompt-strategies are often sub-optimal. In this
paper, we present P ROMPTBREEDER, a generalpurpose self-referential self-improvement mechanism that evolves and adapts prompts for a given
domain. Driven by an LLM, Promptbreeder mutates a population of task-prompts, evaluates them
for fitness on a training set, and repeats this process over multiple generations to evolve taskprompts. Crucially, the mutation of these taskprompts is governed by mutation-prompts that the
LLM generates and improves throughout evolution in a self-referential way. That is, Promptbreeder is not just improving task-prompts, but
it is also improving the mutation-prompts that
improve these task-prompts. Promptbreeder outperforms state-of-the-art prompt strategies such as
Chain-of-Thought and Plan-and-Solve Prompting
on commonly used arithmetic and commonsense
reasoning benchmarks. Furthermore, Promptbreeder is able to evolve intricate task-prompts
for the challenging problem of hate speech classification.

1. Introduction
Prompting is central to the downstream performance of foundation models. For example, different prompt strategies1
can have a significant impact on a model’s reasoning abilities (Wei et al., 2022; Nye et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2022;
Wang et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023b),
multi-modal processing abilities (Yang et al., 2023b; Wang
et al., 2023d), or tool use abilities (Yao et al., 2022; Schick
1

Google DeepMind, London. Correspondence to: Chrisantha
Fernando <chrisantha@google.com>.

In this paper, we introduce P ROMPTBREEDER (PB) for
self-referential self-improvement of LLMs. Given a seed
set of mutation-prompts (i.e. instructions to modify a
task-prompt), thinking-styles (i.e. text descriptions of
general cognitive heuristics), and a domain-specific problem

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
See Appendix A for definitions of terminology.

1

