Spectral Preconditioning for Gradient Methods
on Graded Non-convex Functions
Nikita Doikov 1 Sebastian U. Stich 2 Martin Jaggi 1

Spectrum

Abstract
600

Eigenvalue, i

The performance of optimization methods is often tied to the spectrum of the objective Hessian. Yet, conventional assumptions, such as
smoothness, do often not enable us to make finelygrained convergence statements—particularly not
for non-convex problems. Striving for a more
intricate characterization of complexity, we introduce a unique concept termed graded nonconvexity. This allows to partition the class of nonconvex problems into a nested chain of subclasses.
Interestingly, many traditional non-convex objectives, including partially convex problems, matrix
factorizations, and neural networks, fall within
these subclasses. As a second contribution, we
propose gradient methods with spectral preconditioning, which employ inexact top eigenvectors
of the Hessian to address the ill-conditioning of
the problem, contingent on the grade. Our analysis reveals that these new methods provide provably superior convergence rates compared to basic
gradient descent on applicable problem classes,
particularly when large gaps exist between the
top eigenvalues of the Hessian. Our theory is
validated by numerical experiments executed on
multiple practical machine learning problems.

Top eigenvalues

400
200
0

Negative curvature

200
3000

2400

1800

1200

Index, i

600

1

Figure 1. Spectrum of the Hessians for the matrix factorization
problem (Example 2.10) of the optimization dimension n = 3000,
for 10 random objectives.

drawback of the gradient method remains to be its slow rate
of convergence: for solving modern optimization problems
up to a reasonable accuracy level, it is often required to do a
lot of gradient steps, due to ill-conditioning of the problem.
In order to improve the gradient direction, we can multiply the gradient by a specifically crafted matrix called
preconditioner, which should adjust the method to the right
geometry of the problem. However, finding a good preconditioner with strong theoretical guarantees is not easy,
especially for non-convex problems. In this work, we propose a new family of spectral preconditioners that rely on
an additional refined information about the function class.
As a by-product, we establish convergence rates, that are
provably better than those of the gradient methods.

1. Introduction

Optimization theory suggests that the main complexity parameters that affect the rate of convergence for gradient
methods are the spectrum of the Hessian ∇2 f and its extremal characteristics, such as the bound for the maximal
eigenvalue (the Lipschitz constant of the gradient) or the
condition number (the ratio of the largest and smallest eigenvalues) (Nemirovski & Yudin, 1983; Nesterov, 2018). Moreover, some of the fundamental properties of the objective
function, such as convexity, weak convexity, or strong convexity, that distinguish between all optimization problems
and globally solvable ones, can be defined in terms of lower
bounds on the spectrum. Thus (for a twice differentiable
function),

Motivation. The gradient method is an important and attractive tool for solving large-scale optimization problems.
It has very cheap cost of every iteration and well established
convergence guarantees, that hold starting from an arbitrary
initial point and for a wide family of problem classes, including convex and non-convex problems. However, the major
1

Machine Learning and Optimization Laboratory (MLO),
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland 2 CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security, Saarbrücken, Germany. Correspondence
to: Nikita Doikov <nikita.doikov@epfl.ch>, Sebastian U. Stich
<stich@cispa.de>, Martin Jaggi <martin.jaggi@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

f is convex
1

⇔

∇2 f ⪰ 0.

(1)

