Exploiting Code Symmetries for Learning Program Semantics

Kexin Pei 1 2 Weichen Li 1 Qirui Jin 3 Shuyang Liu 4 Scott Geng 5
Lorenzo Cavallaro 6 Junfeng Yang 1 Suman Jana 1

Abstract

a (sequential) code fragment x=2;y=4. Reordering the instructions to y=4;x=2 does not change the semantics of the
code. Of course, any code analysis task that depends solely on
the semantics of the code (e.g., bug detection) needs to preserve
these symmetries by staying invariant to the transformations.
Otherwise, if a bug detector flips its prediction from correct to
buggy due to such simple semantics-preserving permutations,
developers will lose confidence in the tool (Bessey et al., 2010).
Formally, given a code block c and a set of symmetries G, an
LLM m should ensure ∀g ∈G,m(g(c))=m(c). Incorporating
such an invariant property in the model has proven an effective
approach in many domains to enforce domain-specific rules
and improve generalization (Cohen & Welling, 2016).

This paper tackles the challenge of teaching code
semantics to Large Language Models (LLMs) for
program analysis by incorporating code symmetries
into the model architecture. We introduce a grouptheoretic framework that defines code symmetries
as semantics-preserving transformations, where
forming a code symmetry group enables precise and
efficient reasoning of code semantics. Our solution,
SYMC, develops a novel variant of self-attention that
is provably equivariant to code symmetries from the
permutation group defined over the program dependence graph. SYMC obtains superior performance
on five program analysis tasks, outperforming stateof-the-art code models, including GPT-4, without
any pre-training. Our results suggest that code
LLMs that encode the code structural prior via the
code symmetry group generalize better and faster.

Limitations of existing approaches. A popular way to train
LLMs to be robust to code symmetries is via large-scale
pre-training, where the pre-training dataset likely includes many
semantically equivalent code samples (Roziere et al., 2023).
While this approach improves the generalization, it is inherently
a best-effort attempt and does not guarantee invariance for the
pre-trained model. Without the guarantee, the trained model
lacks assurance when deployed for program analysis (Ullah
et al., 2023), e.g., the malware can be easily transformed to
evade detection. In fact, we find that state-of-the-art LLMs
break desired invariances at an alarmingly high rate, e.g., 18%
in CodeLlama in predicting function names (Table 1) even for
simple code symmetries like a two-statement permutation.

1. Introduction
Automated program analysis using Large Language Models
(LLMs) has become widely popular for software engineering
and security tasks (Liu et al., 2023; Maniatis & Tarlow, 2023),
but it remains unclear whether code LLMs can stay robust
and generalize to new code (Henke et al., 2022; Rabin et al.,
2021; Gao et al., 2023b;a; Yefet et al., 2020; Bundt et al., 2022;
Zhang et al., 2023). This paper aims to enhance LLMs by
establishing and preserving fundamental code symmetries,
drawing inspiration from translation and rotation symmetries
that typically hold in vision.

A more direct approach is to explicitly enumerate the code
symmetries via data augmentation. However, it is prohibitively
expensive due to the sheer number of possible symmetries and
their compositions. Similar to pre-training, even exhausting
the code symmetries in the augmented training set does not
provide any guarantee that the trained model stays invariant to
the observed code symmetries. An alternative strategy involves
approximating code symmetry structures as priors within the
model’s architecture, e.g., data and control flow graphs, using
Graph Neural Nets (GNNs) (Allamanis et al., 2017). Such
approaches are argued to offer a better generalization, e.g., as
evidenced in Table 1 where GGNN has the lowest violation
rate among the baselines. However, graph architectures often
restrict a model’s expressiveness relative to LLM architectures (Ying et al., 2021). Moreover, the existing common
practice of encoding code structures into GNNs does not
explicitly preserve code symmetries and thus lacks guarantee

Code symmetry. Intuitively, symmetry of code refers to any
transformation applied to a code block that preserves the semantics (i.e., input-output behavior) of the original code. Consider
1

Columbia University 2 The University of Chicago 3 University
of Michigan 4 Huazhong University of Science and Technology
5
University of Washington 6 University College London. Correspondence to: Kexin Pei<kpei@cs.uchicago.edu>, Suman Jana
<suman@cs.columbia.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by the
author(s).

1

