Learning Constraints from Offline Demonstrations via
Superior Distribution Correction Estimation

Guorui Quan 1 Zhiqiang Xu 2 Guiliang Liu 1 *

Abstract

complexity of environmental dynamics, the optimal constraint is often time-varying, context-sensitive, and rooted
in human experience. These constraints are challenging
to specify manually with prior knowledge and may not be
readily available to RL agents in policy learning.

An effective approach for learning both safety
constraints and control policies is Inverse Constrained Reinforcement Learning (ICRL). Previous ICRL algorithms commonly employ an online learning framework that permits unlimited
sampling from an interactive environment. This
setting, however, is infeasible in many realistic
applications where data collection is dangerous
and expensive. To address this challenge, we
propose Inverse Constrained Superior Distribution Correction Estimation (ICSDICE) as an offline ICRL solver. ICSDICE extracts feasible constraints from superior distributions, thereby highlighting policies with expert-exceeding rewards
maximization ability. To estimate these distributions, ICSDICE solves a regularized dual optimization problem for safe control by exploiting
the observed reward signals and expert preferences. Striving for transferable constraints and
unbiased estimations, ICSDICE actively encourages sparsity and incorporates a discounting effect
within the learned and observed distributions. Empirical studies show that ICSDICE outperforms
other baselines by accurately recovering the constraints and adapting to high-dimensional environments. The code is available at https:
//github.com/quangr/ICSDICE.

To address these problems, Inverse Constraint Reinforcement Learning (ICRL) considers inferring constraints from
expert demonstrations. Existing ICRL algorithms (Scobee
& Sastry, 2020; Malik et al., 2021; Liu & Zhu, 2022; Gaurav
et al., 2023; Papadimitriou et al., 2023; Qiao et al., 2023;
Xu & Liu, 2023) follow an online learning paradigm, where
the agent explores and collects experience from an interactive environment. However, boundless exploration often
involves unsafe behaviors that potentially violate underlying constraints. Such a shortcoming is fundamental since
constraint violation contradicts the primary goal of safe control and may cause significant loss in practical applications,
especially for algorithms that require a large number of
training samples.
To effectively overcome these limitations, we propose designing an offline ICRL algorithm that relies solely on a
fixed dataset for constraint inference. This task is challenging, primarily due to 1) the offline dataset covers only partial
knowledge of the training environment, necessitating the
algorithm to handle the uncertainty in unvisited states. 2)
ICRL algorithms typically depend on executing policy rollout in an online manner to learn the constraint, making it
infeasible to transfer to offline settings. 3) Offline ICRL is
inherently ill-posed since the ground-truth constraint is not
identifiable (Liu et al., 2022) from a limited dataset. How
to specify the ICRL objective in a meaningful and practical
way remains a critical challenge.

1. Introduction
To deploy Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms for
safety-critical applications, the control policy must adhere to
underlying constraints in the environment (Liu et al., 2021).
However, in many real-world tasks, due to the inherent

In this work, we address the aforementioned challenges by
reformulating offline ICRL into a two-stage optimization
problem, integrating policy learning with constraint inference through the estimation of superior distributions. These
distributions capture high-risk behaviors that yield greater
rewards than those achieved by expert agents. To estimate
these distributions from the offline dataset, in the forward
stage, we design a dual optimization problem for offline
RL under a Constrained Markov Decision Process (CMDP).
The problem solver constitutes an effective and meaningful

*

Corresponding Author 1 School of Data Science, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, Guangdong, 518172, P.R.
China 2 Machine Learning, Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE. Correspondence to: Guiliang
Liu <liuguiliang@cuhk.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

