Aligned Objective for Soft-Pseudo-Label Generation in Supervised Learning

Ning Xu 1 2 Yihao Hu 1 2 Congyu Qiao 1 2 Xin Geng 1 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Soft pseudo-labels, i.e., the soft labels that are not originally
included in the training dataset but generated by the softmax predictions of the trained networks, are of paramount
importance for state-of-the-art deep learning methods. Numerous previous researches (Zhang et al., 2019; Hinton
et al., 2015) have demonstrated the success of soft pseudolabels in improving the generalization performance of deep
neural networks (DNNs) in supervised learning. As pseudolabels could improve the predictive performance of deep
neural networks, they have been successfully applied across
various domains, including computer vision (Lukov et al.,
2022; Algan & Ulusoy, 2022), natural language processing
(Sun et al., 2019; Ngo et al., 2022), and data mining (Li
et al., 2015; Xu et al., 2020).

Soft pseudo-labels, generated by the softmax predictions of the trained networks, offer a probabilistic rather than binary form, and have been
shown to improve the performance of deep neural
networks in supervised learning. Most previous
methods adopt classification loss to train a classifier as the soft-pseudo-label generator and fail
to fully exploit their potential due to the misalignment with the target of soft-pseudo-label generation, aimed at capturing the knowledge in the data
rather than making definitive classifications. Nevertheless, manually designing an effective objective function for a soft-pseudo-label generator is
challenging, primarily because datasets typically
lack ground-truth soft labels, complicating the
evaluation of the soft pseudo-label accuracy. To
deal with this problem, we propose a novel framework that alternately trains the predictive model
and the soft-pseudo-label generator guided by a
meta-network-parameterized label enhancement
objective. The parameters of the objective function are optimized based on the feedback from
both the performance of the predictive model and
the soft-pseudo-label generator in the learning
task. Additionally, the framework offers versatility across different learning tasks by allowing
direct modifications to the task loss. Experiments
on the benchmark datasets validate the effectiveness of the proposed framework. Source code is
available at https://github.com/palm-ml/SEAL

Self-knowledge distillation (Zhang et al., 2019) utilizes a
DNNs classifier’s predictions as the soft pseudo-labels to
train the model itself to improve the test accuracy. Online distillation (Zhang et al., 2018) adopts an ensemble
of classifiers’ predictions as the soft pseudo-label to learn
mutually from each other. Label enhancement (Xu et al.,
2023) adopts Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) to generate soft pseudo-labels to deal with the multi-label problem. In addition, soft pseudo-labels are adopted to learn
with weak supervision. PENCIL (Yi & Wu, 2019) utilizes
back-propagation to probabilistically update and correct soft
pseudo-labels via updating the network parameters to deal
with noisy labels in the training dataset. To identify the true
label, partial label learning (Lv et al., 2020) generates soft
pseudo-labels to strengthen the weight of the correct label
among the candidate label set for training in each epoch.
Most previous methods adopt classification loss to train a
classifier as the soft-pseudo-label generator, which is not
aligned with the target of soft-pseudo-label generation. The
objective of training a classifier is maximizing the generalization of the classifier itself while training a soft-pseudolabel generator is aimed at capturing the knowledge in the
data to generate the appropriate soft pseudo-labels for improving the performance of the student models. Therefore,
despite making an effort to tune the generated soft pseudolabels, previous methods usually do not unleash the full potential of soft pseudo-labels for improving the performance
of deep neural networks. Nevertheless, manually designing

1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China 2 Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its Interdisciplinary Applications
(Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China. E-mail:
{xning, yhhu, qiaocy, xgeng}@seu.edu.cn. Correspondence to:
Xin Geng <xgeng@seu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

