Pluvial Flood Emulation with Hydraulics-informed Message Passing

Arnold Kazadi 1 James Doss-Gollin 2 Arlei Silva 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Flooding is the natural hazard with the greatest social and
economic impact in the United States and affects lives and
livelihoods around the world (Tellman et al., 2021; Eckstein
et al., 2021; National Academies of Sciences, Engineering,
and Medicine; Jha et al.; PBL Netherlands Environmental
Assessment Agency). In cities, flooding generates direct
property damage, indirect losses through supply chain disruption, and threats to livelihood through drowning and
interruption of transportation networks, limiting access to
emergency services (Haraguchi & Lall; Han et al.; Gori
et al.; Panakkal et al., a;b). With climate change increasing
the intensity and frequency of extreme precipitation in many
regions (on Climate Change , IPCC), urbanization reducing
natural flood protection (Merz et al., 2014; Sebastian et al.,
2019), and rapid population growth in flood-prone regions,
the severity of urban flooding is projected to continue to
grow (Berkhahn et al., 2019; Schreider et al., 2000).

Machine Learning (ML) has emerged as a promising alternative to numerical methods for physicsbased simulation due to its flexibility and efficiency. Flood modeling is a key case study for
ML-based simulation due to its relevance as a tool
for supporting preventive and emergency measures to mitigate flood risks. However, the complexity of the topography or domain (ground elevation) and the sparsity of the time-evolving precipitations (external forcing) can be challenging
for most existing ML approaches for simulating
flooding processes in space and time. Another
critical challenge is incorporating physics domain
knowledge (hydraulics) into these data-driven
models. This paper addresses these challenges by
introducing a hydraulics-informed graph neural
network for flood simulation. Given a (geographical) region and precipitation data, our model
predicts water depths in an auto-regressive fashion. We propose a message-passing framework
inspired by the conservation of momentum and
mass expressed in the shallow-water equations,
which describe the physical process of a flooding event. Empirical results on a dataset covering 9 regions and 7 historical precipitation events
demonstrate that our model outperforms the best
baseline, and can capture the propagation of water
flow more effectively, especially at the very early
stage of the flooding event when the amount of
water in the domain is scarce. Differently from
some of the most recent methods for ML-based
simulation, which tend to work well only when
the domain is a smooth surface (e.g., flat terrain),
we show that our solution achieves accurate results for real ground elevation data.

The evolution of a flooding event is a time-evolving physical process typically represented by the 2D shallow-water
equations (Eq. 1 & 2). In practice, flooding is modeled
using specialized solvers, such as LISFLOOD-FP (Shaw
et al., 2021) and HEC-RAS (Brunner, 2016), which not
only solve the relevant PDEs but also account for spaceand time-varying rainfall, evolving inundation regions, topographies, and additional features. However, these models
remain computationally expensive and require extensive calibration of key parameters such as Manning’s roughness
coefficients and infiltration rates (Zajac et al., 2013), with
documented cases of major calibration failures (Van den
Honert & McAneney, 2011). This limits the utility of these
specialized solvers for vitally important applications including real-time flood warning, probabilistic hazard assessment,
representation of green infrastructure benefits, and optimization of infrastructure design.
Machine learning (ML) methods have emerged as a promising alternative to hydrodynamic numerical models due to
their flexibility and efficiency (Mosavi et al., 2018; Bentivoglio et al., 2022) (See running times in Appendix A.6).
ML-based models for flooding have generally fallen into
three groups. The first uses time series models such as
Long-Short Term Memory (LSTM) networks trained on
gauge observations to predict the time series of discharge

1
Department of Computer Science, Rice University, Houston,
TX, USA 2 Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering,
Rice University, Houston, TX, USA. Correspondence to: Arnold
Kazadi <akn7@rice.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

