Attention Meets Post-hoc Interpretability:
A Mathematical Perspective

Gianluigi Lopardo 1 2 Frederic Precioso 1 3 Damien Garreau 4

Abstract

α-avg: attention based explanations are popular but questionable
α-max: attention based explanations are popular but questionable
lime: attention based explanations are popular but questionable
G-avg: attention based explanations are popular but questionable
G-l1: attention based explanations are popular but questionable
G-l2: attention based explanations are popular but questionable
GˆI: attention based explanations are popular but questionable

Attention-based architectures, in particular transformers, are at the heart of a technological revolution. Interestingly, in addition to helping obtain
state-of-the-art results on a wide range of applications, the attention mechanism intrinsically provides meaningful insights on the internal behavior
of the model. Can these insights be used as explanations? Debate rages on. In this paper, we
mathematically study a simple attention-based architecture and pinpoint the differences between
post-hoc and attention-based explanations. We
show that they provide quite different results, and
that, despite their limitations, post-hoc methods
are capable of capturing more useful insights than
merely examining the attention weights.

Figure 1. Different explainers can produce very different explanations. Here, the attention mean (α-avg) and maximum (α-max)
over the heads, LIME (lime), the gradient mean (G-avg), L1 norm
(G-l1), and L2 norm (G-l2), with respect to the tokens, and Gradient times Input (GˆI) are employed to interpret the prediction
of a sentiment-analysis model. Words with positive (respectively,
negative) weights are highlighted in green (respectively, red), with
intensity proportional to their weight. In the example, all the explainers identify the word questionable as highly significant, while
only lime, and GˆI highlight a negative contribution. Interestingly,
α-avg and α-max identify the word popular as the most important
word in absolute terms, in disagreement with the all others.

1. Introduction
The attention mechanism, introduced by Bahdanau et al.
(2015), revolutionized neural networks by enabling models
to focus dynamically on different parts of input sequences,
enhancing their ability to capture long-range dependencies.
This innovation laid the groundwork for various deep learning models. The Transformer architecture, introduced by
Vaswani et al. (2017), is a notable application of the attention
mechanism. Initially designed for natural language processing (NLP) tasks, the Transformer eliminated the need for
recurrent neural networks and convolutional layers, relying
solely on attention mechanisms. The Transformer has since
become the state-of-the-art in numerous machine learning
domains due to its flexibility, performance, and ability to
model complex relationships in data. Its innovative design
and significant improvements in training efficiency have
paved the way for the development of advanced models
such as BERT (Devlin et al., 2019), and GPT-3 (Brown

et al., 2020), which have revolutionized NLP.

Université Côte d’Azur, Inria, CNRS 2 LJAD 3 I3S 4 JuliusMaximilians-Universität Würzburg. Correspondence to: Gianluigi
Lopardo <glopardo@unice.fr>.

As a by-product of the attention mechanism, weights corresponding to the per-token attention at a given layer can
easily be extracted from the model. One is tempted to use
these weights as explanations for the model’s predictions,
and many researchers have indeed done so (Chefer et al.,
2021; Mylonas et al., 2023). However, the use of attention
mechanisms for explainability has been questioned in the
literature. Jain & Wallace (2019) notably critique its clarity,
questioning the relationship between attention weights and
model output. Conversely, Wiegreffe & Pinter (2019) argue
that attention mechanisms remain useful for interpretability, without specifically addressing Jain & Wallace (2019)’s
requirements. These works have sparked an intriguing debate in the literature, which we develop in Section 1.1. In
our opinion, neither stance has provided a solid theoretical
foundation to support their respective claims.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

In this paper, we propose a mathematical analysis of an
attention-based model and the associated explanations, trying to shed light on the respective merits of each approach

1

1

