Variational Inference with Coverage Guarantees in Simulation-Based Inference

Yash Patel 1 Declan McNamara 1 Jackson Loper 1 Jeffrey Regier * 1 Ambuj Tewari * 1

Abstract

Deistler et al., 2022; Papamakarios et al., 2019; Boelts
et al., 2022), posterior distributions P(Θ | x) are sought
over a large collection of x, typically on the order of
10,000 or more. In such scientific settings, (θ, x) pairs
are assumed to come from nature, which has led to the
growth of “simulation-based inference,” in which a likelihood P(X | θ) and prior P(Θ) are posited and simulated to
fit posteriors (Cranmer et al., 2020; Lueckmann et al., 2021).
Even when the likelihood and prior are well specified, exact sampling from the posteriors is intractable, requiring
running 10,000 separate MCMC chains.

Amortized variational inference is an often employed framework in simulation-based inference
that produces a posterior approximation that can
be rapidly computed given any new observation. Unfortunately, there are few guarantees
about the quality of these approximate posteriors. We propose Conformalized Amortized Neural Variational Inference (CANVI), a procedure
that is scalable, easily implemented, and provides
guaranteed marginal coverage. Given a collection of candidate amortized posterior approximators, CANVI constructs conformalized predictors based on each candidate, compares the predictors using a metric known as predictive efficiency, and returns the most efficient predictor.
CANVI ensures that the resulting predictor constructs regions that contain the truth with a userspecified level of probability. CANVI is agnostic
to design decisions in formulating the candidate
approximators and only requires access to samples from the forward model, permitting its use in
likelihood-free settings. We prove lower bounds
on the predictive efficiency of the regions produced by CANVI and explore how the quality
of a posterior approximation relates to the predictive efficiency of prediction regions based on that
approximation. Finally, we demonstrate the accurate calibration and high predictive efficiency of
CANVI on a suite of simulation-based inference
benchmark tasks and an important scientific task:
analyzing galaxy emission spectra.

In these settings, amortized variational inference is frequently employed. Variational inference (VI) has become
a staple in Bayesian inference; however, it has been repeatedly noted that a major shortcoming of VI is its lack of
any theoretical guarantees and tendency to produce biased
posterior estimates (Blei et al., 2017; Murphy, 2022; Zhang
et al., 2018; Yao et al., 2018). The most common metric for
assessing the calibration of such inference algorithms is the
“expected coverage.” Having calibrated expected coverage
is a necessary but not sufficient condition for conditional
coverage, yet amortized variational approximations fail to
even achieve this minimal requirement, despite significant
work to remedy this shortcoming (Deistler et al., 2022; Delaunoy et al., 2022; Lemos et al., 2023; Delaunoy et al.,
2023). A lack of such calibration limits the capacity to
reach downstream scientific conclusions, highlighted in a
recent meta-study of likelihood-free inference algorithms
(Hermans et al., 2021b).
In applications where many posteriors need to be estimated,
credible regions with marginally calibrated coverage can be
sufficient for downstream scientific inquiries. For instance,
in astrophysics, there is great interest in constraining the
ΛCDM model, the current concordance model in cosmology
(Gilman et al., 2021; Hezaveh et al., 2016; Vegetti et al.,
2010; Vegetti & Koopmans, 2009; Hogg & Blandford, 1994).
A recent work from this community, (Hermans et al., 2021a),
leveraged Bayesian inference towards this end, obtaining
approximate posteriors for the parameters of interest on
each of 10,000 observations. Crucially, these posteriors
were then used to produce credible intervals with marginally
valid frequentist coverage, from which they made claims on
the ΛCDM model.

1. Introduction
In many scientific applications, such as in astrophysics,
neuroscience, and particle physics (Papamakarios & Murray, 2016; Lueckmann et al., 2017; Greenberg et al., 2019;
*

Senior author order was decided by a coin flip. 1 Department of
Statistics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA. Correspondence to: Yash Patel <yppatel@umich.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

