Chain-of-Thought Predictive Control

Zhiwei Jia 1 Vineet Thumuluri 1 Fangchen Liu 2 Linghao Chen 3 Zhiao Huang 1 Hao Su 1

Abstract

eralizability. On the other hand, imitation learning (IL)
remains one of the most powerful approaches to training
autonomous agents. Without densely labeled rewards or
on-policy/online interactions, IL usually casts policy learning as (self-)supervised learning with the potential to leverage large-scale pre-collected demonstrations, usually with
Transformer, as inspired by the recent success of large language models (LLMs). An obstacle in building foundational
decision-making models (Yang et al., 2023) remains the better use of sub-optimal demonstrations. In this paper, we
study hierarchical IL from sub-optimal demonstrations for
low-level control tasks.

We study generalizable policy learning from
demonstrations for complex low-level control
(e.g., contact-rich object manipulations). We
propose a novel hierarchical imitation learning
method that utilizes sub-optimal demos. Firstly,
we propose an observation space-agnostic approach that efficiently discovers the multi-step
subskill decomposition of the demos in an unsupervised manner. By grouping temporarily close
and functionally similar actions into subskill-level
demo segments, the observations at the segment
boundaries constitute a chain of planning steps for
the task, which we refer to as the chain-of-thought
(CoT). Next, we propose a Transformer-based design that effectively learns to predict the CoT as
the subskill-level guidance. We couple action
and subskill predictions via learnable prompt tokens and a hybrid masking strategy, which enable
dynamically updated guidance at test time and
improve feature representation of the trajectory
for generalizable policy learning. Our method,
Chain-of-Thought Predictive Control (CoTPC),
consistently surpasses existing strong baselines
on various challenging low-level manipulation
tasks with sub-optimal demos. See project page.

Despite the recent progress (Chen et al., 2021; Florence
et al., 2022; Shafiullah et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022; Ajay
et al., 2022; Chi et al., 2023), it remains extremely challenging to solve low-level control tasks such as contact-rich
object manipulations by IL in a scalable manner. Usually,
the demonstrations are inherently sub-optimal because of
the underlying contact dynamics (Pfrommer et al., 2021) and
the way they are produced. The undesirable properties, such
as being non-Markovian, noisy, discontinuous, and random,
pose great challenges in both the optimization and the generalization of the imitators (see more in Appendix A). We find
that, by adopting the hierarchical principles (i.e., temporal
abstraction and high-level planning) into our Transformerbased design, we can better leverage sub-optimal demos
to solve challenging tasks. To achieve this, we first propose an unsupervised subskill discovery strategy to generate
subskill-level supervision from the demonstrations. We then
train our model to dynamically generate subskill guidance
for better low-level action predictions.

1. Introduction
Hierarchical RL (HRL) (Hutsebaut-Buysse et al., 2022) has
attracted much attention in the AI community as a promising direction for sample-efficient and generalizable policy
learning. HRL tackles complex sequential decision-making
problems by decomposing them into simpler and smaller
sub-problems via temporal abstractions (the so-called Chainof-Thought (Wei et al., 2022)). In addition, many adopt a
two-stage policy and possess the planning capabilities for
high-level actions (i.e., subgoals or options) to achieve gen-

Specifically, we consider the multi-step subskill decomposition of a task into a chain of planning steps as its chainof-thought, CoT, inspired by (Wei et al., 2022; Yang et al.,
2022). As part one of our contribution, we propose an observation space-agnostic approach that efficiently discovers the
subskills, defined as a sequence of key observations of the
demos, in an unsupervised manner. We propose to group
temporarily close and functionally similar actions into a
segment. Then the change points (the segment boundaries)
naturally constitute the subskill sequence, i.e., the CoT, that
represents the high-level task completion process. For part
two, we propose a novel Transformer-based design that effectively learns to predict the CoT jointly with the low-level

1
UC San Diego 2 UC Berkeley 3 Zhejiang University. Correspondence to: Zhiwei Jia <zjia@ucsd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

