Provably Efficient Long-Horizon Exploration in Monte Carlo Tree Search
through State Occupancy Regularization

Liam Schramm 1 Abdeslam Boularias 1

Abstract

autonomous driving, theorem proving, penetration testing,
and power grid management (Schrittwieser et al., 2020;
Osiński et al., 2021; Lample et al., 2022; Schwartz & Kurniawati, 2019; Zhang et al., 2019). We build on the recent
work by Grill et al. (2020) to reveal a mathematical connection between MCTS, regularized policy optimization,
and SBMP. We then propose a family of MCTS algorithms
based on policy optimization with state occupancy measure
regularization, with strong exploration guarantees.

Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS) has been successful in a variety of domains, but faces challenges with long-horizon exploration when compared to sampling-based motion planning algorithms like Rapidly-Exploring Random Trees. To
address these limitations of MCTS, we derive a
tree search algorithm based on policy optimization with state occupancy measure regularization,
which we call Volume-MCTS. We show that countbased exploration and sampling-based motion
planning can be derived as approximate solutions
to this state occupancy measure regularized objective. We test our method on several robot navigation problems, and find that Volume-MCTS
outperforms AlphaZero and displays significantly
better long-horizon exploration properties.

The main contributions of this work are the following: (1)
We show that both the Voronoi bias of SBMP algorithms
and the count-based exploration (CBE) method used in reinforcement learning can be derived as solutions to a state
occupancy measure regularization objective. (2) We prove
that in search trees, for any convex loss function of state
occupancy measure, L(dπ ), L can be optimized by independently optimizing the policy at each node. This novel finding
makes it possible and efficient to use MCTS-style algorithms
for arbitrary regularization of the state occupancy measure.
Notably, this is true only for trees – general Markov Decision Processes do not have this property (Hazan et al.,
2019). (3) We derive Volume-MCTS, a variant of AlphaZero
that uses state occupancy regularization to encourage longhorizon exploration without making the stronger assumptions used in SBMP. We find that this method outperforms
a range of reinforcement learning and planning algorithms,
including AlphaZero and AlphaZero with CBE, on longhorizon exploration problems. (4) We prove non-asymptotic
high-probability bounds on Volume-MCTS’s exploration efficiency. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first bound
of this type to be proven for MCTS-family algorithms.

1. Introduction
In robotics, sampling-based motion planning (SBMP) algorithms are frequently used instead of reinforcement learning (RL) based methods such as Monte Carlo tree search
(MCTS) for long-horizon exploration, due to challenges RL
methods face in determining what regions may yield high
rewards and how to reach them. While SBMP methods are
highly efficient at exploration, they may be slow to converge to near-optimal paths, and do not provide a canonical
way to either train or use neural networks to guide search
(McMahon et al., 2022). Additionally, SBMP methods require much stronger assumptions than MCTS. They solve
the problem of finding the shortest path to a goal region
while avoiding obstacles, in a setting with continuous time
setting with known and deterministic dynamics, while RL
has been used in domains as wide-ranging as video games,

2. Definitions
Let M be a Markov Decision Process (MDP) with continuous state space S, continuous action space A, reward
function R : S → R, discount factor γ, and deterministic transition function T : S × A → S. We assume S is
bounded, measurable, and metrizable. Let T be the set of
nodes in a search tree. Let N be defined as || T ||. For any
node n ∈ T , let subtree(n) be the subtreeof n.Let λ be a
regularization coefficient that scales as O √1N .

1
Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University, New
Brunswick, USA. This work is supported by NSF awards
1846043 and 2132972. Correspondence to: Liam Schramm
<lbs105@cs.rutgers.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

