Understanding Unimodal Bias in Multimodal Deep Linear Networks

Yedi Zhang 1 Peter E. Latham 1 Andrew Saxe 1 2

Abstract

et al., 2016), whereas they tend to overly rely on the language modality and ignore the visual modality (Goyal et al.,
2017; Agrawal et al., 2018; Hessel & Lee, 2020). This phenomenon has been observed in a variety of settings, and has
several names: unimodal bias (Cadene et al., 2019), greedy
learning (Wu et al., 2022), modality competition (Huang
et al., 2022), modality laziness (Du et al., 2023), and modality underutilization (Makino et al., 2023). In this paper, we
adopt the term unimodal bias to refer to the phenomenon
in which a multimodal network learns from different input
modalities at different times during joint training.

Using multiple input streams simultaneously to
train multimodal neural networks is intuitively advantageous but practically challenging. A key
challenge is unimodal bias, where a network
overly relies on one modality and ignores others during joint training. We develop a theory of
unimodal bias with multimodal deep linear networks to understand how architecture and data
statistics influence this bias. This is the first work
to calculate the duration of the unimodal phase
in learning as a function of the depth at which
modalities are fused within the network, dataset
statistics, and initialization. We show that the
deeper the layer at which fusion occurs, the longer
the unimodal phase. A long unimodal phase can
lead to a generalization deficit and permanent unimodal bias in the overparametrized regime. Our
results, derived for multimodal linear networks,
extend to nonlinear networks in certain settings.
Taken together, this work illuminates pathologies
of multimodal learning under joint training, showing that late and intermediate fusion architectures
can give rise to long unimodal phases and permanent unimodal bias. Our code is available at:
https://yedizhang.github.io/unimodal-bias.html.

The extent to which multimodal networks exhibit unimodal
bias depends on both the dataset and the multimodal network
architecture. Regarding datasets, practitioners managed to
alleviate the bias by building more balanced multimodal
datasets (Goyal et al., 2017; Agrawal et al., 2018; Hudson &
Manning, 2019). Regarding multimodal network architectures, empirical work has shown that unimodal bias emerges
in jointly trained late fusion networks (Wang et al., 2020;
Huang et al., 2022) and intermediate fusion networks (Wu
et al., 2022), while early fusion networks may encourage
usage of all input modalities (Gadzicki et al., 2020; Barnum
et al., 2020).
Despite empirical evidence, there is scarce theoretical understanding of how unimodal bias is affected by the network
configuration, dataset statistics, and initialization. To fill the
gap, we study multimodal deep linear networks where unimodal bias manifests in ways consistent with those observed
in complex networks, thereby serving as a prerequisite for
theoretical understanding of complex networks. We show
that unimodal bias is conspicuous in late and intermediate
fusion linear networks but not in early fusion linear networks. Intermediate and late fusion linear networks learn
one modality first and the other after a delay, yielding a
phase in which the multimodal network implements a unimodal function. We calculate the duration of the unimodal
phase in terms of parameters of the network and statistics
of the dataset. We find that a deeper fusion layer within the
multimodal network, stronger correlations between input
modalities, and greater disparities in input-output correlations for each modality all prolong the unimodal phase. In
the overparameterized regime, long unimodal phases creates
a dilemma between overfitting one modality and underfitting the other, resulting in permanent unimodal bias and a

1. Introduction
The success of multimodal deep learning hinges on effectively utilizing multiple modalities (Baltrušaitis et al., 2019;
Liang et al., 2024). However, some multimodal networks
overly rely on a faster-to-learn or easier-to-learn modality and ignore the others during joint training (Goyal et al.,
2017; Cadene et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2020; Gat et al., 2021;
Peng et al., 2022). For example, Visual Question Answering
models should provide a correct answer by both “listening” to the question and “looking” at the image (Agrawal
1

Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit, University College
London 2 Sainsbury Wellcome Centre, University College London.
Correspondence to: Yedi Zhang <yedi@gatsby.ucl.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

