Asymptotics of Learning with Deep Structured (Random) Features

Dominik Schröder∗ 1 Daniil Dmitriev∗ 2 Hugo Cui∗ 3 Bruno Loureiro 4

Abstract

lack of a complete picture, insights can be found in recent
empirical and theoretical works.

For a large class of feature maps we provide a
tight asymptotic characterisation of the test error
associated with learning the readout layer, in the
high-dimensional limit where the input dimension, hidden layer widths, and number of training
samples are proportionally large. This characterization is formulated in terms of the population
covariance of the features. Our work is partially
motivated by the problem of learning with Gaussian rainbow neural networks, namely deep nonlinear fully-connected networks with random but
structured weights, whose row-wise covariances
are further allowed to depend on the weights of
previous layers. For such networks we also derive
a closed-form formula for the feature covariance
in terms of the weight matrices. We further find
that in some cases our results can capture feature maps learned by deep, finite-width neural
networks trained under gradient descent.

On the theoretical side, a substantial fraction of the
literature has focused on the study of deep networks at
initialisation, motivated by the lazy training regime of
large-width networks with standard scaling. Besides the
mathematical convenience, the study of random networks at
initialisation have proven to be a valuable theoretical testbed
– allowing in particular to capture some empirically observed
behaviour, such as the double-decent (Belkin et al., 2019)
and benign overfitting (Bartlett et al., 2020) phenomena.
As such, proxys for networks at initialisation, such as the
Random Features (RF) model (Rahimi & Recht, 2007) have
thus been the object of considerable theoretical attention,
with their learning being asymptotically characterized in the
two-layer case (Goldt et al., 2021; 2020; Gerace et al., 2021;
Hu & Lu, 2022; Dhifallah & Lu, 2020; Mei & Montanari,
2022; Mei et al., 2022) and the deep case (Zavatone-Veth
et al., 2022; Schröder et al., 2023; Bosch et al., 2023a;
Zavatone-Veth & Pehlevan, 2023). With the exception of
(Gerace et al., 2021; Mel & Pennington, 2022) (limited
to two-layer networks) and (Zavatone-Veth & Pehlevan,
2023) (limited to linear networks), all the analyses for
non-linear deep RFs assume unstructured random weights.
In sharp contrast, the weights of trained neural networks
are fundamentally structured - restricting the scope of these
results to networks at initialization.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks are the backbone of most successful
machine learning algorithms in the past decade. Despite
their ubiquity, a firm theoretical understanding of the very
basic mechanism behind their capacity to adapt to different
types of data and generalise across different tasks remains,
to a large extent, elusive. For instance, what is the relationship between the inductive bias introduced by the network
architecture and the representations learned from the data,
and how does it correlate with generalisation? Despite the

Indeed, an active research direction consists of empirically
investigating how the statistics of the weights in trained neural networks encode the learned information, and how this
translates to properties of the predictor, such as inductive
biases (Thamm et al., 2022; Martin & Mahoney, 2021). Of
particular relevance to our work is a recent observation by
(Guth et al., 2023) that a random (but structured) network
with the weights sampled from an ensemble with matching
statistics can retain a comparable performance to the original trained neural networks. In particular, for some tasks it
was shown that second order statistics suffices – defining a
Gaussian rainbow network ensemble.

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Mathematics, ETH Zurich,
8006 Zürich, Switzerland 2 Department of Mathematics, ETH
Zurich and ETH AI Center, 8092 Zürich, Switzerland 3 Statistical
Physics Of Computation lab., Institute of Physics, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL),
1015 Lausanne, Switzerland 4 Département d’Informatique, École
Normale Supérieure (ENS) - PSL & CNRS, F-75230 Paris
cedex 05, France. Correspondence to: Dominik Schröder
<dschroeder@ethz.ch>, Hugo Cui <hugo.cui@epfl.ch>.

Our goal in this manuscript is to provide an exact asymptotic characterization of the properties of Gaussian rainbow
networks, i.e. deep, non-linear networks with structured
random weights. Our main contributions are:

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

