Language Models as Semantic Indexers

Bowen Jin 1 Hansi Zeng 2 Guoyin Wang 3 Xiusi Chen 4 Tianxin Wei 1 Ruirui Li 3 Zhengyang Wang 3
Zheng Li 3 Yang Li 3 Hanqing Lu 3 Suhang Wang 5 Jiawei Han 1 Xianfeng Tang 3

Abstract

1. Introduction
In the context of information retrieval (IR), unique IDs are
usually assigned to the documents, as doing so facilitates
various downstream tasks including indexing and retrieval.
For example, in the realm of e-commerce platforms, products are often tagged with distinctive product IDs (He &
McAuley, 2016), and web passages are linked to specific
URLs (Kousha & Thelwall, 2007). However, these document or item IDs are often randomly assigned, lacking the
assurance of accurately encapsulating the underlying characteristics or content information of items and documents.
This issue hinders the effective understanding, indexing,
searching, and analysis of these items or documents based
solely on their IDs. Thus, semantic ID, which is a sequence
of discrete ID numbers that captures the semantic meaning
of a document, has been proposed as an advanced unique
ID to address this issue. The objective is to ensure that
the initial set of semantic IDs captures the coarse-grained
document semantics while the subsequent IDs delve into
the details of its content in a hierarchical structure.

Semantic identifier (ID) is an important concept
in information retrieval that aims to preserve
the semantics of objects such as documents and
items inside their IDs. Previous studies typically adopt a two-stage pipeline to learn semantic
IDs by first procuring embeddings using off-theshelf text encoders and then deriving IDs based
on the embeddings. However, each step introduces potential information loss, and there is
usually an inherent mismatch between the distribution of embeddings within the latent space
produced by text encoders and the anticipated
distribution required for semantic indexing. It
is non-trivial to design a method that can learn
the document’s semantic representations and its
hierarchical structure simultaneously, given that
semantic IDs are discrete and sequentially structured, and the semantic supervision is deficient.
In this paper, we introduce LMI NDEXER, a selfsupervised framework to learn semantic IDs with
a generative language model. We tackle the challenge of sequential discrete ID by introducing
a semantic indexer capable of generating neural
sequential discrete representations with progressive training and contrastive learning. In response
to the semantic supervision deficiency, we propose to train the model with a self-supervised
document reconstruction objective. We show
the high quality of the learned IDs and demonstrate their effectiveness on three tasks including
recommendation, product search, and document
retrieval on five datasets from various domains.
Code is available at https://github.com/
PeterGriffinJin/LMIndexer.

Recent research efforts (Tay et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022;
Rajput et al., 2023) have focused on acquiring semantic IDs
through a self-supervised approach employing a two-step
methodology. Generally, they first procure embeddings for
documents using off-the-shelf text encoders, such as BERT
(Devlin et al., 2019), under the assumption that these embeddings possess the capacity to encapsulate the semantic
essence of documents for indexing purposes. They then employ specific techniques such as rq-VAE (Lee et al., 2022)
or hierarchical clustering (Murtagh & Contreras, 2012) to
derive semantic IDs for the documents, using the embeddings obtained as input. However, a notable issue arises due
to the inherent mismatch between the distribution of embeddings in the latent space generated by text encoders and the
expected distribution necessary for effective semantic indexing. Typically, the former exhibits a uniform distribution
(Wang & Isola, 2020), while the latter requires a hierarchical structure to capture the coarse-grained to fine-grained
semantics. Furthermore, each step of this process introduces
potential information loss (Beaudry & Renner, 2012), as
the embeddings may not faithfully preserve the entirety of
the original document’s semantics, and the second-stage
methods may not produce flawless IDs.

1
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 2 University of
Massachusetts Amherst 3 Amazon 4 University of California, Los
Angeles 5 The Pennsylvania State University. Correspondence to:
Bowen Jin <bowenj4@illinois.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

