BWS: Best Window Selection Based on Sample Scores
for Data Pruning across Broad Ranges

Hoyong Choi * 1 Nohyun Ki * 2 Hye Won Chung 2

Abstract

concerns related to privacy (Schwartz et al., 2020; Strubell
et al., 2019). Data subset selection emerges as a promising
approach to address these issues. This involves the careful
selection of a smaller, yet highly informative, subset from
the original large dataset. The goal is to find a subset with a
specified selection ratio that approximates the performance
of the entire dataset or incurs minimal performance loss.

Data subset selection aims to find a smaller yet
informative subset of a large dataset that can approximate the full-dataset training, addressing
challenges associated with training neural networks on large-scale datasets. However, existing
methods tend to specialize in either high or low
selection ratio regimes, lacking a universal approach that consistently achieves competitive performance across a broad range of selection ratios.
We introduce a universal and efficient data subset
selection method, Best Window Selection (BWS),
by proposing a method to choose the best window subset from samples ordered based on their
difficulty scores. This approach offers flexibility
by allowing the choice of window intervals that
span from easy to difficult samples. Furthermore,
we provide an efficient mechanism for selecting
the best window subset by evaluating its quality
using kernel ridge regression. Our experimental
results demonstrate the superior performance of
BWS compared to other baselines across a broad
range of selection ratios over datasets, including
CIFAR-10/100 and ImageNet, and the scenarios
involving training from random initialization or
fine-tuning of pre-trained models.

Data subset selection has two primary approaches: scorebased selection and optimization-based selection. Scorebased selection involves defining a specific score to measure
each sample’s influence (Koh & Liang, 2017), difficulty
(Toneva et al., 2019; Paul et al., 2021), or consistency (Jiang
et al., 2021) in training neural networks. The primary goal
is to identify the most valuable or influential samples within
the dataset while pruning the remaining samples that have
minimal impact on the model’s generalization ability. On the
other hand, optimization-based selection approaches find the
optimal subset of a fixed size that can best approximate the
full dataset training in terms of loss gradient or curvature by
solving the associated optimization problem (Mirzasoleiman
et al., 2020; Pooladzandi et al., 2022; Shin et al., 2023; Yang
et al., 2023). The original optimization, which is NP-hard,
is commonly approximated by submodular functions and
a greedy algorithm is adopted to sequentially select the
samples up to the size limit of the subset.
While the prior approaches successfully reduce dataset size
in specific scenarios, there is not a single selection method
that universally outperforms other baselines across broad
selection ratios. To illustrate this, we conduct a benchmark comparison between two methods: Forgetting score
(Toneva et al., 2019) representing the score-based selection
approach, and LCMat (Shin et al., 2023) representing the
optimization-based selection approach. We evaluate the test
accuracy of models trained with different subset sizes of
datasets, including CIFAR-10/100 (Krizhevsky, 2009) and
ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009), ranging from 1% to 90%,
as selected by these two methods (Table 1). Score-based
methods, which prioritize samples of high influence or difficulty, tend to initially select rare yet influential samples
while excluding typical or easy samples. These methods
demonstrate competitive performance, nearly matching the
full-dataset training, when the selection ratio is sufficiently

1. Introduction
In many machine learning tasks, the effectiveness of deep
neural networks often relies on large-scale datasets that
include a vast number of samples, enabling them to achieve
state-of-the-art performances. However, working with such
large datasets presents several challenges, including the high
computational costs, storage requirements, and potential
*
Equal contribution 1 Samsung Research, Seoul, South Korea
School of Electronic Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of
Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, South Korea. Correspondence to: Hye Won Chung <hwchung@kaist.ac.kr>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

