Adaptive Online Experimental Design for Causal Discovery

Muhammad Qasim Elahi * 1 Lai Wei * 2 Murat Kocaoglu 1 Mahsa Ghasemi 1

Abstract

tional data is generally inadequate for establishing causal
relationships and interventional data, obtained by deliberately perturbing the system, becomes necessary. Consequently, contemporary approaches propose leveraging both
observational and interventional data for causal discovery
(Hauser & Bühlmann, 2014; Greenewald et al., 2019). A
well-established model for depicting causal relationships
is the directed acyclic graph (DAG). A directed edge between two variables indicates a direct causal effect, while
a directed path indicates an indirect causal effect (Spirtes
et al., 2000).

Causal discovery aims to uncover cause-andeffect relationships encoded in causal graphs by
leveraging observational, interventional data, or
their combination. The majority of existing causal
discovery methods are developed assuming infinite interventional data. We focus on interventional data efficiency and formalize causal discovery from the perspective of online learning,
inspired by pure exploration in bandit problems.
A graph separating system, consisting of interventions that cut every edge of the graph at least once,
is sufficient for learning causal graphs when infinite interventional data is available, even in the
worst case. We propose a track-and-stop causal
discovery algorithm that adaptively selects interventions from the graph separating system via
allocation matching and learns the causal graph
based on sampling history. Given any desired
confidence value, the algorithm determines a termination condition and runs until it is met. We
analyze the algorithm to establish a problemdependent upper bound on the expected number
of required interventional samples. Our proposed
algorithm outperforms existing methods in simulations across various randomly generated causal
graphs. It achieves higher accuracy, measured by
the structural hamming distance (SHD) between
the learned causal graph and the ground truth,
with significantly fewer samples.

A causal graph is typically identifiable only up to its Markov
equivalence class (MEC) (Verma & Pearl, 2022) using observational data. Markov equivalence class is a set of DAGs
that encode the same set of conditional independencies.
There is a growing focus on developing algorithms for the
design of interventions, specifically aimed at learning causal
graphs (Hu et al., 2014; Shanmugam et al., 2015; Ghassami
et al., 2017). These algorithms rely on the availability of
an infinite amount of interventional data, whose collection
in real-world settings is often more challenging and expensive than gathering observational data. In numerous medical contexts, abundant observational clinical data is readily
available (Subramani & Cooper, 1999), whereas conducting
randomized controlled trials can be costly or sometimes
present ethical challenges. In this work, we consider a scenario where access is limited to only a finite number of
interventional samples. Similar to (Hu et al., 2014; Shanmugam et al., 2015; Ghassami et al., 2017), we assume
causal sufficiency, meaning that all variables are observed,
and no latent or hidden variables are involved.
The PC algorithm (Spirtes et al., 2000) utilizes conditional
independence tests in combination with Meek orientation
rules (Meek, 1995) to learn the causal structure with all
identifiable causal relations from the data. The graph separating system, which is a set of interventions that cuts every
edge of the graph at least once is sufficient for learning
the full causal graph when infinite interventional data is
available. (Shanmugam et al., 2015; Kocaoglu et al., 2017).
Bayesian causal discovery is a valuable tool for efficiently
learning causal models from limited interventional data, but
it encounters challenges when it comes to computing probabilities over the combinatorial space of DAGs (Heckerman
et al., 1997; Annadani et al., 2023; Toth et al., 2022). Deal-

1. Introduction
Causal discovery is a fundamental problem encountered
across various scientific and engineering disciplines (Pearl,
2009; Spirtes et al., 2000; Peters et al., 2017). Observa*

Equal contribution 1 School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana, USA
2
Life Sciences Institute, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
Michigan, USA. Correspondence to: Muhammad Qasim Elahi
<elahi0@purdue.edu>, Lai Wei <weilaitim@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

