Patchscopes: A Unifying Framework for Inspecting
Hidden Representations of Language Models

Asma Ghandeharioun * 1 Avi Caciularu * 1 Adam Pearce 1 Lucas Dixon 1 Mor Geva 1 2
Step 1:

Abstract

Feeding Source Prompt
to Source Model

Understanding the internal representations of
large language models (LLMs) can help explain
models’ behavior and verify their alignment with
human values. Given the capabilities of LLMs
in generating human-understandable text, we propose leveraging the model itself to explain its internal representations in natural language. We
introduce a framework called Patchscopes
and show how it can be used to answer a wide
range of questions about an LLM’s computation.
We show that many prior interpretability methods based on projecting representations into the
vocabulary space and intervening on the LLM
computation can be viewed as instances of this
framework. Moreover, several of their shortcomings such as failure in inspecting early layers or lack of expressivity can be mitigated by
Patchscopes. Beyond unifying prior inspection techniques, Patchscopes also opens up
new possibilities such as using a more capable
model to explain the representations of a smaller
model, and multihop reasoning error correction1 .

Step 2:

Transforming
Hidden State

f(

) =

Amazon `s former CEO attended Oscars

Step 3:

Feeding Target Prompt
to Target Model

Step 4:

Running Execution
on Patched Target

Jeff Bezos

cat->cat; 135->135; hello->hello; ?

Figure 1. Illustration of our framework, showing a Patchscope
for decoding the hidden representation of “CEO” in the source
prompt (left). We use a target prompt (right) comprised of fewshot demonstrations of string repetitions to encourage the LLM
to explain its internal representation. Step 1: Run the forward
computation on the source prompt in the source model. Step 2:
Optionally transform the hidden state at the source layer. Step 3:
Run the forward computation on the target prompt up to the target
layer in the target model. Step 4: Patch the target representation
of the token “?” at the target layer with the transformed representation (from step 2), then continue the forward computation
from that layer onward. The modularity of Patchscopes allows
designing a variety of methods by configuring the target prompt,
model and transformation.

1. Introduction
The question of what information is captured in the hidden
representations of large language models (LLMs) is of key
importance in control and understanding of modern generative AI, and has drawn substantial attention recently (Casper
et al., 2022; Madsen et al., 2022; Patel & Pavlick, 2021;
Nanda et al., 2023). To tackle this question, prior work has
introduced a diverse array of interpretability methods, which
largely rely on three prominent approaches: training linear

classifiers, called probes, on top of hidden representations
(Belinkov & Glass, 2019; Belinkov, 2022; Alain & Bengio,
2017), projecting representations to the model’s vocabulary
space (nostalgebraist, 2020; Din et al., 2023; Belrose et al.,
2023), and intervening on the computation to identify if a
representation is critical for certain predictions (Meng et al.,
2022a; Wallat et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2022; Conmy et al.,
2023; Geva et al., 2023).

*

Equal contribution 1 Google Research 2 Tel Aviv University. Correspondence to: Asma Ghandeharioun <aghandeharioun@google.com>.

Despite the wide success of these methods, they each exhibit
practical shortcomings. First, probing relies on supervised
training for pre-defined classes, which is hard to scale when
there is a large number of classes or when all the categories
are not known a priori. Second, the accuracy of vocabulary

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
Code is publicly available at https://pair-code.
github.io/interpretability/patchscopes.

1

