New Sample Complexity Bounds for Sample Average Approximation in
Heavy-Tailed Stochastic Programming

Hongcheng Liu 1 Jindong Tong 2

Abstract

function; that is, there exist two deterministic and everywhere differentiable functions, denoted by F1 : X → R
and F2 : X → R such that

This paper studies sample average approximation
(SAA) and its simple regularized variation in solving convex or strongly convex stochastic programming problems. Under heavy-tailed assumptions
and comparable regularity conditions as in the
typical SAA literature, we show — perhaps for
the first time — that the sample complexity can
be completely free from any complexity measure
(e.g., logarithm of the covering number) of the
feasible region. As a result, our new bounds can
be more advantageous than the state-of-the-art in
terms of the dependence on the problem dimensionality.

F (x) = F1 (x) + F2 (x),

where F1 and F2 satisfy regularities in Assumption 1.1 below:
Assumption 1.1. Given q ≥ 1, let ϱ = q/(q − 1). For
some scalars L ≥ 0, M ≥ 0, and any pair of vectors
(x1 , x2 ) ∈ X 2 ,
∥∇F1 (x1 ) − ∇F1 (x2 )∥ϱ ≤ L · ∥x1 − x2 ∥q ,

1. Introduction.

(4)

Here, (3) means that the first component of the populationlevel objective function F1 admits Lipschitz continuous
gradient. Meanwhile, (4) essentially imposes that the second
component of the population-level objective function F2 is
Lipschitz continuous. Results that apply to such a composite
objective function subsume the special cases of F being
smooth (with F2 = 0) and F being Lipschitz (with F1 =
0). Conditions closely similar to, if not more critical than,
Assumption 1.1 have been considered in much SP literature
(such as Ghadimi & Lan, 2012; 2013; Nemirovski et al.,
2009; Rakhlin et al., 2011; Lan, 2020).

This paper is focused on a convex or strongly convex
stochastic programming (SP) problem of the following
form:
min F (x) := E[f (x, ξ)],

(3)

and, simultaneously,
∥∇F2 (x)∥ϱ ≤ M, ∀x ∈ X .

x∈X

(2)

(1)

where X ⊆ Rd is a non-empty convex feasible region with
integer d being the number of decision variables (a.k.a., dimensionality), ξ is a random vector of problem parameters
whose probability distribution P is supported on Θ ⊆ Rm ,
and the cost function f : X × Θ → R is deterministic and
measurable. Throughout this paper, we assume that f ( · , ξ)
is everywhere differentiable
R for almost every ξ ∈ Θ, the
expectation E [f (x, ξ)] = Θ f (x, ξ) dP(ξ) is well defined
for every x ∈ X , and F admits a finite minimizer x∗ on
X with a finite optimal cost. Furthermore, we also assume
the presence of some structure of a composite objective

The SP problem above has been widely applied and much
discussed (e.g., by Shapiro et al., 2021; Birge, 1997; Birge &
Louveaux, 2011; Ruszczyński & Shapiro, 2003; Lan, 2020,
to name only a few). Particularly, it has extensive connections with many machine learning problems (as per, e.g.,
Bartlett et al., 2006; Liu et al., 2019). Indeed, the suboptimality gap in solving (1) can often be interpreted as the
excess risk, an important metric of generalizability, when
the SP problem is constructed for fitting/training a statistical or machine learning model. Due to the (increasingly)
frequent need to perform data-driven modeling or decisionmaking in the presence of extreme values or outliers in data,
studying solution techniques for (1) under heavy-tailed-ness
becomes growingly more important (Oliveira & Thompson,
2023).

1

Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, University
of Florida, Gainesville, FL, 32611 USA. 2 Department of Industrial
and Systems Engineering, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL,
32611 USA. Email: jindongtong@ufl.edu. Correspondence to:
Hongcheng Liu <liu.h@ufl.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

