DoRA: Weight-Decomposed Low-Rank Adaptation

Shih-Yang Liu 1 2 Chien-Yi Wang 1 Hongxu Yin 1 Pavlo Molchanov 1 Yu-Chiang Frank Wang 1
Kwang-Ting Cheng 2 Min-Hung Chen 1

Abstract
Pretrained
Weight

Among the widely used parameter-efficient finetuning (PEFT) methods, LoRA and its variants
have gained considerable popularity because of
avoiding additional inference costs. However,
there still often exists an accuracy gap between
these methods and full fine-tuning (FT). In this
work, we first introduce a novel weight decomposition analysis to investigate the inherent differences between FT and LoRA. Aiming to resemble the learning capacity of FT from the
findings, we propose Weight-Decomposed LowRank Adaptation (DoRA). DoRA decomposes
the pre-trained weight into two components, magnitude and direction, for fine-tuning, specifically
employing LoRA for directional updates to efficiently minimize the number of trainable parameters. By employing DoRA, we enhance
both the learning capacity and training stability of LoRA while avoiding any additional inference overhead. DoRA consistently outperforms LoRA on fine-tuning LLaMA, LLaVA,
and VL-BART on various downstream tasks,
such as commonsense reasoning, visual instruction tuning, and image/video-text understanding.
Code is available at https://github.com/
NVlabs/DoRA.

Merged
Weight

Frozen
Trainable

Decompose
(Initialize)

Merge

Magnitude

Magnitude

Direction

Direction

Pretrained
Weight

Adapt
Pretrained
Weight

B

A

Figure 1. An overview of our proposed DoRA, which decomposes
the pre-trained weight into magnitude and direction components
for fine-tuning, especially with LoRA to efficiently update the
direction component. Note that || · ||c denotes the vector-wise
norm of a matrix across each column vector.

employed, involving the retraining of all model parameters.
Nevertheless, as the size of models and datasets expand
in scale, the expense associated with fine-tuning the entire
model becomes prohibitively large.
To address this issue, parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT)
methods (Houlsby et al., 2019) have been introduced to finetune the pre-trained models with only a minimal number of
parameters. Among these, LoRA (Hu et al., 2022), which
does not change the model architecture, has become notably
popular for its simplicity and efficacy. Nevertheless, there
is still a capacity gap between LoRA and FT, which is often
attributed to the limited number of trainable parameters
without further exploration of other underlying causes (Hu
et al., 2022; Kopiczko et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
Models that are pre-trained with extensive general domain
datasets have demonstrated remarkable generalization abilities, significantly benefiting a wide array of applications,
from natural language processing (NLP) tasks (Qin et al.,
2023; Taori et al., 2023) to multi-modal tasks (Li et al., 2022;
Liu et al., 2023a). To tailor these general models for specific downstream tasks, full fine-tuning (FT) is commonly
1

NVIDIA 2 HKUST. Correspondence to: Shih-Yang Liu <shihyangl@nvidia.com, sliuau@connect.ust.hk>, Min-Hung Chen
<minhungc@nvidia.com>.

Drawing on Weight Normalization (Salimans & Kingma,
2016), which achieves faster convergence via improving the
conditioning of the gradient with weight reparameterization,
we introduce a novel weight decomposition analysis that initially reparameterizes model weights into magnitude and directional components, subsequently examining the changes

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

