Improved Bounds for Pure Private Agnostic Learning:
Item-Level and User-Level Privacy

Bo Li 1 Wei Wang 1 Peng Ye 1

Abstract

PAC learning as a combination of probably approximately
correct (PAC) learning (Valiant, 1984) and differential privacy. The most important measure for the utility of a learner
is the minimum amount of data required to find a hypothesis that achieves some target accuracy, which is called the
sample complexity. Subsequent work (e.g., (Feldman &
Xiao, 2014; Alon et al., 2019)) showed that the privacy constraint makes the sample complexity much higher than the
non-private setting.

Machine Learning has made remarkable progress
in a wide range of fields. In many scenarios, learning is performed on datasets involving sensitive
information, in which privacy protection is essential for learning algorithms. In this work, we study
pure private learning in the agnostic model – a
framework reflecting the learning process in practice. We examine the number of users required
under item-level (where each user contributes one
example) and user-level (where each user contributes multiple examples) privacy and derive
several improved upper bounds. For item-level
privacy, our algorithm achieves a near optimal
bound for general concept classes. We extend this
to the user-level setting, rendering a tighter upper
bound than the one proved by Ghazi et al. (2023).
Lastly, we consider the problem of learning thresholds under user-level privacy and present an algorithm with a nearly tight user complexity.

The PAC model assumes that all the samples are labeled
by a concept in the given concept class. This is called the
realizable assumption. However, in many situations, such an
assumption could be unrealistic. For example, the collected
data may be noisy, or one may choose an inappropriate
concept class that cannot classify the samples perfectly. The
agnostic learning model, introduced by Haussler (1992)
and Kearns et al. (1994), addresses this issue by requiring
the learner to output a hypothesis within some additive error
compared to the best one in the concept class. Motivated
by this, Kasiviswanathan et al. (2011) also defined private
agnostic learning with the agnostic model replacing the PAC
model in private PAC learning.

1. Introduction

For pure private realizable learning, tight sample complexity
bounds were shown by Beimel et al. (2019). However, for
agnostic learning, there were no such tight results. Though
several algorithms were proposed (Kasiviswanathan et al.,
2011; Beimel et al., 2015; Alon et al., 2020), none of them
achieve a sample complexity that matches the trivial lower
bound, i.e., the one combines lower bounds of private realizable learning and non-private agnostic learning. On the
other hand, there have been no non-trivial lower bounds
obtained in the literature. Thus, a gap exists, leading to the
following question:

Differential Privacy (DP) (Dwork et al., 2006b;a) is a mathematical definition for measuring the privacy of algorithms.
An algorithm is considered private if the presence or absence of a single user does not significantly affect the output.
Due to its soundness and quantifiability, DP has become
the gold standard for ensuring data privacy and has been
employed by the industry (Apple Differential Privacy Team,
2017) and the governments (Abowd, 2018).
Machine learning models are usually trained on datasets that
contain sensitive data (e.g., in medical or financial applications). Thus, it is necessary to design privacy-preserving
machine learning algorithms. Kasiviswanathan et al. (2011)
initiated the study of private learning and defined private

What is the sample complexity of pure private
agnostic learning?

1

What we have discussed so far only considers the situation
in that each user contributes one example, which we refer
to as item-level DP. In practice, however, one user may
have many items (e.g., in federated learning (Kairouz et al.,
2021)). Here, the goal becomes protecting all the examples
contributed by a single user. In this user-level DP setting,

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hong
Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong SAR,
China. Correspondence to: Peng Ye <pyeac@connect.ust.hk>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

