In-Context Sharpness as Alerts: An Inner Representation Perspective for
Hallucination Mitigation

Shiqi Chen * 1 Miao Xiong * 2 Junteng Liu 3 ZhengXuan Wu 4 Teng Xiao 5 Siyang Gao 1 Junxian He 6
schen438-c@my.cityu.edu.hk miao.xiong@u.nus.edu junxianh@cse.ust.hk

Abstract

undermine the trustworthiness and reliability of LLMs, as
highlighted in recent studies (Chen et al., 2023; Ji et al.,
2023; Wang et al., 2023). To address the factuality issue,
many efforts have focused on retrieving external knowledge (Ram et al., 2023b; Yu et al., 2023; Jiang et al., 2023)
for generation or fact-checking, as well as fine-tuning (Asai
et al., 2023) and self-evaluation (Pan et al., 2023; Xiong
et al., 2023). However, these methods often require high
computational resources or high-quality knowledge bases,
which may not be available for domain-specific cases. In
contrast, we aim to tackle this challenge from the perspective of model’s inner representations, investigating whether
the hidden states contain information about hallucination.

Large language models (LLMs) frequently hallucinate and produce factual errors, yet our understanding of why they make these errors remains limited. In this study, we delve into the
underlying mechanisms of LLM hallucinations
from the perspective of inner representations,
and discover a salient pattern associated with
hallucinations: correct generations tend to have
sharper context activations in the hidden states
of the in-context tokens, compared to the incorrect ones. Leveraging this insight, we propose
an entropy-based metric to quantify the “sharpness” among the in-context hidden states and incorporate it into the decoding process to formulate a constrained decoding approach. Experiments on various knowledge-seeking and hallucination benchmarks demonstrate our approach’s
consistent effectiveness, for example, achieving
up to an 8.6 point improvement on TruthfulQA.
We believe this study can improve our understanding of hallucinations and serve as a practical solution for hallucination mitigation. Code
is publicly available at https://github.com/hkustnlp/Activation Decoding.

1

To gain this mechanistic understanding of hallucinations1
through the lens of hidden states, we begin by formulating
an internal knowledge extraction process following Geva
et al. (2023), to examine whether the hidden states of the
model encode the target knowledge in the response. The
underlying hypothesis is that hallucinated knowledge may
not be encoded into the intermediate hidden states. Specifically, for example, in the prompt ‘Beats Music is owned
by’, if the target token ‘Apple’ is encoded within the representations of the subject ‘Beats Music’, we posit that
the model “knows” Beats Music and Apple are related in
some ways and Apple is more likely to be a correct answer.
In this case, we consider the token ‘Apple’ activated by the
representations of ‘Beats Music’. Our case study (Table 1)
on the C OUNTER FACT dataset (Meng et al., 2022) – where
the subject, object, and relation annotations are available –
reveal that the correct answers have a significantly higher
rate of activation compared to incorrect answers.

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have made remarkable advancements in recent years, with extensive applications
across various domains (OpenAI, 2022; 2023; Kaddour
et al., 2023). Despite these advances, LLMs still face notable challenges regarding factuality, which could critically

However, this preliminary study based on the method
in Geva et al. (2023) requires knowledge triplet annotations.
To mitigate this requirement, we extend our investigation
to examining the activations of correct versus incorrect answers across the full input sequence, moving beyond merely

*

Equal contribution. Work done during SC’s vist to HKUST.
City University of Hong Kong 2 National University of Singapore 3 Shanghai Jiao Tong University 4 Stanford University 5 Penn
State University 6 HKUST. Correspondence to: Junxian He <junxianh@cse.ust.hk>.

1

1
Hallucinations can be described as outputs that do not conform
to the model’s inner belief (Zou et al., 2023). However, the concept
of “inner belief” and its measurement remains debatable. Thus in
this paper, we use “hallucination” to denote a generation that is not
aligned with world knowledge to simplify the discussion, which
shares the same definition as “factuality”.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

