Causally Motivated Personalized Federated Invariant Learning with
Shortcut-Averse Information-Theoretic Regularization

Xueyang Tang 1 2 Song Guo 3 Jingcai Guo 1 4 Jie Zhang 1 Yue Yu 2

1. Introduction

Abstract
Exploiting invariant relations and mitigating spurious correlation (a.k.a., shortcut) between representation and target across varied data distributions
can tackle the challenging out-of-distribution
(OOD) generalization problem. In personalized
federated learning (PFL), heterogeneous data distribution across local clients offers the inherent
prerequisites to extract the invariant features that
maintain invariant relation with target. Nevertheless, personalized features are closely entangled
with spurious features in PFL since they exhibit
similar variability across different clients, which
makes preserving personalization knowledge and
eliminating shortcuts two conflicting objectives
in PFL. To address the above challenge, we analyse the heterogeneous data generation on local
clients through the lens of structured causal model
and propose a crucial causal signature which can
distinguish personalized features from spurious
features with global invariant features as the anchor. Then the causal signature is quantified as an
information-theoretic constraint that facilitates the
shortcut-averse personalized invariant learning on
each client. Theoretical analysis demonstrates
our method, FedPIN, can yield a tighter bound
on generalization error than the prevalent PFL approaches when train-test distribution shift exists
on clients. Moreover, we provide a theoretical
guarantee on the convergence rate of FedPIN in
this paper. The results of extensive experiments
show that our method can achieve superior OOD
generalization performance compared with the
state-of-the-art competitors.

Modern machine learning models are prone to rely on spurious correlations (correlations between spurious features
and target, a.k.a, shortcuts) in diverse vision and language
tasks (Geirhos et al., 2020). Since shortcuts are unstable
over diverse data distributions, models performing well on
training data can experience a significant degradation in
performance on test data when distribution shift exists. We
consider a binary classification task for illustration where
a learning model needs to differentiate between pictures of
“cow” and “camel” (Beery et al., 2018). Because most cows
stand with grass backgrounds and the majority of camels appear in desert backgrounds in the practical training dataset,
there is a shortcut from background representation to target/label. The trained learning model prefers to choose
background (spurious feature) rather than the shape of animals (intended feature) as the discriminative feature. When
images with camels standing in grass backgrounds arrive at
inference stage, they will be categorized as “cow” because
the spurious correlation is no longer applicable.
With the aim of learning intended features and eliminating spurious features, invariant learning (IL) emerges as
one of the most effective and promising directions recently.
Intended features are regarded as features that have an invariant causal relation to the target across various data distributions, consequently, they are referred to as invariant features.
The prevalent IL methods necessitate exposure to multiple
training environments1 (i.e., heterogeneous data distributions) for producing an invariant predictor elicited from the
invariant features. The obtained model can generalize to
diverse unknown data distributions, and therefore resolve
the out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization problem.
When we shift our focus to federated learning where the
local datasets are usually non-independently and identically
distributed (i.e., Non-IID), exploiting invariant representation across different data distributions can be facilitated.
However, the heterogeneous federated clients present an additional significant demand: personalization, due to the fact
that a shared global model can fail to fit the diverse local data

1
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University. 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory. 3 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. 4 Hong Kong Polytechnic University Shenzhen Research
Institute. Correspondence to: Song Guo <songguo@cse.ust.hk>,
Jingcai Guo <jc-jingcai.guo@polyu.edu.hk>, Jie Zhang <jiecomp.zhang@polyu.edu.hk>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1
Environment refers to a data distribution specified by a latent
variable in invariant learning.

1

