FedMBridge: Bridgeable Multimodal Federated Learning

Jiayi Chen 1 Aidong Zhang 1

Abstract

and audio) into the PFL systems has become a significant
research area. For example, in vision-centered MFL, clients
could leverage various auxiliary modalities, such as text
and audio, to boost the unimodal vision-only models; some
clients learn only the image modality, some learn to fuse
image and audio modalities, and some others may focus on
modeling image-text interactions.

Multimodal Federated Learning (MFL) addresses
the setup of multiple clients with diversified
modality types (e.g. image, text, video, and audio) working together to improve their local personal models in a data-privacy manner. Prior
MFL works rely on restrictive compositional neural architecture designs to ensure inter-client information sharing via blockwise model aggregation, limiting their applicability in the real-world
Architecture-personalized MFL (AMFL) scenarios, where clients may have distinguished multimodal interaction strategies and there is no restriction on local architecture design. The key
challenge in AMFL is how to automatically and
efficiently tackle the two heterogeneity patterns–
statistical and architecture heterogeneity–while
maximizing the beneficial information sharing
among clients. To solve this challenge, we propose FedMBridge, which leverages a topologyaware hypernetwork to act as a bridge that can automatically balance and digest the two heterogeneity patterns in a communication-efficient manner. Our experiments on four AMFL simulations
demonstrate the efficiency and effectiveness of
our proposed approach.

A key challenge in MFL is how to encourage knowledge
sharing among clients with diversified neural architectures
due to their inconsistent input modality types. To address
this challenge, prior MFL approaches (Zhao et al., 2021;
Chen & Zhang, 2022; Yu et al., 2023) have leveraged a compositional neural architecture design (i.e., neural architectures are made of common smaller blocks) for a blockwise
knowledge sharing scheme. However, these methods require that all clients’ models should be splittable into blocks
as well as use the same multimodal fusion flow, which have
ignored three real-world characteristics of MFL. (1) Task
complexity difference. Due to personalization, clients may
vary greatly in their complexity of modeling the inter-modal
interactions, with some local tasks being more complex than
others. In this situation, it is essential for different clients to
employ diverse neural network sizes or even utilize varied
network families that align with their personal data distributions. (2) Multimodal pattern difference. Studies in
Multimodal Fusion (Atrey et al., 2010; Gao et al., 2020)
have demonstrated that the patterns of inter-modal interactions can also shift across clients, necessitating distinct
mechanisms for effective learning (Atrey et al., 2010; Gao
et al., 2020). For example, some image-text clients may benefit from just a straightforward concatenation of different
modalities’ features; some image-audio clients may need an
element-wise alignment; and some image-text-audio clients
may need a complex intra- and inter-modal attention mechanism. (3) Resource budget difference. In real systems,
client devices can be mobile phones, tablets, and personal
computers, thus vary greatly in computation resource budgets (e.g., computation capacity, memory, storage, and network bandwidth). A client with poor resource cannot afford
large-size models, such as pre-trained large foundation models, while a resource-rich client can benefit from it.

1. Introduction
Personalized Federated Learning (PFL) (Arivazhagan et al.,
2019; T Dinh et al., 2020; Deng et al., 2020) provides a collaborative training scheme, allowing multiple clients to train
their personal models simultaneously while taking benefits
from each other’s learning experiences with a guarantee of
data privacy. With recent advancements of multi-sensory
devices, Multimodal Federated Learning (MFL) (Chen
& Zhang, 2022; Zhao et al., 2021; Xiong et al., 2022) incorporating diverse modality types (e.g. image, video, text,
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, VA 22903, USA. Correspondence to: Jiayi Chen
<jc4td@virginia.edu>, Aidong Zhang <aidong@virginia.edu>.

Motivated by the above practical MFL properties underexplored in prior works, it is natural to consider the coexistence of diverse multimodal fusion strategies, as well as

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

