INViT: A Generalizable Routing Problem Solver
with Invariant Nested View Transformer
Han Fang 1 Zhihao Song 1 Paul Weng 2 Yutong Ban 1

Abstract

Large problem scale

Recently, deep reinforcement learning has shown
promising results for learning fast heuristics to
solve routing problems. Meanwhile, most of the
solvers suffer from generalizing to an unseen distribution or distributions with different scales. To
address this issue, we propose a novel architecture, called Invariant Nested View Transformer
(INViT), which is designed to enforce a nested
design together with invariant views inside the
encoders to promote the generalizability of the
learned solver. It applies a modified policy gradient algorithm enhanced with data augmentations. We demonstrate that the proposed INViT
achieves a dominant generalization performance
on both TSP and CVRP problems with various
distributions and different problem scales. Code
is avaiable at https://github.com/KasumigaokaUtaha/INViT.

Generalize
Train

IN ViT

Generalize
U niform distribution
Small problem scale

Different distributions

Figure 1. Our method INViT aggregates node information from
multiple nested local views (marked as colored discs). Trained on
small instances following uniform distributions, INViT can generalize to instances with larger sizes or/and different distributions.

To obtain faster heuristics, researchers have started to actively explore the exploitation of deep learning, and especially deep reinforcement learning (DRL), either (1) to learn
to construct (Kool et al., 2019; Jin et al., 2023), in which
case the learned solver generates a solution step by step, or
(2) to learn to search (da Costa et al., 2021; Fu et al., 2021;
Min et al., 2023; Falkner & Schmidt-Thieme, 2023), in
which case the learned solver guides a local search method.
In this paper, we focus on neural constructive methods,
which usually enjoy faster inference while still reaching
good performance compared with learn-to-search methods.

1. Introduction
Among all combinatorial optimization problems, routing
problems, such as traveling salesman problem (TSP) or vehicle routing problem (VRP), are arguably among the most
studied thanks to their wide application range, such as logistics (Madani et al., 2021), electronic design automation
(Alkaya & Duman, 2013), or bioinformatics (Matai et al.,
2010). Due to their NP-hard nature, exact algorithms are
impracticable for solving large-scale instances, which has
motivated the active development of approximate heuristic
methods. Although state-of-the-art (SOTA) heuristic methods, such as LKH3 (Helsgaun, 2009; 2017) or HGS (Vidal,
2022), have been designed to provide high-quality solutions
for large routing problem instances with higher efficiency,
the computational costs remain prohibitively high.

While constructive solvers demonstrate promising results,
the existing DRL-based models generally lack robust generalization abilities, as also previously noted by Joshi et al.
(2022). Indeed, those models are usually trained on fixedscale (e.g., small) instances drawn from a fixed (e.g., uniform) probability distribution, but, once trained, they are
incapable of generating satisfactory solutions on new instances of larger scales (i.e., cross-size generalization) or
drawn from a different distribution (i.e., cross-distribution
generalization). While one may think of training on more
diverse instances (larger scales or drawn from more diverse
distributions) to address this generalization issue, this comes
with an increased computational cost, which may be com-

1

Joint Institute of Michigan, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai, China 2 Duke Kunshan University, Jiangsu, China. Correspondence to: Paul Weng <paul.weng@dukekunshan.edu.cn>,
Yutong Ban <yban@sjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by

the author(s).

1

