Promoting External and Internal Equities Under Ex-Ante/Ex-Post Metrics in
Online Resource Allocation
Karthik Abinav Sankararaman 1 Aravind Srinivasan 2 Pan Xu 3

Abstract

1. Introduction
We consider online resource allocation under a typical nonprofit setting, where limited or even scarce resources are
administered by a not-for-profit organization like a government, and our priority is equity such that every type of
online agent could receive a fair share of the limited supplies. Examples include refugee resettlement (Ahani et al.,
2021), allocation of public housing for lower-income families (Benabbou et al., 2018), distribution of emergency aid
for natural disasters like wildfires (Wang et al., 2019), allocation of food donation from mobile pantries for needy
families (Lien et al., 2014), and the distribution of urgent
medical equipment to local hospitals and nursing homes
during a pandemic (Manshadi et al., 2021).

This paper proposes two different models for
equitable resource allocation in online settings.
The first one is called external equity promotion,
where sequentially arriving agents are heterogeneous in their external attributes, namely how
many resources they demand, which are drawn
from a probability distribution (accessible to the
algorithm). The focus is then to devise an allocation policy such that every requester can get a fair
share of resources proportional to their demands,
regardless of their arrival time. The second is
called internal equity promotion, where arriving
requesters can be treated homogeneously in external attributes (demands) but are heterogeneous in
internal traits such as demographics. In particular, each requester can be identified as belonging
to one or several groups, and an allocation of resources is regarded as equitable when every group
of requesters can receive a fair share of resources
proportional to the percentage of that group in
the whole population. For both models above, we
consider as the benchmark a clairvoyant optimal
solution that has the privilege to access all random
demand realizations in advance. We consider two
equity metrics, namely ex-post and ex-ante, and
discuss the challenges under the two metrics in detail. Specifically, we present two linear program
(LP)-based policies for external equity promotion
under ex-ante with independent demands, each
achieving an optimal CR of 1/2 with respect to
the benchmark LP. For internal equity promotion,
we present optimal policies under both ex-ante
and ex-post metrics.

In this work, we identify two different classes of models for
equitable resource allocation in online settings. In the first
class, which we refer to as external equity promotion, the
arriving requesters can be heterogeneous in their external
attributes, namely how much resource they demand, which
is drawn from a probability distribution. The focus is then to
devise an allocation policy such that every requester can get
a fair share of resources proportional to their demand, regardless of their arrival time. Some representative works for
this class investigate distributing medical suppliers (Manshadi et al., 2021) and allocating food donations to different
agencies (Lien et al., 2014). By contrast, in the second
class, the arriving requesters all demand exactly one unit
of resource. We call this class internal equity promotion
because the emphasis is on the differences between the demographics of requesters. The requesters can be identified
as belonging to one or several groups, and the distribution
of resources is regarded as equitable when every group of
requesters can receive a fair share of resources proportional
to the percentage of that group in the whole population.
Internal equity has been studied in ride-hailing services
(during peak hours especially), where we need to allocate
(limited) available drivers to arriving riders such that riders
of each group (based on gender, race, etc.) can receive a
fair share of drivers (Ma et al., 2022; Nanda et al., 2020; Xu
& Xu, 2020). The issue of internal equity has been raised
again and well reported in the COVID-19 vaccine distribution. There is much news showing stark racial disparities
existing in the early stages of the vaccine rollout across the

1
Meta AI, Menlo Park, USA 2 Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park, USA 3 Department of
Computer Science, New Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark,
USA. Correspondence to: Pan Xu <pxu@njit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

