Correcting Diffusion-Based Perceptual Image Compression
with Privileged End-to-End Decoder

Yiyang Ma 1 Wenhan Yang 2 Jiaying Liu 1

Abstract

technologies promotes the propensity of a series of emerging
applications, e.g., video streaming and augmented reality.
With the rapid increase in existing image resolutions, e.g.,
the emergence and polarity of High Definition, Full High
Definition, and Ultra High Definition, image compression
has drawn greater attention and interest.

The images produced by diffusion models can attain excellent perceptual quality. However, it is
challenging for diffusion models to guarantee distortion, hence the integration of diffusion models
and image compression models still needs more
comprehensive explorations. This paper presents
a diffusion-based image compression method that
employs a privileged end-to-end decoder model as
correction, which achieves better perceptual quality while guaranteeing the distortion to an extent.
We build a diffusion model and design a novel
paradigm that combines the diffusion model and
an end-to-end decoder, and the latter is responsible for transmitting the privileged information
extracted at the encoder side. Specifically, we theoretically analyze the reconstruction process of
the diffusion models at the encoder side with the
original images being visible. Based on the analysis, we introduce an end-to-end convolutional
decoder to provide a better approximation of the
score function ∇xt log p(xt ) at the encoder side
and effectively transmit the combination. Experiments demonstrate the superiority of our method
in both distortion and perception compared with
previous perceptual compression methods. The
project is at https://realpasu.github.
io/CorrDiff_Website.

In the past few decades, the conventional image compression
pipeline consists of several fundamental modules: transformation, quantization, and entropy coding. The images are
first decomposed into less correlated components, whose distributions are then estimated and modeled. This framework
leads to the birth and success of a series of coding standards,
e.g., JPEG (Wallace, 1991) and BPG (BPG-Contributors,
2018). The compression method can also adaptively adjust
by the corresponding input, achieving better-customized
results (Fu et al., 2011; 2012). However, persistent manual optimization and pattern expansion result in an overly
complex framework, gradually revealing performance bottlenecks as development progresses.
With the advancement of deep learning (DL), recent years
have shown that DL-based image compression methods significantly surpass classical methods in balancing bit rate
and reconstruction quality. In the beginning, deep neural
networks are employed to capture the nonlinear mapping
relationship, to augment the function of existing modules of
image codecs (Theis et al., 2017; Toderici et al., 2017; Rippel & Bourdev, 2017). The later efforts (Ballé et al., 2017;
2018; Minnen et al., 2018; Toderici et al., 2016) make the entropy estimation learnable and lead compression techniques
to enter the era of end-to-end training.

1. Introduction

To evaluate the performance of image compression methods, there are two categories of metrics including distortion
and perception (Blau & Michaeli, 2019). Distortion metrics
(e.g., PSNR, MS-SSIM (Wang et al., 2003)) which measure
the fidelity of reconstructed images are leveraged by most
image compression methods. Perception metrics refer to
the subjective evaluation of human eyes. However, when
image compression methods reach a certain level of fidelity,
rich evidence is provided to theoretically and experimentally prove that optimizing distortion inevitably leads to the
degradation of perceptual quality (Blau & Michaeli, 2019;
Muckley et al., 2023). Such degradation usually includes

Image compression aims to minimize the amount of data
required to represent the image while retaining as much relevant information as possible, to reconstruct the image with
high fidelity. The persistent evolution of image compression
1

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China 2 Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China.
Correspondence to: Jiaying Liu <liujiaying@pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

