Observable Propagation: Uncovering Feature Vectors in Transformers

Jacob Dunefsky 1 Arman Cohan 1

Abstract

gating how to decompose the computation carried out by
a model into human-understandable pieces. This helps us
predict their behavior, identify and correct discrepancies,
align them with our goals, and assess their trustworthiness,
especially in high-risk scenarios. The primary goal is to
improve output prediction on real-world data distributions,
identify and understand discrepancies between intended and
actual behavior, align the model with our objectives, and
assess trustworthiness in high-risk applications (Olah et al.,
2018).

A key goal of current mechanistic interpretability
research in NLP is to find linear features (also
called “feature vectors”) for transformers: directions in activation space corresponding to concepts that are used by a given model in its computation. Present state-of-the-art methods for finding linear features require large amounts of labelled data – both laborious to acquire and computationally expensive to utilize. In this work,
we introduce a novel method, called “observable
propagation” (in short: O B P ROP), for finding linear features used by transformer language models in computing a given task – using almost no
data. Our paradigm centers on the concept of
“observables”, linear functionals corresponding to
given tasks. We then introduce a mathematical
theory for the analysis of feature vectors, including a similarity metric between feature vectors
called the coupling coefficient which estimates
the degree to which one feature’s output correlates with another’s. We use O B P ROP to perform
extensive qualitative investigations into several
tasks, including gendered occupational bias, political party prediction, and programming language
detection. Our results suggest that O B P ROP surpasses traditional approaches for finding feature
vectors in the low-data regime, and that O B P ROP
can be used to better understand the mechanisms
responsible for bias in large language models.

One important notion in mechanistic interpretability is that
of “features”. A feature can be thought of as a simple function of the activations at a particular layer of the model, the
value of which is important for the model’s computation at
that layer. For instance, in the textual domain, features used
by a language model at some layer might reflect whether
a token is an adverb, whether the language of the token
is French, or other such characteristics. Possibly the most
sought-after type of feature is a “linear feature”, or “feature vector”: a fixed vector in embedding space that the
model utilizes by determining how much the input embedding points in the direction of that vector. Linear features
are in some sense the holy grails of features: they are both
easy for humans to interpret and amenable to mathematical
analysis (Olah, 2022).
Contributions Our primary contribution is a method,
which we call “observable propagation” (O B P ROP in short),
for both finding feature vectors in large language models
corresponding to given tasks, and analyzing these features
in order to understand how they affect other tasks. Unlike
non-feature-based interpretability methods such as saliency
methods (Simonyan et al., 2013; Jacovi et al., 2021; Wallace et al., 2019) or circuit discovery methods (Conmy et al.,
2023; Wang et al., 2022), observable propagation reveals the
specific information from the model’s internal activations
that are responsible for its output, rather than merely tokens
or model components that are relevant. And unlike methods
for finding feature vectors such as probing (Gurnee et al.,
2023; Li et al., 2023; Elazar et al., 2021) or sparse autoencoders (Cunningham et al., 2023), observable propagation
can find these feature vectors without having to store large
datasets of embeddings, perform many expensive forward
passes, or utilize vast quantities of labeled data. In addition,
we present the following contributions:

1. Introduction
When a large language model predicts that the next token in
a sentence is far more likely to be “him” than “her”, what is
causing it to make this decision? The field of mechanistic
interpretability aims to answer such questions by investi1
Department of Computer Science, Yale University, New
Haven, CT, United States.
Correspondence to: Jacob
Dunefsky <jacob.dunefsky@yale.edu>, Arman Cohan <arman.cohan@yale.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

