In-context Convergence of Transformers

Yu Huang 1 Yuan Cheng 2 Yingbin Liang 3

Abstract

natural language processing (Devlin et al., 2018; OpenAI,
2023), computer vision (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020; He et al.,
2022), reinforcement learning (Chen et al., 2021; Janner
et al., 2021), and so on. Recently, large language models
(LLMs) based on transformers have exhibited remarkable
in-context learning capabilities, where the model can solve
a new task solely through inference based on prompts of the
task without further fine-tuning (Brown et al., 2020).

Transformers have recently revolutionized many
domains in modern machine learning and one
salient discovery is their remarkable in-context
learning capability, where models can solve an
unseen task by utilizing task-specific prompts
without further parameters fine-tuning. This also
inspired recent theoretical studies aiming to understand the in-context learning mechanism of
transformers, which however focused only on linear transformers. In this work, we take the first
step toward studying the learning dynamics of
a one-layer transformer with softmax attention
trained via gradient descent in order to in-context
learn linear function classes. We consider a structured data model, where each token is randomly
sampled from a set of feature vectors in either
balanced or imbalanced fashion. For data with
balanced features, we establish the finite-time convergence guarantee with near-zero prediction error by navigating our analysis over two phases of
the training dynamics of the attention map. More
notably, for data with imbalanced features, we
show that the learning dynamics take a stage-wise
convergence process, where the transformer first
converges to a near-zero prediction error for the
query tokens of dominant features, and then converges later to a near-zero error for query tokens of
under-represented features, via one and four training phases. Our proof features new techniques for
analyzing the competing strengths of two types of
attention weights, the change of which determines
different training phases.

Such striking abilities have inspired a recent line of research
to understand the underlying mechanisms of in-context
learning from various aspects (Garg et al., 2022; Min et al.,
2022; Wei et al., 2023; Von Oswald et al., 2023; Xie et al.,
2021). Among these studies, the pioneering work of Garg
et al. (2022) empirically studied in-context learning via an
interpretable framework, highlighting the capacity of transformers to acquire in-context knowledge of linear and some
more complex function classes. Specifically, they showed
that an in-context trained model over a function class F
can accurately predict the function value f (xquery ) of a new
query token xquery for most f ∈ F by using a prompt sequence including in-context input-label pairs along with the
query token (x1 , f (x1 ) , . . . , xN , f (xN ) , xquery ).
Built on this theoretically amenable setting, many follow-up
works explored theoretical properties of in-context learning
of transformers from different perspectives such as expressive power (Akyürek et al., 2022; Giannou et al., 2023), generalization (Li et al., 2023b), internal mechanisms (Von Oswald et al., 2023; Bai et al., 2023), etc. Specially, a few
recent studies (Zhang et al., 2023a; Mahankali et al., 2023;
Ahn et al., 2023) made interesting progress towards understanding the training dynamics of transformers for incontext learning1 . However, those studies focused only on
‘linear’ transformers, and does not capture the crucial role
of the ‘softmax’ mapping, which lies in the core design of
transformers to be advantageous over other network architectures. Therefore, the following fundamental problem still
remains largely open:

1. Introduction
Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) have emerged as the
foundational architectures in various domains, including
1

Department of Statistics and Data Science, Wharton School,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA 2 National University of Singapore, Singapore 3 Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH,
USA. Correspondence to: Yingbin Liang <liang.889@osu.edu>.

How do softmax-based transformers trained via gradient
descent learn in-context?
This paper takes the first step toward addressing this problem by investigating the learning dynamics of a single-layer

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1
More detailed discussions for related work can be found in
Appendix A.

1

