Don’t trust your eyes: on the (un)reliability of feature visualizations

Robert Geirhos * 1 Roland S. Zimmermann * 2 3 Blair Bilodeau * 4 Wieland Brendel§ 2 3 Been Kim§ 1

Abstract

there is general consensus in the field that given the realworld impact of AI, developing systems that fulfill those
qualities is no longer just a “nice to have” criterion. In
particular, we need “reliable” interpretability methods to
better understand models that are often described as blackboxes. The development of interpretability methods has
followed a pattern similar to Hegelian dialectic: a method
is introduced (thesis), often followed by a paper pointing
out severe limitations or failure modes (antithesis), until
eventually this conflict is resolved through the development
of an improved method (synthesis), which frequently forms
the starting point of a new cycle. An example of this cycle
are saliency maps: Developed to highlight which image region influences a model’s decision (e.g., Springenberg et al.,
2014; Sundararajan et al., 2017), many existing saliency
methods were shown to fail simple sanity checks (Adebayo
et al., 2018; Nie et al., 2018), which then spurred the ongoing development of methods that aim to be more reliable
(e.g., Gupta & Arora, 2019; Rao et al., 2022).

How do neural networks extract patterns from
pixels? Feature visualizations attempt to answer
this important question by visualizing highly activating patterns through optimization. Today, visualization methods form the foundation of our
knowledge about the internal workings of neural
networks, as a type of mechanistic interpretability.
Here we ask: How reliable are feature visualizations? We start our investigation by developing
network circuits that trick feature visualizations
into showing arbitrary patterns that are completely
disconnected from normal network behavior on
natural input. We then provide evidence for a
similar phenomenon occurring in standard, unmanipulated networks: feature visualizations are
processed very differently from standard input,
casting doubt on their ability to “explain” how
neural networks process natural images. This
can be used as a sanity check for feature visualizations. We underpin our empirical findings by
theory proving that the set of functions that can
be reliably understood by feature visualization
is extremely small and does not include general
black-box neural networks. Therefore, a promising way forward could be the development of
networks that enforce certain structures in order
to ensure more reliable feature visualizations.

In contrast to saliency maps and attribution methods like
GradCAM (Selvaraju et al., 2017), LIME (Ribeiro et al.,
2016) and SHAP (Lundberg & Lee, 2017) where the field
has developed a relatively good understanding of their reliability, another central mechanistic interpretability method
currently lacks good sanity checks: feature visualizations
(Erhan et al., 2009; Mordvintsev et al., 2015; Olah et al.,
2017). While attribution/saliency methods attempt to explain how a network responds to an individual sample, feature visualizations attempt to explain the general sensitivity
of a unit (e.g., a single channel of a convolutional layer) in
a neural network. This is achieved by visualizing highly
activating patterns through activation maximization. First
introduced by Erhan et al. (2009), feature visualizations
have continually been refined through better priors and regularization terms that improve their intuitive appeal (e.g.,
Yosinski et al., 2015; Mahendran & Vedaldi, 2016; Nguyen
et al., 2016; Olah et al., 2017; Fel et al., 2023). Today, feature visualization methods underpin many of our intuitions
about the inner workings of neural networks. They have
been proposed as debugging tools (Nguyen et al., 2019),
found applications in neuroscience (Walker et al., 2019;
Bashivan et al., 2019; Ponce et al., 2019), and according to
Olah et al. (2017), “to make neural networks interpretable,
feature visualization stands out as one of the most promis-

1. Introduction
A recent open letter called for a “pause on giant AI experiments” in order to gain time to make “state-of-the-art
systems more accurate, safe, interpretable, transparent, robust, aligned, trustworthy, and loyal” (Future of Life Institute, 2023). While the call sparked controversial debate,
*

Joint first authors; order between RSZ and BB determined by
coinflip § Joint senior authors 1 Google DeepMind 2 Max Planck
Institute for Intelligent Systems 3 Tübingen AI Center 4 Department
of Statistical Sciences, University of Toronto. Correspondence to:
Robert Geirhos <lastname@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

