Efficient Online Set-valued Classification with Bandit Feedback
Zhou Wang 1 Xingye Qiao 1

Abstract

systems, misidentifying real obstacles as harmless shadows
on the road potentially causes abrupt braking or even dangerous maneuvers. In medical diagnostics, the challenge
of differentiating between benign and malignant tumors
in ambiguous cases can result in critical misdiagnoses, influencing treatment decisions. Such scenarios underscore
the need for models capable of cautiously handling those
observations with high uncertainty.

Conformal prediction is a distribution-free
method that wraps a given machine learning
model and returns a set of plausible labels that
contain the true label with a prescribed coverage
rate. In practice, the empirical coverage achieved
highly relies on fully observed label information
from data both in the training phase for model
fitting and the calibration phase for quantile estimation. This dependency poses a challenge in the
context of online learning with bandit feedback,
where a learner only has access to the correctness
of actions (i.e., pulled an arm) but not the full
information of the true label. In particular, when
the pulled arm is incorrect, the learner only knows
that the pulled one is not the true class label, but
does not know which label is true. Additionally,
bandit feedback further results in a smaller labeled
dataset for calibration, limited to instances with
correct actions, thereby affecting the accuracy of
quantile estimation. To address these limitations,
we propose Bandit Class-specific Conformal Prediction (BCCP), offering coverage guarantees on
a class-specific granularity. Using an unbiased
estimation of an estimand involving the true label,
BCCP trains the model and makes set-valued inferences through stochastic gradient descent. Our
approach overcomes the challenges of sparsely
labeled data in each iteration and generalizes the
reliability and applicability of conformal prediction to online decision-making environments.

Quantifying the uncertainty associated with each observation can be addressed by reporting a prediction set, which
can be realized by some set-valued classification paradigms
such as Classification with the Reject Option (Herbei &
Wegkamp, 2006; Bartlett & Wegkamp, 2008; Charoenphakdee et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2018) and Conformal
Prediction (Vovk et al., 2005; Shafer & Vovk, 2008; Balasubramanian et al., 2014). Intuitively speaking, an observation
with a large prediction set indicates its intrinsic difficulty
and it is hard to be correctly classified. Unlike Classification
with the Reject Option, the Conformal Prediction method
particularly yields a set with valid prediction coverage, i.e.,
a prediction set includes the true label with a user-prescribed
coverage rate 1 − α, α ∈ [0, 1].
The literature on Conformal Prediction (and other set-valued
classification methods) covers various aspects. For instance,
Lei et al. (2013); Lei (2014); Lei et al. (2015; 2018); Sadinle
et al. (2019); Wang & Qiao (2018; 2022) consider the coverage guarantees conditional on each class instead of the
standard marginal coverage (Vovk et al., 2005). Romano
et al. (2020); Angelopoulos et al. (2021) explore different
(un)conformity scores to output informative conformal prediction sets. Tibshirani et al. (2019) introduces weighted
conformal prediction in the situation of covariate distribution shift, while Hechtlinger et al. (2018); Guan & Tibshirani
(2022); Wang & Qiao (2023; 2024) generalize set-valued
predictions to the realm of out-of-distribution detection due
to the semantic distribution shift by admitting an empty prediction set. However, these studies predominantly focus on
the setting with access to full-label information and offline
training, limiting their applicability in real-world scenarios.

1. Introduction
Machine learning models, while highly effective, can fail
in complicated scenarios due to inherent uncertainties and
hence lead to irreversible consequences, particularly in highstake applications. For instance, in autonomous vehicle
1

Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Binghamton
University, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Zhou Wang
<zwang198@binghamton.edu>.

Recent extensions of Conformal Prediction to online learning settings, (1) address arbitrary distribution shifts (Gibbs
& Candes, 2021; Gibbs & Candès, 2022; Zaffran et al.,
2022; Bhatnagar et al., 2023), and (2) apply the principles
on the off-policy evaluation problem (Taufiq et al., 2022;

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

