Asymptotics of Feature Learning in Two-layer Networks after One Gradient-step

Hugo Cui 1 Luca Pesce 2 Yatin Dandi 1 2 Florent Krzakala 2 Yue M. Lu 3 Lenka Zdeborová 1 Bruno Loureiro 4

Abstract

classification to text generation. A large part of our current
theoretical understanding of neural networks stems from
the investigation of their lazy regime where features are not
learned during training. This includes a set of works that fall
under the umbrella of Gaussian processes (Neal, 1996; Lee
et al., 2018), the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) (Jacot et al.,
2018) and the Lazy regime (Chizat et al., 2019). A crucial question in the theoretical machine learning community
is thus to characterize the advantages of two-layer neural
networks beyond these convex optimization approaches.

In this manuscript, we investigate the problem
of how two-layer neural networks learn features
from data, and improve over the kernel regime,
after being trained with a single gradient descent
step. Leveraging the insight from (Ba et al., 2022),
we model the trained network by a spiked Random Features (sRF) model. Further building on
recent progress on Gaussian universality (Dandi
et al., 2023), we provide an exact asymptotic description of the generalization error of the sRF in
the high-dimensional limit where the number of
samples, the width, and the input dimension grow
at a proportional rate. The resulting characterization for sRFs also captures closely the learning
curves of the original network model. This enables us to understand how adapting to the data
is crucial for the network to efficiently learn nonlinear functions in the direction of the gradient –
where at initialization it can only express linear
functions in this regime.

Different theoretical works have offered sharp separation
results between kernel and feature learning regimes (see e.g.
(Ghorbani et al., 2019; Refinetti et al., 2021b; Damian et al.,
2022; Abbe et al., 2023; Shi et al., 2022)). In particular, (Ba
et al., 2022; Damian et al., 2022), and later (Dandi et al.,
2023), discussed the advantage of neural networks when
training with only one single step of large-batch gradient
descent with a large learning rate. Specifically, (Ba et al.,
2022) highlighted that the weight matrix after the first training step can be decomposed in a bulk plus a rank-one spike,
effectively mapping the learned features to a spiked Random
Features model (sRF), defined in eq. 6). This observation has
fueled many further studies on the effect of spiked structure,
see e.g. (Damian et al., 2022; Dandi et al., 2023; Ba et al.,
2024; Mousavi-Hosseini et al., 2023; Moniri et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
A common deep learning intuition behind the unreasonable
effectiveness of neural networks is their capacity to effectively adapt to the training data which makes them superior
to kernel methods. While kernel methods and their finite
width approximations are known to be data-hungry (see
e.g. (Adlam et al., 2023)), neural networks have proven
themselves to be flexible and efficient in practice. Their
adaptivity and capacity to learn features from data are behind the success in efficiently solving problems from image

In this paper, we follow this line of work and provide an
exact high-dimensional description of the test error achieved
by a sRF, which we use to model a two-layer network after
a single, large, gradient step. Our work provides a sharp
asymptotic treatment of a setting where feature learning is
modeled in a non-perturbative, high-dimensional regime,
with a model able to express non-linear functions beyond
polynomials. This analysis quantitatively illustrates the
benefits of feature learning over the lazy regime.

*

Equal contribution 1 Statistical Physics Of Computation lab.,
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland 2 Information Learning & Physics lab., École
Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), 1015 Lausanne,
Switzerland 3 Harvard University, School of Engineering and
Applied Sciences 4 Département d’Informatique, École Normale
Supérieure (ENS) - PSL & CNRS, F-75230 Paris cedex 05, France.
Correspondence to: Hugo Cui <hugo.cui@epfl.ch>.

Our main contributions in this paper are the following:
• Exact asymptotics for sRF – We provide a sharp asymptotic characterization of the test error, alongside a set of
summary statistics, for a sRF. We discuss analytically, and
provide numerical support, why sRFs constitute good approximations for two-layer neural networks with first layer
weights trained with a large learning rate gradient step. The
derivation leverages the (non-rigorous) replica method from
statistical physics (Parisi, 1979; 1983), and provides a set of

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

