Amortized Equation Discovery in Hybrid Dynamical Systems

Yongtuo Liu 1 Sara Magliacane 1 Miltiadis Kofinas 1 Efstratios Gavves 1

Abstract

designs of cyber-physical systems (Sanfelice et al., 2016),
and systems with interacting objects (Liu et al., 2023).

Hybrid dynamical systems are prevalent in science and engineering to express complex systems
with continuous and discrete states. To learn laws
of systems, all previous methods for equation
discovery in hybrid systems follow a two-stage
paradigm, i.e. they first group time series into
small cluster fragments and then discover equations in each fragment separately through methods in non-hybrid systems. Although effective,
these methods do not take fully advantage of the
commonalities in the shared dynamics of multiple fragments that are driven by the same equations. Besides, the two-stage paradigm breaks the
interdependence between categorizing and representing dynamics that jointly form hybrid systems. In this paper, we reformulate the problem
and propose an end-to-end learning framework,
i.e. Amortized Equation Discovery (AMORE), to
jointly categorize modes and discover equations
characterizing the dynamics of each mode by all
segments of the mode. Experiments on four hybrid and six non-hybrid systems show that our
method outperforms previous methods on equation discovery, segmentation, and forecasting.

A major challenge with hybrid dynamical systems is that
one cannot know a priori the number of possible modes
and when the switching happens within them. The dynamic
modes might alternate from one to another constantly and at
any time, due to either internal mechanisms or external influences. When modeling generalized time series as hybrid
dynamical systems, it is thus crucial that we categorize the
complex dynamics into the most likely discrete modes while
characterizing the continuous motion dynamics in between.
Another challenge with characterizing dynamics in hybrid
systems, especially physical ones, is that predictive models
are often not interpretable. We are often interested in the
underlying laws that govern the dynamics, thus preferring
analytic models, usually in the form of closed-form ordinary differential equations. Equation discovery from first
principles is a challenging problem in all fields of science.
To bypass expensive and cumbersome targeted experimentation, researchers have explored using data-driven methods
for equation discovery of systems from observations (Langley, 1981; Lemos et al., 2023). They distill parsimonious
equations from data and find that compared with black-box
neural networks, learned equations can provide insight into
the essential dynamics of systems and tend to generalize
better (Lutter et al., 2019; Karniadakis et al., 2021).
Equation discovery for hybrid dynamical systems has been
a topic of interest for a long time (Vidal et al., 2003; Ozay
et al., 2008; Bako, 2011; Ohlsson & Ljung, 2013). Recently, Mangan et al. (2019); Novelli et al. (2022) proposed
methods for equation discovery in non-linear hybrid systems. Both methods consist of two stages: they first group
time series fragments into a large number of small cluster
fragments and then apply an equation discovery method
proposed in non-hybrid systems, e.g. SINDy (Brunton et al.,
2016), to discover equations in each fragment separately.
The separate multi-stage processing limits the potential performance because it does not leverage the commonalities
across fragments from the same mode and splits learning
into two separate stages, i.e. categorizing and then representing motion dynamics which jointly form hybrid systems.

1. Introduction
Complex systems in science and engineering often exhibit
behaviors and patterns that change over time. Hybrid dynamical systems (Van Der Schaft & Schumacher, 2007)
characterize these systems by continuous time series which
are interleaved with structural changes producing discrete
modes. For instance, consider the motions of antelopes in
a herd and how these suddenly change in the presence of
lions. Hybrid systems are researched widely with applications in epidemiology (Keeling et al., 2001), legged locomotion (Holmes et al., 2006), robotics (Cortes, 2008), the
1
University of Amsterdam. Correspondence to: Yongtuo Liu
<y.liu6@uva.nl>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

In this paper, we reformulate the problem of equation discovery in hybrid dynamical systems and propose a one1

