E(3)-Equivariant Actor-Critic Methods for Cooperative Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning

Dingyang Chen 1 Qi Zhang 1

Abstract

metric state-action pairs essentially define a homomorphism
from the original Markov decision process (MDP) to a
smaller abstract MDP (Ravindran & Barto, 2001), which has
been recently shown to be effective for deep single-agent
RL (Van der Pol et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2022a; Zhao et al.,
2022b; Mondal et al., 2022; Nguyen et al., 2023).

Identification and analysis of symmetrical patterns in the natural world have led to significant
discoveries across various scientific fields, such
as the formulation of gravitational laws in physics
and advancements in the study of chemical structures. In this paper, we focus on exploiting Euclidean symmetries inherent in certain cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL)
problems and prevalent in many applications. We
begin by formally characterizing a subclass of
Markov games with a general notion of symmetries that admits the existence of symmetric optimal values and policies. Motivated by these
properties, we design neural network architectures with symmetric constraints embedded as an
inductive bias for multi-agent actor-critic methods. This inductive bias results in superior performance in various cooperative MARL benchmarks
and impressive generalization capabilities such as
zero-shot learning and transfer learning in unseen
scenarios with repeated symmetric patterns.

In this paper, we are interested in cooperative multi-agent
reinforcement learning (MARL) problems, where symmetry
structures are also prevalent and often exist in two forms.
The first form is permutation invariance which exists if
agents are homogenous in terms of their effects on state
dynamics and reward function, which has been well-studied
in prior works, including both formalisms (Nguyen et al.,
2017; Yang et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2022) and algorithmic
techniques such as actor parameter sharing (Lowe et al.,
2017; Rashid et al., 2020b; Chen et al., 2022), permutationinvariant centralized critics (Liu et al., 2020), and meanfiled approximation (Yang et al., 2018). We focus on the
second form of Euclidean symmetries, including transformations of translation, rotation, and reflection, which exist
if the MARL problem is situated in an Euclidean space.
Intuitively, MARL problems exhibit Euclidean symmetries
whenever coordinate frames are used to provide references
for the agents and their environment, because Euclidean
transformations can be simply viewed as being applied to
the reference frames, without changing the essence of the
agents and environment. We are particularly dealing with
3D Euclidean, i.e., E(3), multi-agent symmetries, which are
prevalent in applications grounded in the physical world.

1. Introduction
It is widely believed by scientists that the organization and
operation of our universe follow certain symmetry patterns
and principles. These symmetry structures in physics lead
to profound implications, such as the existence of conservation laws. When done properly, artificial intelligence (AI)
can and has already benefited tremendously from exploiting these symmetries, with perhaps the most well-known
example of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) being
translation invariant to the input images (Goodfellow et al.,
2016). Symmetries have also been identified and exploited
for single-agent reinforcement learning (RL), where sym-

Although prevalent, multi-agent Euclidean symmetries are
relatively underexplored, including only van der Pol et al.
(2022) and Yu et al. (2023) as the prior work we know of.
Although sharing the same motivation, prior work falls short
of providing “genuine” E(3) multi-agent symmetries in the
sense that their Euclidean equivariance is only preserved
for rotations of discrete angles in {k ∗ 360◦ /n}n−1
k=0 , which
degenerates to the cyclic symmetries of Cn , a subgroup
of E(2) that is only 2D. We identify challenges that have
prevented prior work from exploiting continuous E(3) multiagent symmetries and highlight our solutions as the threefold contribution of this work:

1

Artificial Intelligence Institute, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC, USA. Correspondence to: Dingyang Chen
<dingyang@email.sc.edu>, Qi Zhang <qz5@cse.sc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

(i) The first challenge is to find problem representations that
1

