Batch Singular Value Polarization and Weighted Semantic Augmentation for
Universal Domain Adaptation

Ziqi Wang 1 Wei Wang 1 * Chao Huang 1 * Jie Wen 2 Cong Wang 1

Abstract

well-labeled source domain to assist in annotating a target
domain of interest. However, in practice, the domain shift
problem may exist between the two domains, which will
degrade annotation performance in the target. To address
this problem, domain adaptation (DA) as an effective technology allows for domain shift and aims to improve the
generalization performance of a model trained on the source
to the target (Wang et al., 2020; 2021; 2022a; 2023a;b).

As a more challenging domain adaptation setting, universal domain adaptation (UniDA) introduces category shift on top of domain shift,
which needs to identify unknown category in
the target domain and avoid misclassifying target samples into source private categories. To
this end, we propose a novel UniDA approach
named Batch Singular value Polarization and
Weighted Semantic Augmentation (BSP-WSA).
Specifically, we adopt an adversarial classifier to
identify the target unknown category and align
feature distributions between the two domains.
Then, we propose to perform SVD on the classifier’s outputs to maximize larger singular values
while minimizing those smaller ones, which could
prevent target samples from being wrongly assigned to source private classes. To better bridge
the domain gap, we propose a weighted semantic augmentation approach for UniDA to generate data on common categories between the two
domains. Extensive experiments on three benchmarks demonstrate that BSP-WSA could outperform existing state-of-the-art UniDA approaches.

However, DA assumes that the source and target domains
share the same label space, which does not align with realworld scenarios. In recent years, researchers have relaxed
the assumption of the same label space and proposed various new DA settings, such as partial DA (Cao et al., 2018;
Zhang et al., 2018; Cao et al., 2019), open-set DA (Saito
et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2019; Luo et al., 2020), universal DA
(UniDA) (You et al., 2019b; Lifshitz & Wolf, 2021; Kundu
et al., 2022). Among these scenarios, UniDA is the most
challenging one, as it introduces category shift on top of
domain shift. UniDA assumes that the two domains not only
have common categories but also have their own private categories. Moreover, there is no prior knowledge about which
classes are common and which are private.
For a UniDA task, it is crucial to classify target domain samples accurately. Samples that belong to private classes of the
target domain should be identified as unknown, while those
from classes common to both domains should be classified
into the corresponding classes of the source domain. Since
the source domain also contains private classes, it is essential to prevent target samples from being misclassified into
source private classes, considering distribution differences
between the two domains. Conversely, when we attempt
to alleviate the domain shift using existing DA techniques,
the lack of prior knowledge about the relationship between
the label spaces of the two domains (category shift) makes
it difficult to reduce the distribution discrepancy between
common categories effectively.

1. Introduction
The tremendous successes of deep learning are largely
attributed to its reliance on diverse and massive annotated training data (Huang et al., 2021; 2022a;b; 2023;
2024). However, meeting such requirements is laborious
and resource-intensive, especially in the military and medical fields (Chen et al., 2024). Intuitively, one can leverage a
*Corresponding Author. 1 School of Cyber Science and
Technology, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University,
Shenzhen, China. 2 School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China.
Ziqi Wang <hhdxdwzq@gmail.com>. Correspondence to:
Wei Wang <wangwei29@mail.sysu.edu.cn>, Chao Huang
<huangch253@mail.sysu.edu.cn>.

To address the aforementioned problems in UniDA, we propose a Batch Singular value Polarization and Weighted
Semantic Augmentation approach (BSP-WSA). Inspired
by Saito et al., we employ an adversarial classifier to simultaneously detect samples of unknown category in the target
domain and achieve distribution alignment between the two

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

