Explaining Probabilistic Models with Distributional Values

Luca Franceschi 1 Michele Donini 1 Cédric Archambeau 2 Matthias Seeger 1

Abstract

(Bhatt et al., 2020). Examples include SHAP (Lundberg &
Lee, 2017), asymmetric (Frye et al., 2020b), causal (Heskes
et al., 2020), connected and local (Chen et al., 2018) Shapley values, neuron-Shapley (Ghorbani & Zou, 2020) and
D-Shapley for data valuation (Ghorbani et al., 2020), among
others (see Rozemberczki et al., 2022, for an overview). We
collectively refer to this class of methods as game-theoretic
XAI (also GT-XAI).

A large branch of explainable machine learning is
grounded in cooperative game theory. However,
research indicates that game-theoretic explanations may mislead or be hard to interpret. We
argue that often there is a critical mismatch between what one wishes to explain (e.g. the output
of a classifier) and what current methods such as
SHAP explain (e.g. the scalar probability of a
class). This paper addresses such gap for probabilistic models by generalising cooperative games
and value operators. We introduce the distributional values, random variables that track changes
in the model output (e.g. flipping of the predicted
class) and derive their analytic expressions for
games with Gaussian, Bernoulli and categorical
payoffs. We further establish several characterising properties, and show that our framework
provides fine-grained and insightful explanations
with case studies on vision and language models.

Simplifying, these approaches compute explanations by first
constructing a real-valued cooperative game representing
the outcome to be explained (e.g. a prediction of a multiclass classifier, a model outputted by a learning algorithm,
etc.) and then apply a value operator, typically the Shapley value (Shapley, 1953a), to such game. Explanations so
computed are often interpreted as importance or attributions
of the constituent parts (namely, input features, data points,
etc.) and enjoy a number of theoretical properties inherited
from CGT. The “game design” step is a crucial and delicate part of the pipeline that has been discussed at length
especially in the context of feature attributions (Aas et al.,
2021; Janzing et al., 2020; Covert et al., 2020). However,
the requirement that the game be real-valued, fundamental
in standard CGT, has often been unquestioned. Yet, this limits the array of explanations that may be provided, as scalar
payoffs may only capture part of a probabilistic output, like
the probability of a class, rather than the full distribution.

1. Introduction
The ability of explaining automated decisions is a key
desideratum for real-world deployment of machine learning
systems that has led to a burgeoning field of explainable
machine learning and artificial intelligence (XAI) (Langer
et al., 2021; Adadi & Berrada, 2018; Guidotti et al., 2018).
Explanations shall cater to diverse needs, such as verification, justification, attribution, etc., which necessitate different technical approaches. In this paper we focus on attributive explanations which, in essence, seek to establish
links between outcomes and constituent parts: a prototypical question being “which features did the model rely on
to assign a specific prediction to a given example?”. In
this sub-area, techniques grounded in cooperative game theory (CGT) (Peleg & Sudhölter, 2007) first introduced by
Strumbelj & Kononenko (2010) have gained notable traction

In this work we reconsider the basic building blocks of gametheoretic XAI in order to dispose of this limiting restriction.
We study games with probabilistic rather than scalar payoffs
and frame marginal contributions of players to coalitions as
differences between two random variables. Based on these,
we define a class of operators mapping stochastic games
to random variables that track changes to the payoff while
accounting for coalition structure. In our framework, these
random variables, which we dub distributional values, constitute the attributions for stochastic models, replacing the
scalar attributions resulting from traditional game-theoretic
XAI methods.

1

Amazon Web Services, Berlin, Germany 2 Helsing, Berlin,
Germany.
Correspondence to: Luca Franceschi <franuluc@amazon.de>.

While games with stochastic payoffs have been considered
before both in CGT (Charnes & Granot, 1973; Suijs et al.,
1999) and XAI (Covert & Lee, 2021) (although here we take
a somewhat different view), our proposed distributional values represent a primary novel contribution of this work

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

