Understanding Forgetting in Continual Learning with Linear Regression

Meng Ding 1 Kaiyi Ji 1 Di Wang 2 Jinhui Xu 1

Abstract

sequentially to the model. A primary challenge in continual learning is the catastrophic forgetting phenomenon
(McCloskey & Cohen, 1989), wherein the model forgets
previously acquired knowledge when exposed to new data.

Continual learning, focused on sequentially learning multiple tasks, has gained significant attention recently. Despite the tremendous progress
made in the past, the theoretical understanding,
especially factors contributing to catastrophic forgetting, remains relatively unexplored. In this
paper, we provide a general theoretical analysis
of forgetting in the linear regression model via
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) applicable
to both under-parameterized and overparameterized regimes. Our theoretical framework reveals
some interesting insights into the intricate relationship between task sequence and algorithmic
parameters, an aspect not fully captured in previous studies due to their restrictive assumptions.
Specifically, we demonstrate that, given a sufficiently large data size, the arrangement of tasks in
a sequence—where tasks with larger eigenvalues
in their population data covariance matrices are
trained later—tends to result in increased forgetting. Additionally, our findings highlight that an
appropriate choice of step size will help mitigate
forgetting in both under-parameterized and overparameterized settings. To validate our theoretical
analysis, we conducted simulation experiments
on both linear regression models and Deep Neural
Networks (DNNs). Results from these simulations substantiate our theoretical findings.

Previous research addressing catastrophic forgetting in
continuous learning primarily focuses on empirical studies, which can be broadly classified into three categories:
expansion-based methods, regularization-based methods,
and memory-based methods. Expansion-based methods
(Yoon et al., 2017; 2019; Yang et al., 2021) mitigate catastrophic forgetting by allocating distinct subsets of network
parameters to individual tasks. Regularization-based methods (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017; Aljundi et al., 2018; Serra
et al., 2018; Liu & Liu, 2022) employee structural regularization in fixed capacity models to counteract forgetting,
which penalize significant changes in parameters that are
crucial for previous tasks. Memory-based methods (Shin
et al., 2017; Chaudhry et al., 2018; Riemer et al., 2018;
Saha et al., 2021; Lin et al., 2022; Hao et al., 2023) alleviate forgetting by storing subsets of previous task data or
synthesizing pseudo-data without data-replay.
Recently, there has been a growing body of work focused on
understanding the behavior of catastrophic forgetting from
a theoretical standpoint. For example, Bennani et al. 2020;
Doan et al. 2021 analyze the generalization of continual
learning for Orthogonal Gradient Descent (OGD) (Farajtabar et al., 2020) in the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) (Jacot et al., 2018) regime. Lee et al. 2021; Asanuma et al. 2021
explore the impact of task similarity in a teacher-student
setting. Evron et al. 2022; Lin et al. 2023 provide a detailed
forgetting analysis of the minimum-norm interpolator for
the overparameterized linear regression model. However,
the existing analyses of forgetting often rely on relatively
stringent assumptions that may not be applicable in many
scenarios. For example, Bennani et al. 2020; Doan et al.
2021; Evron et al. 2022; Lin et al. 2023 necessitate an overparameterized regime for their analysis, which may be invalid when involving large datasets. Moreover, Lee et al.
2021; Asanuma et al. 2021; Lin et al. 2023; Swartworth
et al. 2023 assume that data follows a Gaussian distribution
that may not hold in real-world datasets exhibiting more
complex distributions. Evron et al. 2022; Lin et al. 2023
focus on the minimum-norm interpolator, where each task
requires achieving zero loss on its training samples and

1. Introduction
Continual learning, also known as lifelong learning, is a subfield of machine learning that focuses on developing a model
capable of learning continuously from a stream of data,
which are i.i.d sampled from different tasks and presented
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, State
University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, USA 2 Division
of CEMSE, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia. Correspondence to: Kaiyi Ji <kaiyiji@buffalo.edu>, Jinhui Xu <jinhui@buffalo.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

