SparQ Attention: Bandwidth-Efficient LLM Inference

Luka Ribar * 1 Ivan Chelombiev * 2 Luke Hudlass-Galley * 1 Charlie Blake 1 Carlo Luschi 1 Douglas Orr 1

Abstract
SQuAD Accuracy

0.8

The computational difficulties of large language
model (LLM) inference remain a significant obstacle to their widespread deployment. The need for
many applications to support long input sequences
and process them in large batches typically causes
token-generation to be bottlenecked by data transfer. For this reason, we introduce SparQ Attention, a technique for increasing the inference
throughput of LLMs by utilising memory bandwidth more efficiently within the attention layers,
through selective fetching of the cached history.
Our proposed technique can be applied directly to
off-the-shelf LLMs during inference, without requiring any modification to the pre-training setup
or additional fine-tuning. We show that SparQ Attention brings up to 8× savings in attention data
transfers without substantial drops in accuracy, by
evaluating Llama 2 and 3, Mistral, Gemma and
Pythia models on a wide range of downstream
tasks.

0.6

0.4

0.2

dense 512 MB
transfers

1
2

256 MB

128 MB

1
8

Attention transfers per token
Dense

H2 O

1
4

LM-Infinite

SparQ Attention
FlexGen (16-bit)

Figure 1: Llama 2 13B SQuAD 1-shot performance versus
attention transfers over a range of compression ratios. SparQ
Attention achieves matching performance, while transferring between 1/8 and 1/4 as much data as the original dense
model. Line thickness shows ± one standard error over
4000 examples (the uncertainty from a finite test set). This
pattern is representative of the performance across various
models and tasks, shown in Figures A1 to A3.
used to support in-context learning, key-value (KV) caching
(Pope et al., 2023), is constrained by the need to fetch a large
amount of data from memory when processing batches of
long sequences. This in turn limits the speed at which tokens
can be generated—a key usability metric for LLMs.

1. Introduction
Transformer models trained on large corpora of text have
recently shown remarkable performance on complex natural
language processing tasks (Achiam et al., 2023; Touvron
et al., 2023). This has been attributed to the in-context
learning capabilities that emerge with large-scale training,
enabling arbitrary textual information (e.g. long instructions,
chat histories, relevant documents) to be incorporated at
inference-time (Wei et al., 2022).

This bottleneck can be attributed to the auto-regressive nature of transformer generation. For each token generated,
the full KV cache must be fetched from memory. The size
of the KV cache scales linearly with the sequence length,
as well as the batch size, thus rendering generation for long
batched sequences increasingly memory bandwidth limited.
Despite this expensive cache-fetch at each step, tokens generally only attend to a small part of the sequence at a time
(Vig, 2019; Yun et al., 2020). If it were possible to efficiently
predict which tokens will have high attention scores, memory bandwidth efficiency could be significantly increased by
only transferring the key-value pairs of high-scoring tokens.

To leverage the benefits of in-context learning, there has
been demand for LLMs to support increasingly long input
sequences. However, the standard inference optimisation
*
Equal contribution 1 Graphcore Research, United Kingdom
Synthesia, United Kingdom (work done while at Graphcore Research). Correspondence to: Luka Ribar, Luke Hudlass-Galley,
Douglas Orr {lukar, lukehg, douglaso}@graphcore.ai.
2

Building upon this idea, we present SparQ Attention, a
technique for significantly improving the memory bandwidth efficiency of transformer inference. By approximating
attention scores using a subset of query and key components,

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

