Taylor Videos for Action Recognition

Lei Wang * 1 Xiuyuan Yuan * 1 Tom Gedeon 2 Liang Zheng 1

Abstract
Effectively extracting motions from video is a critical and long-standing problem for action recognition. This problem is very challenging because
motions (i) do not have an explicit form, (ii) have
various concepts such as displacement, velocity,
and acceleration, and (iii) often contain noise
caused by unstable pixels. Addressing these challenges, we propose the Taylor video, a new video
format that highlights the dominant motions (e.g.,
a waving hand) in each of its frames named the
Taylor frame. Taylor video is named after Taylor series, which approximates a function at a
given point using important terms. In the scenario of videos, we define an implicit motionextraction function which aims to extract motions
from video temporal blocks. In these blocks, using the frames, the difference frames, and higherorder difference frames, we perform Taylor expansion to approximate this function at the starting
frame. We show the summation of the higherorder terms in the Taylor series gives us dominant motion patterns, where static objects, small
and unstable motions are removed. Experimentally, we show that Taylor videos are effective inputs to popular architectures including 2D CNNs,
3D CNNs, and transformers. When used individually, Taylor videos yield competitive action
recognition accuracy compared to RGB videos
and optical flow. When fused with RGB or optical flow videos, further accuracy improvement is
achieved. Additionally, we apply Taylor video
computation to human skeleton sequences, resulting in Taylor skeleton sequences that outperform the use of original skeletons for skeletonbased action recognition. Code is available at:
https://github.com/LeiWangR/video-ar.
*

Figure 1. Visualizing different video formats. (Top left): RGB
video and time-color reordering frames (Kim et al., 2022). (Bottom
left): U and V components of optical flow. (Right): proposed
Taylor video frames. Taylor frames clearly (i) remove static objects
and unstable motions and (ii) highlight motions.

1. Introduction
Extracting motions and thus recognizing actions from videos
are important problems. Extensive efforts have been made
in improving video inputs (Kim et al., 2022; Bilen et al.,
2016; 2018; Wang & Koniusz, 2024), optimizing networks
(Carreira & Zisserman, 2018; Wang et al., 2018; 2023b;
Lin et al., 2019), and training skills (Mandal et al., 2019;
Sabater et al., 2021; Perrett et al., 2021). This paper focuses
on improving the input, while leaving the rest unchanged.
Motion is an abstract and general concept. By ‘abstract’,
motion does not have an explicit form, so we ask whether
we can use a function to implicitly capture motions in different granularity levels. In comparison, existing methods
explicitly define motions in different formats, such as optical
flow that tracks pixels and objects. By ‘general’, there are
various motion concepts, such as displacement, velocity,
and acceleration. While they look challenging to compute,
they have clear physical relationships, e.g., velocity is the
derivative of displacement with respect to time. In action
recognition, this has not been explicitly considered, to the
best of our knowledge.
We consider the above points and propose to model motion
using an implicit function that outputs motion in some unknown format. Instead of seeking an exact function output
which is intractable (motion is very abstract), we propose to
approximate this output, especially the dominant motions,
using video frames, their differences, and higher-order differences. We find that Taylor series is a great tool for this,
allowing us to use similar approximation formulas to com-

1

Equal contribution School of Computing, Australian National
University, Canberra, Australia 2 School of Electrical Engineering,
Computing and Mathematical Sciences, Curtin University, Perth,
Australia. Correspondence to: Lei Wang <lei.w@anu.edu.au>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

