OAK: Enriching Document Representations
using Auxiliary Knowledge for Extreme Classification

Shikhar Mohan* 1 Deepak Saini* 2 Anshul Mittal 1 Sayak Ray Chowdhury 3 Bhawna Paliwal 3 Jian Jiao 2
Manish Gupta 1 Manik Varma 3

Abstract
The objective in eXtreme Classification (XC) is
to find relevant labels for a document from an
exceptionally large label space. Most XC application scenarios have rich auxiliary data associated with the input documents, e.g., frequently
clicked webpages for search queries in sponsored
search. Unfortunately, most of the existing XC
methods do not use any auxiliary data. In this
paper, we propose a novel framework, Online
Auxiliary Knowledge (OAK), which harnesses
auxiliary information linked to the document to
improve XC accuracy. OAK stores information
learnt from the auxiliary data in a knowledge bank
and during a forward pass, retrieves relevant auxiliary knowledge embeddings for a given document.
An enriched embedding is obtained by fusing
these auxiliary knowledge embeddings with the
document’s embedding, thereby enabling much
more precise candidate label selection and final
classification. OAK training involves three stages.
(1) Training a linker module to link documents
to relevant auxiliary data points. (2) Learning an
embedding for documents enriched using linked
auxiliary information. (3) Using the enriched
document embeddings to learn the final classifiers. OAK outperforms current state-of-the-art
XC methods by up to ∼ 5% on academic datasets,
and by ∼ 3% on an auxiliary data-augmented variant of LF-ORCAS-800K dataset in Precision@1.
OAK also demonstrates statistically significant
improvements in sponsored search metrics when
deployed on a large scale search engine.

Document
Auxiliary
Knowledge
(AK)

Plinth Assemblage
Mount Meager massif, Geologic formations of British
Columbia, Volcanism of British Columbia, Pleistocene volcanism, Beaufort Group, Paleontology in South Africa

NGAME (Ignores AK)
OAK (Uses
AK)

Job Assemblage, Assemblage, Pylon Assemblage, Capricorn
Assemblage, Assemblage (art)
Pylon Assemblage, Capricorn Assemblage, Job Assemblage,
List of Cascade volcanoes, List of volcanoes in Canada

Table 1. OAK leverages auxiliary knowledge pieces (AKPs) for
accurate XC. Consider an example from the WikiSeeAlsoTitles
dataset. Given a Wikipedia page title, auxiliary knowledge indicates relevant categories. The related Wikipedia pages predicted
by OAK are more accurate than the state-of-the-art XC algorithm,
NGAME. OAK is able to accurately predict labels related to volcanoes thanks to the information from auxiliary knowledge. Legend:
Black (correct), Red (incorrect), Green (correct; unique to OAK)

1. Introduction
eXtreme Classification (XC) is the problem of predicting
the most relevant subset of labels for a data point from an
extremely large set of labels. XC methods have proved
to be effective for several applications like product recommendation (Dahiya et al., 2021b; Medini et al., 2019; Mittal et al., 2021a), document tagging (Babbar & Schölkopf,
2017; Chang et al., 2020; You et al., 2019), search and advertisement (Dahiya et al., 2021b; Jain et al., 2016; Prabhu et al.,
2018b), and query recommendation (Chang et al., 2020; Jain
et al., 2019). While earlier XC methods used sparse linear
models (Babbar & Schölkopf, 2017; Prabhu et al., 2018b)
recent ones have been deep-learning based (You et al., 2019;
Dahiya et al., 2021b; Mittal et al., 2021a; Dahiya et al.,
2021a; Kharbanda et al., 2022; Dahiya et al., 2023a; Jain
et al., 2023; Dahiya et al., 2023b; Kharbanda et al., 2023).
For full-text XC datasets such as LF-Wikipedia-500K (Bhatia et al., 2016a), documents are represented using a more
detailed description. However, short-text tasks abound in
ranking and recommendation applications where data points
are user queries or products/webpages represented using
only their titles. In such cases, e.g., in the LF-WikiTitles500K dataset, documents are represented by a 3-5 word
textual description such as the name of a product or title
of a webpage. The sparse document representation adds
to the complexity of XC tasks on such short-text datasets.

*

Equal contribution 1 Microsoft, India 2 Microsoft, USA
Microsoft Research, India. Correspondence to: Shikhar Mohan
<shikharmohan@microsoft.com>.
3

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

