Modeling Caption Diversity in Contrastive Vision-Language Pretraining

Samuel Lavoie 1 2 Polina Kirichenko * 1 3 Mark Ibrahim * 1 Mahmoud Assran 1 Andrew Gordon Wilson 3
Aaron Courville 2 Nicolas Ballas 1

Abstract

ing (Li et al., 2023b; Moon et al., 2023).

There are a thousand ways to caption an image.
Contrastive Language Pretraining (CLIP) on the
other hand, works by mapping an image and its
caption to a single vector—limiting how well
CLIP-like models can represent the diverse ways
to describe an image. In this work, we introduce
Llip, Latent Language Image Pretraining, which
models the diversity of captions that could match
an image. Llip’s vision encoder outputs a set of
visual features that are mixed into a final representation by conditioning on information derived
from the text. We show that Llip outperforms noncontextualized baselines like CLIP and SigLIP on
a variety of tasks even with large-scale encoders.
Llip improves zero-shot classification by an average of 2.9% zero-shot classification benchmarks
with a ViT-G/14 encoder. Specifically, Llip attains
a zero-shot top-1 accuracy of 83.5% on ImageNet
outperforming a similarly sized CLIP by 1.4%.
We also demonstrate improvement on zero-shot
retrieval on MS-COCO by 6.0%. We provide a
comprehensive analysis of the components introduced by the method and demonstrate that Llip
leads to richer visual representations.

At its core, CLIP aims to learn an image representation that
is invariant to the caption diversity (see Figure 1a). CLIP
uses a visual encoder and a text encoder to independently
map visual and text inputs into a common representation
space. The joint encoders are trained with a contrastive
objective that maximizes the similarity of representations
extracted from the same image-text pair while pushing away
the representations from other examples (Radford et al.,
2021). This training criterion encourages the representation of an image to exactly match the representation of its
corresponding text description. Further, if different text descriptions are associated with an image, CLIP contrastive
objective will push both text representations toward the
same visual representation.
Yet, there is an information imbalance between the visual
and text modality as visual content is often more rich than
its text description (Foucault, 1990). Multiple diverse text
captions can be equally valid descriptions of a given image, each one focusing on a different visual aspect. For
example, depending on context, someone could describe the
animal from the image shown in Figure 1a while another
person could instead highlight the location where the picture was taken. Both are valid descriptions of the image
and, arguably, different descriptions may capture different
visual properties of the image. A training objective of a
vision-language model should therefore aim at capturing the
diversity of possible text descriptions to model the richness
of the visual input.

1. Introduction
Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP; Radford
et al. (2021)) combined with a large-scale weakly supervised dataset has become the standard Visual Language Pretraining (VLP) approach to learn visual representation (Li
et al., 2021; 2023e; Sun et al., 2023; Zhai et al., 2023;
Xu et al., 2023). Due to its generality, CLIP representations are now used for many downstream tasks such as
zero-shot classification (Radford et al., 2021), image generation (Ramesh et al., 2021) and visual question answer-

In this work, we propose to explicitly model the fact that
many different captions, and therefore representations, are
plausible for a given image. To enable the prediction of
different representations from a fixed image, we implement
the image to text representation function as a one-to-many
mapping. Conceptually, we augment our visual encoder
with a latent variable that captures contextual information.
Given this extra conditioning, our visual encoder can output different representations for different contexts. In our
approach, the contextual latent is inferred directly from the
target caption, which is then used to modulate the visual
representation.

*

Equal contribution 1 FAIR at Meta 2 Mila, Université de
Montréal 3 New York University. Correspondence to: Samuel
Lavoie <samuel.lavoie.m@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Specifically, our visual encoder is implemented by a vi1

