Beyond the Federation: Topology-aware Federated Learning for
Generalization to Unseen Clients
Mengmeng Ma 1 Tang Li 1 Xi Peng 1

Abstract

Out-of-federation
evaluation

Federated Learning is widely employed to tackle
distributed sensitive data. Existing methods primarily focus on addressing in-federation data heterogeneity. However, we observed that they suffer
from significant performance degradation when
applied to unseen clients for out-of-federation
(OOF) generalization. The recent attempts to
address generalization to unseen clients generally struggle to scale up to large-scale distributed
settings due to high communication or computation costs. Moreover, methods that scale well
often demonstrate poor generalization capability.
To achieve OOF-resiliency in a scalable manner,
we propose Topology-aware Federated Learning
(TFL) that leverages client topology - a graph representing client relationships - to effectively train
robust models against OOF data. We formulate a
novel optimization problem for TFL, consisting
of two key modules: Client Topology Learning,
which infers the client relationships in a privacypreserving manner, and Learning on Client Topology, which leverages the learned topology to identify influential clients and harness this information into the FL optimization process to efficiently
build robust models. Empirical evaluation on a variety of real-world datasets verifies TFL’s superior
OOF robustness and scalability.

In-federation
evaluation

Predictive
Model
Federated
Learning

Hold-out

Hold-out

85.1%

Accuracy
↓27.9%

57.2%

Training hospitals
Unseen hospitals

Hold-out
IF

OOF

Figure 1. Our empirical evaluation of patient mortality prediction using Federated Learning on distributed Healthcare dataset
(eICU (Pollard et al., 2018)). We observed that a model exhibiting
high accuracy with in-federation (IF) data can fail catastrophically when presented with out-of-federation (OOF) data.

approach harnesses the collective intelligence of all participating nodes to build a model that is potentially more robust
and generalizable (Sheller et al., 2020). Existing robust FL
methods (Li et al., 2020b; Deng et al., 2020) primarily focus
on learning a global model with good average or worst-case
performance, addressing in-federation (IF) data heterogeneity. However, these methods can fail catastrophically on
out-of-federation (OOF) clients, i.e., clients outside the collaborative federation. The OOF clients pose significant generalization challenges, as FL models may encounter unseen
distributions outside their training space (Pati et al., 2022a).
Our empirical study shows that existing methods suffer from
significant performance degradation when applied to unseen
clients for OOF generalization (see Figure 1).

1. Introduction

There have been recent attempts to address the challenge of
unseen clients through client augmentation and client alignment. However, these approaches encounter difficulties in
large-scale distributed environments. Client augmentation
methods (Liu et al., 2021) often necessitate intensive clientserver communication, leading to a notable communication
bottleneck that hinders scalability (Zhou et al., 2023). Client
alignment methods (Zhang et al., 2021), which operate by
aligning client distributions through adversarial training, are
less communication costly but introduce substantial computation burdens due to complex local training process (Bai
et al., 2023). While using a fixed reference distribution for
alignment (Nguyen et al., 2022) offers computational effi-

Federated Learning (FL) has emerged as a promising solution for handling distributed sensitive data, enabling multiinstitutional collaboration by distributing model training
to data owners and aggregating results on a centralized
server (McMahan et al., 2017). This data-decentralized
1

DeepREAL Lab, Department of Computer & Information
Sciences, University of Delaware. Correspondence to: Mengmeng
Ma <mengma@udel.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

