Larimar: Large Language Models with Episodic Memory Control

Payel Das * 1 Subhajit Chaudhury * 1 Elliot Nelson 1 Igor Melnyk 1
Sarathkrishna Swaminathan 1 Sihui Dai 1 2 Aurélie Lozano 1 Georgios Kollias 1 Vijil Chenthamarakshan 1
Jiřı́ Navrátil 1 Soham Dan 1 Pin-Yu Chen 1

Abstract

that models can protect privacy, eliminate bias and hallucination, and catch up with new facts. Model editing
should remove the undesired, incorrect, or obsolete facts
from the LLM’s “memory”, and optionally replace it with
the desired outcome. Similarly, the ability to quickly update the LLM can also help with the challenging problem
of input context length generalization beyond the training
distribution,which is crucial when learning from datasets
where longer context instances are rare (Anil et al., 2022;
Kazemnejad et al., 2023). A straightforward solution is to
fine-tune the model on the corrected/new datasets. Such
an approach suffers the risk of overfitting and catastrophic
forgetting (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017; Zhu et al., 2020), as
the knowledge is implicitly and distributionally encoded
across the LLM parameters. Several lines of research have
proposed effective and precise LLM editing (for comprehensive surveys on LLM editing, see (Li et al., 2022; Liu
et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 2020)), which includes training an
external memory model or a hypernetwork model to work
alongside with the frozen LLM. Another popular approach
is to locate the original fact within LLM features and then
do a local parameter update. As shown in Table 1, both
lines of methods face scalability problems due to overfitting and the need for retraining or locating for new states,
causing a slow-down in editing speed. The high memory
needs for storing numerous edits provide a further obstacle in terms of scaling to sequential and batch editing setups. These challenges hinder the application of updating large language models in real-world industrial settings.
Further, handling fact editing and selective fact forgetting
appear challenging within the same methodological framework even for current state-of-the-art editing methods (Patil
et al., 2023), while both new information learning and old
information forgetting are intrinsically related to each other
in in brain (Dempsey et al., 2022; Autore et al., 2023).

Efficient and accurate updating of knowledge
stored in Large Language Models (LLMs) is one
of the most pressing research challenges today.
This paper presents Larimar - a novel, braininspired architecture for enhancing LLMs with a
distributed episodic memory. Larimar’s memory
allows for dynamic, one-shot updates of knowledge without the need for computationally expensive re-training or fine-tuning. Experimental results on multiple fact editing benchmarks
demonstrate that Larimar attains accuracy comparable to most competitive baselines, even in the
challenging sequential editing setup, but also excels in speed—yielding speed-ups of 8-10x depending on the base LLM —as well as flexibility
due to the proposed architecture being simple,
LLM-agnostic, and hence general. We further
provide mechanisms for selective fact forgetting, information leakage prevention, and input
context length generalization with Larimar and
show their effectiveness. Our code is available at
https://github.com/IBM/larimar.

1. Introduction
Pre-trained Large Language Models (LLMs) have achieved
impressive performance on various Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks (Devlin et al., 2018; Raffel et al.,
2020; Brown et al., 2020; Vaswani et al., 2017), and are
often considered as knowledge repositories (Petroni et al.,
2019). In order to keep these models fact-relevant, safe,
and ethical after deployment - the knowledge of the LLM
needs to be constantly updated. Thus, it is critical to develop efficient mechanisms to quickly update LLMs so

Humans, in contrast, can very quickly perform knowledge updating and generalization, both of which conform to rapid learning after seeing the first relevant instance. In the brain, such rapid learning is thought to
depend on the hippocampus and its capacity for episodic
memory. Consistently, while both semantic and working
memory systems struggle with sequential decision making

*

Equal contribution 1 IBM AI Research 2 Princeton University;
work done during internship at IBM Research. Correspondence
to: Payel Das and Subhajit Chaudhury <daspa@us.ibm.com;
subhajit@ibm.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

