Exploration and Anti-Exploration with Distributional Random Network
Distillation
Kai Yang * 1 Jian Tao * 1 Jiafei Lyu 1 Xiu Li † 1

Abstract

constrained state spaces rely on recording state visitation frequencies to allocate exploration bonuses (Strehl & Littman,
2008; Azar et al., 2017). However, this method encounters
challenges in massive or continuous state spaces. In expansive state spaces, “pseudo counts” have been introduced as
an alternative (Bellemare et al., 2016; Lobel et al., 2023;
Ostrovski et al., 2017; Machado et al., 2020). However,
establishing a correlation between counts and probability
density requires rigorous criteria (Ostrovski et al., 2017),
complicating the implementation of density-based pseudo
counts resulting in a significant dependency on network
design and hyperparameters.

Exploration remains a critical issue in deep reinforcement learning for an agent to attain high
returns in unknown environments. Although the
prevailing exploration Random Network Distillation (RND) algorithm has been demonstrated
to be effective in numerous environments, it often needs more discriminative power in bonus
allocation. This paper highlights the “bonus inconsistency” issue within RND, pinpointing its
primary limitation. To address this issue, we introduce the Distributional RND (DRND), a derivative of the RND. DRND enhances the exploration
process by distilling a distribution of random networks and implicitly incorporating pseudo counts
to improve the precision of bonus allocation. This
refinement encourages agents to engage in more
extensive exploration. Our method effectively mitigates the inconsistency issue without introducing
significant computational overhead. Both theoretical analysis and experimental results demonstrate
the superiority of our approach over the original
RND algorithm. Our method excels in challenging online exploration scenarios and effectively
serves as an anti-exploration mechanism in D4RL
offline tasks. Our code is publicly available at
https://github.com/yk7333/DRND.

Curiosity-driven methods motivate agents to explore and
learn by leveraging intrinsic motivation. This inherent motivation, often called “curiosity”, pushes the agent to explore
unfamiliar states or actions. Certain approaches derive intrinsic rewards from the prediction loss of environmental
dynamics (Achiam & Sastry, 2017; Burda et al., 2018a;
Pathak et al., 2017). As states and actions become more
familiar, these methods become more efficient. However,
these methods can face difficulties when essential information is missing or the target function is inherently stochastic,
as highlighted by the “noisy-TV” problem (Pathak et al.,
2017). The Random Network Distillation (RND) method
uses the matching loss of two networks for a particular
state to be the intrinsic motivation (Burda et al., 2018a). It
leverages a randomly initialized target network to generate a
fixed value for specific states and trains a prediction network
to match this output. RND has demonstrated remarkable
results in exploration-demanding environments with sparse
rewards, such as Montezuma’s Revenge. However, RND
has its limitations. While its reliance on network loss for
intrinsic rewards lacks a robust mathematical foundation, its
interpretability should be more evident compared to countbased techniques. Moreover, the RND method grapples with
the issue of bonus inconsistency, which becomes apparent during the initial stages of training when no states have
been encountered, leading to bonuses that exhibit considerable deviations from a random distribution. RND struggles
to precisely represent the dataset’s distribution as training
progresses, resulting in indistinguishable bonuses.

1. Introduction
Exploration is a pivotal consideration in reinforcement learning, especially when dealing with environments that offer
sparse or intricate reward information. Several methods
have been proposed to promote deep exploration (Osband
et al., 2016), including count-based and curiosity-driven
approaches. Count-based techniques in environments with
*Equal contribution. † Corresponding author. 1 Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University. Correspondence to: Xiu Li <li.xiu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

We introduce the Distributional Random Network Distillation (DRND) approach to tackle the challenge of bonus
1

