Best Arm Identification for Stochastic Rising Bandits

Marco Mussi 1 Alessandro Montenegro 1 Francesco Trovò 1 Marcello Restelli 1 Alberto Maria Metelli 1

Abstract

tion (Auer et al., 2002) and best arm identification (Bubeck
et al., 2009). In regret minimization, the goal is to control
the cumulative loss w.r.t. the optimal arm over a time horizon. Conversely, in best arm identification, the goal is to
provide a recommendation about the best arm at the end
of the time budget. We are interested in the fixed-budget
scenario, where we seek to minimize the error probability of
recommending the wrong arm at the end of the time budget,
no matter the loss incurred during learning. Furthermore,
we require that these algorithms suffer a small simple regret.

Stochastic Rising Bandits (SRBs) model sequential decision-making problems in which the expected reward of the available options increases
every time they are selected. This setting captures a wide range of scenarios in which the available options are learning entities whose performance improves (in expectation) over time (e.g.,
online best model selection). While previous
works addressed the regret minimization problem, this paper focuses on the fixed-budget Best
Arm Identification (BAI) problem for SRBs. In
this scenario, given a fixed budget of rounds, we
are asked to provide a recommendation about the
best option at the end of the identification process.
We propose two algorithms to tackle the abovementioned setting, namely R-UCBE, which resorts to a UCB-like approach, and R-SR, which
employs a successive reject procedure. Then, we
prove that, with a sufficiently large budget, they
provide guarantees on the probability of properly
identifying the optimal option at the end of the
learning process and on the simple regret. Furthermore, we derive a lower bound on the error probability, matched by our R-SR (up to constants),
and illustrate how the need for a sufficiently large
budget is unavoidable in the SRB setting. Finally,
we numerically validate the proposed algorithms
in both synthetic and realistic environments.

This work focuses on the Stochastic Rising Bandits (SRB),
a specific instance of the rested bandit setting (Tekin & Liu,
2012) in which the expected reward of an arm increases
whenever it is pulled. Online learning in such a scenario
has been recently addressed from a regret minimization
perspective by Metelli et al. (2022), providing no-regret
algorithms for SRB in both the rested and restless cases.
Motivating Example. The SRB setting models several realworld scenarios where arms improve their performance over
time. A classic example is the so-called Combined Algorithm Selection and Hyperparameter optimization (CASH,
Thornton et al., 2013; Kotthoff et al., 2017; Erickson et al.,
2020; Li et al., 2020; Zöller & Huber, 2021), a problem
of paramount importance in Automated Machine Learning (AutoML, Feurer et al., 2015; Yao et al., 2018; Hutter
et al., 2019; Mussi et al., 2023). In CASH, the goal is to
identify the best learning algorithm together with the best
hyperparameter configuration for a given machine learning task (e.g., classification or regression). In this problem,
every arm represents a hyperparameter tuner acting on a
specific learning algorithm. A pull corresponds to a unit
of time/computation in which we improve (on average) the
hyperparameter configuration (via the tuner) for the corresponding learning algorithm.1 CASH was handled in a
bandit Best Arm Identification (BAI) fashion in Li et al.
(2020) and Cella et al. (2021). The former handles the
problem by considering rising bandits with deterministic
rewards, failing to represent the uncertain nature of such
processes. The latter, while allowing stochastic rewards,
assumes that the expected rewards evolve according to a
known parametric functional class, whose parameters have
to be learned.

1. Introduction
Multi-Armed Bandits (MAB, Lattimore & Szepesvári,
2020) are a well-known framework for sequential decisionmaking. Given a time horizon, the learner chooses, at each
round, an option (i.e., arm) and observes a reward, which is
a realization of an unknown distribution. The MAB problem is commonly studied in two flavors: regret minimiza1
Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy.
Correspondence to: Marco Mussi <marco.mussi@polimi.it>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

1

Additional motivating examples are discussed in Appendix B.

