Multiplicative Weights Update, Area Convexity and Random Coordinate Descent
for Densest Subgraph Problems

Ta Duy Nguyen 1 Alina Ene 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

In this work, we study the densest subgraph problem (DSG)
and its generalization to finding dense subgraph decompositions of graphs. In the densest subgraph problem, we are
given a graph G = (V, E) and the goal is to find a subgraph of maximum density |E(S)| / |S|, where |E(S)| is
the number of edges in the graph induced by S (for weighted
graphs, we consider the total weight of the edges). Densest
subgraphs and related dense subgraph discovery problems
have seen numerous applications in machine learning and
data mining, including DNA motif detection, fraud detection, and distance query computation (see (Lee et al., 2010;
Gionis & Tsourakakis, 2015; Faragó & R. Mojaveri, 2019;
Tsourakakis & Chen; Lanciano et al., 2023) for more comprehensive surveys).

We study the densest subgraph problem and
give algorithms via multiplicative weights update

and area convexity that converge in O logϵ2m


and O logϵ m iterations, respectively, both with
nearly-linear time per iteration. Compared with
the work by Bahmani et al. (2014), our MWU
algorithm uses a very different and much simpler
procedure for recovering the dense subgraph from
the fractional solution and does not employ a binary search. Compared with the work by Boob
et al. (2019), our algorithm via area convexity
improves the iteration complexity by a factor ∆—
the maximum degree in the graph, and matches
the fastest theoretical runtime currently known via
flows (Chekuri et al., 2022) in total time. Next,
we study the dense subgraph decomposition problem and give the first practical iterative algorithm

with linear convergence rate O mn log 1ϵ via
accelerated random coordinate
 descent.
This sig√
m mn∆
nificantly improves over O
time of
ϵ
the FISTA-based algorithm by Harb et al. (2022).
In the high precision regime ϵ ≪ n1 where we
can even recover the exact solution, our algorithm
has a total runtime of O (mn log n), matching the
exact algorithm via parametric flows (Gallo et al.,
1989). Empirically, we show that this algorithm is
very practical and scales to very large graphs, and
its performance is competitive with widely used
methods that have significantly weaker theoretical
guarantees.

The densest subgraph problem and its generalizations are
fundamental graph optimization problems with a long history in algorithm design. A classical result due to Goldberg
(1984) showed that DSG can be solved in polynomial time
via a reduction to maximum flow. Specifically, Goldberg
(1984) showed that, given a guess D for the maximum density, one can either find a subgraph with density at least
D or certify that no such subgraph exists by computing a
maximum s-t flow in a suitably defined network. This approach together with binary search allows us to compute an
optimal solution using a logarithmic number of maximum
flow computations. Gallo et al. (1989) designed a more
efficient algorithm for DSG via a reduction to parametric
maximum flows that solve a sequence of related maximum
flow instances more efficiently than the binary search approach. This led to an
algorithm for DSG with running
time O nm log n2 /m , where n and m are the number
of nodes and edges in the input graph, respectively. Based
on the near-linear time algorithm for computing minimumcost flows by Chen et al. (2022), Harb et al. (2022) gave an
algorithm that
 computes an optimal dense decomposition in
O m1+o(1) time. The recent work of Chekuri et al. (2022)
designed a maximum flow based algorithm
an
 that2 computes

m log (m)
(1 − ϵ)-approximate solution in time O
. To the
ϵ
best of our knowledge, these are the fastest running times
for exact and approximate algorithms, respectively.

1

Department of Computer Science, Boston University, USA.
Correspondence to: Ta Duy Nguyen <taduy@bu.edu>, Aline Ene
<aene@bu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

