EfficientZero V2: Mastering Discrete and Continuous Control with Limited Data

Shengjie Wang * 1 2 3 Shaohuai Liu * 1 4 Weirui Ye * 1 2 3 Jiacheng You 1 Yang Gao† 1 2 3

Abstract

Sparse
Reward

Sample efficiency remains a crucial challenge in
applying Reinforcement Learning (RL) to realworld tasks. While recent algorithms have made
significant strides in improving sample efficiency,
none have achieved consistently superior performance across diverse domains. In this paper, we
introduce EfficientZero V2, a general framework
designed for sample-efficient RL algorithms. We
have expanded the performance of EfficientZero
to multiple domains, encompassing both continuous and discrete actions, as well as visual and
low-dimensional inputs. With a series of improvements we propose, EfficientZero V2 outperforms
the current state-of-the-art (SOTA) by a significant margin in diverse tasks under the limited data
setting. EfficientZero V2 exhibits a notable advancement over the prevailing general algorithm,
DreamerV3, achieving superior outcomes in 50
of 66 evaluated tasks across diverse benchmarks,
such as Atari 100k, Proprio Control, and Vision
Control.

High-dim
Observation

Low-dim
Observation

Discrete
Control

EfficientZero V2

Continuous
Control

Dense
Reward

Dreamer V3
SOTA in each domain

Figure 1. Comparison between EfficientZero V2, DreamerV3 and
other SOTAs in each domain. We evaluate them under the Atari
100k, DMControl Proprio, and DMControl Vision benchmarks.
We then set the performance of the previous SOTA as 1, allowing
us to derive normalized mean scores for both EfficientZero V2 and
Dreamer V3. EfficientZero V2 surpasses or closely matches the
previous SOTA in each domain.

challenging. If gathering data in real-world settings, the
process tends to be time-consuming and expensive. Consequently, it is crucial to explore and develop RL algorithms
to achieve high-level performance with limited data.

1. Introduction

Previous studies have introduced a range of algorithms
aimed at enhancing sample efficiency, including TD-MPC
series (Hansen et al., 2022; 2023), EfficientZero (Ye et al.,
2021), and the Dreamer series (Hafner et al., 2019; 2021;
2023). Despite these advancements, these algorithms do not
consistently attain superior sample efficiency across multiple domains. For example, TD-MPC (Hansen et al., 2022)
leverages Model Predictive Path Integral (MPPI) (Rubinstein, 1997) control for planning. The huge computational
burden in planning hinders its application in vision-based
RL. EfficientZero (Ye et al., 2021) employs the MonteCarlo Tree Search (MCTS) algorithm, which masters discrete control. However, EfficientZero is unable to handle
high-dimensional action spaces, especially in continuous
control scenarios. DreamerV3 (Hafner et al., 2023) is a
universal algorithm that extends to diverse tasks in a wide
range of domains. However, as shown in Fig. 1, DreamerV3
still has noticeable performance gaps to the state-of-the-art
(SOTA) algorithms in each domain. Thus, there remains an
open question on how to achieve both high performance and
sample efficiency across various domains at the same time.

Reinforcement learning (RL) has empowered computers to
master diverse tasks, such as Go (Silver et al., 2018), video
games (Ye et al., 2021), and robotics control (Hwangbo et al.,
2019; Andrychowicz et al., 2020; Akkaya et al., 2019). However, these algorithms require extensive interactions with
their environments, leading to significantly increased time
and computational costs (Petrenko et al., 2023; Chen et al.,
2022). For example, an RL-based controller requires nearly
100M interactions to reorient complex and diverse object
shapes using vision input (Chen et al., 2023). Furthermore,
building certain simulators for daily housework could be
*

Equal contribution 1 Institute for Interdisciplinary Information
Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 2 Shanghai Qi Zhi
Institute, Shanghai, China 3 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai, China 4 Texas A&M University. Correspondence
to: Yang Gao <gaoyangiiis@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

