Regularizing with Pseudo-Negatives for Continual Self-Supervised Learning

Sungmin Cha 1 Kyunghyun Cho 1 2 Taesup Moon 3

Abstract

models, since they typically require large-scale unsupervised data, large mini-batch sizes, and numerous gradient
update steps for training.

We introduce a novel Pseudo-Negative Regularization (PNR) framework for effective continual
self-supervised learning (CSSL). Our PNR leverages pseudo-negatives obtained through modelbased augmentation in a way that newly learned
representations may not contradict what has been
learned in the past. Specifically, for the InfoNCEbased contrastive learning methods, we define
symmetric pseudo-negatives obtained from current and previous models and use them in both
main and regularization loss terms. Furthermore,
we extend this idea to non-contrastive learning
methods which do not inherently rely on negatives.
For these methods, a pseudo-negative is defined
as the output from the previous model for a differently augmented version of the anchor sample and
is asymmetrically applied to the regularization
term. Extensive experimental results demonstrate
that our PNR framework achieves state-of-theart performance in representation learning during
CSSL by effectively balancing the trade-off between plasticity and stability.

To that end, Continual Self-Supervised Learning (CSSL),
in which the aim is to learn progressively improved representations from a sequence of unsupervised data, can be
an efficient alternative to the high-cost, jointly trained selfsupervised learning. With such motivation, several recent
studies (Madaan et al., 2022; Hu et al., 2022; Fini et al.,
2022) have considered the CSSL using various SSL methods
and showed their effectiveness in maintaining representation
continuity. Despite the positive results, we note that the core
idea for those methods is mainly borrowed from the large
body of continual learning research for supervised learning
(Parisi et al., 2019; Delange et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2024).
Namely, a typical supervised continual learning method
can be generally described as employing a single-task loss
term for the new task (e.g., cross-entropy or supervised contrastive loss (Khosla et al., 2020)) together with a certain
type of regularization (e.g., distillation-based (Li & Hoiem,
2017; Douillard et al., 2020; Kang et al., 2022; Wang et al.,
2022; Cha et al., 2021a) or norm-based (Kirkpatrick et al.,
2017; Aljundi et al., 2018; Jung et al., 2020; Ahn et al.,
2019; Cha et al., 2021b) or replay-sample based terms (Wu
et al., 2019; Rebuffi et al., 2017)) to prevent forgetting; the
recent state-of-the-art CSSL methods simply follow that approach with self-supervised loss terms (e.g., CaSSLe (Fini
et al., 2022)).

1. Introduction
Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) has recently emerged as a
cost-efficient approach for training neural networks, eliminating the need for laborious data labelling (Gui et al., 2023).
Specifically, the representations learned by recent SSL methods (e.g., MoCo (He et al., 2020), SimCLR (Chen et al.,
2020a), BarlowTwins (Zbontar et al., 2021), BYOL (Grill
et al., 2020), and VICReg (Bardes et al., 2022)) are shown to
have excellent quality, comparable to those learned from supervised learning. Despite such success, huge memory and
computational complexities are the apparent bottlenecks for
easily maintaining and updating the self-supervised learned

In this regard, we raise an issue on the current CSSL approach; the efficacy of simply incorporating a regularization
term into the existing self-supervised loss for achieving
successful CSSL remains uncertain. Namely, typical regularization terms are essentially designed to maintain the
representations of the previous model, but they may hinder
the capability of learning better representations while learning from the new task (i.e., plasticity) (Cha et al., 2024;
Kim & Han, 2023).
To address these limitations, we propose a novel method
called Pseudo-Negative Regularization (PNR) for CSSL,
which utilizes pseudo-negatives for each anchor of a given
input, obtained by model-based augmentation. In the CSSL
using various SSL methods, PNR defines different pseudonegatives tailored for each contrastive and non-contrastive

1

New York University 2 Genentech 3 ASRI / INMC / IPAI / AIIS,
Seoul National University. Correspondence to: Taesup Moon
<tsmoon@snu.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

