Learning a Diffusion Model Policy from Rewards via Q-Score Matching

Michael Psenka * 1 Alejandro Escontrela * 1 Pieter Abbeel 1 Yi Ma 1

Abstract

Robotics RL applications typically need to work in a continuous vector space for both states and actions. This not only
makes traditional RL algorithms designed for discrete state
and action spaces infeasible, but makes parameterizing the
policy (distribution of actions) a difficult challenge, where
one must typically choose between ease of sampling (e.g.
Gaussians (Agostini & Celaya, 2010)) and expressiveness.

Diffusion models have become a popular choice
for representing actor policies in behavior cloning
and offline reinforcement learning. This is due
to their natural ability to optimize an expressive
class of distributions over a continuous space.
However, previous works fail to exploit the scorebased structure of diffusion models, and instead
utilize a simple behavior cloning term to train
the actor, limiting their ability in the actor-critic
setting. In this paper, we present a theoretical framework linking the structure of diffusion
model policies to a learned Q-function, by linking the structure between the score of the policy to the action gradient of the Q-function. We
focus on off-policy reinforcement learning and
propose a new policy update method from this
theory, which we denote Q-score matching. Notably, this algorithm only needs to differentiate
through the denoising model rather than the entire diffusion model evaluation, and converged
policies through Q-score matching are implicitly
multi-modal and explorative in continuous domains. We conduct experiments in simulated environments to demonstrate the viability of our proposed method and compare to popular baselines.
Source code is available from the project website:
https://michaelpsenka.io/qsm.

Recently, diffusion models (Hyvärinen & Dayan, 2005; Ho
et al., 2020) have emerged as a promising avenue for parameterizing distributions. These models, rooted in the idea
of iterative increments of noising and denoising from a distribution, have shown great potential in generative tasks
(Rombach et al., 2022; Watson et al., 2022). In the context
of RL, diffusion models offer both expressiveness and easy
sampling, since normalization constants do not need to be
computed for sampling. However, their adoption in RL is
relatively nascent, and the nuances of their implementation
and performance are still subjects of investigation.
One unexplored approach is through the alignment of the
learned policy’s score, denoted by ∇a log(π(a|s)), with the
score of an optimal policy, denoted by ∇a log(π ∗ (a|s)).
However, traditional score matching is ill-posed in
this setting, because we not only lack samples from
∇a log(π ∗ (a|s)), but also from π ∗ (a|s) itself. Our primary
result emphasizes that in the context of RL, one can match
the score of π to that of π ∗ by iteratively matching the score
of π to the gradient of the state-action value function with
respect to action, ∇a Qπ (s, a). This offers a new, geometric perspective on policy optimization, where the focus for
policy optimization becomes iteratively pushing the vector
field ∇a log(π(a|s)) towards the vector field ∇a Qπ (s, a).
We call this approach Q-score matching (QSM).

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has firmly established its importance across a range of complex domains, from discrete
game environments like Go, Chess, and Poker (Silver et al.,
2016; 2017; Brown & Sandholm, 2019) to continuous environments like goal-oriented robotics (Kober et al., 2013;
Sünderhauf et al., 2018; Ibarz et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2022).

We then use this novel method on off-policy reinforcement
learning scenarios, an important but yet unexplored area
for diffusion model policies. Without a fixed distribution to
sample from (akin to what is given for behavior cloning or
offline RL applications), it is unclear how exactly to train
a diffusion model represented policy. We postulate and
empirically demonstrate that QSM is a viable algorithm for
learning diffusion model policies.

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science, University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Michael Psenka <psenka@eecs.berkeley.edu>.

The paper is structured as follows: we begin by establishing
a continuous-time formulation of RL via stochastic differential equations to allow score-based analysis while keeping

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

