Shifted Interpolation for Differential Privacy

Jinho Bok 1 Weijie J. Su 1 Jason Altschuler 1

Abstract

algorithms for private optimization. It is therefore a central
question to quantify the differential privacy of these algorithms. However, tight characterizations remain open, even
in the seemingly simple setting of convex optimization.

Noisy gradient descent and its variants are the
predominant algorithms for differentially private
machine learning. It is a fundamental question to
quantify their privacy leakage, yet tight characterizations remain open even in the foundational
setting of convex losses. This paper improves
over previous analyses by establishing (and refining) the “privacy amplification by iteration”
phenomenon in the unifying framework of f differential privacy—which tightly captures all
aspects of the privacy loss and immediately implies tighter privacy accounting in other notions
of differential privacy, e.g., (ε, δ)-DP and Rényi
DP. Our key technical insight is the construction
of shifted interpolated processes that unravel the
popular shifted-divergences argument, enabling
generalizations beyond divergence-based relaxations of DP. Notably, this leads to the first exact privacy analysis in the foundational setting
of strongly convex optimization. Our techniques
extend to many settings: convex/strongly convex,
constrained/unconstrained, full/cyclic/stochastic
batches, and all combinations thereof. As an immediate corollary, we recover the f -DP characterization of the exponential mechanism for strongly
convex optimization in Gopi et al. (2022), and
moreover extend this result to more general settings.

In words, DP measures how distinguishable the output
of a (randomized) algorithm is when run on two adjacent datasets, i.e., two datasets that differ in only one
individual record. There are several ways to measure
distinguishability—leading to many relaxations of DP, e.g.,
(Bun & Steinke, 2016; Mironov, 2017; Dong et al., 2022).
Different DP notions lead to different privacy analyses, and
a long line of work has sought to prove sharp privacy bounds
for noisy gradient descent and its variants (Bassily et al.,
2014; Abadi et al., 2016; Feldman et al., 2018; Chourasia
et al., 2021; Ye & Shokri, 2022; Altschuler & Talwar, 2022).
A common approach is to use the composition theorem,
which essentially pays a price in privacy for every intermediate iterate along the optimization trajectory, leading
to possibly suboptimal privacy bounds. Recent work has
significantly improved the privacy analysis in the case of
convex and strongly convex losses by leveraging stability
properties of (stochastic) gradient descent (Chourasia et al.,
2021; Ye & Shokri, 2022; Altschuler & Talwar, 2022) in
order to show that the privacy leakage does not increase
ad infinitum in the number of iterations t. This is in stark
contrast to the composition-based
approach, which gives
√
privacy bounds that scale as t.
All these “convergent” privacy bounds were proved in the
Rényi DP framework, which is inherently lossy. To achieve
the tightest possible privacy bound on private gradient methods, a natural goal is to use the f -DP framework (Dong et al.,
2022) for analysis, since it is an information-theoretically
lossless definition of DP. This definition measures distinguishability in terms of the Type I vs Type II error tradeoff
curve f for the hypothesis testing problem of whether a
given user was in the training dataset. The f -DP framework is desirable because: (1) f -DP exactly characterizes
all relevant aspects of the hypothesis testing problem defining DP, and thus (optimal) f -DP bounds can be losslessly
converted to (optimal) bounds in other notions of privacy
such as (ε, δ)-DP or Rényi DP, (2) f -DP is lossless under
composition of multiple private mechanisms, which is the
most ubiquitous operation in DP since it enables combining

1. Introduction
Private optimization is the primary approach for private machine learning. The goal is to train good models while not
leaking sensitive attributes of the training data. Differential
privacy (DP) is the gold standard for measuring information
leakage (Dwork et al., 2006; Dwork & Roth, 2014), and
noisy gradient descent and its variants are the predominant
1

Department of Statistics and Data Science, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. Correspondence to: Jinho Bok
<jinhobok@upenn.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

