Incorporating Information into Shapley Values:
Reweighting via a Maximum Entropy Approach

Darya Biparva 1 Donatello Materassi 1

Abstract

prevalent method to disentangle the individual contributions
of each player to the team’s payoff (Shapley, 1953). Specifically, Shapley values are given by the average marginal
contribution of each player in every possible ordering of
the players in the team. When addressing feature attribution, the authors in (Lundberg & Lee, 2017) quantified the
contribution of each feature to the model’s output by employing an analogy where the model output is viewed as the
team’s payoff, and each feature is considered as an individual player. Given a payoff function vpSq defined for each
subset of features S Ď X “ tX1 , ..., XN u in a model, a
possible way to compute the Shapley values for a specific
instance of the features X1 “ x1 ,...,XN “ xN is by using
the following Algorithm 1.

Both the marginal contributions needed for the
computation of Shapley values and the graph produced by Pearl-Verma theorem rely on the choice
of an ordering of the variables. For Shapley values, the marginal contributions are averaged over
all orderings, while in causal inference methods,
the typical approach is to select orderings producing a graph with a minimal number of edges. We
reconcile both approaches by reinterpreting them
from a maximum entropy perspective. Namely,
Shapley values assume no prior knowledge about
the orderings and treat them as equally likely,
while causal inference approaches apply Occam’s
razor and consider only orderings producing the
simplest explanatory graphs. We find that the
blind application of Occam’s razor to Shapley
values does not produce fully satisfactory explanations. Hence, we propose two variations of
Shapley values based on entropy maximization to
appropriately incorporate prior information about
the model.

Algorithm 1 Calculation of Shapley values
Require: Payoff v, instance of features x “ tx1 , ..., xN u
for Every permutation π of t1, ..., N u do
ziπ Ð features preceding xi in the ordering π
ϕπi Ð v pziπ Y txi uq ´ v pziπ q
end for ř
ϕi Ð N1 ! π ϕπi

1. Introduction

We refer to the quantity ϕπi as the marginal contribution of
the feature instance xi in the ordering π whereas the Shapley value of the feature instance xi is represented by the
output ϕi in Algorithm 1, calculated as the average of these
marginal contributions ϕπi across all N ! possible orderings.
Although this algorithm is computationally expensive, our
emphasis is on the theoretical definition of Shapley values,
with no consideration for practical computations.
Given a model f , a common choice (Lundberg & Lee, 2017)
for the payoff function is vpSq “ Erf pXq|Ss which is the
expectation of the output given the subset of features S. In
essence, the computation of Shapley values involves considering the marginal contributions of each feature/player,
which, though, are reliant on the ordering of the coalition.
Assuming that there is no preferred natural ordering, Shapley values take the approach of averaging over all of them.
In addition to its simplicity, this approach has the appealing characteristic of satisfying several seemingly desirable
properties that an additive feature attribution method should

Additive feature attribution algorithms are commonly used
in eXplainable AI (XAI) to quantify how a model generates
its output from the input features (Lundberg & Lee, 2017).
However, assessing a feature’s impact on a complex model
is challenging due to interdependencies and non-linear interactions among features (Aas et al., 2021). As noted in
(Lundberg & Lee, 2017; Štrumbelj & Kononenko, 2014;
Datta et al., 2016), the problem is akin to cooperative games,
where individual players contribute to the team’s success,
but how to isolate each player’s contribution to the final outcome remains unclear. In game theory, Shapley values are a
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, USA. Correspondence to: Darya
Biparva <bipar001@umn.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

