Weak-to-Strong Generalization:
Eliciting Strong Capabilities With Weak Supervision

Collin Burns * 1 Pavel Izmailov * 1 Jan Hendrik Kirchner * 1 Bowen Baker * 1 Leo Gao * 1
Leopold Aschenbrenner * 1 Yining Chen * 1 Adrien Ecoffet * 1 Manas Joglekar * 1
Jan Leike 1 Ilya Sutskever 1 Jeff Wu * 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

We mainly steer or align today’s models with reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF): we reinforce
behaviors that human evaluators rate highly and penalize behaviors that evaluators rate poorly (Christiano et al., 2017;
Stiennon et al., 2020; Ouyang et al., 2022; Glaese et al.,
2022; Bai et al., 2022a). This procedure is very effective
when human evaluators can tell if model behavior is good
or bad and is a core part of training modern language model
assistants. However, superhuman models will be capable
of complex and creative behaviors that humans cannot fully
understand. For example, if a model generates a million
lines of complicated code, humans will not be able to provide reliable supervision for key alignment-relevant tasks,
including: whether the code follows the user’s intentions,
whether the assistant model answers questions about the
code honestly, whether the code is safe or dangerous to execute, and so on. As a result, if we finetune a superhuman
model with human supervision on a reward modeling (RM)
or safety classification task, it is unclear how that model
will generalize to complicated behaviors that humans could
not reliably supervise themselves.

Widely used alignment techniques, such as
reinforcement learning from human feedback
(RLHF), rely on the ability of humans to supervise model behavior—for example, to evaluate
whether a model faithfully followed instructions
or generated safe outputs. However, future superhuman models will behave in complex ways too
difficult for humans to reliably evaluate; humans
will only be able to weakly supervise superhuman
models. We study an analogy to this problem:
can weak model supervision elicit the full capabilities of a much stronger model? We test this
using a range of pretrained language models in
the GPT-4 family on natural language processing
(NLP), chess, and reward modeling tasks. We find
that when we naively finetune strong pretrained
models on labels generated by a weak model, they
consistently perform better than their weak supervisors, a phenomenon we call weak-to-strong
generalization. However, we are still far from
recovering the full capabilities of strong models
with naive finetuning alone, suggesting that techniques like RLHF may scale poorly to superhuman models without further work. We find that
simple methods can often significantly improve
weak-to-strong generalization: for example, when
finetuning GPT-4 with a GPT-2-level supervisor
and an auxiliary confidence loss, we can recover
close to GPT-3.5-level performance on NLP tasks.
Our results suggest that it is feasible to make empirical progress today on a fundamental challenge
of aligning superhuman models.

This leads to a fundamental technical challenge of aligning superhuman models: how can weak supervisors control
models much smarter than them? Despite the importance of
this problem, it is difficult to empirically study today. Most
prior work on alignment has either confronted this core challenge head-on—but been restricted to primarily theoretical
frameworks and toy problems (Irving et al., 2018; Christiano et al., 2018; Leike et al., 2018; Demski & Garrabrant,
2019; Hubinger et al., 2019), or empirically studied humans
supervising today’s models—without addressing the core
challenges that may arise with superhuman models (Christiano et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2021; Ouyang et al., 2022;
Bowman et al., 2022; Saunders et al., 2022). In contrast, we
would like to have a setup that captures core challenges of
aligning future superhuman models while also being able to
make iterative empirical progress today.

*
Primary authors. Code is available at github.com/
1
openai/weak-to-strong
Superalignment
Generalization Team, OpenAI. Correspondence to:
<generalization@openai.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

We propose a simple setup for studying the problem of
humans supervising superhuman models by considering
1

