Neural Networks Learn Statistics of Increasing Complexity

Nora Belrose 1 Quintin Pope 2 Lucia Quirke 1 Alex Mallen 1 Xiaoli Fern 2

Abstract

act as increasingly precise approximations to the real data,
showing that early checkpoints perform about as well on
real data as checkpoints trained directly on the real data.

The distributional simplicity bias (DSB) posits
that neural networks learn low-order moments
of the data distribution first, before moving on to
higher-order correlations. In this work, we present
compelling new evidence for the DSB by showing that networks automatically learn to perform
well on maximum-entropy distributions whose
low-order statistics match those of the training
set early in training, then lose this ability later.
We also extend the DSB to discrete domains by
proving an equivalence between token n-gram frequencies and the moments of embedding vectors,
and by finding empirical evidence for the bias in
LLMs. Finally we use optimal transport methods
to surgically edit the low-order statistics of one
class of images to match those of another, and
show early-training networks treat the edited images as if they were drawn from the target class.
Code is available at https://github.com/
EleutherAI/features-across-time.

We build on Refinetti et al. (2023) by inverting their experimental setup. We train our models on real datasets, then
test them throughout training on synthetic data that probe
the model’s reliance on statistics of different orders. We
believe this experimental design provides more direct evidence about the generalization behavior of commonly used
models and training practices.
Our primary theoretical contributions are to (1) motivate the
DSB through a Taylor expansion of the expected loss, (2)
propose criteria quantifying whether a model “uses” statistics up to order k by checking that the model is sensitive to
interventions on the first k statistics, while being robust to
interventions on higher-order statistics, (3) describe efficient
methods of producing synthetic data that let us investigate
whether models satisfy the above criteria, and (4) extend the
DSB to discrete domains by proving an equivalence between
token n-gram frequencies and the moments of sequences of
embedding vectors.
We use a Taylor series expansion to express a model’s expected loss as a sum over the central moments of an evaluation dataset. This connection provides some motivation for
the DSB. Specifically, if during training, a network’s loss is
well approximated by the first k terms of its Taylor expansion, then the model should only be sensitive to statistics up
to order k, and we argue that earlier terms of the expansion
will generally become relevant before later terms.

1. Introduction
Neural networks exhibit a remarkable ability to fit complex datasets while generalizing to unseen data points and
distributions. This is especially surprising given that deep
networks can perfectly fit random labels (Zhang et al., 2021),
and it is possible to intentionally “poison” networks so that
they achieve zero training loss while behaving randomly on
a held out test set (Huang et al., 2020).

We describe two intuitive criteria that a model sensitive to
statistics up to order k should satisfy: (1) changing the first
k statistics of data from class A to match class B should
cause the model to classify the modified data as class B, and
(2) models should be unaffected by “deleting” higher-order
data statistics. We evaluate whether image classification
networks satisfy the above criteria during training through
extensive empirical experiments across a variety of network
architectures and image datasets.

A recently proposed explanation for this phenomenon is
the distributional simplicity bias (DSB): neural networks
learn to exploit the lower-order statistics of the input data
first– e.g. mean and (co)variance– before learning to use its
higher-order statistics, such as (co)skewness or (co)kurtosis.
Refinetti et al. (2023) provide evidence for the DSB by
training networks on a sequence of synthetic datasets that
*
Equal contribution 1 EleutherAI 2 Oregon State University. Correspondence to: Nora Belrose <nora@eleuther.ai>.

We evaluate whether the network satisfies criterion (1) by
generating synthetic datasets where we “graft” the means
and covariances of one class onto images of another class,
and evaluating whether the network’s classifies the result-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

