SAM-E: Leveraging Visual Foundation Model with Sequence Imitation
for Embodied Manipulation

Junjie Zhang 1 2 Chenjia Bai 2 Haoran He 3 2 Zhigang Wang 2 Bin Zhao 2 Xiu Li 1 Xuelong Li 2 4

Abstract

et al., 2023; Reed et al., 2022) or Reinforcement Learning
(RL) algorithms (Zakka et al., 2023; Hansen et al., 2022;
Shi et al., 2024; Bai et al., 2024), and advanced transformer
(Chebotar et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2023a) or diffusion-based
networks (Xian et al., 2023; He et al., 2023; 2024). To perform a wide range of complex manipulation tasks in the 3D
physical world, it is crucial to understand the 3D scene structure that encompasses object positions, orientations, shapes,
occlusions, and the relationships between objects and the
environment (Billard & Kragic, 2019). Various methods
utilize 3D representations such as voxel patches (James
et al., 2022b; Shridhar et al., 2022b), point clouds (Chen
et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023b) to provide 3D localizations
for predicting the end-effector poses. However, learning a
3D representation can be computationally expensive. For
instance, the voxel-based method (Shridhar et al., 2022b)
achieves state-of-the-art performance while suffering from
cubic scaling of the number of voxels with the resolution,
making it prohibitive for larger datasets.

Acquiring a multi-task imitation policy in 3D manipulation poses challenges in terms of scene understanding and action prediction. Current methods employ both 3D representation and multiview 2D representation to predict the poses of
the robot’s end-effector. However, they still require a considerable amount of high-quality robot
trajectories, and suffer from limited generalization in unseen tasks and inefficient execution in
long-horizon reasoning. In this paper, we propose
SAM-E, a novel architecture for robot manipulation by leveraging a vision-foundation model for
generalizable scene understanding and sequence
imitation for long-term action reasoning. Specifically, we adopt Segment Anything (SAM) pretrained on a huge number of images and promptable masks as the foundation model for extracting task-relevant features, and employ parameterefficient fine-tuning on robot data for a better understanding of embodied scenarios. To address
long-horizon reasoning, we develop a novel multichannel heatmap that enables the prediction of the
action sequence in a single pass, notably enhancing execution efficiency. Experimental results
from various instruction-following tasks demonstrate that SAM-E achieves superior performance
with higher execution efficiency compared to the
baselines, and also significantly improves generalization in few-shot adaptation to new tasks.

To tackle these challenges, recent studies have investigated
feature extraction from single-view images and information
aggregation using multi-view transformers (Guhur et al.,
2022), which provide enhanced efficiency as the scaling of
image patches aligns with the input resolution. For example, recently proposed RVT (Goyal et al., 2023) achieves
36 times faster training speeds and better performance than
voxel-based approaches. However, learning a multi-view
policy still requires a considerable amount of high-quality
robot trajectories for imitation, and the resulting policy exhibits limited generalization capabilities for unseen tasks
and low execution efficiency in long-horizon reasoning. Motivated by recent research on visual foundation models that
leverage web-scale datasets and demonstrate robust zeroshot and few-shot generalization (Radford et al., 2021; Li
et al., 2022; Rombach et al., 2022; Hudson et al., 2023), we
delve further into the multi-view architecture to enhance the
generalization capabilities and execution efficiency of 3D
manipulation policies in language-following tasks.

1. Introduction
Robot manipulation has made significant progress, benefiting from embodied datasets (Walke et al., 2023; Collaboration, 2023; Fang et al., 2023), Imitation Learning (IL) (Jiang
1

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua
University 2 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 3 Hong
Kong University of Science and Technology 4 Institute of Artificial
Intelligence (TeleAI), China Telecom, P. R. China. Correspondence to: Chenjia Bai <baichenjia@pjlab.org.cn>.

In this paper, we present a novel architecture for robot manipulation that leverages a vision-foundation model for image understanding and sequence imitation for long-horizon
reasoning. We name our method SAM-E, as we utilize the

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

