Stability and Generalization of Stochastic Compositional Gradient Descent
Algorithms

Ming Yang * 1 Xiyuan Wei * 2 Tianbao Yang 2 Yiming Ying 3

1. Introduction

Abstract

Recently, stochastic compositional optimization (SCO)
has attracted considerable interest (Chen et al., 2021a;b;
Dentcheva et al., 2017; Ghadimi et al., 2020; Hu et al.,
2020; Tolstaya et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2017; 2016; Zhang
& Lan, 2020) in machine learning. It has the following form:
n
o
min F (x) = f ◦ g(x) = Eν [fν (Eω [gω (x)])] , (1)

Many machine learning tasks can be formulated
as a stochastic compositional optimization (SCO)
problem such as reinforcement learning, AUC
maximization and meta-learning, where the objective function involves a nested composition
associated with an expectation. Although many
studies have been devoted to studying the convergence behavior of SCO algorithms, there is little
work on understanding their generalization, that
is, how these learning algorithms built from training data would behave on future test examples.
In this paper, we provide the stability and generalization analysis of stochastic compositional
gradient descent algorithms in the framework of
statistical learning theory. Firstly, we introduce
a stability concept called compositional uniform
stability and establish its quantitative relation with
generalization for SCO problems. Then, we establish the compositional uniform stability results
for two notable stochastic compositional gradient descent algorithms, namely SCGD and SCSC.
Finally, we derive dimension-independent excess
risk bounds for SCGD and SCSC by balancing
stability results and optimization errors. To the
best of our knowledge, these are the first-ever
known results on stability and generalization analysis of stochastic compositional gradient descent
algorithms.

x∈X

where f ◦g(x) = f (g(x)) denotes the function composition,
f : Rd → R and g : Rp → Rd are differentiable functions,
ν, ω are random variables, and X is a convex domain in Rp .
SCO generalizes the classic (non-compositional) stochastic optimization where its objective function F (·) involves
nested compositions of functions and each composition is
associated with an expectation.
SCO problem (1) instantiates various learning problems.
For example, reinforcement learning (Sutton & Barto, 2018;
Szepesvári, 2010) aims to obtain a value function of the
given policy that can be considered as an SCO problem
(Wang et al., 2017). Model-agnostic meta-learning (MAML)
(Finn et al., 2017) finds a common initialization for rapid
adaptation to new tasks, which was essentially a SCO problem, as pointed out by Chen et al. (2021a). Portfolio optimization with risk aversion (Shapiro et al., 2021), biasvariance issues in supervised learning (Dentcheva et al.,
2017; Tolstaya et al., 2018), and robust group distributional
optimization (Qi et al., 2021a; Jiang et al., 2022b) can also
be formulated in similar SCO forms. Likewise, other learning tasks, such as maximization of the area under precisionrecall curves (AUCPRC), and other compositional performance measures, can be cast in a similar way (Yang, 2022).
There are a substantial number of studies devoted to studying the convergence behavior of stochastic compositional optimization algorithms for solving (1). Wang et al. (2017) pioneered the non-asymptotic analysis of the so-called stochastic compositional gradient decent algorithms (SCGD) which
employed two-time scales with a slower stepsize to update
the variable and a faster one used in the moving average
sequence yt+1 to track the inner function g(xt ). An accelerated version of SCGD was analyzed by Wang et al. (2016)
and its adapted variant was studied by Tutunov et al. (2020).
In particular, Chen et al. (2021a) proposed the stochasti-

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Mathematics and Statistics, State University of New York at Albany, Albany, NY 12222,
USA 2 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Texas
A&M University, College Station, TX 77843, USA 3 The University of Sydney, School of Mathematics and Statistics, Sydney,
NSW 2006, Australia. Correspondence to: Yiming Ying <yiming.ying@sydney.edu.au>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

