Neural Operators with Localized Integral and Differential Kernels

Miguel Liu-Schiaffini * 1 Julius Berner * 1 Boris Bonev * 2 Thorsten Kurth 2 Kamyar Azizzadenesheli 2
Anima Anandkumar 1

Abstract
Neural operators learn mappings between function spaces, which is practical for learning solution operators of PDEs and other scientific modeling applications. Among them, the Fourier neural
operator (FNO) is a popular architecture that performs global convolutions in the Fourier space.
However, such global operations are often prone
to over-smoothing and may fail to capture local
details. In contrast, convolutional neural networks
(CNN) can capture local features but are limited
to training and inference at a single resolution. In
this work, we present a principled approach to operator learning that can capture local features under two frameworks by learning differential operators and integral operators with locally supported
kernels. Specifically, inspired by stencil methods,
we prove that we obtain differential operators under an appropriate scaling of the kernel values of
CNNs. To obtain local integral operators, we utilize suitable basis representations for the kernels
based on discrete-continuous convolutions. Both
these approaches preserve the properties of operator learning and, hence, the ability to predict at
any resolution. Adding our layers to FNOs significantly improves their performance, reducing the
relative L2 -error by 34-72% in our experiments,
which include a turbulent 2D Navier-Stokes and
the spherical shallow water equations.

Regular kernel

Local integral kernel

Differential kernel
h

−−−−−→

h/2

−−−−−→

0

Figure 1: Visualization of different limits of a convolution with a
discretized function v as the grid width h is refined, i.e., h → 0.
(Top) A regular convolution is collapsing to a pointwise linear operator. (Middle) Instead, we can use a kernel that can be evaluated
at arbitrary resolutions and keep the receptive field unchanged, to
converge to a local integral operator, see Section 3.4. (Bottom)
Alternatively, we can let it collapse while constraining the kernel
appropriately, converging to a differential operator, see Section 3.2.

1. Introduction
Deep learning holds the promise to greatly accelerate advances in computational science and engineering, which
often require numerical solutions of partial differential equa-

tions (PDEs) (Azizzadenesheli et al., 2024; Zhang et al.,
2023; Cuomo et al., 2022). Recent advances in deep learning have enabled applications such as weather forecasting (Pathak et al., 2022; Bonev et al., 2023; Lam et al., 2023),
seismology (Sun et al., 2023; Shi et al., 2023), reservoir engineering for carbon capture (Wen et al., 2022; 2023), and
many other applications with orders of magnitude speedup
over traditional methods.

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena
CA 91125 2 NVIDIA, Santa Clara, CA 95051. Correspondence
to: Miguel Liu-Schiaffini <mliuschi@caltech.edu>, Julius Berner
<jberner@caltech.edu>, Boris Bonev <bbonev@nvidia.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Many of the above results are achieved by neural operators,
which learn mappings between function spaces, enabling
1

