Toward Availability Attacks in 3D Point Clouds

Yifan Zhu * 1 2 Yibo Miao * 1 2 Yinpeng Dong 3 4 Xiao-Shan Gao 1 2 5

Abstract

ing (Chen et al., 2017b; Yue et al., 2018), medical image processing (Taha & Hanbury, 2015), scene reconstruction (Malihi et al., 2016), and face recognition (Zhou & Xiao, 2018).
Since PointNet (Qi et al., 2017a) was first proposed, many
deep learning-based methods have been applied to the 3D
domain and shown tremendous success in various tasks.
Although great progress has been made, data privacy and
security issues in 3D deep learning are not explored systematically. Users may be reluctant to contribute their privacysensitive data, such as online healthcare records, to training
large-scale commercial 3D models (Xu et al., 2023; Zhou
et al., 2023). In fact, according to a report by Das (2023), an
insurance company illicitly acquired a substantial amount
of biomedical data to develop a commercial chronic disease risk prediction model. Another investigation indicated
a growing number of lawsuits between data owners and
machine learning companies (Vincent, 2019; Burt, 2020;
Conklin, 2020). Consequently, there is an increasing focus
on safeguarding data from unauthorized use for training.

Despite the great progress of 3D vision, data privacy and security issues in 3D deep learning are
not explored systematically. In the domain of 2D
images, many availability attacks have been proposed to prevent data from being illicitly learned
by unauthorized deep models. However, unlike
images represented on a fixed dimensional grid,
point clouds are characterized as unordered and
unstructured sets, posing a significant challenge
in designing an effective availability attack for 3D
deep learning. In this paper, we theoretically show
that extending 2D availability attacks directly to
3D point clouds under distance regularization is
susceptible to the degeneracy, rendering the generated poisons weaker or even ineffective. This
is because in bi-level optimization, introducing
regularization term can result in update directions
out of control. To address this issue, we propose a
novel Feature Collision Error-Minimization (FCEM) method, which creates additional shortcuts
in the feature space, inducing different update
directions to prevent the degeneracy of bi-level
optimization. Moreover, we provide a theoretical
analysis that demonstrates the effectiveness of the
FC-EM attack. Extensive experiments on typical
point cloud datasets, 3D intracranial aneurysm
medical dataset, and 3D face dataset verify the
superiority and practicality of our approach. Code
is available at https://github.com/hala64/fc-em.

In the realm of 2D images, many availability attacks have
been proposed to prevent data from being illicitly learned
by unauthorized deep models (Feng et al., 2019; Huang
et al., 2020; Fowl et al., 2021; Fu et al., 2022; SandovalSegura et al., 2022b). They add imperceptible perturbations
to the training data so that the model cannot learn much
information from the data and thereby significantly reducing the model’s accuracy on test data. Within the literature,
two representative 2D availability attack methods stand out.
Huang et al. (2020) propose an error-minimization poisoning approach, known as Unlearnable Examples, leveraging
iterative optimization of a bi-level min-min problem to create shortcuts by minimizing network loss. On the other
hand, Fowl et al. (2021) propose an error-maximization
poisoning approach, known as Adversarial Poisons, employing stronger adversarial attacks on the pre-trained source
classifier to generate poisoning noises.

1. Introduction
Vision for 3D has been developed rapidly and become more
popular in real-world applications, such as autonomous driv*
Equal contribution 1 Academy of Mathematics and Systems
Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 University of Chinese
Academy of Sciences 3 Tsinghua University 4 RealAI 5 Kaiyuan
International Mathematical Sciences Institute. Correspondence to:
Xiao-Shan Gao <xgao@mmrc.iss.ac.cn>, Yibo Miao <miaoyibo@amss.ac.cn>.

However, to date, there is a notable absence of research in
the domain of data privacy and security concerning 3D data.
The data structure of 3D point clouds is inherently different
from 2D images, posing a significant challenge in designing
an effective availability attack. Specifically, unlike images
represented on a fixed dimensional grid, point clouds are
characterized as unordered and unstructured sets. As shown
in Figure 1, the poisons have noticeable outliers, lacking im-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

