Learning from Integral Losses in Physics Informed Neural Networks

Ehsan Saleh 1 Saba Ghaffari 1 Timothy Bretl 2 Luke Olson 1 Matthew West 3

Abstract

Error (MSE), is applied to these residuals, and the network
learns the true solution by minimizing this loss through
back-propagation and stochastic approximation. These elements form the basis of many methods capable of learning
high-dimensional parameters. A wealth of existing work
demonstrated the utility of this approach to solving a wide
array of applications and PDE forms (Li et al., 2020; Shukla
et al., 2021; Li et al., 2019).

This work proposes a solution for the problem
of training physics-informed networks under partial integro-differential equations. These equations require an infinite or a large number of neural evaluations to construct a single residual for
training. As a result, accurate evaluation may be
impractical, and we show that naive approximations at replacing these integrals with unbiased
estimates lead to biased loss functions and solutions. To overcome this bias, we investigate three
types of potential solutions: the deterministic sampling approaches, the double-sampling trick, and
the delayed target method. We consider three
classes of PDEs for benchmarking; one defining
Poisson problems with singular charges and weak
solutions of up to 10 dimensions, another involving weak solutions on electro-magnetic fields and
a Maxwell equation, and a third one defining a
Smoluchowski coagulation problem. Our numerical results confirm the existence of the aforementioned bias in practice and also show that our
proposed delayed target approach can lead to accurate solutions with comparable quality to ones
estimated with a large sample size integral. Our
implementation is open-source and available at
https://github.com/ehsansaleh/btspinn.

One particular problem in this area is the prevalent assumption around our ability to accurately evaluate the PDE residuals for learning. In particular, partial integro-differential
forms include integrals or large summations within them.
These forms appear in a broad range of scientific applications including quantum physics (Laskin, 2000), aerosol
modeling (Wang et al., 2022a), and ecology (Humphries
et al., 2010). In such instances, an accurate evaluation of the
PDE elements, even at a single point, can become impractical. Naive approximations, such as replacing integrals with
unbiased estimates, can result in biased solutions, as we will
show later. This work is dedicated to the problem of learning PINNs with loss functions containing a parametrized
integral or summation.
One natural approach for learning PINNs with integral
forms would be to use techniques such as importance sampling, numerical quadrature, or Quasi Monte Carlo (QMC)
to estimate the integrals more accurately than a standard
i.i.d. sampling approach. This follows the classical theory
and such approaches have been investigated thoroughly in
prior work (Caflisch, 1998; Evans & Swartz, 1995).

1. Introduction

In this work, we consider an alternative approach, which we
will show can be more effective than reducing the variance
of the integral estimation. The methods we investigate are
based around the idea of reducing the bias and the variance
in the parameter gradients so that we can train effectively
even if our loss functions are not accurately estimated. We
consider three potential approaches to do this; the deterministic sampling approach, the double-sampling trick, and the
delayed target method. As we will see, the delayed target
approach, which is based upon ideas from learning temporal differences (Sutton, 1984; Mnih et al., 2015; Fujimoto
et al., 2018), gives the best results, performing comparable
or slightly better than accurate integral estimators (i.e., with
N = 100 samples) using just a single sample (N = 1).

Physics Informed Neural Networks (PINNs) (Raissi et al.,
2019) can be described as solvers of a particular Partial Differential Equation (PDE). Typically, these problems consist
of three defining elements. A sampling procedure selects a
number of points for learning. Automatic differentiation is
then used to evaluate the PDE at these points and define a
residual. Finally, a loss function, such as the Mean Squared
1
Department of Computer Science 2 Department of Aerospace
Engineering 3 Department of Mechanical Science and Engineering.
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign. Correspondence to:
Ehsan Saleh <ehsans2@illinois.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

