Revisit the Essence of Distilling Knowledge through Calibration

Wen-Shu Fan 1 2 Su Lu 1 2 Xin-Chun Li 1 2 De-Chuan Zhan 1 2 Le Gan 1 2

Abstract
Knowledge Distillation (KD) has evolved into a
practical technology for transferring knowledge
from a well-performing model (teacher) to a weak
model (student). A counter-intuitive phenomenon
known as capacity mismatch has been identified,
wherein KD performance may not be good when
a better teacher instructs the student. Various preliminary methods have been proposed to alleviate
capacity mismatch, but a unifying explanation for
its cause still lacks. In this paper, we propose
a unifying analytical framework to pinpoint the
core of capacity mismatch based on calibration.
Through extensive analytical experiments, we observe a positive correlation between the calibration of the teacher model and the KD performance
with original KD methods. As this correlation
arises due to the sensitivity of metrics (e.g., KL divergence) to calibration, we recommend employing measurements insensitive to calibration such
as ranking-based loss. Our experiments demonstrate that ranking-based loss can effectively replace KL divergence, aiding large models with
poor calibration to teach better.

Teacher Accuracy

KD Performance

Architecture- based
……

ST

ST

LT

LT
RESKD

TAKD

KD

Teacher Regularization
Small Teacher (ST)

Student

……

KD
Epoch

Large Teacher (LT)

KD Performance

Training Performance

Student

Capacity Mismatch in KD

ESKD

Teacher

Checkpoint

Methods to Alleviate Capacity Mismatch

Both can be Attributed to Calibration

Figure 1. The significance of our work: On the left, a large teacher
achieves high performance but struggles in low KD performance,
known as capacity mismatch. The right part depicts existing solutions, including architecture adjustments and teacher regularization.
Our calibration-based framework provides an explanation for both
capacity mismatch and these solutions.

that increasing the capacity of the teacher adversely impacts
the performance of KD (Cho & Hariharan, 2019; Li et al.,
2021). Researchers attribute this phenomenon to a capacity
mismatch between the teacher’s and student’s models. Some
efforts have focused on narrowing the size gap between both
architectures (Mirzadeh et al., 2020; Zhu & Wang, 2021),
other approaches have aimed to regularize teacher networks
to narrow capacity gap (Cho & Hariharan, 2019; Wang et al.,
2022). Recently, several studies (Li et al., 2022; Zhao et al.,
2022) have aimed to provide a theoretical explanation for
why larger models may not teach better in KD. Although
these studies offer diverse perspectives to explain why a
larger teacher network may not inherently enhance teaching
performance, the explanations remain fragmented and lack
a more comprehensive framework (Li et al., 2023a;b).

1. Introduction
Knowledge Distillation (KD) is a model reuse technique
that involves having a large model (teacher) teach a smaller
model (student). The function of KD is to enhance the performance of smaller models on resource-constrained platforms, such as mobile devices (Sandler et al., 2018; Zhang
et al., 2018; Ma et al., 2018; Tan & Le, 2019).
A prevailing intuition is that a more prominent teacher with
stronger expressive capabilities is more likely to impart
superior knowledge. However, recent studies have revealed

The primary objective of this paper is to explore the reasons
behind the occurrence of capacity mismatch. We hold the
view that teacher’s accuracy does not directly reflect the
performance of the distilled student. Instead, we focus on
calibration of the teacher model. If the probability associated with the predicted class label can reflect its ground truth
correctness likelihood, we say this network is of calibrated
confidence (Guo et al., 2017). The research indicates that
larger teacher models, while achieving better performance,

*
Equal contribution 1 School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing
University, China 2 National Key Laboratory for Novel Software
Technology, Nanjing University, China. Correspondence to: DeChuan Zhan <zhandc@nju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

