Improving Sample Efficiency of Model-Free
Algorithms for Zero-Sum Markov Games

Songtao Feng 1 Ming Yin 2 Yu-Xiang Wang 3 Jing Yang 4 Yingbin Liang 5

1. Introduction

Abstract
The problem of two-player zero-sum Markov
games has recently attracted increasing interests
in theoretical studies of multi-agent reinforcement
learning (RL). In particular, for finite-horizon
episodic Markov decision processes (MDPs), it
has been shown that model-based algorithms can
find an ϵ-optimal Nash Equilibrium (NE) with the
sample complexity of O(H 3 SAB/ϵ2 ), which is
optimal in the dependence of the horizon H and
the number of states S (where A and B denote
the number of actions of the two players, respectively). However, none of the existing model-free
algorithms can achieve such an optimality. In
this work, we propose a model-free stage-based
algorithm and show that it achieves the same
sample complexity as the best model-based algorithm, and hence for the first time demonstrate
that model-free algorithms can enjoy the same
optimality in the H dependence as model-based
algorithms. The main improvement of the dependency on H arises by leveraging the popular variance reduction technique based on the referenceadvantage decomposition previously used only for
single-agent RL. However, such a technique relies
on a critical monotonicity property of the value
function, which does not hold in Markov games
due to the update of the policy via the coarse correlated equilibrium (CCE) oracle. Thus, to extend
such a technique to Markov games, our algorithm
features a key novel design of updating the reference value functions as the pair of optimistic
and pessimistic value functions whose value difference is the smallest in the history in order to
achieve the desired improvement in the sample
efficiency.

Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) commonly
refers to the sequential decision making framework, in
which more than one agent learn to make decisions in an
unknown shared environment to maximize their cumulative
rewards. MARL has achieved great success in a variety of
practical applications, including the game of GO [Silver
et al., 2016; 2017], real-time strategy games involving team
play [Vinyals et al., 2019], autonomous driving [ShalevShwartz et al., 2016], and behavior learning in complex
social scenarios [Baker et al., 2020]. Despite the great
empirical success, one major bottleneck for many RL algorithms is that they require enormous samples. For example,
in many practical MARL scenarios, a large number of samples are often required to achieve human-like performance
due to the necessity of exploration. It is thus important to
understand how to design sample-efficient algorithms.
As a prevalent approach to the MARL, model-based methods use the existing visitation data to estimate the model,
run a planning algorithm on the estimated model to obtain
the policy, and execute the policy in the environment. In
two-player zero-sum Markov games, an extensive series of
studies [Bai & Jin, 2020a; Zhang et al., 2020a; Liu et al.,
2021] have shown that model-based algorithms are provably efficient in MARL, and can achieve minimax-optimal
sample complexity O(H 3 SAB/ϵ2 ) except for the term AB
[Zhang et al., 2020a; Liu et al., 2021], where H denotes
the horizon, S denotes the number of states, and A and
B denote the numbers of actions of the two players, respectively. On the other hand, model-free methods directly
estimate the (action-)value functions at the equilibrium policies instead of estimating the model. However, none of
the existing model-free algorithms can achieve the aforementioned optimality (attained by model-based algorithms)
[Bai et al., 2020; Mao & Başar, 2021; Song et al., 2022; Jin
et al., 2022a; Mao et al., 2022]. Specifically, the number
of episodes required for model-free algorithms scales suboptimally in step H, which naturally motivates the following
open question:

1
The University of Florida 2 Princeton University 3 The University of California, Santa Barbara 4 The Pennsylvania State University 5 The Ohio State University. Correspondence to: Songtao Feng
<sfeng1@ufl.edu>.

Can we design model-free algorithms with the optimal
sample dependence on the time horizon for learning
two-player zero-sum Markov games?

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

