Sampling is as easy as keeping the consistency:
Convergence guarantee for Consistency Models

Junlong Lyu 1 Zhitang Chen 2 Shoubo Feng 3

Abstract

((Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Nichol et al., 2021; Ramesh
et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022)), audio synthesis ((Kong
et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020; Popov et al., 2021)) and video
generation ((Ho et al., 2022a;b)); see, e.g., the recent surveys
((Cao et al., 2022; Croitoru et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2022)).
A key point of diffusion models is the iterative sampling
process which gradually reduces noise from random initial
vectors which provides a flexible trade-off of compute and
sample quality, as using extra compute for more iterations
usually yields samples of better quality. However, compared
to single-step generative models like GANs, VAEs, or normalizing flows, the generation process of diffusion models
requires 10-2000 times more, limiting it to a small number
of real-time applications.

We provide the first convergence guarantee for
the Consistency Models (CMs), a newly emerging
type of one-step generative models that is capable
of generating comparable samples to those sampled from state-of-the-art Diffusion Models. Our
main result is that, under the basic assumptions
on score-matching errors, consistency errors, and
smoothness of the data distribution, CMs can efficiently generate samples in one step with small
W2 error to any real data distribution. Our results (1) hold for L2 -accurate assumptions on both
score and consistency functions (rather than L∞ accurate assumptions); (2) do not require strong
assumptions on the data distribution such as logsobolev conditions; (3) scale polynomially in all
parameters; and (4) match the state-of-the-art convergence guarantee for score-based generative
models. We also show that the Multi-step Consistency Sampling procedure can further reduce
the error comparing to one step sampling, which
supports the original statement of (Song et al.,
2023). Our result can be generalized to arbitrary
bounded data distributions that may be supported
on some low-dimensional sub-manifolds. Our
results further imply TV error guarantees when
making some Langevin-based modifications to
the output distributions.

To overcome this limitation, (Song et al., 2023) proposed
Consistency Models (CMs) that can directly map noise to
data, which can be seen as an extension of SGMs. CMs support fast one-step generation by design, while still allowing
multistep sampling to trade compute for sampling quality.
CMs can be trained either by distilling pre-trained diffusion models or as stand-alone generative models altogether.
(Song et al., 2023) demonstrates its superiority through
extensive experiments outperforming existing distillation
techniques for diffusion models, and when trained in isolation, CMs outperform existing one-step, non-adversarial
generative models on standard benchmarks.
Besides the achievements of CMs in saving the the generation costs as well as keeping the sampling quality, it is
a pressing question of both practical and theoretical concern to understand the mathematical underpinnings that
explain their startling successes. The theoretical guarantee
for SGMs has been extensively studied and well established
(Chen et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2022a;b). Despite the theoretical successes of SGMs, one would wonder if CMs can
inherit the good points from SGMs, as they are inextricably
linked in their underlying mathematical process.

1. Introduction
Score-based generative models (SGMs), also known as diffusion models ((Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Song & Ermon,
2019; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Song et al., 2021; 2020)),
are a family of generative models which achieve unprecedented success across multiple fields like image generation

Providing a convergence analysis for CMs and exploring
the benefits for CMs compared to SGMs is a pressing first
step towards theoretically understanding why CMs work in
practice.

1

Theory Lab, Huawei 2 Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei 3 Noah’s
Ark Lab, Huawei. Correspondence to: Junlong Lyu <lyujunlong@huawei.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

