Decomposing Uncertainty for Large Language Models
through Input Clarification Ensembling

Bairu Hou 1 Yujian Liu 1 Kaizhi Qian 2 Jacob Andreas 3 Shiyu Chang 1 Yang Zhang 2

Abstract

and correct, which may be formalized as the problem of
uncertainty quantification (UQ). Uncertainty quantification
aims to measure the confidence level of neural networks
in their predictions (Gal et al., 2016; Bhatt et al., 2021;
Hüllermeier & Waegeman, 2021). A higher uncertainty
implies the output of LLMs should be clarified, manually
evaluated, or rejected.

Uncertainty decomposition refers to the task of
decomposing the total uncertainty of a predictive
model into aleatoric (data) uncertainty, resulting
from inherent randomness in the data-generating
process, and epistemic (model) uncertainty, resulting from missing information in the model’s
training data. In large language models (LLMs)
specifically, identifying sources of uncertainty is
an important step toward improving reliability,
trustworthiness, and interpretability, but remains
an important open research question. In this paper, we introduce an uncertainty decomposition
framework for LLMs, called input clarification ensembling, which can be applied to any pre-trained
LLM. Our approach generates a set of clarifications for the input, feeds them into an LLM,
and ensembles the corresponding predictions.
We show that, when aleatoric uncertainty arises
from ambiguity or under-specification in LLM
inputs, this approach makes it possible to factor
an (un-clarified) LLM’s predictions into separate
aleatoric and epistemic terms, using a decomposition similar to the one employed by Bayesian
neural networks. Empirical evaluations demonstrate that input clarification ensembling provides
accurate and reliable uncertainty quantification
on several language processing tasks. Code and
data are available at https://github.com/
UCSB-NLP-Chang/llm_uncertainty.

Quantifying LLMs’ total uncertainty has been the focus
of increasing research attention. Existing work observes
that LLMs are relatively well-calibrated, especially when
predictions are obtained by ensembling multiple reasoning
chains (Wang et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2022; Si et al.,
2023) or prompts (Jiang et al., 2023), or when LLMs are
prompted to directly output their confidence levels (Kadavath et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2022; Tian et al., 2023). Many
other methods have been proposed to quantify the uncertainty of LLMs (Lin et al., 2022; Xiao et al., 2022; Kuhn
et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2023; Duan et al., 2023; Huang et al.,
2023; Park & Kim, 2023; Ren et al., 2023). Accurate quantification of the uncertainty can be used for various applications, such as out-of-distribution detection and misclassified
data detection.
However, measuring uncertainty is just the first step towards
understanding uncertainty in LLM predictions. For many
applications, it is necessary to distinguish between different
types of uncertainty and decompose the source into these
types, a problem we refer to as uncertainty decomposition.
As discussed more formally below, it is always possible to
decompose a predictive model’s uncertainty into two components: aleatoric (data) uncertainty and epistemic (model) uncertainty. Epistemic uncertainty arises when correct outputs
are predictable in principle, but models lack the knowledge
required for prediction. For example, the question What
is 2+3? requires the knowledge of algebraic operations.
Without such knowledge, the uncertainty will be high. On
the other hand, aleatoric uncertainty arises from ambiguity
or inherent randomness in the data-generating process itself:
in language processing applications, it may result from ambiguous questions (Min et al., 2020; Guo et al., 2021; Kuhn
et al., 2023) and unclear task instructions (Tamkin et al.,
2022). In particular, an important source of aleatoric uncertainty is the input ambiguity. For example, the answer to

1. Introduction
With the widespread application of large language models
(LLMs), it is becoming crucial to ensure predictions from
LLMs are trustworthy. One critical dimension of trustworthiness is the ability to indicate when generated text is reliable
3

1
UC Santa Barbara 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research
MIT CSAIL. Correspondence to: Bairu Hou <bairu@ucsb.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

