Bayesian Regret Minimization in Offline Bandits

Marek Petrik 1 Guy Tennenholtz 2 Mohammad Ghavamzadeh 3

Abstract

the true model. When provided with good priors, Bayesian
methods offer sufficiently tight bounds to achieve excellent
practical results (Lattimore & Szepesvari, 2018; Gelman
et al., 2014; Vaart, 2000). As such, the strengths of Bayesian
methods complement the scalability and simplicity of the
frequentist algorithms.

We study how to make decisions that minimize
Bayesian regret in offline linear bandits. Prior
work suggests that one must take actions with
maximum lower confidence bound (LCB) on their
reward. We argue that the reliance on LCB is inherently flawed in this setting and propose a new
algorithm that directly minimizes upper bounds
on the Bayesian regret using efficient conic optimization solvers. Our bounds build heavily on
new connections to monetary risk measures. Proving a matching lower bound, we show that our upper bounds are tight, and by minimizing them we
are guaranteed to outperform the LCB approach.
Our numerical results on synthetic domains confirm that our approach is superior to LCB.

Most prior work on Bayesian offline RL and bandits has
adopted a form of pessimism that chooses actions with the
highest lower confidence bounds (LCBs). These LCB-style
algorithms compute a policy or action with the largest expected return (or reward), penalized by its uncertainty. The
uncertainty penalty is computed from credible regions derived from the posterior distribution (Delage & Mannor,
2010; Hong et al., 2023; Brown et al., 2020; Javed et al.,
2021; Lobo et al., 2023), and often gives rise to some form
of robust optimization (Behzadian et al., 2021; Petrik &
Russel, 2019). LCB-style Bayesian algorithms are generally
inspired by the success of this approach in frequentist settings, where LCB is typically computed from concentration
inequalities (Xie et al., 2021; Rashidinejad et al., 2022; Jin
et al., 2022; Ghosh et al., 2022; Cheng et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
The problem of offline bandits is an important special case of
offline reinforcement learning (RL) in which the model consists of a single state and involves no state transitions (Hong
et al., 2023). Offline RL, a challenging research problem
with a rich history, is inspired by the need to make reliable
decisions when learning from a logged dataset (Lange et al.,
2012; Rashidinejad et al., 2022). Practical problems from
recommendations to search to ranking can be modeled as
offline bandits; see, for example, Hong et al. (2023) and
references therein. Moreover, gaining a deeper theoretical
understanding of offline bandits is a vital stepping stone in
understanding the complete offline RL problem.

In this paper, we propose a Bayesian regret minimization algorithm, called BRMOB, that takes a new approach to
Bayesian offline bandits. Instead of adopting an LCB-style
strategy, we directly minimize new regret upper bounds.
To derive these bounds, we reformulate the usual highconfidence objective as a Value-at-Risk (VaR) of the epistemic uncertainty. Then, we bound the VaR by combining
techniques from robust optimization and Chernoff analysis.
Our bounds apply to both Gaussian and sub-Gaussian posteriors over the latent reward parameter. BRMOB minimizes the
regret bounds efficiently using convex conic solvers. Finally,
we also establish a matching lower bound that shows our
upper bounds are tight.

We study the problem of minimizing the Bayesian regret in
the offline linear bandit setting. Bayesian regret differs substantially from its frequentist counterpart. While frequentist
regret assumes a fixed true model and studies algorithms’
response to random datasets, Bayesian regret assumes a
fixed dataset and studies algorithms’ regret as a function of

Compared with prior work in Bayesian offline bandits,
BRMOB achieves tighter theoretical guarantees and better empirical performance. Two main innovations enable these
improvements. First, BRMOB computes randomized policies.
Our numerical results show that randomizing among actions
results in hedging that can significantly reduce regret compared to deterministic policies. In contrast to BRMOB, most
existing algorithms in Bayesian offline bandits (Hong et al.,
2023) and Bayesian offline RL (Delage & Mannor, 2010;

*

Equal contribution 1 University of New Hampshire 2 Google
Research 3 Amazon AGI. Correspondence to: Marek Petrik
<mpetrik@cs.unh.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

