Improving Prototypical Visual Explanations with
Reward Reweighing, Reselection, and Retraining

Aaron J. Li 1 Robin Netzorg 2 Zhihan Cheng 2 Zhuoqin Zhang 2 Bin Yu 2

Abstract

part network (ProtoPNet), which classifies a given image
based on its similarities to prototypical parts of different
classes (Chen et al., 2019). This model aims to combine the
power of deep learning with an intuitive reasoning module
similar to humans.

In recent years, work has gone into developing
deep interpretable methods for image classification that clearly attributes a model’s output to
specific features of the data. One such of these
methods is the prototypical part network (ProtoPNet), which attempts to classify images based on
meaningful parts of the input. While this architecture is able to produce visually interpretable
classifications, it often learns to classify based
on parts of the image that are not semantically
meaningful. To address this problem, we propose the reward reweighing, reselecting, and retraining (R3) post-processing framework, which
performs three additional corrective updates to a
pretrained ProtoPNet in an offline and efficient
manner. The first two steps involve learning a
reward model based on collected human feedback
and then aligning the prototypes with human preferences. The final step is retraining, which realigns the base features and the classifier layer of
the original model with the updated prototypes.
We find that our R3 framework consistently improves both the interpretability and the predictive
accuracy of ProtoPNet and its variants.

While ProtoPNet aims to learn meaningful prototypical concepts, in practice, learned prototypes suffer from learning
spurious features, such as the background of an image, and
inconsistent concepts, such as learning both the head and
the wing of a bird (Bontempelli et al., 2023). Problems like
these are highly detrimental to the transparency and efficacy
of these models, and thus make the models less likely to
be utilized by a human user. Various methods have been
proposed to improve such questionable visual explanations
(Nauta et al., 2021; Barnett et al., 2021; Bontempelli et al.,
2023; Huang et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2023), but none of
them have attempted to explicitly quantify the human user’s
preference for the prototypes.
Thus, in addition to improve the model performance itself,
the main goal of this work is to prompt the model to produce
prototypes that are more aligned with human preferences,
which is a crucial step towards model interpretability (Lage
et al., 2018). These two objectives also correspond to the
predictive accuracy and relevancy within the well-known
predictive,descriptive, relevant (PDR) interpretable machine
learning framework (Murdoch et al., 2019).

1. Introduction

Harvard University 2 University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Aaron J. Li <jiaxun li@g.harvard.edu>, Bin Yu
<binyu@berkeley.edu>.

Towards this end, we propose the reward reweighing, reselecting, and retraining (R3) concept-level debugging framework which improves the original ProtoPNet by using a
learned reward model to improve the quality of the prototypes. Our method doesn’t need to train the model from
scratch, and we call the debugged model R3-ProtoPNet. The
human feedback R3 requires is a small number of rating
data of prototype quality with multiple scales, given by users
when they are shown visualizations of image-prototype pairs.
With limited human feedback data on the Caltech-UCSD
Birds-200-2011 (CUB-200-211) dataset (Welinder et al.,
2010), we are able to train a high-quality reward model that
achieves 90.1% test accuracy when ranking human prefer-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

The source code of this work is available at https://github.
com/aaron-jx-li/R3-ProtoPNet.

With the widespread use of deep learning, making large
models interpretable has become an increasingly important
goal for the machine learning community. As these models
continue to see use in high-stakes situations, practitioners
hoping to justify a decision need to understand how a deep
model makes a prediction, and trust that those explanations
are valuable and correct (Rudin et al., 2021). One such
proposed method for image classification is the prototypical
1

1

