Risk Aware Benchmarking of Large Language Models

Apoorva Nitsure 1 Youssef Mroueh 1 Mattia Rigotti 1 Kristjan Greenewald 1 2 Brian Belgodere 1
Mikhail Yurochkin 1 2 Jiri Navratil 1 Igor Melnyk 1 Jarret Ross 1

Abstract

are benchmarked across diverse tasks and domains (Chang
et al., 2023).

We propose a distributional framework for benchmarking socio-technical risks of foundation models with quantified statistical significance. Our approach hinges on a new statistical relative testing
based on first and second order stochastic dominance of real random variables. We show that
the second order statistics in this test are linked
to mean-risk models commonly used in econometrics and mathematical finance to balance risk
and utility when choosing between alternatives.
Using this framework, we formally develop a riskaware approach for foundation model selection
given guardrails quantified by specified metrics.
Inspired by portfolio optimization and selection
theory in mathematical finance, we define a metrics portfolio for each model as a means to aggregate a collection of metrics, and perform model
selection based on the stochastic dominance of
these portfolios. The statistical significance of
our tests is backed theoretically by an asymptotic
analysis via central limit theorems instantiated in
practice via a bootstrap variance estimate. We use
our framework to compare various large language
models regarding risks related to drifting from
instructions and outputting toxic content.

In order to quantify these risks, (Liang et al., 2022; Wang
et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2023; Sun et al., 2024) proposed
benchmarks of automatic metrics for probing the trustworthiness of LLMs. These metrics include accuracy, robustness, fairness, toxicity of the outputs, etc. Human evaluation
benchmarks can be even more nuanced, and are often employed when tasks surpass the scope of standard metrics.
Notable benchmarks based on human and automatic evaluations include, among others, Chatbot Arena (Zheng et al.,
2023), HELM (Bommasani et al., 2023), MosaicML’s Eval,
Open LLM Leaderboard (Wolf, 2023), and BIG-bench (Srivastava et al., 2022), each catering to specific evaluation
areas such as chatbot performance, knowledge assessment,
and domain-specific challenges. Traditional metrics, however, sometimes do not correlate well with human judgments. Aiming for a better alignment with human judgments, some approaches utilize ChatGPT/GPT-4 for natural
language generation evaluations (Liu et al., 2023; Zhang
et al., 2023; Hada et al., 2023).
A comprehensive evaluation of LLMs requires addressing
the following critical considerations:
1. Interpretability. Evaluation of foundation models
is multi-dimensional in nature and multiple metrics
benchmark the models on different socio-technical dimensions that probe the trustworthiness of their outputs
and their adherence to shared values and ethics. It is
critical to establish an aggregate-level measure to facilitate the interpretation and effective communication
of the evaluation results.

1. Introduction
Foundation models such as large language models (LLMs)
have shown remarkable capabilities redefining the field of artificial intelligence. At the same time, they present pressing
and challenging socio-technical risks regarding the trustworthiness of their outputs and their alignment with human values and ethics (Bommasani et al., 2021). Evaluating LLMs
is therefore a multi-dimensional problem, where those risks

2. Risk Aware Benchmarking. In natural language
(and other) applications, metrics quantify important
guardrails such as model’s toxicity, safety, or robustness. Therefore, a comprehensive evaluation framework must incorporate a risk aware benchmarking.
This entails ranking models based on the assessment of
failure modes and tail statistics1 , providing a nuanced
understanding of potential pitfalls.

1

IBM Research 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab. Correspondence to:
Apoorva Nitsure <Apoorva.Nitsure@ibm.com>, Youssef Mroueh
<mroueh@us.ibm.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1
I.e. understanding and quantifying low-probability high-risk
events.

1

