Probabilistic Constrained Reinforcement Learning with Formal Interpretability

Yanran Wang 1 Qiuchen Qian 1 David Boyle 1

Abstract

et al., 2021; Levine, 2022). This challenge in comprehension poses a significant barrier to real-world RL’s implementation in safety-critical domains, such as advanced manufacturing (Napoleone et al., 2020), autonomous navigation
(Fernandez-Llorca & Gómez, 2023) and financial trading
(McNamara, 2016).

Reinforcement learning can provide effective reasoning for sequential decision-making problems
with variable dynamics. Such reasoning in practical implementation, however, poses a persistent challenge in interpreting the reward function
and the corresponding optimal policy. Consequently, representing sequential decision-making
problems as probabilistic inference can have considerable value, as, in principle, the inference
offers diverse and powerful mathematical tools
to infer the stochastic dynamics whilst suggesting a probabilistic interpretation of policy optimization. In this study, we propose a novel
Adaptive Wasserstein Variational Optimization,
namely AWaVO, to tackle these interpretability
challenges. Our approach uses formal methods
to achieve the interpretability for convergence
guarantee, training transparency, and intrinsic
decision-interpretation. To demonstrate its practicality, we showcase guaranteed interpretability
√
with a global convergence rate Θ(1/ T ) in simulation and in practical quadrotor tasks. In comparison with state-of-the-art benchmarks, including
TRPO-IPO, PCPO, and CRPO, we empirically
verify that AWaVO offers a reasonable trade-off
between high performance and sufficient interpretability.

Key Challenges. The challenges surrounding interpretability in the context of RL can be conceptualized through three
distinct phases: a. Guarantee of convergence ensures
that an RL framework converges towards an optimal policy, e.g., in an asymptotic manner. b. Transparency in
training convergence emphasizes the identification of the
underlying processes that an RL algorithm employs to reach
convergence during its training. An instance is the convergence rate, where, based on a given number of training
iterations, the rate enables the prediction of the expected
level of convergence with a certain degree of confidence.
c. Interpretation of decisions seeks to explain why these
specific sequential decisions were made within a given state
and environment. Specifically, this interpretation involves
clarifying the quantitative impact of latent factors on these
sequential decisions. Moreover, due to legal mandates in
industries, this facet of interpretation is of even greater significance, particularly in ensuring the trustworthiness of
self-driving vehicles (Fernández Llorca & Gómez, 2021;
Fernandez-Llorca & Gómez, 2023), aerospace engineering
(Brat, 2021; Torens et al., 2022), and high-frequency trading
(McNamara, 2016).
One widely adopted approach to achieving model interpretability involves the use of post-hoc explanation methods.
These methods provide retrospective rationales for model
predictions, often through the creation of saliency maps
or exemplars, as discussed in previous research (Lipton,
2018; Kenny et al., 2021). Despite their popularity, these
approaches may produce incomplete or inaccurate explanations (Slack et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2022). In response
to these limitations, recent studies have shifted their focus towards intrinsic interpretability (Rudin, 2019; Kenny
et al., 2022). These methods, however, face challenges
in providing a transparent and comprehensive view in the
decision-making process. While they present decision explanations that are user-friendly, as demonstrated in (Kenny
et al., 2022), corresponding to Key Challenge c, there is no
guaranteed transparency, as highlighted in Key Challenges

1. Introduction
Sequential decision-making problems can be represented
using Reinforcement Learning (RL) or optimal control technologies to efficiently determine optimal policies or control
strategies in the presence of uncertainties (Levine, 2018).
Nevertheless, such reasoning poses an ongoing challenge
to create a convincing interpretation of sequential decisionmaking and its corresponding optimal policies (Devidze
1

Systems and Algorithms Laboratory, Imperial College London,
South Kensington, London. Correspondence to: Yanran Wang
<yanran.wang.20@imperial.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

