DS-Agent: Automated Data Science
by Empowering Large Language Models with Case-Based Reasoning

Siyuan Guo 1 2 3 Cheng Deng 4 Ying Wen 4 Hechang Chen 1 2 Yi Chang 1 2 3 Jun Wang 5

1. Introduction

Abstract

Recently, the remarkable foundational capabilities of large
language models (LLMs) (OpenAI, 2022; 2023) have empowered autonomous language agents to address a wide
spectrum of tasks effectively (Brohan et al., 2023; Kim et al.,
2023; Shen et al., 2023; Boiko et al., 2023; Romera-Paredes
et al., 2023). In this work, we explore an open-ended decision making scenario-automated data science (De Bie et al.,
2022; Mahadi Hassan et al., 2023), which aims at democratizing access to data insights while minimizing the need for
specialized expertise. Specifically, our focus is on automating machine learning (ML), a particularly specialized part,
with the primary goal of comprehending task requirements,
building and training the best-fit ML models, and finally
deploying the trained model.

In this work, we investigate the potential of large
language models (LLMs) based agents to automate data science tasks, with the goal of comprehending task requirements, then building and
training the best-fit machine learning models. Despite their widespread success, existing LLM
agents are hindered by generating unreasonable
experiment plans within this scenario. To this end,
we present DS-Agent, a novel automatic framework that harnesses LLM agent and case-based
reasoning (CBR). In the development stage, DSAgent follows the CBR framework to structure an
automatic iteration pipeline, which can flexibly
capitalize on the expert knowledge from Kaggle,
and facilitate consistent performance improvement through the feedback mechanism. Moreover,
DS-Agent implements a low-resource deployment
stage with a simplified CBR paradigm to adapt
past successful solutions from the development
stage for direct code generation, significantly reducing the demand on foundational capabilities
of LLMs. Empirically, DS-Agent with GPT-4
achieves 100% success rate in the development
stage, while attaining 36% improvement on average one pass rate across alternative LLMs in
the deployment stage. In both stages, DS-Agent
achieves the best rank in performance, costing
$1.60 and $0.13 per run with GPT-4, respectively.
Our data and code are open-sourced at https:
//github.com/guosyjlu/DS-Agent.

Despite the widespread success of LLM agents, a recent
work (Huang et al., 2023) indicates that existing agents, including AutoGPT (Significant Gravitas, 2023), LangChain
(Chase, 2022), and the state-of-the-art ResearchAgent
(Huang et al., 2023), struggle to achieve a high task completion rate within the data science scenario, even when
implemented with the most powerful LLM GPT-4. This is
mainly attributed to LLMs’ deficiency in generating reasonable plans and their hallucination issues. To mitigate this,
a promising solution is to further finetune LLMs to align
with the automated data science scenario (Carta et al., 2023;
Zeng et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023; Christianos et al., 2023).
Nevertheless, collecting sufficient samples for finetuning
poses a significant challenge due to the time costs involved,
particularly because feedback from automated data science
tasks necessitates the completion of code execution. Worse
still, since LLMs typically have billions of parameters, the
back-propagation and optimization during the finetuning
leads to intensive computation resources.

1

School of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University 2 Engineering
Research Center of Knowledge-Driven Human-Machine Intelligence, Jilin University 3 International Center of Future
Science, Jilin University 4 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
5
University College London. Correspondence to: Hechang Chen
<chenhc@jlu.edu.cn>, Yi Chang <yichang@jlu.edu.cn>, Jun
Wang <jun.wang@cs.ucl.ac.uk>.

In this context, Kaggle emerges as a pivotal resource. As the
world’s largest data science competition platform, it boasts a
vast repository of technical reports and codes contributed by
a community of seasoned data scientists. To empower LLM
agents to harness this wealth of expert knowledge efficiently,
we turn to a classical AI problem-solving paradigm–casebased reasoning (CBR) (Kolodner, 1992; Watson & Marir,
1994). The CBR framework operates by retrieving similar

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

