Translation Equivariant Transformer Neural Processes

Matthew Ashman 1 Cristiana Diaconu 1 Junhyuck Kim 1 Lakee Sivaraya 1 Stratis Markou 1 James Requeima 2
Wessel P. Bruinsma 3 Richard E. Turner 1 3

Abstract

models—such ChatGPT (Achiam et al., 2023) and DALL-E
(Betker et al., 2023)—owing to their ability to learn complex
dependencies amongst input data. More generally, transformers can be understood as permutation equivariant set
functions. This abstraction has led to the deployment of
transformers in domains beyond that of sequence modelling,
including particle physics, molecular modelling, climate
science, and Bayesian inference (Lee et al., 2019; Fuchs
et al., 2020; Müller et al., 2021).

The effectiveness of neural processes (NPs)
in modelling posterior prediction maps—the
mapping from data to posterior predictive
distributions—has significantly improved since
their inception. This improvement can be attributed to two principal factors: (1) advancements in the architecture of permutation invariant set functions, which are intrinsic to all NPs;
and (2) leveraging symmetries present in the
true posterior predictive map, which are problem dependent. Transformers are a notable development in permutation invariant set functions,
and their utility within NPs has been demonstrated through the family of models we refer
to as transformer neural processes (TNPs). Despite significant interest in TNPs, little attention
has been given to incorporating symmetries. Notably, the posterior prediction maps for data that
are stationary—a common assumption in spatiotemporal modelling—exhibit translation equivariance. In this paper, we introduce of a new family
of translation equivariant TNPs (TE-TNPs) that
incorporate translation equivariance. Through an
extensive range of experiments on synthetic and
real-world spatio-temporal data, we demonstrate
the effectiveness of TE-TNPs relative to their nontranslation-equivariant counterparts and other NP
baselines.

NPs (Garnelo et al., 2018a;b) are a broad family of metalearning models which learn the mapping from sets of observed datapoints to predictive stochastic processes (Foong
et al., 2020). They are straightforward to train, handle offthe-grid data and missing observations with ease, and can
be easily adapted for different data modalities. This flexibility makes them an attractive choice for a wide variety
of problem domains, including spatio-temporal modelling,
healthcare, and few-shot learning (Jha et al., 2022). Exchangeability in the predictive distribution with respect to
the context set is achieved through the use of permutation
invariant set functions, which, in NPs, map from the sets of
observations to some representation space. Given the utility
of transformers as set functions, it is natural to consider their
use within NPs. This gives rise to TNPs.
The family of TNPs include the attentive NP (ANP) (Kim
et al., 2019), diagonal TNP (TNP-D), autoregressive TNP
(TNP-AR), and non-diagonal TNP (TNP-ND) (Nguyen &
Grover, 2022), and the latent-bottlenecked ANP (LBANP)
(Kim et al., 2019). Despite a significant amount of interest in
TNPs from the research community, there are certain properties that we may wish our model to possess that have not yet
been addressed. In particular, for spatio-temporal problems
the data is often roughly stationary, in which case it is desirable to equip our model with translation equivariance: if the
data are translated in space or time, then the predictions of
our model should be translated correspondingly. Although
translation equivariance has been incorporated into other
families of NP models, such as the convolutional conditional
NP (ConvCNP) (Gordon et al., 2019) and relational CNP
(RCNP) (Huang et al., 2023), it is yet to be incorporated
into the TNP. The key ingredient to achieving this is to
establish effective translation equivariant attention layers
that can be used in place of the standard attention layers

1. Introduction
Transformers have emerged as an immensely effective architecture for natural language processing and computer
vision tasks (Vaswani et al., 2017; Dosovitskiy et al., 2020).
They have become the backbone for many state-of-the-art
1
Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK 2 Vector Institute, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Canada 3 Microsoft Research AI for Science, Cambridge, UK.
Correspondence to: Matthew Ashman <mca39@cam.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

