BLO-SAM: Bi-Level Optimization Based Finetuning of the Segment Anything
Model for Overfitting-Preventing Semantic Segmentation

Li Zhang 1 Youwei Liang 1 Ruiyi Zhang 1 Amirhosein Javadi 1 Pengtao Xie 1

1. Introduction

Abstract
The Segment Anything Model (SAM), a foundation model pretrained on millions of images
and segmentation masks, has significantly advanced semantic segmentation, a fundamental
task in computer vision. Despite its strengths,
SAM encounters two major challenges. Firstly,
it struggles with segmenting specific objects autonomously, as it relies on users to manually input
prompts like points or bounding boxes to identify targeted objects. Secondly, SAM faces challenges in excelling at specific downstream tasks,
like medical imaging, due to a disparity between
the distribution of its pretraining data, which predominantly consists of general-domain images,
and the data used in downstream tasks. Current
solutions to these problems, which involve finetuning SAM, often lead to overfitting, a notable
issue in scenarios with very limited data, like in
medical imaging. To overcome these limitations,
we introduce BLO-SAM, which finetunes SAM
based on bi-level optimization (BLO). Our approach allows for automatic image segmentation
without the need for manual prompts, by optimizing a learnable prompt embedding. Furthermore, it significantly reduces the risk of overfitting by training the model’s weight parameters
and the prompt embedding on two separate subsets of the training dataset, each at a different
level of optimization. We apply BLO-SAM to diverse semantic segmentation tasks in general and
medical domains. The results demonstrate BLOSAM’s superior performance over various stateof-the-art image semantic segmentation methods.
The code of BLO-SAM is available at https:
//github.com/importZL/BLO-SAM.

Semantic segmentation is a critical task in computer vision,
which aims to assign each pixel with a semantic class (object classes such as dog and cat, or scene categories such as
sky and ocean) (Mo et al., 2022). Deep learning has demonstrated great success in advancing the performance of semantic segmentation (Lateef & Ruichek, 2019). This progress
has been further propelled by the emergence of foundation
models (FMs) (Bommasani et al., 2021), a.k.a. large pretrained models, which have demonstrated unprecedented
prevalence across diverse tasks, including vision (Radford
et al., 2021; Moor et al., 2023), language (Brown et al., 2020;
Touvron et al., 2023a;b), and multi-modality (Alayrac et al.,
2022; Wang et al., 2022). Building on a data engine using
11 million image-mask pairs, the Segment Anything Model
(SAM) (Kirillov et al., 2023) emerges as a noteworthy segmentation foundation model, and demonstrates strong capabilities in segmenting diverse natural images. As a novel
promptable segmentation model, SAM distinguishes itself
by yielding desired segmentation masks when provided with
appropriate points or bounding boxes as prompts (detailed
descriptions about SAM can be found in Appendix B).
Despite its strong performance in producing accurate segmentation masks based on prompts, SAM faces a notable
limitation - it cannot autonomously segment specific objects, as it requires points or bounding boxes as manual
prompts1 . For example, if we would like to segment lungs
from a chest X-ray image, we need to provide at least one
point on the lung region or bounding boxes enclosing the
lungs to indicate that the objects aimed to segment are the
lungs. Another significant challenge of applying SAM for
downstream segmentation tasks arises from the distribution
discrepancy between the pretraining data of SAM and the
data in downstream tasks. On tasks where the data distribution deviates from the pretraining data, SAM struggles
to segment the desired objects accurately even with proper
prompts (Mazurowski et al., 2023; He et al., 2023).

1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. Correspondence to: Pengtao Xie <p1xie@ucsd.edu>.

To address the distribution discrepancy issue, Med-SA (Wu
1
Although the SAM paper mentions that SAM can accept textual prompts, only points, bounding boxes, and coarse masks are
supported as prompts in its public codebase.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

