Towards a Better Theoretical Understanding of
Independent Subnetwork Training

Egor Shulgin 1 Peter Richtárik 1

Abstract

ciency and implies sharding the dataset across computing
devices. This allowed very efficient scaling and acceleration
of training moderately sized models by using additional
hardware (Goyal et al., 2018). However, this data parallel
approach can suffer from communication bottleneck, which
has sparked extensive research on distributed optimization
with compressed communication of the parameters between
nodes (Alistarh et al., 2017; Konečný et al., 2016; Seide
et al., 2014).

Modern advancements in large-scale machine
learning would be impossible without the
paradigm of data-parallel distributed computing.
Since distributed computing with large-scale models imparts excessive pressure on communication
channels, significant recent research has been directed toward co-designing communication compression strategies and training algorithms with
the goal of reducing communication costs. While
pure data parallelism allows better data scaling,
it suffers from poor model scaling properties. Indeed, compute nodes are severely limited by memory constraints, preventing further increases in
model size. For this reason, the latest achievements in training giant neural network models
also rely on some form of model parallelism. In
this work, we take a closer theoretical look at
Independent Subnetwork Training (IST), which
is a recently proposed and highly effective technique for solving the aforementioned problems.
We identify fundamental differences between IST
and alternative approaches, such as distributed
methods with compressed communication, and
provide a precise analysis of its optimization performance on a quadratic model.

1.1. The Need for Model Parallelism
Despite its efficiency, data parallelism has some fundamental limitations when it comes to scaling up the model size.
As the dimensions of a model increase, the amount of memory required to store and update the parameters also increases, which becomes problematic due to resource constraints on individual devices. This has led to the development of model parallelism (Dean et al., 2012; Richtárik
& Takáč, 2016), which splits a large model across multiple nodes, with each node responsible for computations of
parts of the model (Farber & Asanovic, 1997; Zhang et al.,
1989). However, naive model parallelism also poses challenges because each node can only update its portion of the
model based on the data it has access to. This creates a need
for very careful management of communication between
devices. Thus, a combination of both data and model parallelism is often necessary to achieve efficient and scalable
training of huge models.

1. Introduction

IST. Independent Subnetwork Training (IST) is a technique
that suggests dividing a neural network into smaller subparts, training them in a distributed parallel fashion, and
then aggregating the results to update the weights of the
whole model. In IST, every subnetwork can operate independently and has fewer parameters than the full model,
which not only reduces the load on computing nodes but
also results in faster synchronization. A generalized analog
of the described method is formalized as an iterative procedure in Algorithm 1 and schematically depicted in Figure 3.
IST paradigm was pioneered by Yuan et al. (2022) for networks with fully connected layers and was later extended to
ResNets (Dun et al., 2022) and Graph architectures (Wolfe
et al., 2023). Previous experimental studies have shown

A huge part of today’s machine learning success is driven by
the possibility of building more and more complex models
and training them on increasingly larger datasets. This rapid
progress has become feasible due to advancements in distributed optimization, which is necessary for proper scaling
when the size of the training data grows (Zinkevich et al.,
2010). In a typical scenario, data parallelism is used for effi1

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology,
Thuwal, Saudi Arabia. Correspondence to: Egor Shulgin
<egor.shulgin@kaust.edu.sa>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

