Exploring Training on Heterogeneous Data with Mixture of Low-rank Adapters

Yuhang Zhou 1 2 Zihua Zhao 1 2 Siyuan Du 3 2 Haolin Li 3 2 Jiangchao Yao 1 2 Ya Zhang 1 2 Yanfeng Wang 1 2

Abstract

ing (Aoki et al., 2022), resulting in the suppression of the
scale advantage of the pre-training dataset and severely impacting the performance of the model (Yuan et al., 2022).
In order to address this issue, it becomes crucial to explore
conflict harmony solutions for heterogeneous data training.

Training a unified model to take multiple targets
into account is a trend towards artificial general
intelligence. However, how to efficiently mitigate
the training conflicts among heterogeneous data
collected from different domains or tasks remains
under-explored. In this study, we explore to leverage Mixture of Low-rank Adapters (MoLA) to
mitigate conflicts in heterogeneous data training,
which requires to jointly train the multiple lowrank adapters and their shared backbone. Specifically, we introduce two variants of MoLA, namely,
MoLA-Grad and MoLA-Router, to respectively
handle the target-aware and target-agnostic scenarios during inference. The former uses task identifiers to assign personalized low-rank adapters
to each task, disentangling task-specific knowledge towards their adapters, thereby mitigating
heterogeneity conflicts. The latter uses a novel
Task-wise Decorrelation (TwD) loss to intervene
the router to learn oriented weight combinations
of adapters to homogeneous tasks, achieving similar effects. We conduct comprehensive experiments to verify the superiority of MoLA over
previous state-of-the-art methods and present indepth analysis on its working mechanism. Source
code is available at: https://github.com/
MediaBrain-SJTU/MoLA

One close area to handle heterogeneous data is multi-task
learning (MTL), which learns multiple tasks simultaneously
in a single model (Caruana, 1993; Crawshaw, 2020; Ruder,
2017; Hu et al., 2024; Fan et al., 2023). Standard MTL
methods can be roughly categorized into two types: hard
parameter sharing (HPS) (Long et al., 2017; Lu et al., 2017)
and soft parameter sharing (SPS) (Misra et al., 2016; Liu
et al., 2019). The former has not constructed task-specific
branches, which results in personalized features easily diminished in a fully shared network. The contradiction of
heterogeneity in the data and the complete sharing manner
in the parameters limits the potential of such methods (Guo
et al., 2020; Tang et al., 2020). The latter introduces additional parameters to enable heterogeneous feature learning
and thus achieves higher performance. However, the current design lacks effective ways to control the model size,
making it hard to extend to more general collaborative training scenarios (Liu et al., 2019; Yao et al., 2023; Fan et al.,
2022b; 2024; Zhang et al., 2024; Feng et al., 2021).
To pace forward the above study, we explore to combat the
heterogeneity by Mixture of Low-rank Adapters (MoLA),
which consists of multiple low-rank adapters (Hu et al.,
2021) attached to a shared backbone. Note that, previous explorations about low-rank adaptation (LoRA) mainly limit
to the parameter-efficient finetuning on a pre-training model,
which differs from our end-to-end aspect, as we target to
jointly train the MoLA with their shared backbone. Besides,
compared to the Mixture of Experts (MoE) structure (Ma
et al., 2018; Tang et al., 2020), MoLA is easier to scale up
friendly due to its low-rank design. Generally, the intuition
that we consider MoLA is two-fold: 1) the low-rank property of MoLA ensures that the increase of parameters is
controllable; 2) the (primary-secondary) rank discrepancy
between backbone and adapters encourages model to disentangle the shared knowledge and complementary knowledge.
The above advantages make MoLA more flexible and capable in dealing with the heterogeneous data training.

1. Introduction
Diverse training data collected from different domains or
tasks is often utilized to train a unified model for pursuing
universal capability (Sellergren et al., 2022; Touvron et al.,
2023). However, due to the presence of heterogeneity, such
unification may suffer from strong conflicts during train1

Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University 2 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 3 Fudan University.
Correspondence to: Jiangchao
Yao <Sunarker@sjtu.edu.cn>, Yanfeng Wang <wangyanfeng622@sjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Inspired by above analysis, we propose its two variants,

1

