Keep the Momentum: Conservation Laws beyond Euclidean Gradient Flows

Sibylle Marcotte 1 Rémi Gribonval 2 Gabriel Peyré 1 3

Abstract

across layers (Saxe et al., 2013; Du et al., 2018; Arora et al.,
2019). They can be leveraged to understand which specific
attributes (e.g. sparsity, low-rank, etc.) the optimization
process tends to select from the potentially infinite pool of
solutions (Saxe et al., 2013; Bah et al., 2022; Arora et al.,
2018; Tarmoun et al., 2021; Min et al., 2021). They can
also be used to prove under restrictive conditions the global
convergence of gradient descent (Du et al., 2018; Arora
et al., 2019; Bah et al., 2022; Chizat & Bach, 2020; Ji &
Telgarsky, 2019; Min et al., 2021). For linear and ReLU
neural networks, the number of conservation laws for a gradient flow dynamic is determined by the dimension of a Lie
algebra and there are no more conservation laws than these
“balancedness” laws (Marcotte et al., 2024).

Conservation laws are well-established in the context of Euclidean gradient flow dynamics, notably
for linear or ReLU neural network training. Yet,
their existence and principles for non-Euclidean
geometries and momentum-based dynamics remain largely unknown. In this paper, we characterize “all” conservation laws in this general
setting. In stark contrast to the case of gradient flows, we prove that the conservation laws
for momentum-based dynamics exhibit temporal
dependence. Additionally, we often observe a
“conservation loss” when transitioning from gradient flow to momentum dynamics. Specifically,
for linear networks, our framework allows us to
identify all momentum conservation laws, which
are less numerous than in the gradient flow case
except in sufficiently over-parameterized regimes.
With ReLU networks, no conservation law remains. This phenomenon also manifests in nonEuclidean metrics, used e.g. for Nonnegative Matrix Factorization (NMF): all conservation laws
can be determined in the gradient flow context,
yet none persists in the momentum case.

Momentum and non-Euclidean metrics. Momentum
and non-Euclidean metrics are two key ideas to accelerate
the convergence of optimization schemes, enable the use
of larger step sizes, and take into account constraints on
the weights. The initial idea dates back to Polyak’s heavy
ball (Polyak, 1964), which introduces a momentum in the
gradient descent algorithm to perform an extrapolation step.
In the continuous-time limit of using small step sizes, this
corresponds to using a second-order differential equation.
Nesterov’s acceleration (Nesterov, 1983) goes one step further by progressively increasing the momentum strength
during the dynamics, reaching a faster convergence rate on
the class of smooth functions. A complementary idea to better capture the curvature of the loss is to use spatially varying
metrics. The simplest cases are data-independent metrics,
which are Hessian of some potential function (Raskutti &
Mukherjee, 2015). This corresponds to the continuous-time
counterpart to the mirror descent algorithm (Nemirovskij
& Yudin, 1983), which is closely related to optimization
schemes using Bregman’s divergences (Bregman, 1967).
Another advantage of these non-Euclidean metrics is that
they can naturally enforce constraints, such as positivity
when using the mirror descent metric associated with the
Shannon entropy potential (Bubeck et al., 2015). Datadependent metrics estimate the local curvature using variations around the idea of natural gradient (Amari, 1998).
They are popular for training neural networks, using efficient low-rank approximations of the metric (Martens, 2010;
Martens & Sutskever, 2012; Martens & Grosse, 2015).

1. Introduction
Discovering functions that remain unchanged during the
optimization of neural networks is important to gain insight
into the properties of trained models. While these laws are
understood in Euclidean gradient flows, they are much less
studied in non-Euclidean metrics or momentum dynamics.
Conservation laws of Euclidean gradient flows are
known and extensively used to study the training of linear and ReLU networks without momentum. These laws
correspond to “balancedness properties” between neurons
1

ENS - PSL Univ. 2 Univ Lyon, EnsL, UCBL, CNRS,
Inria, LIP. 3 CNRS. Correspondence to: Sibylle Marcotte
<sibylle.marcotte@ens.fr>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning,Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

