R E GAL: Refactoring Programs to Discover Generalizable Abstractions

Elias Stengel-Eskin * 1 Archiki Prasad * 1 Mohit Bansal 1

Abstract

Q: A small 9 gon and a
small
Q: A
small 9 gon to the left
of a small 5 gon

While large language models (LLMs) are increasingly being used for program synthesis, they lack
the global view needed to develop useful abstractions; they generally predict programs one
at a time, often repeating the same functionality. Generating redundant code from scratch
is both inefficient and error-prone. To address
this, we propose Refactoring for Generalizable
Abstraction Learning (R E GAL), a gradient-free
method for learning a library of reusable functions via code refactorization, i.e., restructuring
code without changing its execution output. R E GAL learns from a small set of existing programs,
iteratively verifying and refining its abstractions
via execution. We find that the shared function
libraries discovered by R E GAL make programs
easier to predict across diverse domains. On five
datasets – LOGO graphics generation, Date reasoning, TextCraft (a Minecraft-based text-game)
MATH, and TabMWP – both open-source and
proprietary LLMs improve in accuracy when predicting programs with R E GAL functions. For
CodeLlama-13B, R E GAL results in absolute accuracy increases of 11.5% on LOGO, 26.1% on
date understanding, and 8.1% on TextCraft, outperforming GPT-3.5 in two of three domains. Our
analysis reveals R E GAL’s abstractions encapsulate frequently-used subroutines as well as environment dynamics.1

generating programs from scratch
Q: 6-sided snowflake with a
line and small 9 gon as arms
for j in range(6):
forward(4)
#Incorrect reasoning
for i in range(9):
forward(2)
left(40.5)#Math error
left(60.0)

for i in range(9):
forward(2)
left(40.0)
penup();forward(8)
pendown()
for i in range(5):
forward(2)
left(72.0)

ReGAL: Discovers abstractions that
can be reused as helper functions

Q: 6 sided snowflake with a
line and small 9 gon as arms

draw...
fetch
Code
helpers
draw_small_5_gon() Bank draw...
draw_small_9_gon()

for j in range(6):
# Correct reasoning
embed('forward(4)
draw_small_9gon()',#Reuse
locals())
left(60.0)

Figure 1. R E GAL trains by refactoring primitive-only programs
into abstractions that are verified and stored. These abstractions
have two benefits: Reusability: Rewriting the same code multiple
times leads to errors; Abstraction: R E GAL makes prediction easier by allowing matching between the query and the abstractions.

2023), robotics (Ahn et al., 2022; Singh et al., 2023), tool
use (Schick et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2023; Qin et al., 2023),
and complex reasoning (Lyu et al., 2023). In all these cases,
the overall program generation framework is the same: an
individual query is given (along with an instructive prompt)
to an LLM, which produces a program that, when executed,
yields the desired result. Crucially, each program is generated independently (as shown in Fig. 1), with no reference
to other queries or programs, and is composed of primitive
operations, i.e., the domain language’s built-in operations.
This approach has two major and related limitations:
1) Lack of Reusability: Each program is designed as a
one-off script to solve a given example but is not reused
by other examples. This increases redundancy and can result in unnecessary errors: for two examples requiring a
shared subroutine, the model might correctly generate the
subroutine in one example and make a mistake in the other.
For instance, in Fig. 1 (top) although the “primitive-only”
model had previously generated nonagons, it draws a polygon with an incorrect angle. R E GAL’s draw small 9gon()
function, on the other hand, executes correctly.

1. Introduction
An increasing range of tasks can be tackled by using a large
language model (LLM) to generate an executable program
for a given query; this paradigm has been applied in computer vision (Surı́s et al., 2023; Gupta et al., 2018; Cho et al.,

2) Lack of Abstraction: Shared abstractions can improve
accuracy by making skills more accessible to the model.
When generating from primitives alone, the model must
interpret the query and generate the correct mapping from
the query to multiple primitives, requiring more reasoning.
The model’s overall task becomes easier when it uses interpretable abstractions, as it is choosing a function name

*
Equal contribution 1 UNC Chapel Hill. Correspondence to:
Elias Stengel-Eskin <esteng@cs.unc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
Code:
https://github.com/esteng/regal_
program_learning.

1

