Automated Evaluation of Retrieval-Augmented
Language Models with Task-Specific Exam Generation

Gauthier Guinet 1 Behrooz Omidvar-Tehrani 1 Anoop Deoras 1 Laurent Callot 1

Abstract
We propose a new method to measure the taskspecific accuracy of Retrieval-Augmented Large
Language Models (RAG). Evaluation is performed by scoring the RAG on an automaticallygenerated synthetic exam composed of multiple
choice questions based on the corpus of documents associated with the task. Our method is
an automated, cost-efficient, interpretable, and robust strategy to select the optimal components for
a RAG system. We leverage Item Response Theory (IRT) to estimate the quality of an exam and
its informativeness on task-specific accuracy. IRT
also provides a natural way to iteratively improve
the exam by eliminating the exam questions that
are not sufficiently informative about a model’s
ability. We demonstrate our approach on four new
open-ended Question-Answering tasks based on
Arxiv abstracts, StackExchange questions, AWS
DevOps troubleshooting guides, and SEC filings.
In addition, our experiments reveal more general
insights into factors impacting RAG performance
like size, retrieval mechanism, prompting and
fine-tuning. Most notably, our findings show that
choosing the right retrieval algorithms often leads
to bigger performance gains than simply using a
larger language model.

Figure 1. Granular results of our exam evaluation for the task of
AWS DevOps troubleshooting. Accuracy is reported for different
retrieval approaches and retriever sizes, on a % scale. Labels
on the diameter shows the troubleshooting categories, i.e., AWS
resources. Colors correspond to different retrieval approaches
(Oracle, DPRV2, MultiQA, ClosedBook, as discussed in
Section 4.2) and patterns correspond to the base LLM size (7B,
13B, and 70B). For instance, we observe that a small model such
as Mistral-7B with MultiQA embeddings has an accuracy around
80% for the AWS resource “Relational Database Service” (RDS).

No single metric can adequately capture every aspects of it.
In this work, we propose an LLM-driven exam-based evaluation methodology to measure the accuracy of RetrievalAugmented LLMs (RAG) on a given task. Our method
is fully automated and does not require annotated groundtruth dataset. Our metrics focus on factual accuracy, i.e.,
the ability to retrieve and leverage the right information to
correctly answer a user query. In addition to enabling users
to select the optimal combination of components of a RAG
system for their retrieval tasks, our methodology reveals
more general insights into RAG performance factors like
size, retrieval mechanism, prompting, and fine-tuning.

1. Introduction
Evaluating Large Language Models (LLM) beyond a set of
limited tasks is notoriously challenging. General capabilities of LLMs conveyed through public benchmarks are not
necessarily related to performance on narrow and highly specific customer tasks, even more so when such tasks involve
specific domain knowledge corpus. Evaluation metrics aim
at capturing different aspects of the performance of a LLM.
1
AWS AI Labs. Correspondence to: Gauthier Guinet
<guinetgg@amazon.com>.

Our first contribution is a quantitative exam-based evaluation strategy which is fully automated, guaranteeing scalability in contrast to conventional human-in-the-loop evaluations, while concurrently mitigating expenses linked with
expert or annotator engagement. Exams are generated by a

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

