Pricing with Contextual Elasticity and Heteroscedastic Valuation

Jianyu Xu 1 Yu-Xiang Wang 2

Abstract

generalize from one product to another in order to successfully price a previously-unseen product. A formal problem
setup is described below:

We study an online contextual dynamic pricing problem, where customers decide whether
to purchase a product based on its features and
price. We introduce a novel approach to modeling a customer’s expected demand by incorporating feature-based price elasticity, which can be
equivalently represented as a valuation with heteroscedastic noise. To solve the problem, we propose a computationally efficient algorithm called
"Pricing
√ with Perturbation (PwP)", which enjoys
an O( dT log T ) regret while allowing arbitrary
adversarial input context sequences. √
We also
prove a matching lower bound at Ω( dT ) to
show the optimality regarding d and T (up to
log T factors). Our results shed light on the relationship between contextual elasticity and heteroscedastic valuation, providing insights for effective and practical pricing strategies.

Contextual pricing. For t = 1, 2, ..., T :
1. A product occurs, described by a context xt ∈ Rd .
2. The seller (we) proposes a price pt ≥ 0.
3. The customer reveals a demand 0 ≤ Dt ≤ 1.
4. The seller gets a reward rt = pt · Dt .

Here T is the time horizon, and the (random) demand Dt is
drawn from a distribution determined by context (or feature)
xt and price pt . The sequence of contexts {xt } can be
either independently and identically distributed (iids) or
chosen arbitrarily by an adversary. The seller’s goal is to
minimize the cumulative regret against the sequence of
optimal prices.
Existing works on contextual pricing usually assumes linearity on the demand, but they fall into two camps. On
the one hand, the "linear demand" camp (Qiang & Bayati,
2016; Ban & Keskin, 2021; Bu et al., 2022) assumes the
demand Dt as a (generalized) linear model. A typical model
is Dt = λ(αpt + xTt β) + ϵt . Here α < 0 is a parameter
closely related to the price elasticity. We will rigorously
define a price elasticity in Appendix A.1 according to Parkin
et al. (2002), where we also show that α is the coefficient
of elasticity. Besides of α, other parameters like β ∈ Rd
captures the base demand of products with feature xt , ϵt is
a zero-mean demand noise, and λ is a known monotonically
increasing link function. With this model, we have a noisy
observation on the expected demand, which is reasonable
as the same product is offered many times in period t. On
the other hand, the "linear valuation" camp (Cohen et al.,
2020; Javanmard & Nazerzadeh, 2019; Xu & Wang, 2021)
models a buyer’s valuation yt as linear and assumes a binary demand Dt = 1[pt ≤ yt ]. All three works listed above
∗
assume a linear-and-noisy model with yt = x⊤
t θ + Nt ,
∗
d
where θ ∈ R is an unknown linear parameter that captures common valuations and Nt is an idiosyncratic noise
assumed to be iid.

1. Introduction
Contextual pricing, a.k.a., Feature-based dynamic pricing,
considers the problem of setting prices for a sequence of
highly specialized or individualized products. With the
growth of e-commerce and the increasing popularity of online retailers as well as customers, there has been a growing
interest in this area (see, e.g., Amin et al., 2014; Qiang &
Bayati, 2016; Javanmard & Nazerzadeh, 2019; Shah et al.,
2019; Cohen et al., 2020; Xu & Wang, 2021; Bu et al.,
2022).
Formulated as a learning problem, the seller has no prior
knowledge of ideal prices but is expected to learn on the
fly by exploring different prices and adjusting their pricing strategy after collecting every demand feedback from
customers. Different from non-contextual dynamic pricing
(Kleinberg & Leighton, 2003) where identical products are
sold repeatedly, a contextual pricing agent is expected to
1

University of California, Santa Barbara 2 University of
California, San Diego.
Correspondence to: Jianyu Xu
<xu_jy15@ucsb.edu>, Yu-Xiang Wang <yuxiangw@ucsd.edu>.

Interestingly, the seemingly different modeling principles
are closely connected to each other. In the "linear valuation"
camp, notice that a customer’s probability of "buying" a
product equals E[Dt ], which is further given by

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

