Hybrid Inverse Reinforcement Learning

Juntao Ren * 1 Gokul Swamy * 2 Zhiwei Steven Wu 2 J. Andrew Bagnell 3 2 Sanjiban Choudhury 1

Abstract

Classification

The inverse reinforcement learning approach to
imitation learning is a double-edged sword. On
the one hand, it can enable learning from a smaller
number of expert demonstrations with more robustness to error compounding than behavioral
cloning approaches. On the other hand, it requires
that the learner repeatedly solve a computationally expensive reinforcement learning (RL) problem. Often, much of this computation is wasted
searching over policies very dissimilar to the expert’s. In this work, we propose using hybrid
RL – training on a mixture of online and expert
data – to curtail unnecessary exploration. Intuitively, the expert data focuses the learner on good
states during training, which reduces the amount
of exploration required to compute a strong policy. Notably, such an approach doesn’t need the
ability to reset the learner to arbitrary states in
the environment, a requirement of prior work in
efficient inverse RL. More formally, we derive a
reduction from inverse RL to expert-competitive
RL (rather than globally optimal RL) that allows
us to dramatically reduce interaction during the
inner policy search loop while maintaining the
benefits of the IRL approach. This allows us to
derive both model-free and model-based hybrid
inverse RL algorithms with strong policy performance guarantees. Empirically, we find that our
approaches are significantly more sample efficient
than standard inverse RL and several other baselines on a suite of continuous control tasks.

Inverse RL

Hybrid
Inverse RL

Online RL

Hybrid RL

(

(

)

(

)

)

Figure 1: Standard inverse reinforcement algorithms (left)
require repeatedly solving a reinforcement learning problem
in their inner loop. Thus, the learner is potentially forced
to explore the entire state space to find any reward. We
introduce hybrid inverse reinforcement learning, where the
learner trains on a mixture of its own and the expert’s data
during the policy search inner loop. This reduces the exploration burden on the learner by providing positive examples.
We provide model-free and model-based algorithms that
are both significantly more sample efficient than standard
inverse RL approaches on continuous control tasks.

(e.g. inverse reinforcement learning (Ziebart et al., 2008a),
DAgger (Ross et al., 2011)). Offline approaches to imitation aren’t robust to the covariate shift between the expert’s
state distribution and the learner’s induced state distribution; therefore, they suffer from compounding errors which
results in poor test-time performance (Ross et al., 2011;
Swamy et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021). Instead, interactive
algorithms allow the the learner to observe the consequences
of their actions and therefore learn to recover from their own
mistakes. This is the fundamental reason why interactive
approaches like inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) continue to provide state-of-the-art performance for challenging
tasks like autonomous driving (Bronstein et al., 2022; Igl
et al., 2022; Vinitsky et al., 2022) and underlie large-scale
services like Google Maps (Barnes et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
Broadly speaking, we can break down the approaches to
imitation learning (IL) into offline algorithms (e.g. behavioral cloning, (Pomerleau, 1988)) and interactive algorithms
*

Equal contribution 1 Cornell University 2 Carnegie Mellon University 3 Aurora Innovation. Correspondence to: Gokul Swamy
<gswamy@cmu.edu>.

However, inverse reinforcement learning reduces the problem of imitation to repeatedly solving a reinforcement learning problem, and thus the agent has to potentially pay the
exponential interaction complexity of reinforcement learn-

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

