Principled Gradient-Based MCMC for Conditional Sampling of Text

Li Du 1 Afra Amini 2 Lucas Torroba Hennigen 3 Xinyan Velocity Yu 4
Holden Lee 1 Jason Eisner 1 Ryan Cotterell 2

Abstract

for reasons we discuss in §3.1. To address this problem, the
approaches above exploit the fact that the original language
model and the auxiliary energy terms are differentiable with
respect to the continuous embeddings of the input tokens,
even though the tokens themselves are discrete. The resulting first-order gradient information can be incorporated into
an MCMC procedure, potentially accelerating convergence.

We consider the problem of sampling text from
an energy-based model. This arises, for example,
when sampling text from a neural language model
subject to soft constraints. Although the target
distribution is discrete, the internal computations
of the energy function (given by the language
model) are differentiable, so one would like to exploit gradient information within a method such
as MCMC. Alas, all previous attempts to generalize gradient-based MCMC to text sampling fail to
sample correctly from the target distribution. We
propose a solution, along with variants, and study
its theoretical properties. Through experiments on
various forms of text generation, we demonstrate
that our unbiased samplers are able to generate
more fluent text while better adhering to the control objectives. The same methods could be used
to sample from discrete energy-based models unrelated to text.

As one of the most successful gradient-based samplers,
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) and its variants (Duane
et al., 1987; Neal, 1993; Hoffman and Gelman, 2014)
have been proven to be highly effective in sampling from
high-dimensional, continuous distributions, making them
the default samplers of many probabilistic programming languages (Carpenter et al., 2017; Bingham et al., 2018; Phan
et al., 2019). Adapting HMC to a discrete setting, Amini
et al. (2023) recently proposed a promising sampler for
controlled text generation. Alternatively, Langevin dynamics (Grenander and Miller, 1994; Welling and Teh, 2011),
another gradient-based sampler, has been a more popular
candidate to adapt into NLP models due to its simplicity.1
As a result, Qin et al. (2022) and Kumar et al. (2022)
proposed text samplers inspired by Langevin dynamics.

1. Introduction

Unfortunately, a closer look reveals that none of these
gradient-based Markov chains for text generation provably
converge to their intended distributions in the limit, as we
theoretically and empirically show in §3.3. While these previous papers did achieve good results on downstream tasks,
this observation raises the question: What would happen if
we sampled from the target distribution correctly?

Recent papers have performed controlled text generation
from pretrained language models by formulating energybased models over text and applying Markov Chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC) algorithms (Qin et al., 2022; Kumar et al.,
2022; Mireshghallah et al., 2022; Amini et al., 2023).
Energy-based language modeling is versatile, allowing a
generic pretrained language model to be modified by arbitrary energy terms that express desired traits for the output
text. The normalization constant is intractable to compute
(Lin et al., 2021), as for other energy-based models (EBMs),
but one can use MCMC algorithms to draw samples.

In this work, we tackle this question by proposing several
tractable gradient-based samplers that are faithful to the target energy-based text distribution, meaning that they have
the correct limit distribution. We derive two novel samplers,
based on Langevin dynamics and Gibbs sampling, respectively, and then develop their adaptive and hybrid variants.
When applicable, we also prove convergence and mixing
properties of our proposed samplers.

However, simple approaches to discrete MCMC, such as
Gibbs sampling, tend to scale poorly (Deng et al., 2020),
1

Johns Hopkins University 2 ETH Zürich 3 MIT CSAIL
University of Southern California. Correspondence to: Li Du
<leodu@cs.jhu.edu>.

Faithful samplers are not guaranteed to outperform unfaith-

4

1

In fact, it is well-known that Langevin dynamics can be seen
as HMC where the Hamiltonian dynamics are simulated for a
single step. See, e.g., Neal (1993) or Kennedy (1990).

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

