Mitigating Privacy Risk in Membership Inference by Convex-Concave Loss

Zhenlong Liu 1 Lei Feng 2 Huiping Zhuang 3 Xiaofeng Cao 4 Hongxin Wei 1

Abstract

health care (Paul et al., 2021), financial service (Mahalle
et al., 2018), and DNA sequence analysis (Arshad et al.,
2021). This gives rise to the importance of designing robust
algorithms to secure DNNs from MIAs.

Machine learning models are susceptible to membership inference attacks (MIAs), which aim to
infer whether a sample is in the training set. Existing work utilizes gradient ascent to enlarge the
loss variance of training data, alleviating the privacy risk. However, optimizing toward a reverse
direction may cause the model parameters to oscillate near local minima, leading to instability
and suboptimal performance. In this work, we
propose a novel method – Convex-Concave Loss
(CCL), which enables a high variance of training loss distribution by gradient descent. Our
method is motivated by the theoretical analysis
that convex losses tend to decrease the loss variance during training. Thus, our key idea behind
CCL is to reduce the convexity of loss functions
with a concave term. Trained with CCL, neural networks produce losses with high variance
for training data, reinforcing the defense against
MIAs. Extensive experiments demonstrate the
superiority of CCL, achieving a state-of-the-art
balance in the privacy-utility trade-off.

In the literature, sample loss has been a representative metric of membership inference attacks. In particular, a large
gap in the expected loss values on the member (training)
and non-member data is proved to be sufficient for attacks
(Yeom et al., 2018). Consequently, defenders can mitigate the privacy risk by reducing distinguishability between
the member and non-member loss distributions. Recently,
RelaxLoss (Chen et al., 2022) utilizes gradient ascent to
promote a high variance of training loss distribution, which
is shown to strengthen the defense against MIAs. However, optimizing toward a reverse direction may cause the
model parameters to oscillate near local minima, leading
to instability and suboptimal performance. This motivates
our method, which enables us to enlarge the training loss
variance via gradient descent.
In this work, we propose a novel and generalized method –
Convex-Concave Loss (CCL), by integrating a concave term
into convex losses. Our method is motivated by a theoretical
analysis of the connection between the convexity of loss
functions and the resulting loss variance. We demonstrate
that convex loss functions are optimized to encourage a
small loss variance (see Theorem 3.1), being vulnerable to
membership inference attacks. On the contrary, concave
functions can increase the loss variance during gradient
descent, which are expected to mitigate privacy risk.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved tremendous
performance for various learning tasks, with sufficient capacity (Zhang et al., 2021). The powerful capability enables
models to memorize information of training data (Zhang
et al., 2017), therefore being highly susceptible to membership inference attacks (MIAs) (Shokri et al., 2017). In
particular, membership inference attacks are designed to
infer whether a sample is included in the training set of a
target model. Such attacks can increase the risks of violating privacy regulations, making it challenging to apply
machine learning techniques in sensitive applications, like

Thus, our key idea behind CCL is to decrease the convexity of loss functions for a large loss variance. This can be
achieved by incorporating a concave term into the original
convex losses, e.g., cross-entropy loss. In effect, the resulting loss weakens the convexity of the original convex loss at
the late stage of training and can converge to the optimum
of the convex loss. Trained with CCL, the network tends to
produce losses with high variance for training data, reducing
the differentiability of sample losses between the member
and non-member data.

1
Southern University of Science and Technology 2 Singapore
University of Technology and Design 3 South China University of
Technology 4 Jilin University. Correspondence to: Hongxin Wei
<weihx@sustech.edu.cn>.

To verify the effectiveness of our method, we conduct extensive evaluations on five datasets, including Texas100
(Texas Department of State Health Services, 2006), Purchase100 (Kaggle, 2014), CIFAR-10/100 (Krizhevsky et al.,

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

