Rewards-in-Context: Multi-objective Alignment of Foundation Models with
Dynamic Preference Adjustment

Rui Yang 1 2 * Xiaoman Pan 1 * Feng Luo 1 * Shuang Qiu 2 * Han Zhong 3 Dong Yu 1 Jianshu Chen 1

Abstract

for specific downstream tasks through supervised learning.
However, this conventional approach may not align optimally with human preferences and values (Sun et al., 2023).
Recent advancements (Ziegler et al., 2019; Stiennon et al.,
2020; Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022; OpenAI, 2023)
have demonstrated success in aligning language models
with reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF).

We consider the problem of multi-objective alignment of foundation models with human preferences, which is a critical step towards helpful
and harmless AI systems. However, it is generally costly and unstable to fine-tune large foundation models using reinforcement learning (RL),
and the multi-dimensionality, heterogeneity, and
conflicting nature of human preferences further
complicate the alignment process. In this paper,
we introduce Rewards-in-Context (RiC), which
conditions the response of a foundation model
on multiple rewards in its prompt context and applies supervised fine-tuning for alignment. The
salient features of RiC are simplicity and adaptivity, as it only requires supervised fine-tuning
of a single foundation model and supports dynamic adjustment for user preferences during inference time. Inspired by the analytical solution
of an abstracted convex optimization problem,
our dynamic inference-time adjustment method
approaches the Pareto-optimal solution for multiple objectives. Empirical evidence demonstrates
the efficacy of our method in aligning both Large
Language Models (LLMs) and diffusion models
to accommodate diverse rewards with only around
10% GPU hours compared with multi-objective
RL baseline.

In RLHF, a reward model is often used to provide supervision for reinforcement learning (Ouyang et al., 2022).
However, human preferences are inherently heterogeneous
and multi-dimensional, and can often be in conflict with
one another, such as the dichotomy between harmlessness
and helpfulness (Bai et al., 2022; Rame et al., 2023). Consequently, fine-tuning large language models with a single
reward model may not adequately align with diverse human
preferences. This highlights the necessity for further exploration into Multi-Objective RLHF (MORLHF), which
could potentially offer a more comprehensive solution to
accommodate diverse human preferences (Vamplew et al.,
2018; Rame et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2023).
A plausible approach to MORLHF is linear scalarization (Li
et al., 2020b) that uses RLHF to optimize a linearly weighed
reward with human preference as the weights. Nevertheless, this solution necessitates substantial computational
resources due to the vastness of the user preference space
(Rame et al., 2023), even when considering a quantized preference space. Recent research (Rame et al., 2023) proposes
to use linearly interpolated LLM weights, thereby reducing
the number of model training from M (the size of preference
space) to N (the number of reward models), where M typically represents the number of discretized points within the
N -simplex. Despite this reduction, the approach remains
resource-intensive due to the high cost and instability of a
single RLHF process (Hu et al., 2023; Rafailov et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
Foundational models (Radford et al., 2018; Devlin et al.,
2018; Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020; Kaplan et al.,
2020; Caron et al., 2021; Nichol et al., 2021) are predominantly pretrained on vast, internet-scale data using selfsupervised learning techniques, and subsequently fine-tuned

In this paper, we aim to tackle the challenge of the multiobjective alignment problem by introducing Rewards-inContext (RiC), a highly scalable algorithm for aligning
large models1 . RiC restructures the multi-objective alignment problem into three stages: (i) an offline training stage
that utilizes multi-reward conditional supervised fine-tuning

*
Equal contribution 1 Tencent AI Lab 2 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 3 Peking University. Correspondence to: Rui Yang <yangrui.thu2015@gmail.com>, Jianshu
Chen <chenjianshu@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

1

Code is available at https://github.com/YangRui2015/RiC

