Low-Rank Bandits via Tight Two-to-Infinity Singular Subspace Recovery

Yassir Jedra * 1 William Réveillard * 2 Stefan Stojanovic * 2 Alexandre Proutiere 2

Abstract

analysis of the exploration-exploitation trade-off in sequential decision making and have been used in a variety of
applications ranging from recommendation systems to clinical trials. When designing bandit algorithms, it is crucial
to leverage as much as possible all information initially
available to the learner. This information often comes as
structural properties satisfied by the mapping of the arms
to their rewards, see e.g. linear (Dani et al., 2008), convex
(Agarwal et al., 2011), or unimodal (Combes & Proutiere,
2014). In this paper, we investigate bandit problems where
the arm-to-reward mapping exhibits a low-rank structure.
Such a structure has received a lot of attention recently (Kveton et al., 2017; Jun et al., 2019; Jang et al., 2021; Bayati
et al., 2022; Kang et al., 2022; Pal & Jain, 2022; Lee et al.,
2023). Despite these efforts, it remains unclear how one
may optimally exploit low-rank structures and how much
gains in terms of performance they bring. We make progress
towards answering these questions.

We study contextual bandits with low-rank structure where, in each round, if the (context, arm)
pair (i, j) ∈ [m] × [n] is selected, the learner
observes a noisy sample of the (i, j)-th entry of
an unknown low-rank reward matrix. Successive
contexts are generated randomly in an i.i.d. manner and are revealed to the learner. For such bandits, we present efficient algorithms for policy
evaluation, best policy identification and regret
minimization. For policy evaluation and best policy identification, we show that our algorithms are
nearly minimax optimal. For instance, the number
of samples required to return an ε-optimal policy
with probability at least 1 − δ typically1 scales
as m+n
ε2 log(1/δ). Our regret minimization algorithm enjoys minimax √
guarantees typically1 scal5/4
3/4
ing as r (m + n)
T , which improves over
existing algorithms. All the proposed algorithms
consist of two phases: they first leverage spectral
methods to estimate the left and right singular subspaces of the low-rank reward matrix. We show
that these estimates enjoy tight error guarantees in
the two-to-infinity norm. This in turn allows us to
reformulate our problems as a misspecified linear
bandit problem with dimension roughly r(m + n)
and misspecification controlled by the subspace
recovery error, as well as to design the second
phase of our algorithms efficiently.

We consider the following contextual low-rank bandit model,
similar to that studied in (Bayati et al., 2022; Pal & Jain,
2022; Lee et al., 2023). In each round, the learner first
observes a random context i ∈ [m], and then selects an arm
j ∈ [n]. When the pair (i, j) is selected, the learner observes
a noisy sample of the (i, j)-th entry of a rank-r matrix M ,
where r is typically assumed to be much smaller than m
and n. For this low-rank bandit model, we address three
learning tasks: policy evaluation, best policy identification,
and regret minimization. Our contributions are as follows:
(a) We propose a generic method to design two-phase algorithms for low-rank bandit problems. In the first phase,
we estimate the singular subspaces of the reward matrix M
using simple spectral methods. We establish tight upper
bounds on the subspace recovery error in the two-to-infinity
norm. In turn, these new error bounds allow us to reformulate our low-rank bandits as a misspecified contextual linear
bandit problem with dimension r(m+n)−r2 and controlled
misspecification. In the second phase, the algorithm solves
the resulting misspecified contextual linear bandit problem.
The main contribution of this paper is to demonstrate that
the above method, based on tight subspace recovery guarantees in the two-to-infinity norm, yields computationally
efficient algorithms that either are nearly minimax optimal
or outperform existing algorithms for the three considered
learning tasks.

1. Introduction
Stochastic Multi-Armed Bandits (MABs) (Lai & Robbins,
1985) provide an efficient and natural framework for the
*

Equal contribution 1 Laboratory for Information and Decision
Systems, MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA 2 Division of Decision and
Control Systems, KTH, Stockholm, Sweden. Correspondence to:
Yassir, Jedra <jedra@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
By ”typically” here, we mean when the matrix M and the
(context, arm) distribution are homogeneous (refer to Definition
3.1 for details). Note that under homogeneity of M , m = Θ(n).

1

