Graph-enhanced Large Language Models in Asynchronous Plan Reasoning

Fangru Lin 1 Emanuele La Malfa 1 2 Valentin Hofmann 1 3 4 Elle Michelle Yang 1
Anthony G. Cohn 2 5 Janet B. Pierrehumbert 1

Abstract
Planning is a fundamental property of human intelligence. Reasoning about asynchronous plans
is challenging since it requires sequential and parallel planning to optimize time costs. Can large
language models (LLMs) succeed at this task?
Here, we present the first large-scale study investigating this question. We find that a representative set of closed and open-source LLMs,
including GPT-4 and LLaMA-2, behave poorly
when not supplied with illustrations about the
task-solving process in our benchmark AsyncHow. We propose a novel technique called Plan
Like a Graph (PLaG) that combines graphs with
natural language prompts and achieves state-ofthe-art results. We show that although PLaG
can boost model performance, LLMs still suffer from drastic degradation when task complexity increases, highlighting the limits of utilizing LLMs for simulating digital devices. We
see our study as an exciting step towards using
LLMs as efficient autonomous agents. Our code
and data are available at https://github.com/
fangru-lin/graph-llm-asynchow-plan.

Figure 1. A planning task (top) can be executed sequentially, in
parallel, or asynchronously. Blue arrows denote action ordering
constraints. Although complete parallelism is logically the most
time-efficient strategy, it results in invalid reasoning steps (e.g.
‘Baking’ cannot happen at the same time with ‘Rolling the
dough’); at the same time, sequentially executing each task negatively affects efficiency. Given infinite resources, an optimal
(asynchronous) plan should parallelize actions wherever possible.

1. Introduction
As large language models (LLMs) show unprecedented capabilities, claims surge that artificial general intelligence is
close (Bubeck et al., 2023). Planning is an important property of human intelligence (Sternberg, 1984; Colom et al.,
2010), and it is also vital in many downstream tasks such as
developing autonomous robotic agents (Huang et al., 2022a;
Shinn et al., 2023). While symbolic processors have been
historically used for handling plan design (Fikes & Nilsson,
1971; McDermott, 2000), LLMs have recently emerged as a
relevant complementary approach (Ahn et al., 2022; Dagan

et al., 2023; Song et al., 2023). Although LLMs generate reasonable elementary planning steps when informed
with appropriate guidance (Huang et al., 2022b; Yuan et al.,
2023), they cannot combine those units effectively and develop optimal plans without external processors (Silver et al.,
2022; Dagan et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023). This might be
an issue if LLMs are deployed for related tasks.
This work explores the reasoning ability of LLMs in naturalistic asynchronous planning, which we define as complex
planning tasks involving both sequential and parallel actions.
Given a set of steps for a task, the time required for each
step, and step ordering constraints, we ask whether LLMs
can compute the shortest possible time needed for an optimal plan for the task (Figure 1). We note that asynchronous
planning problems involve (i) time summation (correctly
adding time durations), (ii) time comparison (correctly mak-

1

University of Oxford 2 Alan Turing Institute 3 Allen Institute
for AI 4 LMU Munich 5 University of Leeds. Correspondence to:
Fangru Lin <fangru.lin@ling-phil.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

