Zero-Sum Positional Differential Games as a Framework for
Robust Reinforcement Learning: Deep Q-Learning Approach

Anton Plaksin 1 Vitaly Kalev 2

Abstract

(see also Robust Adversarial RL (Pinto et al., 2017)), in
which such uncertainty or disturbances are interpreted as
actions of a second adversarial agent, and thus the problem is reduced to seeking the agents’ policies robust to any
opponent’s actions.

Robust Reinforcement Learning (RRL) is
a promising Reinforcement Learning (RL)
paradigm aimed at training robust to uncertainty
or disturbances models, making them more efficient for real-world applications. Following this
paradigm, uncertainty or disturbances are interpreted as actions of a second adversarial agent,
and thus, the problem is reduced to seeking the
agents’ policies robust to any opponent’s actions.
This paper is the first to propose considering the
RRL problems within the positional differential
game theory, which helps us to obtain theoretically justified intuition to develop a centralized Qlearning approach. Namely, we prove that under
Isaacs’s condition (sufficiently general for realworld dynamical systems), the same Q-function
can be utilized as an approximate solution of both
minimax and maximin Bellman equations. Based
on these results, we present the Isaacs Deep QNetwork algorithms and demonstrate their superiority compared to other baseline RRL and MultiAgent RL algorithms in various environments.

The fundamental difficulty of RRL problems, as a particular
(zero-sum) case of Multi-Agent RL (MARL) problems, is
the non-stationarity of the environment from the point of
each agent’s view (see, e.g., (Busoniu et al., 2008; Zhang
et al., 2021)). Often, this leads to the failure of the decentralized (independent) learning (Lanctot et al., 2017) and
motivates the design of a centralized approach allowing
agents to exchange information during the learning (see,
e.g., (Lowe et al., 2017; Foerster et al., 2018)). The exchange can utilize a shared memory, a shared policy, but
more often, a shared Q-function, which requires an adequate theory within which such a function is well-defined
and exists.
According to the Markov game theory (see, e.g., (Shapley,
1953; Bertsekas, 1976; Van Der Wal, 1980)), any zero-sum
game has a value (Nash equilibrium) which can be used to
construct such a shared Q-function (Littman, 1994). However, even in the simplest examples of Markov games (e.g.,
paper-rock-scissors), optimal policies may not be pure (deterministic) and, therefore, can provide only the expected
value of a payoff. That is, the optimal agent can guarantee a
certain payoff only on average across runs but not for every
run. Thus, the Markov game theory may be inappropriate
if, according to the problem statement (for example, in the
case of developing expensive or safe and stable control systems), it is required to seek robust policies guaranteeing a
deterministic payoff.

1. Introduction
In the last ten years, neural network models trained by Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms (Sutton & Barto,
2018) have demonstrated outstanding performance in various game and physics simulators (see, e.g., (Mnih et al.,
2015; Silver et al., 2017; OpenAI, 2018; Vinyals et al., 2019;
Liu et al., 2022)). However, the usage of such models for
practical problems is still limited due to their instability to
uncertainty or disturbances occurring in the real world. One
promising paradigm to overcome these difficulties is Robust
Reinforcement Learning (RRL) (Morimoto & Doya, 2000)

In this paper, we make the following contributions to the
RRL research:
• We are the first to propose considering the RRL
paradigm within the framework of the positional differential game theory (Krasovskii & Subbotin, 1987;
Subbotin, 1995). The main difference between this
theory and the theory of Markov games is continuous dynamics, which makes it possible to study pure
optimal policies providing deterministic payoff.

1

Yandex, Moscow, Russia 2 IMM UB RAS, Yekaterinburg, Russia.
Correspondence to: Anton Plaksin
<a.r.plaksin@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

