An Infinite-Width Analysis on the Jacobian-Regularised Training of a Neural
Network
Taeyoung Kim 1 Hongseok Yang 1

Abstract

error and where it converges eventually, are answered (Jacot
et al., 2018), and new techniques for scaling hyperparameters (Yang and Hu, 2021) or finding appropriate hyperparameters (Yang et al., 2021) have been developed. Also, the
tools used in the analysis, such as Neural Tangent Kernel,
turn out to be useful for analysing pruning and other optimisations for deep neural networks (Liu and Zenke, 2020).

The recent theoretical analysis of deep neural networks in their infinite-width limits has deepened
our understanding of initialisation, feature learning, and training of those networks, and brought
new practical techniques for finding appropriate
hyperparameters, learning network weights, and
performing inference. In this paper, we broaden
this line of research by showing that this infinitewidth analysis can be extended to the Jacobian of
a deep neural network. We show that a multilayer
perceptron (MLP) and its Jacobian at initialisation jointly converge to a Gaussian process (GP)
as the widths of the MLP’s hidden layers go to
infinity and characterise this GP. We also prove
that in the infinite-width limit, the evolution of
the MLP under the so-called robust training (i.e.,
training with a regulariser on the Jacobian) is described by a linear first-order ordinary differential
equation that is determined by a variant of the
Neural Tangent Kernel. We experimentally show
the relevance of our theoretical claims to wide
finite networks, and empirically analyse the properties of kernel regression solution to obtain an
insight into Jacobian regularisation.

Our goal is to extend this infinite-width analysis to the Jacobian of a deep neural network. By Jacobian, we mean
the input-output Jacobian of a network’s output. This Jacobian has information about the smoothness of the network’s
output and has been used to measure the robustness of a
trained network against noise (Peck et al., 2017) or to learn
a network that achieves high accuracy on a test dataset even
when examples in the dataset are corrupted with noise. The
Jacobian of a neural network also features in the work on
network testing, verification, and adversarial attack (Goodfellow et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2021).
We show that at initialisation, a multilayer perceptron (MLP)
and its Jacobian jointly converge to a zero-mean Gaussian
process (GP) as the widths of the MLP’s hidden layers
go to infinity, and characterise this GP by describing its
kernel inductively. Our result can be used to compute analytically the posterior of the MLP (viewed as a random
function) conditioned on not just usual input-output pairs
(x(1) , y (1) ), . . . , (x(N ) , y (N ) ) in the training set, but also
derivatives at some inputs, in the infinite-width setting.

1. Introduction

We also analyse the training dynamics of an MLP under
the so-called robust-training objective, which contains a
regulariser on the Jacobians of the MLP at each training input, in addition to the standard loss over input-output pairs
in the training set. As in the case of the standard training
without the Jacobian regulariser, we show that the training
can be characterised by a kernel that is defined in terms
of the derivatives of the MLP output and its Jacobian with
respect to the MLP parameters. We call this kernel Jacobian
Neural Tangent Kernel (JNTK) due to its similarity with
the standard Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) and show that
it becomes independent of the MLP parameters at initialisation, as the widths of the MLP go to infinity. Thus, the
JNTK at initialisation is deterministic in the infinite-width
limit. Then, we show the JNTK of the infinitely-wide MLP

The recent theoretical analysis of deep neural networks in
their infinite-width limits has substantially deepened our
understanding of initialisation (Neal, 1996; Lee et al., 2018;
Matthews et al., 2018; Yang, 2019; Peluchetti et al., 2020;
Lee et al., 2022), feature learning (Yang and Hu, 2021),
hyperparameter turning (Yang et al., 2021), and training of
those networks (Jacot et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2019; Yang
and Littwin, 2021). Seemingly impossible questions, such
as whether the gradient descent achieves the zero training
1
School of Computing, KAIST, Daejeon, South Korea. Correspondence to: Hongseok Yang <hongseok.yang@kaist.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

