Improving Group Robustness on Spurious Correlation
Requires Preciser Group Inference

Yujin Han 1 Difan Zou 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

The presence of spurious correlation causes machine learning models to fail on certain groups of samples, even when
achieving high accuracy on average group (Ribeiro et al.,
2016; Beery et al., 2018; Hashimoto et al., 2018; Duchi
et al., 2019). Deep networks trained via standard empirical
risk minimization (ERM) may be biased by the spurious
attributes/features such as the image backgrounds (Beery
et al., 2018; Geirhos et al., 2020), which admit different correlations with the true labels for the different groups of data.
As a result, the model typically performs well on the majority group of data that aligns with the spurious attributes but
performs poorly on certain groups of data that have no or
even opposite correlations with spurious attributes. This critical issue is widespread in many fields, such as medical AI,
facial recognition and sentiment analysis (Blodgett et al.,
2016; Tatman, 2017; Gururangan et al., 2018; Badgeley
et al., 2019; Sagawa et al., 2019).

Standard empirical risk minimization (ERM)
models may prioritize learning spurious correlations between spurious features and true labels,
leading to poor accuracy on groups where these
correlations do not hold. Mitigating this issue often requires expensive spurious attribute (group)
labels or relies on trained ERM models to infer
group labels when group information is unavailable. However, the significant performance gap
in worst-group accuracy between using pseudo
group labels and using oracle group labels inspires
us to consider further improving group robustness through preciser group inference. Therefore, we propose GIC, a novel method that accurately infers group labels, resulting in improved
worst-group performance. GIC trains a spurious
attribute classifier based on two key properties
of spurious correlations: (1) high correlation between spurious attributes and true labels, and (2)
variability in this correlation between datasets
with different group distributions. Empirical studies on multiple datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of GIC in inferring group labels, and combining GIC with various downstream invariant
learning methods improves worst-group accuracy,
showcasing its powerful flexibility. Additionally,
through analyzing the misclassifications in GIC,
we identify an interesting phenomenon called semantic consistency, which may contribute to better decoupling the association between spurious
attributes and labels, thereby mitigating spurious correlation. The code for GIC is available
at https://github.com/yujinhanml/GIC.

There have emerged a series of previous works that aim to
develop more robust training methods to improve the worstgroup performance when group information is available.
For instance, one can focus on particularly training over the
worst-group risk (Sagawa et al., 2019) via group distributional robust optimization (GroupDRO). Additionally, the
spurious correlation can also be eliminated by balancing the
risk in different groups, which can be achieved via feature
reweighting (Kirichenko et al., 2022) or selective Mixup
(Yao et al., 2022). These methods have been demonstrated
to be effective to mitigate the spurious correlations, leading
to substantial improvements over ERM.
However, group labeling is expensive, labor-intensive, and
human-biased. It is more important and practical to develop
robust algorithms for improving worst-group accuracy when
the group information is unavailable (Liu et al., 2021; Zhang
et al., 2022). In such a scenario, a line of recent works (Sohoni et al., 2020; Nam et al., 2020; Ahmed et al., 2020; Liu
et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023) propose
to first infer the data groups, and then seek to train a robust
model according to the estimated group information. For
instance, JTT (Liu et al., 2021) identifies the data being
misclassified by the ERM as the minority group, and trains
a more robust model via upweighting the examples in mi-

1
Department of Computer Science, The University of Hong
Kong 2 Department of Computer Science & Institute of Data Science, The University of Hong Kong. Correspondence to: Difan
Zou <dzou@cs.hku.hk>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

