QORA: Zero-Shot Transfer via Interpretable Object-Relational Model Learning

Gabriel Stella 1 Dmitri Loguinov 1

Abstract

to human-level general intelligence, but current methods are
far from achieving this goal in at least three aspects.

Although neural networks have demonstrated significant success in various reinforcement-learning
tasks, even the highest-performing deep models often fail to generalize. As an alternative,
object-oriented approaches offer a promising
path towards better efficiency and generalization; however, they typically address narrow problem classes and require extensive domain knowledge. To overcome these limitations, we introduce QORA, an algorithm that constructs models expressive enough to solve a variety of domains, including those with stochastic transition
functions, directly from a domain-agnostic objectbased state representation. We also provide a
novel benchmark suite to evaluate learners’ generalization capabilities. In our test domains, QORA
achieves 100% predictive accuracy using almost
four orders of magnitude fewer observations than
a neural-network baseline, demonstrates zero-shot
transfer to modified environments, and adapts
rapidly when applied to tasks involving previously
unseen object interactions. Finally, we give examples of QORA’s learned rules, showing them to
be easily interpretable.

First, humans generalize well, transferring knowledge
quickly to new settings, which allows learning to compound
over time. Machine-learning methods, on the other hand,
often fail when tested in scenarios that differ only slightly
from how they were trained (Kansky et al., 2017). Second,
current algorithms do not produce models that are interpretable to humans (Ghorbani et al., 2019; Glanois et al.,
2021). Exchanging information is one of the most important
features of social interaction, increasing trust and making
knowledge acquisition more efficient; models that are difficult to understand cannot help with either of these goals.
Third, humans learn efficiently, with many being able to
confidently accomplish new tasks within hours or even minutes, while state-of-the-art reinforcement-learning agents
can require decades worth of training experience (Badia
et al., 2020). We refer to the set of these three properties as
GIE (generalization, interpretability, efficiency) and propose
the pursuit of all three as a path towards developing humanlevel intelligent systems. As a first step in this direction, we
study algorithms that learn to understand their environments
through interaction and observation.
More formally, the task we are interested in is objectoriented transition modeling without domain knowledge,
which we describe here. Object-oriented representations
work with entities and their attributes (e.g., position, color)
rather than the tensors commonly used in deep learning
(Diuk et al., 2008). Investigations in both machine learning
(Chang et al., 2016) and human psychology (Spelke, 1990)
have shown that understanding the world through objects
and their relationships is an essential part of intelligence.
Transition modeling is the process of learning predictive
models of an environment’s behavior; studies have shown
that this is one of the primary features that enables humans
to generalize (Hamrick et al., 2011) and that it can improve
knowledge transfer in reinforcement learning as well (Young
et al., 2022). Domain knowledge is additional information
given to the agent beyond what it observes through its interactions, e.g., a list of domain-specific preconditions (Diuk
et al., 2008; Marom & Rosman, 2018). While it is useful
in certain applications, this information can be difficult or
impossible to acquire; therefore, algorithms that operate
without requiring such information are much more widely

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning, one of the primary branches of
machine learning, encompasses problems where an agent,
situated in some environment, makes decisions to maximize
a reward signal (Kaelbling et al., 1996; Glanois et al., 2021).
This makes the field uniquely applicable to real-world tasks
such as robotic manipulation (Nagabandi et al., 2020), autonomous driving (Kiran et al., 2022), and plasma confinement for nuclear fusion (Degrave et al., 2022). There is
hope that the study of reinforcement learning may even lead
1

Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Texas A&M
University, College Station, TX, USA. Correspondence to: Gabriel
Stella <gabrielrstella@tamu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

