Improved Differentially Private and Lazy Online Convex Optimization:
Lower Regret without Smoothness Requirements

Naman Agarwal 1 Satyen Kale 2 Karan Singh 3 Abhradeep Thakurta 1

Abstract

function lt : K → R in revealed. Thus the learner suffers
loss lt (xt ) in round t. The learner’s regret is defined as
PT
PT
t=1 lt (xt ) − minx∈K
t=1 lt (x). The learner’s performance may be assessed via her expected regret, averaging
over the randomness in her and the adversary’s choices. In
this paper, we restrict our discussion to obliviously chosen
loss functions, i.e., they are independent of the iterates xt .

We design differentially private regret-minimizing
algorithms in the online convex optimization
(OCO) framework. Unlike recent results, our algorithms and analyses do not require smoothness,
thus yielding the first private regret bounds with
an optimal leading-order term for non-smooth loss
functions. Additionally, even for smooth losses,
the resulting regret guarantees improve upon previous results in terms their dependence of dimension. Our results provide the best known rates for
DP-OCO in all practical regimes of the privacy
parameter, barring when it is exceptionally small.
The principal innovation in our algorithm design
is the use of sampling from strongly log-concave
densities which satisfy the Log-Sobolev Inequality. The resulting concentration of measure allows
us to obtain a better trade-off for the dimension
factors than prior work, leading to improved results. Following previous works on DP-OCO, the
proposed algorithm explicitly limits the number
of switches via rejection sampling. Thus, independently of privacy constraints, the algorithm
also provides improved results for online convex
optimization with a switching budget.

Differentially Private OCO (DP-OCO). Online learning
algorithms often operate over sensitive data, e.g. user-level
data for personalization-oriented services. Hence, in addition to minimizing regret, limiting privacy leakage is desirable, and has been pursued in Jain et al. (2012); Smith &
Thakurta (2013); Agarwal & Singh (2017); Kairouz et al.
(2021); Asi et al. (2023); Agarwal et al. (2023). The promise
of privacy in DP-OCO dictates that if a loss function lt in
any round t were changed to a different function lt′ , then
distribution over the entire iterate sequence produced by
the algorithm is not altered in a quantitative (ε-dependent)
distributional sense. Kairouz
 1/4 √et al.
 (2021) established a red √ T 1
e
gret upper bound of O
. This was improved in
ε
a series of works (Asi et al., 2023; Agarwal et al., 2023),
for moderate ranges of ε, with Agarwal
et al. (2023)
pro√

dT 1/3
e
viding the known best bound of O
T+ ε
; notably,
the first term here matches the optimal non-private regret.
There are two shortcomings of the result in Agarwal et al.
(2023). Firstly, it only applies to smooth loss functions.
Moreover, application of artificial smoothing techniques,
e.g., Moreau-Yoshida smoothing, to arrive at a result for
non-smooth losses yields bounds that are uniformly worse
than in Kairouz et al. (2021), and is therefore fruitless. Secondly, the dependence on the dimension in the second term
is suboptimal; while specifically for the class of generalized
linear model (GLM)
the authors proved an im√functions,
√ 1/3 
e
proved bound of O
T + dTε
, improving the second
√
term by a factor of d, obtaining the above bound for the
general class of Lipschitz convex functions was left open.
In this paper, we resolve both these problems, and offer
an unconditional improvement. Concretely, we provide a
DP-OCO algorithm for potentially non-smooth convex Lip-

1. Introduction
The framework of online convex optimization (OCO) provides a unified treatment of computational and statistical
aspects of decision-making and learning under uncertainty.
In it, in each round t = 1, 2, . . . , T , a learner chooses
an element xt from a compact convex set K ∈ Rd , after which an adversarially chosen Lipschitz convex loss
*
1
Equal contribution
Google DeepMind 2 Google Research 3 Tepper School of Business, Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence to: Naman Agarwal <namanagarwal@google.com>, Satyen Kale <satyenkale@google.com>,
Karan Singh <karansingh@cmu.edu>, Abhradeep Thakurta
<athakurta@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1 e

O (·) hides polylog factors in 1/δ and T .

1

