RoboGen: Towards Unleashing Infinite Data for
Automated Robot Learning via Generative Simulation

Yufei Wang * 1 Zhou Xian * 1 Feng Chen * 2 Tsun-Hsuan Wang 3 Yian Wang 4 Katerina Fragkiadaki 1
Zackory Erickson 1 David Held 1 Chuang Gan 4 5

Abstract

ited explorations, and support massively parallel computation for significantly faster data collection without considerable investment in robotic hardware. However, robot
learning in simulations also presents its own limitations:
while exploration and practicing in simulated environments
are cost-effective, constructing these environments requires
tremendous human effort, demanding tedious steps including designing tasks, producing relevant and semantically
meaningful assets, generating plausible scene layouts and
configurations, and crafting training supervisions such as
reward or loss functions (James et al., 2020; Srivastava et al.,
2022; Gu et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023a). The onerous task
of creating these components and constructing individualized simulation settings for each one of the countless tasks
encountered in our daily life significantly hinders the scalability of robotic skill learning even in simulated worlds.

We present RoboGen, a generative robotic agent
that automatically learns diverse robotic skills at
scale via generative simulation. RoboGen leverages the latest advancements in foundation and
generative models. Instead of directly adapting
these models to produce policies or low-level actions, we advocate for a generative scheme, which
uses these models to automatically generate diversified tasks, scenes, and training supervisions,
thereby scaling up robotic skill learning with minimal human supervision. Our approach equips a
robotic agent with a self-guided propose-generatelearn cycle: the agent first proposes interesting
tasks and skills to develop, and then generates
simulation environments by populating pertinent
assets with proper spatial configurations. Afterwards, the agent decomposes the proposed task
into sub-tasks, selects the optimal learning approach (reinforcement learning, motion planning,
or trajectory optimization), generates required
training supervision, and then learns policies to
acquire the proposed skill. Our fully generative
pipeline can be queried repeatedly, producing an
endless stream of skill demonstrations associated
with diverse tasks and environments.

In light of this, we propose Generative Simulation (Xian
et al., 2023a), a new paradigm aiming for scaling up simulated robot learning with the latest advancement in generative models. Generative simulation advocates for autonomously generating information for all the stages needed
for diverse robotic skill learning in simulation: from highlevel task and skill proposals to task-dependent scene descriptions, asset selections and generations, policy learning choices, and training supervisions. These information
is then used for massive skill training, enabling robots to
acquire proposed skills. In this paper, as an initial realization of this proposed paradigm, we present RoboGen,
a robotic agent that continuously generates new skills via
a self-guided propose-generate-learn cycle: it firstly selfproposes skills to learn, and then generates required assets
and constructs the scene in simulation conditioned on the
proposed task. Afterwards, it labels the tasks with natural
language descriptions, decomposes the task into sub-tasks,
selects the optimal learning approach (reinforcement learning, motion planning, or trajectory optimization), designs
proper training supervisions (e.g. reward functions), and
lastly proceeds to policy learning to solve the proposed task.
One distinct advantage of our proposed paradigm lies in
the careful choice of what modes of knowledge to extract
from contemporary foundation models. These models have
demonstrated impressive capabilities across various modali-

1. Introduction
Simulated environments have become a crucial driving force
for teaching robots various complex skills, spanning complex manipulation and locomotion settings (Weng et al.,
2022; Xu et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2022; Haarnoja et al.,
2023; Zhuang et al., 2023). Compared to exploration and
data collection in the real-world, simulated environments
provide access to privileged low-level states and unlim*

Equal contribution 1 CMU 2 Tsinghua IIIS 3 MIT CSAIL
UMass Amherst 5 MIT-IBM AI Lab. Correspondence to: Yufei
Wang <yufeiw2@andrew.cmu.edu>.
4

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

