CF-OPT: Counterfactual Explanations for Structured Prediction

Germain Vivier-Ardisson 1 2 Alexandre Forel 1 Axel Parmentier 2 Thibaut Vidal 1

Abstract

rameters. While these pipelines have shown great results in
many applications (Mandi et al., 2023; Sadana et al., 2023),
it is hard to justify their outputs since both their prediction and optimization components are complex and opaque.
This lack of interpretability is hardly tackled, even though
it is likely to hinder the adoption of this type of solution.
We aim to explain the decision-making process of structured learning pipelines by providing counterfactual explanations. Counterfactual explanations show the minimum
changes in a feature vector needed to lead the pipeline to
output a different decision. By contrasting the initial factual instance with its counterfactual explanation, they allow
users to understand the impact of features on the decision.
Indeed, identifying which features make a specific solution
optimal and establishing a link between changes in the features and changes in the output are essential conditions for
the reliable use of a model.

Optimization layers in deep neural networks have
enjoyed a growing popularity in structured learning, improving the state of the art on a variety
of applications. Yet, these pipelines lack interpretability since they are made of two opaque
layers: a highly non-linear prediction model,
such as a deep neural network, and an optimization layer, which is typically a complex blackbox solver. Our goal is to improve the transparency of such methods by providing counterfactual explanations. We build upon variational
autoencoders a principled way of obtaining counterfactuals: working in the latent space leads to a
natural notion of plausibility of explanations. We
finally introduce a variant of the classic loss for
VAE training that improves their performance in
our specific structured context. These provide the
foundations of CF-OPT, a first-order optimization algorithm that can find counterfactual explanations for a broad class of structured learning architectures. Our numerical results show that both
close and plausible explanations can be obtained
for problems from the recent literature.

1. Introduction
(a) Initial map

Recent studies have shown a surge of interest in developing
structured learning pipelines that combine machine learning and optimization (Amos & Kolter, 2017; Donti et al.,
2017). From the perspective of structured learning, optimization layers translate a machine-learning prediction into
an output that maximizes a given objective while respecting structural constraints. From an optimization perspective, machine-learning models can identify patterns in data
to optimize an objective function subject to uncertain pa-

(b) Counterfactual map

Figure 1. (a) Initial and (b) counterfactual maps with their respective shortest path (initial and alternative solutions) shown in yellow. The explanation is given by CF-OPT. The corresponding
pipeline and experiment is detailed in Section 5.1 and will serve
as a guiding example in this work.

In this paper, we present CF-OPT, a method to obtain
counterfactual explanations for any deep learning model
concluded by a black-box linear optimization layer, called
thereafter structured learning pipeline. It is based on differentiating a relaxed version of the explanation problem
and applying a first-order optimization method to obtain
a counterfactual. An example explanation provided by
CF-OPT is shown in Figure 1 for the shortest paths on
Warcraft maps structured learning pipeline, taken from
Vlastelica et al. (2019).

1

CIRRELT & SCALE-AI Chair in Data-Driven Supply
Chains, Department of Mathematical and Industrial Engineering,
Polytechnique Montreal, Montreal, Canada 2 CERMICS, École
des Ponts, Marne-la-Vallée, France. Correspondence to: Germain
Vivier-Ardisson <germain.vivier-ardisson@enpc.fr>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

