SeMOPO: Learning High-quality Model and Policy from Low-quality
Offline Visual Datasets
Shenghua Wan 1 2 Ziyuan Chen 3 Le Gan 1 2 Shuai Feng 4 De-Chuan Zhan 1 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Offline reinforcement learning (RL) (Lange et al., 2012;
Levine et al., 2020), which learns policies from fixed
datasets without the need for costly interactions with online
environments, has been increasingly applied in real-world
tasks such as drug discovery (Trabucco et al., 2022) and
autonomous driving (Iroegbu & Madhavi, 2021; Diehl et al.,
2023). Offline RL saves the cost of interacting with the environment and improves sample efficiency. Real-world RL
datasets typically exhibit two main characteristics: (1) they
are often collected by non-expert or random policies (Jin
et al., 2020; Rashidinejad et al., 2021), and (2) they originate
from real environments with high-dimensional observations,
such as images or videos (Rafailov et al., 2021; Prudencio
et al., 2022), containing complex noise like moving backgrounds (Lu et al., 2022). Learning high-quality policies
from low-quality datasets poses a significant challenge.

Model-based offline reinforcement Learning (RL)
is a promising approach that leverages existing
data effectively in many real-world applications,
especially those involving high-dimensional inputs like images and videos. To alleviate the
distribution shift issue in offline RL, existing
model-based methods heavily rely on the uncertainty of learned dynamics. However, the model
uncertainty estimation becomes significantly biased when observations contain complex distractors with non-trivial dynamics. To address this
challenge, we propose a new approach - Separated Model-based Offline Policy Optimization
(SeMOPO) - decomposing latent states into endogenous and exogenous parts via conservative
sampling and estimating model uncertainty on the
endogenous states only. We provide a theoretical guarantee of model uncertainty and performance bound of SeMOPO. To assess the efficacy,
we construct the Low-Quality Vision Deep DataDriven Datasets for RL (LQV-D4RL), where the
data are collected by non-expert policy and the
observations include moving distractors. Experimental results show that our method substantially outperforms all baseline methods, and further analytical experiments validate the critical
designs in our method. The project website is
https://sites.google.com/view/semopo.

Concerning the first characteristic, previous research has
demonstrated the efficacy of offline RL with highly suboptimal or random datasets (Jin et al., 2020; Rashidinejad
et al., 2021; Kumar et al., 2022). Regarding the second
characteristic, some studies have employed model-based
RL (MBRL) methods to address the challenges of highdimensional inputs. MBRL learns a low-dimensional surrogate model of the high-dimensional environment (Ha &
Schmidhuber, 2018; Hafner et al., 2019), allowing the agent
to interact with this model to gather additional trajectories in
the low-dimensional state space. Offline MBRL methods improve sample efficiency and reduce storage costs. However,
an unavoidable gap exists between the actual environment
and the learned model from offline datasets. Offline MBRL
methods (Yu et al., 2020) mitigate the distribution shift problem by incorporating the model prediction’s uncertainty as
a penalty in the reward function.

1

School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing
University, China 3 School of Mathematical Sciences, Center for
Statistical Science, Peking University, Beijing, China 4 School of
Cyberspace Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: De-Chuan Zhan
<zhandc@nju.edu.cn>.
2

In real-world decision-making scenarios, uncertainty arises
not only from task-relevant dynamics but also from irrelevant distractors in observations, such as moving backgrounds. However, previous offline visual RL works (Yu
et al., 2020; Rafailov et al., 2021; Lu et al., 2022) do not differentiate between these two types of uncertainty. If both are
treated as model uncertainty in offline policy training and
used as a penalty in the reward function, the learned policies

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

