Efficient Exploration in Average-Reward Constrained Reinforcement Learning:
Achieving Near-Optimal Regret With Posterior Sampling

Danil Provodin 1 2 Maurits Kaptein 1 Mykola Pechenizkiy 1 3

Abstract

ner while obeying traffic rules (Le et al., 2019). A natural
approach for handling such cases is specifying the problem
using multiple objectives, where one objective is optimized
subject to constraints on the others.

We present a new algorithm based on posterior
sampling for learning in Constrained Markov Decision Processes (CMDP) in the infinite-horizon
undiscounted setting. The algorithm achieves
near-optimal regret bounds while being advantageous empirically compared to the existing
algorithms. Our main theoretical result is a
Bayesian √
regret bound for each cost component
of Õ(DS AT ) for any communicating CMDP
with S states, A actions, and diameter D. This
regret bound matches the lower bound in order
of time horizon T and is the best-known regret
bound for communicating CMDPs achieved by
a computationally tractable algorithm. Empirical results show that our posterior sampling algorithm outperforms the existing algorithms for
constrained reinforcement learning.

A typical way of formulating the constrained RL problem is
a Constrained Markov Decision Process (CMDP) (Altman,
1999), which proceeds in discrete time steps. At each time
step, the system occupies a state, and the decision maker
chooses an action from the set of allowable actions. As a
result of choosing the action, the decision maker receives
a (possibly stochastic) vector of costs, and the system then
transitions to the next state according to a fixed state transition distribution. In the reinforcement learning problem, the
underlying state transition distributions and/or cost distributions are unknown and need to be learned from observations
while aiming to minimize the total cost.
Learning in CMDPs has been a recurrent topic in the reinforcement learning literature, with numerous works addressing this challenge in episodic and discounted settings (see,
e.g., Efroni et al. (2020); Brantley et al. (2020); Qiu et al.
(2020); Liu et al. (2021); Kalagarla et al. (2023)). We consider the reinforcement learning problem in a more general
infinite-horizon average reward setting. When decisions
are made frequently so that the discount rate is very close
to 1, the decision-makers may prefer to compare policies
on the basis of their expected infinite-horizon average reward instead of the expected total discounted reward, and
the objective becomes to achieve optimal long-term average
performance under constraints. This criterion is especially
relevant for inventory systems with frequent restocking decisions or queueing control theory, particularly when applied
to controlling computer systems (Puterman, 1994).

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) refers to the problem of learning by trial and error in sequential decision-making systems
based on the scalar signal aiming to minimize the total cost
accumulated over time. In many situations, however, the
desired properties of the agent behavior are better described
using constraints, as a single objective might not suffice to
explain the real-life setting. For example, a robot should
not only fulfill its task but should also control its wear and
tear by limiting the torque exerted on its motors (Tessler
et al., 2019); for telecommunication networks, it is necessary that the average end-to-end delay be limited, especially
for voice traffic, while maximizing the throughput of the
system (Altman, 1999); and autonomous driving vehicles
should reach the destination in a time and fuel-efficient man-

Learning in CMDP in the infinite-horizon average reward
setting appears to be more challenging because it depends
on the limiting behavior of the underlying stochastic process,
and approaches for analyzing this setting vary with the class
structure of CMDPs. For instance, Singh et al. (2023) and
Zheng & Ratliff (2020) consider a restricted class of ergodic
CMDPs. In ergodic CMDPs, any policy will reach every
state after a sufficient number of steps, making them selfexplorative and easier to learn than general cases. Nevertheless, achieving near-optimal regret bounds is still non-trivial

1
Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven, The Netherlands 2 Jheronimus Academy of Data Science, ‘s-Hertogenbosch,
The Netherlands 3 University of Jyväskylä, Jyväskylä, Finland.
Correspondence to: Danil Provodin <d.provodin@tue.nl>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

