A Persuasive Approach to Combating Misinformation

Safwan Hossain * 1 Andjela Mladenovic * 2 Yiling Chen 1 Gauthier Gidel 2

Abstract

platform regulating freedom of speech. While most Americans support taking steps to restrict misinformation, half
of Americans in 2021 agreed that “freedom of information
should be prioritized over ... restricting false information
online” (Amy & Walker, 2021).

Bayesian Persuasion is proposed as a tool for social media platforms to combat the spread of misinformation. Since platforms can use machine
learning to predict the popularity and misinformation features of to-be-shared posts, and users
are largely motivated to share popular content,
platforms can strategically signal this informational advantage to change user beliefs and persuade them not to share misinformation. We characterize the optimal signaling scheme with imperfect predictions as a linear program and give
sufficient and necessary conditions on the classifier to ensure optimal platform utility is nondecreasing and continuous. Next, this interaction is considered under a performative model,
wherein platform intervention affects the user’s
future behaviour. The convergence and stability of optimal signaling under this performative
process are fully characterized. Lastly, we experimentally validate that our approach significantly
reduces misinformation in both the single round
and performative setting.

We present information design as a viable approach, either
as an alternative or complement, for addressing misinformation on platforms. Our approach leverages the information
asymmetry between a platform and its users. The platform strategically reveals some information that users care
about, who act in self-interest given the information. When
properly designed, this strategic revelation can lead to harmful/poor content being shared less frequently. This approach
acknowledges the different incentive structures for the user
and platform and does not require the platform to police
already shared posts; instead, the platform disincentivizes
the sharing of misinformed content by the user.
Specifically, we model the platform-user interaction under
the Bayesian Persuasion (BP) framework (Kamenica &
Gentzkow, 2011). A post has a two-dimensional hidden
state: its popularity if shared and its degree of misinformation. While a user has some prior belief over these states,
she naturally does not know the true popularity of her to-beshared content. She may also be unaware of her post’s level
of misinformation as it is often introduced unintentionally
and driven by social-psychological factors such as a sense
of belonging (Wardle, 2020), confirmation bias (Ecker et al.,
2022), and habitual sharing (Ceylan et al., 2023). Moreover,
the user may also be indifferent to the misinformation state
and care only about the popularity their post achieves if
shared. While the user may be indifferent or unaware of
misinformation, the platform’s utility for user action (sharing or not sharing) depends on the true realization of both
states — the post’s popularity and degree of misinformation. This misalignment of the user’s and the platform’s
utility poses a challenge for the platform: the platform does
not want the user to share misinformed posts, but the user
derives high utility by sharing popular content, which may
not be truthful. The platform, however, possesses an informational advantage due to its vast troves of historical
user and content data. So while the platform, like the user,
does not know with certainty the true state of the post, it
can leverage this to build classification models to predict
(with certain error rates) the post’s popularity and degree

1. Introduction
Spreading misinformation has been one of the major critiques of social media platforms. The structure of these
platforms rewards users for sharing content to gain popularity (e.g. number of likes and future re-shares), often irrespective of its veracity. This has prompted debates on how
platforms should police their content. The most common
approach is using fact-checking to tag and censor untruthful content. However, such approaches can hardly keep up
with the speed and scale of today’s content generation and
the validity of content may not be a binary true or false.
Censorship moreover leads to thorny debates around the
*
1
Equal contribution
Harvard University 2 Mila, Université de Montréal.
Correspondence to: Safwan Hossain <shossain@g.harvard.edu>, Andjela Mladenovic <andjela.mladenovic@mila.quebec>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

