Sparse-to-dense Multimodal Image Registration via Multi-Task Learning

Kaining Zhang 1 Jiayi Ma 1

Abstract
Ground truth

Aligning image pairs captured by different sensors or those undergoing significant appearance
changes is crucial for various computer vision
and robotics applications. Existing approaches
cope with this problem via either Sparse feature
Matching (SM) or Dense direct Alignment (DA)
paradigms. Sparse methods are efficient but lack
accuracy in textureless scenes, while dense ones
are more accurate in all scenes but demand for
good initialization. In this paper, we propose
SDME, a Sparse-to-Dense Multimodal feature
Extractor based on a novel multi-task network
that simultaneously predicts SM and DA features
for robust multimodal image registration. We propose the sparse-to-dense registration paradigm:
we first perform initial registration via SM and
then refine the result via DA. By using the welldesigned SDME, the sparse-to-dense approach
combines the merits from both SM and DA. Extensive experiments on MSCOCO, GoogleEarth,
VIS-NIR and VIS-IR-drone datasets demonstrate
that our method achieves remarkable performance
on multimodal cases. Furthermore, our approach
exhibits robust generalization capabilities, enabling the fine-tuning of models initially trained
on single-modal datasets for use with smaller multimodal datasets. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/KN-Zhang/SDME.

Sparse matching
Dense alignment

Sparse-only

Dense-only

Sparse-to-dense (ours)

Figure 1. Visualization of homography estimation on three multimodal image pairs when sparse matching (sparse-only), dense
alignment (dense-only), and our sparse-to-dense strategies are
used. All operations are performed with our learned features. Each
image pair is composed of an input image II (the larger one) and
a template image IT (the smaller one). Green, blue and yellow
polygons denote the positions of IT on II with the homography
given by ground truth, sparse matching and dense alignment.

equipped with a RGB and an infrared camera to work at
night; a drone needs to navigate based on the satellite maps
and instant photos. Aligning these images suffers from
multimodal color representations along with appearance
changes. So the challenge of multimodal image registration
not only lies in the large motion variations between image
pairs, but also how to deal with the modality difference.
In this paper, we aim to estimate homography to align image
pairs under the flat world assumptions (Goforth & Lucey,
2019; Zhao et al., 2021). Most approaches in this field can
be categorized into two classes: Sparse feature Matching
(SM) and Direct Alignment (DA). SM consists of three separate phases: keypoint detection, description and matching.
Then homography is recovered from the sparse matches.
This pipeline is very efficient and can deal with large motion variations since it only considers sparse keypoints with
viewpoint-invariant descriptors (Revaud et al., 2019; Xue
et al., 2023). However, as the sparse-only case shown in
Fig. 1, such sparsity introduces robust issue under a textureless scene. DA regards homography as an optimization
variable and finds the optimal solution by minimizing geometric (Schonberger & Frahm, 2016), photometric (Engel
et al., 2014) or feature-metric (Tang & Tan, 2018; Zhao
et al., 2021; Sarlin et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2023) errors
over all pixels. This minimization consists of aggregating
the matching costs over all image pixels iteratively, so it is
more accurate yet computationally more demanding than
the SM counterparts. Moreover, it is easily trapped in local
minima with an inappropriate initialization, as depicted in
the dense-only case in Fig. 1.

1. Introduction
Pixel-wise alignment of multimodal images is of essential importance in computer vision (Ma et al., 2021; Lu
et al., 2023), robotics (Cadena et al., 2016; Nguyen et al.,
2020), remote sensing (Audebert et al., 2018; Gómez-Chova
et al., 2015), medical imaging (Collignon et al., 1995), and
many others. For example, a SLAM system is likely to be
1
Electronic Information School, Wuhan University, Wuhan,
China. Correspondence to: Jiayi Ma <jyma2010@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

