Finite-Time Convergence and Sample Complexity of Actor-Critic
Multi-Objective Reinforcement Learning

Tianchen Zhou * 1 2 FNU Hairi * 3 Haibo Yang 4 Jia Liu 1 Tian Tong 2 Fan Yang 2 Michinari Momma 2 Yan Gao 2

Abstract

the tasks of observing the current state, performing a policyguided action, and receiving rewards and transitioning to
the next state. Upon collecting a trajectory of action-reward
sample pairs, the agent updates its policy to maximize its
long-term accumulative reward. To date, although RL has
found a large number of applications (e.g., healthcare (Petersen et al., 2019; Raghu et al., 2017b), financial recommendation (Theocharous et al., 2015), ranking system (Wen
et al., 2023), resources management (Mao et al., 2016) and
robotics (Levine et al., 2016; Raghu et al., 2017a)), the
standard RL formulation only considers a single reward optimization. However, as RL applications with increasingly
more complex reward structures emerge, it has become apparent that the single-reward structure in the traditional RL
framework is not rich enough to capture the needs of these
complex RL applications, particularly those with multiple
reward objectives.

Reinforcement learning with multiple, potentially
conflicting objectives is pervasive in real-world
applications, while this problem remains theoretically under-explored. This paper tackles the multiobjective reinforcement learning (MORL) problem and introduces an innovative actor-critic algorithm named MOAC which finds a policy by iteratively making trade-offs among conflicting reward
signals. Notably, we provide the first analysis of
finite-time Pareto-stationary convergence and corresponding sample complexity in both discounted
and average reward settings. Our approach has
two salient features: (a) MOAC mitigates the cumulative estimation bias resulting from finding an
optimal common gradient descent direction out
of stochastic samples. This enables provable convergence rate and sample complexity guarantees
independent of the number of objectives; (b) With
proper momentum coefficient, MOAC initializes
the weights of individual policy gradients using
samples from the environment, instead of manual initialization. This enhances the practicality
and robustness of our algorithm. Finally, experiments conducted on a real-world dataset validate
the effectiveness of our proposed method.

For example, in RL-based short video recommender systems (Cai et al., 2023), the agent recommends short videos
to optimize a multi-dimensional reward rate that captures
users’ “WatchTime,” “Like,” “Dislike,” “Comment,” etc. As
another example, e-commerce recommender systems rank
and display products by taking into account and balancing
the preferences of different user groups, some of which prefer faster delivery, while others may prefer lower prices and
tolerate slower delivery. All of these new multi-objective RL
applications necessitate solving multi-objective reinforcement learning (MORL) problems (Stamenkovic et al., 2022;
Ge et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2021a). So far, however, research on MORL is still in its infancy and there remains
a lack of rigorous theoretical understanding of MORL algorithmic designs in terms of finite-time convergence and
sample complexity analysis. This gap motivates us to take
the first attempt at building a theoretical foundation for
MORL in this work.

1. Introduction
1) Background and Motivation: As a foundational machine learning paradigm, reinforcement learning (RL) is
concerned with a sequential decision-making process in
which an agent interacts with an environment and repeats
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA
2
Amazon.com, Seattle, WA, USA 3 Department of Computer Science, University of Wisconsin-Whitewater, WI, USA 4 Department
of Computing and Information Sciences, Rochester Institute of
Technology, Rochester, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Tianchen
Zhou <tiancz@amazon.com>.

Formally, the learning of policy parameters for an M objective MORL problem can be formulated as follows:
⊤
max J (θ) := J 1 (θ), J 2 (θ), . . . , J M (θ) , (1)
θ∈Rd1

where θ is the policy parameter of policy πθ , and J i (θ)
is the expected accumulative reward for objective i ∈
{1, . . . , M } induced by policy πθ (we will focus on two ob-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

