Position: Stop Making Unscientific AGI Performance Claims

Patrick Altmeyer * 1 Andrew M. Demetriou * 1 Antony Bartlett 1 Cynthia C. S. Liem 1

Abstract

mulated four ‘institutional imperatives’ as comprising the
ethos of modern science: universalism, meaning that the
acceptance or rejection of claims entering the lists of science should not depend on personal or social attributes of
the person bringing in these claims; “communism” [sic],
meaning that there should be common ownership of scientific findings and one should communicate findings, rather
than keeping them secret; disinterestedness, meaning that
scientific integrity is upheld by not having self-interested
motivations, and organized skepticism, meaning that judgment on the scientific contribution should be suspended until
detached scrutiny is performed, according to institutionally
accepted criteria (Merton et al., 1942). While the Mertonian norms may not formally be known to academics today,
they still are implicitly being subscribed to in many ways
in which academia has organized academic scrutiny; e.g.,
through the adoption of double-blind peer reviewing, and in
motivations behind open science reforms.

Developments in the field of Artificial Intelligence (AI), and particularly large language models (LLMs), have created a ‘perfect storm’ for observing ‘sparks’ of Artificial General Intelligence
(AGI) that are spurious. Like simpler models,
LLMs distill meaningful representations in their
latent embeddings that have been shown to correlate with external variables. Nonetheless, the
correlation of such representations has often been
linked to human-like intelligence in the latter but
not the former. We probe models of varying complexity including random projections, matrix decompositions, deep autoencoders and transformers: all of them successfully distill information
that can be used to predict latent or external variables and yet none of them have previously been
linked to AGI. We argue and empirically demonstrate that the finding of meaningful patterns in
latent spaces of models cannot be seen as evidence
in favor of AGI. Additionally, we review literature
from the social sciences that shows that humans
are prone to seek such patterns and anthropomorphize. We conclude that both the methodological
setup and common public image of AI are ideal
for the misinterpretation that correlations between
model representations and some variables of interest are ‘caused’ by the model’s understanding
of underlying ‘ground truth’ relationships. We,
therefore, call for the academic community to exercise extra caution, and to be keenly aware of
principles of academic integrity, in interpreting
and communicating about AI research outcomes.

At the same time, in the way in which academic research is
disseminated in the AI and machine learning fields today,
major shifts are happening. Where these research fields
have actively adopted early sharing of preprints and code,
the volume of publishable work has exploded to a degree
that one cannot reasonably keep up with broad state-of-theart, and social media influencers start playing a role in article
discovery and citeability (Weissburg et al., 2024). Furthermore, because of major commercial stakes with regard to
AI and machine learning technology, and e.g. following the
enthusiastic societal uptake of products employing LLMs,
such as ChatGPT, the pressure to beat competitors as fast
as possible is only increasing, and strong eagerness can be
observed in many domains to ‘do something with AI’ in
order to innovate and remain current.
Where AI used to be a computational modeling tool to
better understand human cognition (van Rooij et al., 2023),
the recent interest in AI and LLMs has been turning into
one in which AI is seen as a tool that can mimic, surpass
and potentially replace human intelligence. In this, the
achievement of Artificial General Intelligence (AGI) has
become a grand challenge, and in some cases, an explicit
business goal. The definition of AGI itself is not as clearcut or consistent; loosely, it is a phenomenon contrasting
with ‘narrow AI’ systems, that were trained for specific
tasks (Goertzel, 2014). In practice, to demonstrate that the

1. Introduction
In 1942, when anti-intellectualism was rising and the integrity of science was under attack, Robert K. Merton for*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Intelligent Systems, Delft
University of Technology, Delft, the Netherlands. Correspondence
to: Patrick Altmeyer <patrick.altmeyer@tudelft.nl>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

