T ROVE: Inducing Verifiable and Efficient Toolboxes
for Solving Programmatic Tasks

Zora Zhiruo Wang

1

Graham Neubig

1

Daniel Fried

Abstract

1

TroVE
(ours)

Test

Language models (LMs) can solve tasks such as
answering questions about tables or images by
writing programs. However, using primitive functions often leads to verbose and error-prone programs, and higher-level functions require expert
design. To enable better solutions without human labor, we ask code LMs to curate reusable
high-level functions, and use them to write solutions. We present T ROVE, a training-free method
of inducing a verifiable and efficient toolbox of
functions, by generating via using, growing, and
periodically trimming the toolbox. On 11 datasets
from math, table question answering, and image
reasoning tasks, T ROVE consistently yields simpler solutions with higher accuracy than baselines
using C ODE LL A M A and previous methods using GPT, while using 79-98% smaller toolboxes.
T ROVE further enables 31% faster and 13% more
accurate human verification than baselines. With
the same pipeline, it creates diverse functions for
varied tasks and datasets, providing insights into
their individual characteristics. Code and data are
available at https://github.com/zorazrw/trove.

questions

program
solutions
LM
small
toolbox

reusable
functions

LM
Train

questions

✔ reusable tools
✔ easily veriﬁable

primitive

Test
questions

✔ training-free

x K ✔ simple & accurate

program
solutions

❌ tedious, complex

Test

existing
methods

large questions
toolbox

❌ prone to error

❌ need extra training
❌ complex pipeline

LM

LM

❌ irreusable tools

function
program
solutions

program
solutions

Figure 1. Our T ROVE induces reusable functions to produce better
program solutions than the P RIMITIVE setting, without training,
supervision, or iterations required by EXISTING METHODs.

rely on multiple function calls to Python built-in functions
or libraries such as pandas, as in the example in Figure 2.
However, in many cases relying on these primitive functions can lead to programs that are tedious, complex, and
error-prone (Cai et al., 2023; Majumder et al., 2023). These
programs can also be difficult to verify, as the users may
need to check every operation as well as their combinations and interactions across the entire program (e.g., the
primitive solution in Figure 2).

1. Introduction
Generating code from natural language commands has long
been a method of choice for solving tasks such as question
answering (Zettlemoyer & Collins, 2007; Liang et al., 2011)
or agent navigation (Artzi & Zettlemoyer, 2013). Recently,
language models (LMs) have been used to write programs in
general-purpose languages such as Python, further expanding code generation’s applicability (Yin & Neubig, 2017; Li
et al., 2022b; Cheng et al., 2023). These programs generally

When human developers are faced with an analogous situation, they create application-specific functions, i.e. tools,
composing primitive functions that are often used together.
For instance, in Figure 2 (right), the calc rate of change
tool is easier to understand and less error-prone to use, hence
enabling a more concise and accurate solution.

1

Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University.
Correspondence to: Zora Zhiruo Wang <zhiruow@cs.cmu.edu>,
Graham Neubig <gneubig@cs.cmu.edu>, Daniel Fried
<dfried@cs.cmu.edu>.

A few recent works have attempted to use LMs to automatically induce tools in a similar way (EXISTING METHODs in
Figure 1). However, existing methods tend to either induce
large and ponderous toolboxes and/or have added complexity and data requirements. For instance, Qian et al. (2023)
propose CREATOR to disentangle planning (tool making)

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

