EE-LLM: Large-Scale Training and Inference of Early-Exit
Large Language Models with 3D Parallelism

Yanxi Chen * 1 Xuchen Pan * 1 Yaliang Li 1 Bolin Ding 1 Jingren Zhou 1

Abstract

as their sizes have grown rapidly in recent years. In general, costs for inference are dominant in the long run, as
each model will be deployed to solve many problems for
a long period of time. This has inspired researchers and
engineers to develop various approaches for accelerating
LLM inference.

We present EE-LLM, a framework for large-scale
training and inference of early-exit large language
models (LLMs). While recent works have shown
preliminary evidence for the efficacy of early exiting in accelerating LLM inference, EE-LLM
makes a foundational step towards scaling up
early-exit LLMs by supporting their training and
inference with massive 3D parallelism. Built
upon Megatron-LM, EE-LLM implements a variety of algorithmic innovations and performance
optimizations tailored to early exiting, including
a lightweight method that facilitates backpropagation for the early-exit training objective with
pipeline parallelism, techniques of leveraging idle
resources in the original pipeline schedule for
computation related to early-exit layers, and two
approaches of early-exit inference that are compatible with KV caching for autoregressive generation. Our analytical and empirical study shows
that EE-LLM achieves great training efficiency
with negligible computational overhead compared
to standard LLM training, as well as outstanding
inference speedup without compromising output
quality. To facilitate further research and adoption, we release EE-LLM at https://github.
com/pan-x-c/EE-LLM.

The focus of this work is early exiting, which accelerates
inference by allowing a deep neural network to make predictions and exit early in the network for certain inputs, without
running the forward pass through the full network. This is
achieved by augmenting a standard neural network architecture (with a single exit at the end) with additional early-exit
layers that transform intermediate hidden states into early
outputs. The early-exit model architecture, as visualized in
Figure 1, not only retains the full capacity of a large model,
but is also capable of adaptively using a smaller amount
of computation for solving simpler problems. The idea of
early exiting is a natural analogue of how humans speak,
think, and make decisions: not every problem requires or
deserves the same amount of consideration, and one shall
opt for fast reaction to simple problems without overthinking (Kaya et al., 2019). Early exiting has been an active
research area and widely applied in natural language processing, computer vision, and other areas (Liu et al., 2020;
Elbayad et al., 2020; Schwartz et al., 2020; Xin et al., 2020;
Schuster et al., 2021; Teerapittayanon et al., 2016; Huang
et al., 2018; Scardapane et al., 2020; Han et al., 2022; Xu
& McAuley, 2023). More recently, it has started to gain
attention in the generative LLM domain (Schuster et al.,
2021; Corro et al., 2023; Bae et al., 2023; Varshney et al.,
2023), and is recognized as a promising direction for further
reducing the latency and costs of LLM inference (Pope et al.,
2022).

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have amazed the world
with their astonishing abilities and performance in solving
a wide range of problems (Brown et al., 2020; OpenAI,
2023; Chowdhery et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2022; Touvron
et al., 2023a;b). This is accompanied by excessive costs and
carbon emissions for training and deploying these models,

Goal and motivations. Our primary goal is to build the
infrastructure for scaling up training and inference of earlyexit LLMs. This is motivated by the observation that sizes
of early-exit models in prior works are still relatively small.
While the largest early-exit LLM that we are aware of
has 13 billion parameters (Varshney et al., 2023), standard
LLMs at much larger scales, e.g. the 175B GPT-3 (Brown
et al., 2020), 530B Megatron-Turing NLG (Smith et al.,
2022), 540B PaLM (Chowdhery et al., 2023), or even larger

*

Equal contribution 1 Alibaba Group. {chenyanxi.cyx, panxuchen.pxc, yaliang.li, bolin.ding, jingren.zhou}@alibaba-inc.com.
Correspondence to: Yaliang Li <yaliang.li@alibaba-inc.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

