Multicalibration for Confidence Scoring in LLMs

Gianluca Detommaso 1 Martin Bertran * 1 Riccardo Fogliato * 1 Aaron Roth 1 2

Abstract
This paper proposes the use of “multicalibration” to yield interpretable and reliable confidence scores for outputs generated by large language models (LLMs). Multicalibration asks
for calibration not just marginally, but simultaneously across various intersecting groupings of
the data. We show how to form groupings for
prompt/completion pairs that are correlated with
the probability of correctness via two techniques:
clustering within an embedding space, and “selfannotation” — querying the LLM by asking it
various yes-or-no questions about the prompt. We
also develop novel variants of multicalibration
algorithms that offer performance improvements
by reducing their tendency to overfit. Through
systematic benchmarking across various question answering datasets and LLMs, we show how
our techniques can yield confidence scores that
provide substantial improvements in fine-grained
measures of both calibration and accuracy compared to existing methods.

Figure 1. An application of multicalibration to question answering.
Answers are colored from red to green according to their multicalibrated confidence scores of being a hallucination. Multicalibration
is performed using Algorithm 5.

probabilities indicating whether a generated response constitutes a hallucination. Unlike conventional calibration
methods, multicalibrated probabilities are self-consistent
not just marginally (i.e. on average over all examples),
but also conditionally on various properties of the instance,
which allows them to serve as more refined risk measures.
Producing “risk scores” for hallucinations can provide an
interpretable measure of risk which can be exposed to the
user (e.g. through a coloring scheme, as in Figure 1) to
communicate the risk associated with the generated content.
Moreover, when those risk scores are calibrated, they are
not only interpretable but “trustworthy” in the sense that
they can be safely used as if they were true probabilities
(Noarov et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have revolutionized text
generation, with applications ranging from code development (Chen et al., 2021) to information retrieval (Zhu et al.,
2023). However, alongside their impressive capabilities,
LLMs possess a troubling tendency to fabricate information, generating outputs that diverge from factual reality – a
phenomenon dubbed “hallucination” (Huang et al., 2023a).
These hallucinations pose significant challenges to the trustworthiness and ethical deployment of LLMs, demanding the
development of robust detection and mitigation strategies.

Our approach mirrors the robust assurances offered by conformal prediction, where multicalibration (of quantiles) has
been used to give group-conditional guarantees (Bastani
et al., 2022; Jung et al., 2022; Gibbs et al., 2023). Traditionally multicalibration has been used to give estimates
of uncertainty in tabular data settings that hold conditionally on various features that are explicitly present in the
data — often demographic attributes like sex or race. A
key challenge in applying these techniques to hallucination
detection in LLMs is a lack of such explicit features. An

In this paper, we leverage recent “multicalibration” techniques (Hébert-Johnson et al., 2018) to produce calibrated
*

Equal contribution 1 AWS AI 2 University of Pennsylvania.
Correspondence to: Gianluca Detommaso <detommaso.gianluca@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

