Contrastive Learning for Clinical Outcome Prediction with Partial Data Sources

Meng Xia 1 Jonathan Wilson 2 Benjamin Goldstein 2 Ricardo Henao 1 2 3

Abstract

stantially improve the delivery and quality of healthcare.
Given the proven success of machine learning algorithms
in various fields such as image classification (Simonyan &
Zisserman, 2014; He et al., 2016; Dosovitskiy et al., 2020),
object detection (Redmon et al., 2016; He et al., 2017; Carion et al., 2020), and natural language processing (Devlin
et al., 2018; Brown et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2022a; Touvron
et al., 2023), numerous studies have explored the application of these algorithms to EHR datasets for a variety of
medical tasks, including disease detection (Choi et al., 2017;
Baumel et al., 2018), diagnosis (Doctor; Lipton et al., 2015)
and prognosis (Harutyunyan et al., 2019; Song et al., 2018).

The use of machine learning models to predict
clinical outcomes from (longitudinal) electronic
health record (EHR) data is becoming increasingly popular due to advances in deep architectures, representation learning, and the growing
availability of large EHR datasets. Existing models generally assume access to the same data
sources during both training and inference stages.
However, this assumption is often challenged by
the fact that real-world clinical datasets originate
from various data sources (with distinct sets of
covariates), which though can be available for
training (in a research or retrospective setting),
are more realistically only partially available (a
subset of such sets) for inference when deployed.
So motivated, we introduce Contrastive Learning
for clinical Outcome Prediction with Partial data
Sources (CLOPPS), that trains encoders to capture information across different data sources and
then leverages them to build classifiers restricting
access to a single data source. This approach can
be used with existing cross-sectional or longitudinal outcome classification models. We present
experiments on two real-world datasets demonstrating that CLOPPS consistently outperforms
strong baselines in several practical scenarios.

Prediction of clinical outcomes, e.g., mortality, has emerged
as a crucial focus due to two main reasons, namely, i) it
enables healthcare providers to tailor interventions effectively, improving patient care; and ii) it promises to improve the allocation healthcare resources, for instance, intensive care units (ICUs), staff, procedures and treatments;
all of which aid in optimizing the overall healthcare delivery
process. Initially, traditional machine learning algorithms
were used for mortality prediction tasks (Lemeshow et al.,
1994; Crawford et al., 2000; Meyfroidt et al., 2009). Later,
researchers leveraged the longitudinal nature of EHRs to
develop sequence-based models such as LSTMs (Hochreiter
& Schmidhuber, 1997) and Transformers (Vaswani et al.,
2017), for more granular (over time) and accurate outcome
predictions (Harutyunyan et al., 2019; Song et al., 2018).
Most outcome prediction models share a common assumption requiring the access to identical (clinical) data sources
during both training and inference stages. However, this assumption often does not align with the realities of real-world
healthcare settings. Common examples are those in which
data is collected by different parties (e.g., EHR and claims)
or by different systems (e.g., EHR and picture archiving
systems). Moreover, there are situations where a richer
(e.g., medical narrative) or more complete (e.g., claims) data
sources are available for model training but not at inference
due to security, privacy, readiness or portability constraints.

1. Introduction
In recent times, a growing number of healthcare institutions
have started to routinely collect and leverage electronic
health records (EHR) from large collections of patients,
resulting in the availability of vast, rich, multimodal and
longitudinal EHR datasets. The promise is that these data
sources, if harnessed effectively, have the potential to sub1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke
University, Durham, US 2 Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Duke University, Durham, US 3 King Abdullah University
of Science and Technology, Thuwal, KSA. Correspondence to:
Meng Xia <mx41@duke.edu>.

To address this important challenge and maximize the utility
of complete data sources for the purpose of enhancing prediction of outcomes in clinical settings, we introduce Contrastive Learning for clinical Outcome Prediction with Partial data Sources (CLOPPS). Specifically, we learn encoders

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

