Pursuing Overall Welfare in Federated Learning
through Sequential Decision Making

Seok-Ju Hahn 1 Gi-Soo Kim 1 2 Junghye Lee 3 4 5

1. Introduction

Abstract

Federated Learning (FL) has been posed as an effective
strategy to acquire a global model without centralizing data,
therefore with no compromise in privacy (McMahan et al.,
2017). It is commonly assumed that the central server coordinates the whole FL procedure by repeatedly aggregating
local updates from participating K clients during T rounds.

In traditional federated learning, a single global
model cannot perform equally well for all clients.
Therefore, the need to achieve the client-level fairness in federated system has been emphasized,
which can be realized by modifying the static aggregation scheme for updating the global model to
an adaptive one, in response to the local signals of
the participating clients. Our work reveals that existing fairness-aware aggregation strategies can be
unified into an online convex optimization framework, in other words, a central server’s sequential
decision making process. To enhance the decision
making capability, we propose simple and intuitive improvements for suboptimal designs within
existing methods, presenting AAggFF. Considering practical requirements, we further subdivide
our method tailored for the cross-device and the
cross-silo settings, respectively. Theoretical analyses guarantee sublinear
regret upper bounds for
√
both settings: O( T log K) for the cross-device
setting, and O(K log T ) for the cross-silo setting,
with K clients and T federation rounds. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the federated
system equipped with AAggFF achieves better
degree of client-level fairness than existing methods in both practical settings. Code is available at
https://github.com/vaseline555/AAggFF.

Since each client updates the copy of a global model with its
own data, variability across clients’ data distributions causes
many problems (Kairouz et al., 2021; Li et al., 2020b).
The client-level fairness (Chen et al., 2023) is one of the
main problems affected by such a statistical heterogeneity
(Kairouz et al., 2021; Li et al., 2020b; Mohri et al., 2019; Li
et al., 2019). Although the performance of a global model
is high in average, some clients may be more benefited than
others, resulting in violation of the client-level fairness. In
this situation, there inevitably exists a group of clients who
cannot utilize the trained global model due to its poor performance. This is a critical problem in practice since the
underperformed groups may lose motivation to participate
in the federated system. To remedy this problem, previous
works (Mohri et al., 2019; Li et al., 2019; 2020a; Hu et al.,
2022; Zhang et al., 2022) proposed to modify the static
aggregation scheme into an adaptive aggregation strategy,
according to given local signals (e.g., losses or gradients).
In detail, the server re-weights local updates by assigning
larger mixing coefficients to higher local losses.
When updating the mixing coefficients, however, only a few
bits are provided to the server, compared to the update of
a model parameter. For example, suppose that there exist
K clients in the federated system, each of which has N
local samples. When all clients participate in each round,
KN samples are used effectively for updating a new global
model θ. On the contrary, only K bits (e.g., local losses:
F1 (θ), ..., FK (θ)) are provided to the server for an update
of mixing coefficients. This is aggravated in cases where K
is too large, thus client sampling is inevitably required. In
this case, the server is provided with far less than K signals,
which hinders faithful update of the mixing coefficients.

1

Department of Industrial Enginnering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), Ulsan, South Korea 2 Artificial Intelligence Graduate School, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), Ulsan, South Korea 3 Technology Management, Economics and Policy Program,
Seoul National University (SNU), Seoul, South Korea 4 Graduate
School of Engineering Practice, Seoul National University (SNU),
Seoul, South Korea 5 Institute of Engineering Research, Seoul
National University (SNU), Seoul, South Korea. Correspondence to: Junghye Lee <junghye@snu.ac.kr>, Gi-Soo Kim
<gisookim@unist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

For sequentially updating a status in this sample-deficient situation, the Online Convex Optimization (OCO) framework
1

