Randomized Confidence Bounds for Stochastic Partial Monitoring

Maxime Heuillet 1 Ola Ahmad 1 2 Audrey Durand 1 3

Abstract

ronment simultaneously selects an outcome. The agent then
incurs an instant loss and receives a feedback signal that is
partially informative about the outcome. The challenge is
that the agent does not observe the loss while the goal of
the agent is to minimize the (unobserved) cumulative loss.
To achieve this goal, the agent trades-off between actions
associated to informative feedback signals (exploration) and
small-loss actions (exploitation).

The partial monitoring (PM) framework provides
a theoretical formulation of sequential learning
problems with incomplete feedback. At each
round, a learning agent plays an action while the
environment simultaneously chooses an outcome.
The agent then observes a feedback signal that is
only partially informative about the (unobserved)
outcome. The agent leverages the received feedback signals to select actions that minimize the
(unobserved) cumulative loss. In contextual PM,
the outcomes depend on some side information
that is observable by the agent before selecting the
action. In this paper, we consider the contextual
and non-contextual PM settings with stochastic
outcomes. We introduce a new class of PM strategies based on the randomization of deterministic
confidence bounds. We also extend regret guarantees to settings where existing stochastic strategies
are not applicable. Our experiments show that the
proposed RandCBP and RandCBPside⋆ strategies have competitive performance against stateof-the-art baselines in multiple PM games. To
illustrate how the PM framework can benefit real
world applications, we design a use case on the
real-world problem of monitoring the error rate
of any deployed classification system.

At a specific round, the agent’s performance is measured
by the regret. The regret corresponds to the difference between the loss of the selected action and the loss of the
best action. The cumulative regret scales linearly with the
horizon of rounds T if the agent fails to identify the best
action. In this work, we consider the stochastic PM setting
where outcomes are independent and identically distributed
(i.i.d.) according to some (unknown) stationary outcome
distribution. In the stochastic setting, Bartók et al. (2011)
classified PM games into four categories based on achievable bounds on the cumulative regret: trivial games (no
regret);
√ easy games with poly-logarithmic upper bounds in
Θ̃( T ) ; hard games with upper bounds in Θ(T 2/3 ); and
intractable games with lower bounds in Ω(T ). For example,
the well-known multi-armed bandit problem (Auer et al.,
2002) corresponds to an easy game. Additionally, hard
games capture a valuable diversity of applications, such as
learning from costly expert advice (Helmbold et al., 1997)
and dynamic pricing (Kleinberg et al., 2003).
Deterministic PM strategies such as CBP (Confidence
Bound Partial Monitoring) (Bartók et al., 2012b) and PMDMED (Komiyama et al., 2015) have sub-linear regret guarantees on both easy and hard games. However, these are
consistently outperformed empirically by stochastic strategies such as BPM-Least (Vanchinathan et al., 2014) and
TSPM (Tsuchiya et al., 2020), for which regret guarantees
are limited to easy games.

1. Introduction
Partial monitoring (Bartók et al., 2014) is a framework to
formulate online learning problems where the feedback is
partially informative. These online learning problems can
be cast as partial monitoring (PM) games played between
a learning agent and the environment over multiple rounds.
At a given round, the agent selects an action and the envi-

The contextual PM setting is an extension of the stochastic setting where the outcome distribution is a function of
some side information (a context) observed by the agent
before selecting the action at each round. Existing contextual PM strategies are fairly restrictive. The deterministic
CBPside (Bartók et al., 2012a) (a contextual extension of
CBP) is not applicable to hard games. On the other hand,
the stochastic IDS-FW (Kirschner et al., 2023) has regret

*

Equal contribution 1 Université Laval, Canada 2 Thales Research and Technology (cortAIx), Canada 3 Canada-CIFAR
AI Chair, Mila, Canada.
Correspondence to: Maxime
Heuillet <maxime.heuillet.1@ulaval.ca>, Audrey Durand <audrey.durand@ift.ulaval.ca>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

