Towards Theoretical Understanding of Learning Large-scale Dependent Data via
Random Features
Chao Wang 1 Xin Bing 2 Xin He 1 Caixing Wang 1

Abstract

analysis. Theoretical guarantees for the kernel-based methods have been widely studied in literature (Smale & Zhou,
2007; Caponnetto & De Vito, 2007), just to name a few.
Despite their attractive theoretical properties, these methods
could suffer severe computational burden in dealing with
large-scale data, mainly due to the problem of solving and
storing the inverse of the kernel matrix. To alleviate such
issue, a variety of methods have been proposed, and one
major class is known as kernel approximation, including
Nyström subsampling (Rudi et al., 2015), random sketching
(Yang et al., 2017) and random features (Rahimi & Recht,
2007). Interested readers are referred to Section 3.3 of Rudi
& Rosasco (2017) for detailed comparison and discussion
on these methods.

Random feature (RF) mapping is an attractive
and powerful technique for solving large-scale
nonparametric regression. Yet, the existing theoretical analysis crucially relies on the i.i.d. assumption that individuals in the data are independent and identically distributed. It is still unclear
whether learning accuracy would be compromised
when the i.i.d. assumption is violated. This paper
aims to provide theoretical understanding of the
kernel ridge regression (KRR) with RFs for largescale dependent data. Specifically, we consider
two types of data dependence structure, namely,
the τ -mixing process with exponential decay coefficient, and that with polynomial decay coefficient.
Theoretically, we prove that the kernel ridge estimator with RFs achieves the minimax optimality
under the exponential decay scenario, but yields
a sub-optimal result under the polynomial decay
case. Our analysis further reveals how the decay
rate of the τ -mixing coefficient impacts the learning accuracy of the kernel ridge estimator with
RFs. Extensive numerical experiments on both
synthetic and real examples further validate our
theoretical findings and support the effectiveness
of the KRR with RFs in dealing with dependent
data.

Among them, random feature technique involves constructing an explicit feature mapping with a dimension much
lower than the number of observations. It is proven to be
state-of-the-art from both computational and theoretical aspects (Rudi & Rosasco, 2017; Bach, 2017; Avron et al.,
2017; Sun et al., 2018; Liu & Lian, 2023). Specifically,
Rudi & Rosasco (2017) shows the kernel ridge regression
estimator with random features (KRR-RF) not only enjoys
computational efficiency due to the reduced dimension of
RFs, but also preserves the minimax optimal learning rate,
compared to the standard KRR, provided that the number of
RFs is not chosen too small. However, it is worth pointing
out that the results in Rudi & Rosasco (2017) are established under the i.i.d. assumption which could be restrictive in many real applications, including clinical medicine,
speech recognition, and traffic data (Ralanamahatana et al.,
2005; Fu, 2011). It is unclear whether the aforementioned
properties of KRR-RF still hold when the i.i.d. assumption is violated. This leaves an open question in theoretical
understanding of KRR-RF in dealing with the dependent
data.

1. Introduction
Kernel-based methods (Kimeldorf & Wahba, 1971; Wahba,
1990; Vapnik, 1999; Schölkopf & Smola, 2002) stand as
a cornerstone in machine learning community due to their
computational convenience, flexible framework, and rich capacity of offering efficient and powerful tools for statistical

This paper attempts to fulfill this gap and provide an answer
to the question: whether, and if so, to what extent does the
dependency structure within the data affect the performance
of learning with random features? In the existing literature,
data dependence is often characterized by the mixing structure of stochastic processes, such as α-mixing (Modha &
Masry, 1996), β-mixing (Yu, 1994) and ϕ-mixing (Birman
& Solomyak, 1967). It is worthy pointing out that although

1

School of Statistics and Management, Shanghai University of Finance and Economics, Shanghai, China 2 Department
of Statistical Sciences, University of Toronto. Correspondence
to: Xin He <he.xin17@mail.shufe.edu.cn>, Caixing Wang
<wang.caixing@stu.sufe.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

