Bespoke Non-Stationary Solvers
for Fast Sampling of Diffusion and Flow Models

Neta Shaul 1 Uriel Singer 2 Ricky T. Q. Chen 3 Matthew Le 3 Ali Thabet 2 Albert Pumarola 2 Yaron Lipman 3 1

Abstract

Sample efficiency of generative models is crucial to enable
certain applications, e.g., ones that require interaction with
a user, as well as to reduce carbon footprint and costs of
these, now vastly popular models. An ongoing research effort targets reducing sampling complexity of diffusion/flow
models, concentrating on three main venues: (i) dedicated
solvers: employing high-order numerical ODE solvers (Karras et al., 2022) and/or time and scale reparameterizations to
further simplify sample trajectories (Zhang & Chen, 2022);
(ii) model distillation: fine-tuning the model to approximate
the original model’s samples or the training data with less
function evaluations (Salimans & Ho, 2022; Meng et al.,
2023; Liu et al., 2022). Recently also perception and GAN
discriminator losses have been incorporated to improve perception quality (Yin et al., 2023); (iii) solver distillation: a
rather recent and unexplored approach that limits distillation
to optimizing a numerical solver that effectively sample the
original model (that is kept frozen). While model distillation
is generally able to reduce the number of function evaluations (NFEs) for producing samples with high perceptual
scores, it can reduce the diversity of the model and shift the
generated distribution. Furthermore, it is still costly to train
(i.e., conceptually continues training the original model),
and mostly requires access to the original training data. In
contrast, solver distillation enjoys a tiny parameters space
(i.e., <200 of parameters), very fast optimization compared
to model distillation (i.e., by two order of magnitude), and
does not require access to training data (Shaul et al., 2023).

This paper introduces Bespoke Non-Stationary
(BNS) Solvers, a solver distillation approach to
improve sample efficiency of Diffusion and Flow
models. BNS solvers are based on a family of
non-stationary solvers that provably subsumes existing numerical ODE solvers and consequently
demonstrate considerable improvement in sample approximation (PSNR) over these baselines.
Compared to model distillation, BNS solvers benefit from a tiny parameter space (<200 parameters), fast optimization (two orders of magnitude faster), maintain diversity of samples, and in
contrast to previous solver distillation approaches
nearly close the gap from standard distillation
methods such as Progressive Distillation in the
low-medium NFE regime. For example, BNS
solver achieves 45 PSNR / 1.76 FID using 16
NFE in class-conditional ImageNet-64. We experimented with BNS solvers for conditional image generation, text-to-image generation, and text2-audio generation showing significant improvement in sample approximation (PSNR) in all.

1. Introduction

The main goal of this paper is to introduce Bespoke NonStationary (BNS) solvers, a solver distillation approach that
provably subsumes all previous dedicated and distillation
solvers (that we are aware of). While BNS solver family
enjoys higher expressive power, it still inherits other model
distillation properties such as tiny parameter space and fast
training. Its higher expressive power demonstrates a considerable improvement in approximating the original model’s
samples (PSNR) for lower NFEs, and is able to nearly close
the gap with standard model distillation approaches such as
Progressive Distillation (Salimans & Ho, 2022) in terms of
perception quality (FID) for low-medium NFE range (i.e.,
8-16). We have experimented with BNS solvers for conditional image generation, Text-to-Image (T2I) generation,
and Text-to-Audio generation. In all cases BNS solvers

Diffusion and flow-based methods are now established as
a leading paradigm for generative models of high dimensional signals including images (Rombach et al., 2021),
videos (Singer et al., 2022) audio (Vyas et al., 2023), 3D
geometry (Yariv et al., 2023), and physical structures such
as molecules and proteins (Hoogeboom et al., 2022). While
having an efficient training algorithms, sampling is a costly
process that still requires tens to hundreds of sequential
function evaluations to produce a sample.
1
Weizmann Institute of Science 2 GenAI, Meta 3 FAIR, Meta.
Correspondence to: Neta Shaul <Neta.Shaul@weizmann.ac.il>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

