Binning as a Pretext Task:
Improving Self-Supervised Learning in Tabular Domains

Kyungeun Lee 1 Ye Seul Sim 1 Hye-Seung Cho 1 Moonjung Eo 1 Suhee Yoon 1 Sanghyu Yoon 1
Woohyung Lim 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Tabular datasets are ubiquitous across diverse applications
from financial markets and healthcare diagnostics to ecommerce personalization and manufacturing process automation. These datasets are structured with rows representing individual samples and columns representing heterogeneous features—a combination of categorical and numerical features—and they serve as the foundation for
myriad analyses. Despite the wide applicability of tabular data, research into leveraging deep networks to harness the inherent properties of such datasets is still in its
nascent stage. In contrast, tree-based machine learning
algorithms like XGBoost (Chen & Guestrin, 2016) and
CatBoost (Prokhorenkova et al., 2018) have consistently
demonstrated prowess in discerning the nuances of tabular domains, outperforming deep networks even those with
a larger model capacity and specialized modules (Arik &
Pfister, 2021; Gorishniy et al., 2021; Grinsztajn et al., 2022;
Rubachev et al., 2022). The consistent edge held by tree
models fuels the exploration of how their advantageous biases can be adapted for deep networks.

The ability of deep networks to learn superior
representations hinges on leveraging the proper
inductive biases, considering the inherent properties of datasets. In tabular domains, it is
critical to effectively handle heterogeneous features (both categorical and numerical) in a unified manner and to grasp irregular functions like
piecewise constant functions. To address the
challenges in the self-supervised learning framework, we propose a novel pretext task based
on the classical binning method. The idea is
straightforward: reconstructing the bin indices
(either orders or classes) rather than the original values. This pretext task provides the encoder with an inductive bias to capture the irregular dependencies, mapping from continuous
inputs to discretized bins, and mitigates the feature heterogeneity by setting all features to have
category-type targets. Our empirical investigations ascertain several advantages of binning:
capturing the irregular function, compatibility
with encoder architecture and additional modifications, standardizing all features into equal sets,
grouping similar values within a feature, and
providing ordering information. Comprehensive evaluations across diverse tabular datasets
corroborate that our method consistently improves tabular representation learning performance for a wide range of downstream tasks.
The codes are available in https://github.
com/kyungeun-lee/tabularbinning.

Recently, the quest to boost the performance of deep networks on tabular data has gained momentum. A fundamental challenge is the inherent heterogeneity of tabular
datasets, encompassing both categorical and numerical features (Popov et al., 2019; Borisov et al., 2022; Yan et al.,
2023). To mitigate the feature discrepancies in deep networks, previous studies proposed using an additional module like a feature tokenizer (Gorishniy et al., 2021) and an
abstract layer (Chen et al., 2022). Concurrently, some research has explored ways to infuse the proven strengths of
tree-based models into deep networks. For instance, Grinsztajn et al. (2022) observed that deep networks tend to prefer overly smooth solutions and struggle with modeling irregularities like piecewise constant functions, in contrast to
the tree-based models. To address this challenge, Gorishniy
et al. (2022) introduced a novel approach combining piecewise linear encoding during preprocessing and periodic activation functions. Although these advancements have led
to enhanced performance on several tabular data problems,
they have predominantly been explored within a supervised

1
LG AI Research, Seoul, Repulic of Korea. Correspondence
to: Woohyung Lim <w.lim@lgresearch.ai>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

