Collaborative Heterogeneous Causal Inference Beyond Meta-analysis

Tianyu Guo 1 Sai Praneeth Karimireddy 2 Michael I. Jordan 1 2

Abstract

sity score model. Thanks to the homogeneity, we can use
FL methods to train a shared propensity score model, then
each site gets its own ATE estimator, and ﬁnally, the central
server uses Meta-analysis to take the weighted mean.

Collaboration between different data centers is
often challenged by heterogeneity across sites.
To account for the heterogeneity, the state-of-theart method is to re-weight the covariate distributions in each site to match the distribution of the
target population. Nevertheless, this method still
relies on the concept of traditional meta-analysis
after adjusting for the distribution shift. This
work proposes a collaborative inverse propensity
score weighting estimator for causal inference
with heterogeneous data. Instead of adjusting
the distribution shift separately, we use weighted
propensity score models to collaboratively adjust
for the distribution shift. Our method shows signiﬁcant improvements over the methods based
on meta-analysis when heterogeneity increases.
By incorporating outcome regression models, we
prove the asymptotic normality when the covariates have dimension d < 8. Our methods preserve privacy at individual sites by implementing
federated learning protocols.

Nevertheless, given heterogeneous data, Federated Learning seems to play a negligible role. Since propensity score
models differ between sites, training a shared model is
meaningless. As a result, all methods fall within the scope
of Meta-analysis. For example, to estimate the ATE for a
target site, Han et al. (2022) and Han et al. (2023b) consider using density ratio to re-weight source sites and summarizing estimates from source sites with Meta-analysis.
We propose a novel method tailored for collaboration with
heterogeneous data. Suppose we have K sites, denote the
ATE as τ , the nuisance propensity model as e, the site-wise
weight as ηk . Instead of taking the weighted mean afterward, we directly
take the weighted mean of nuisance modPK
els and get τ̂k ( r=1 ηr êr ) in each site k, which is inconsistent. Then, we could recover a consistent estimator τ̂C LB
by taking the average across all sites. Equations (1) and (2)
summarize the previous and our estimators.
τ̂homo =

1. Introduction

K
X

ηk τ̂k (êFL )

τ̂heter =

k=1

The booming of Federated Learning (FL) has drawn attention in medical and social sciences, where sharing datasets
between data centers is often limited. However, their research focuses more on Causal Inference, in which prediction gets less attention, whereas valid inference is the
main focus. For example, Meta-analysis takes the weighted
mean of published estimators of the average treatment effect (ATE) and mainly focuses on choosing optimal weights
and making inferences.

we propose:

K
X

ηk τ̂k (êk ),

(1)

k=1

τ̂C LB =

K
X

τ̂k (

PK

r=1 ηr êr ).

(2)

k=1

Our method outperforms previous ones in several ways:
ﬁrst, it is the ﬁrst method that allows collaboration across
disjoint domains without additional assumptions; second,
it achieves better accuracy than Meta-analysis; third, it remains stable even as the heterogeneity between sites increases, which encourages collaboration from a broader
range. We provide theory and experiment to demonstrate
these claims.

Given homogeneous data, how could Federated Learning
help Causal Inference? The estimation of ATE commonly
incorporates nuisance prediction models, e.g., the propen-

2. Problem Setup

1

Department of Statistics, UC Berkeley. 2 Department of
EECS, University of California, UC Berkeley. Correspondence
to: Tianyu Guo <tianyu_guo@berkeley.edu>.

We use S = [K] to denote the set of sites, with D(k) being
the dataset of site k. Let Z be the binary treatment, X ∈ Rd
be the covariates with dimension d, Y be the outcome. Let
Y (z) be the potential outcome under treatment z ∈ {1, 0}.
Classical causal inference only copes with the biased sam-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

