Model-based Reinforcement Learning for Parameterized Action Spaces

Renhao Zhang * 1 Haotian Fu * 1 Yilin Miao 1 George Konidaris 1

Abstract

or Robot Soccer (Hausknecht & Stone, 2016b).

We propose a novel model-based reinforcement learning algorithm—Dynamics Learning
and predictive control with Parameterized Actions (DLPA)—for Parameterized Action Markov
Decision Processes (PAMDPs). The agent
learns a parameterized-action-conditioned dynamics model and plans with a modified Model Predictive Path Integral control. We theoretically
quantify the difference between the generated trajectory and the optimal trajectory during planning
in terms of the value they achieved through the
lens of Lipschitz Continuity. Our empirical results on several standard benchmarks show that
our algorithm achieves superior sample efficiency
and asymptotic performance than state-of-the-art
PAMDP methods.1

Compared to just discrete or continuous action space, Reinforcement Learning with Parameterized action space allows
the agent to perform more structural exploration and solve
more complex tasks with a semantically more meaningful
action space (Hausknecht & Stone, 2016b). Recent papers provide various approaches for RL in the PAMDP
setting (Bester et al., 2019; Fu et al., 2019; Fan et al.,
2019; Li et al., 2022). However, to the best of our knowledge, all previous methods are model-free. By contrast, in
continuous/discrete-only action spaces, deep model-based
reinforcement learning has shown better performance than
model-free approaches in many complex domains (Hafner
et al., 2020; 2021; 2023; Hansen et al., 2022), in terms of
both sample efficiency and asymptotic performance. We
therefore seek to leverage the high sample efficiency of
model-based RL in PAMDPs.
We propose a model-based RL framework tailored for
PAMDPs: Dynamics Learning and predictive control with
Parameterized Actions (DLPA). Our key innovations in
terms of contextualizing model-based RL in PAMDPs are:
1. We propose three inference structures for the transition model considering the entangled parameterized action
space. 2. We propose to update the transition models with
H-step loss. 3. We propose to learn two separate reward
predictors conditioned on the prediction for termination.
4. We propose an approach for PAMDP-specific MPPI.
We empirically find that all these components significantly
improves the algorithm’s performance. We also provide theoretical analysis regarding DLPA’s performance guarantee
and sample complexity, which is the first theoretical performance bound for PAMDP RL algorithm, to the best of our
knowledge. Our empirical results on 8 different PAMDP
benchmarks show that DLPA achieves better or comparable
asymptotic performance with significantly better sample
efficiency than all the state-of-the-art PAMDP algorithms.
We also find that DLPA succeeds in tasks with extremely
large parameterized action spaces where prior methods cannot succeed without learning a complex action embedding
space, and converges much faster. The proposed method
even outperforms a method (Li et al., 2022) that has a customized action space compression algorithm as the original
parameterized action space becomes larger. To the best of
our knowledge, our work is the first method that successfully

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has gained significant traction in recent years due to its proven capabilities in solving
a wide range of decision-making problems across various
domains, from game playing (Mnih et al., 2015) to robot
control (Schulman et al., 2015; Lillicrap et al., 2016). One of
the complexities inherent to some RL problems is a discretecontinuous hybrid action space. For instance, in a robot soccer game, at each time step the agent must choose a discrete
action (move, dribble or shoot) as well as the continuous
parameters corresponding to that chosen discrete action, e.g.
the location to move/dribble to. In this setting—the Parameterized Action Markov Decision Processes (PAMDP) (Masson et al., 2016)—each discrete action is parameterized by
some continuous parameters, and the agent must choose
them together at every timestep. PAMDPs model many applications of interest like RTS Games (Xiong et al., 2018)
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science,
Brown University.
Correspondence to: Renhao Zhang
<rzhan160@cs.brown.edu>, Haotian Fu <hfu7@cs.brown.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
Code available at https://github.com/Valarzz/
DLPA.

1

