Efficient Exploration for LLMs

Vikranth Dwaracherla 1 Seyed Mohammad Asghari 1 Botao Hao 1 Benjamin Van Roy 1 2

Abstract

solution is easy.

We present evidence of substantial benefit from
efficient exploration in gathering human feedback
to improve large language models. In our experiments, an agent sequentially generates queries
while fitting a reward model to the feedback
received. Our best-performing agent generates
queries using double Thompson sampling, with
uncertainty represented by an epistemic neural
network. Our results demonstrate that efficient
exploration enables high levels of performance
with far fewer queries. Further, both uncertainty
estimation and the choice of exploration scheme
play critical roles.

Suppose, for example, a pretrained model extrapolates from
its training data to generate large numbers – perhaps millions
or billions – of ideas, one of which is ingenious. While a
human may not have come up with that idea, learning from
enough human feedback can identify it from among the large
number of ideas generated by the model. And, building on
this innovation, further extrapolation can continue to expand
the frontier of ingenuity. In this way, with enough human
feedback, a model ought to become capable of generating
content that a human could not. But will gathering the
required feedback take months, years, or decades?
We present in this paper evidence of enormous benefit to
active exploration. By active exploration we mean the tailoring of interactions to elicit useful feedback. In particular,
our results demonstrate that high levels of performance can
be attained with far less feedback. This acceleration may enable superhuman ingenuity much, perhaps decades, sooner.

1. Introduction
Large language models demonstrate remarkable capabilities
after learning from enormous volumes of text data (Anil
et al., 2023; Hoffmann et al., 2022; OpenAI, 2023). Yet, reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) greatly
improves their behavior even after only tens of thousands of
interactions (Stiennon et al., 2020; Bai et al., 2022; Ouyang
et al., 2022; Glaese et al., 2022). The uptake of chatbots
affords opportunities to gather increasing volumes of human
feedback, with each engagement eliciting expressions of
satisfaction or preference (OpenAI, 2022). It is natural to
wonder what new capabilities may emerge with this growing
source of data. Superhuman ingenuity remains an alluring
possibility.

A common practice in reinforcement learning from human
feedback (RLHF) is to send queries, each comprised of a
prompt and a pair of distinct responses, to human raters.
Each rater expresses a preference for one response over the
other. Prompts are drawn from a corpus, while responses
are generated by the large language model. As this process
progresses, a reward model is fit to the data and steers subsequent responses to align with with feedback received thus
far.
In this paper, we restrict attention to the aforementioned
sort of interaction, in which each query includes a prompt
and pair of distinct responses. We refer to the standard practice of sampling each pair of responses using the language
model as passive exploration. We compare the performance
of passive exploration to several active exploration algorithms. One is Boltzmann exploration, which tends to select
responses with higher predicted reward. We also tried two
approaches that leverage uncertainty estimates offered by an
epistemic neural network (ENN). The first, which we refer
to as infomax, selects a pair of responses with an aim of maximizing information revealed by the feedback. This belongs
within the widely used collection of algorithms that aim to
maximize information gain (see, e.g., (MacKay, 1992; Sun
et al., 2011; Houthooft et al., 2016; Sadigh et al., 2018)).
The second, called double Thompson sampling (Wu & Liu,

With increasing volumes, more can be inferred from human
feedback. This allows behavior to deviate further from
that of a pretrained model. But given that this process
learns only from humans, how can we hope for emergence
of superhuman ingenuity? Perhaps such an outcome is
plausible because rating is easier than synthesizing novel
content. This is analogous to how, for an NP-complete
problem, though solution is hard, verification of a proposed
1
Google DeepMind 2 Stanford University. Correspondence to:
Vikranth Dwaracherla <vikranthd@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

