Switchable Decision: Dynamic Neural Generation Networks

Shujian Zhang 1 Korawat Tanwisuth 1 Chengyue Gong 1 Pengcheng He Mingyuan Zhou 1

Abstract

or compressing the model parameters, e.g., pruning unimportant parts of the neural model weights (Han et al., 2015b;
Fan et al., 2019; Gordon et al., 2020), quantizing the number
of bits needed (Lin et al., 2016; Shen et al., 2020), distilling
from large teacher models to small student models (Hinton
et al., 2015; Jiao et al., 2019). These methods produce only
one small model with a predetermined target size. Another
direction is to switch the model parameters for different
data instances, e.g., the mixture of experts (Shazeer et al.,
2017), and switch transformer (Fedus et al., 2021). Early
exiting, which adaptively produces a series of small models
for different data instances, is one of the most common practices. Most previous work makes exit decisions based on
either the confidence of output probability distributions or a
trained agent. In this work, we propose a carefully designed
candidate space for encoder-decoder auto-regressive models
and enhance the optimization strategies when training the
agent.

Auto-regressive generation models achieve competitive performance across many different NLP
tasks such as summarization, question answering, and classifications. However, they are also
known for being slow in inference, which makes
them challenging to deploy in real-time applications. We propose a switchable decision to accelerate inference by dynamically assigning computation resources for each data instance. Automatically making decisions on where to skip
and how to balance quality and computation cost
with constrained optimization, our dynamic neural generation networks enforce the efficient inference path and determine the optimized trade-off.
Experiments across question answering, summarization, and classification benchmarks show that
our method benefits from less computation cost
during inference while keeping the same accuracy. Extensive experiments and ablation studies
demonstrate that our method can be general, effective, and beneficial for many NLP tasks.

In this spirit, we explore the problem of dynamically allocating computation across a generation model. In particular, we consider a standard encoder-decoder transformer
auto-regressive generation model. It comprises a stacked
structure with multiple layers, each having a multi-head
attention layer followed by a feed-forward network (FFN)
layer (Zhang et al., 2021b;a; Dai et al., 2022; Tanwisuth
et al., 2023). To this end, we introduce a dynamic neural
network for the auto-regressive generation models, which
includes the attention, feed-forward, and input sequence as
the candidate space for switchable decisions. Our method
generates an input-dependent inference strategy for each
data. For each input sequence, the reinforcement learning
agent outputs all the decisions for skipping or keeping each
candidate. With the first-layer hidden representations as the
input, the policy network is trained to maximize a reward
that incentives the use of as few blocks or tokens as possible
while preserving the prediction accuracy.

1. Introduction
Large-scale pre-trained language models such as BART
(Lewis et al., 2019)
(Lewis et al., 2019) have demonstrated a significant performance gain to the natural language processing (NLP)
community but generally come with the cost of a heavy
computational burden. Besides pre-training and fine-tuning,
inference of such a large model also comes with a heavy
computational cost. On IoT (Internet of things) devices
and real-world applications, lower computation cost tolerance and restricted computation resource during inference
impede these models from deployment.

We propose learning optimal switchable strategies that simultaneously preserve prediction accuracy and minimal
computation usage based on input-specific decisions. The
constrained optimization is utilized as a more principled
approach for trading off these two targets (quality v.s. efficiency). We target keeping the predicted quality while
achieving better efficiency as far as possible. A gradientbased constrained optimization algorithm is implemented

Recent efforts of efficient inference mainly focus on pruning
1
The University of Texas at Austin. Correspondence to: Shujian
Zhang <szhang19@utexas.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

