Conformal Predictions under Markovian Data
Frédéric Zheng 1 Alexandre Proutiere 1

Abstract

including regression and classification.

We study the split Conformal Prediction method
when applied to Markovian data. We quantify the
gap in terms of coverage induced by the correlations in the data (compared to exchangeable data).
This gap strongly depends on the mixing properties of the underlying Markovp
chain, and we
prove that it typically scales as tmix ln(n)/n
(where tmix is the mixing time of the chain). We
also derive upper bounds on the impact of the correlations on the size of the prediction set. Finally
we present K-split CP, a method that consists in
thinning the calibration dataset and that adapts to
the mixing properties of the chain. Its coverage
gap is reduced to tmix /(n ln(n)) without really
affecting the size of the prediction set. We finally
test our algorithms on synthetic and real-world
datasets.

CP typically works as follows. Consider a model µ̂ fitted to
a training dataset and with input (or covariate) X and output
µ̂(X). Based on this model and on a calibration dataset
of n (covariate, response) pairs {(X1 , Yt )}nt=1 , CP builds,
for a given certainty level 1 − α, Cn (Xn+1 ) a set of most
likely responses. This set is chosen with size as small as
possible while ensuring the following coverage guarantee
P[Yn+1 ∈ Cn (Xn+1 ] ≥ 1 − α.
The coverage guarantees achieved using CP crucially require the calibration data to be sampled independently and
identically (i.i.d.) or at least to be exchangeable. This assumption does not hold in many real-world datasets, where
indeed samples may be highly correlated. Such correlations
arise naturally in learning tasks pertaining to time series
(e.g. predicting the evolution of market behavior) (Gibbs
& Candes, 2021; Zaffran et al., 2022) or to more general
dynamical systems (e.g. in Reinforcement Learning or adaptive control) (Foffano et al., 2023; Dixit et al., 2023). In this
paper, we aim at studying CP methods when the correlations
in the data are modelled as a Markov chain ({(X1 , Yt )}t≥1
is a Markov chain). This model is general and includes the
classical scenario where the successive covariates form a
Markov chain and where the response Yt remains independent of {(Xs , Ys )}s̸=t (Bresler et al., 2020; Oliveira et al.,
2022). For this model, we address the following questions.
(a) How are the coverage and the prediction set size affected
by the correlations in the data? (b) How can we adapt the
CP methods to minimize the impact of these correlations?

1. Introduction
Machine Learning (ML) algorithms and in particular those
based on deep neural networks are being increasingly used
by practitioners in critical decision processes. If the resulting models often achieve unprecedented levels of prediction
performance, they most often come without any guarantees, which can be too hazardous in application fields where
safety is crucial (including health care, self driving vehicles,
etc.). Introduced and developed by Vovk, see (Vovk et al.,
2005; Gammerman & Vovk, 2007; Shafer & Vovk, 2008),
Conformal Prediction (CP) is a robust and flexible tool to
quantify and handle the inherent uncertainty of these models.
The CP framework allows us to build, from any black-box
prediction model, a new model whose output is a prediction
set with guaranteed level of certainty. CP has become very
popular recently, see (Lei & Wasserman, 2014; Lei et al.,
2018; Romano et al., 2019; Angelopoulos & Bates, 2023)
and references therein, and applied to various learning tasks

Contributions.
1. We first provide a theoretical analysis of marginal coverage and of the prediction set size under the classical split
CP method in the case of Markovian data. The additional
coverage gap due to the correlations depends on the mixing
properties of the underlying Markov chain, and we establish
that under q
generic ergodicity assumptions, this gap scales
at most as tmix ln(n)
n where n is the size of the calibration
dataset and tmix denotes the mixing time of the Markov
chain. We further show that typically, the increase in the
size of the p
prediction interval due to the correlations does
not exceed tmix /n.

1

Division of Decision and Control Systems, EECS KTH and
Digital Futures, Stockholm, Sweden. Correspondence to: Frédéric
Zheng <fzheng@kth.se>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

2. We then investigate the idea of thinning the calibration
dataset so as to alleviate the impact of correlations. We
1

