Dual Operating Modes of In-Context Learning

Ziqian Lin 1 Kangwook Lee 2

Abstract

in-context examples (Brown et al., 2020). This emergent
ability of LLMs, known as in-context learning (ICL), operates in two distinct modes: task learning and task
retrieval (Pan et al., 2023). Large language models exemplify this duality. They can learn unseen functions from incontext examples, demonstrating the learning mode (Brown
et al., 2020; Razeghi et al., 2022; Garg et al., 2022). Concurrently, LLMs can also retrieve and utilize a pretrained skill.
A clear evidence of the task retrieval mode is presented by
Min et al. (2022), where the authors show ICL performance
remains largely unaffected even when in-context examples
are annotated with random labels. This suggests that LLMs
simply retrieve a pretrained skill rather than learn it from
in-context examples.

In-context learning (ICL) exhibits dual operating
modes: task learning, i.e. acquiring a new skill
from in-context samples, and task retrieval, i.e.,
locating and activating a relevant pretrained skill.
Recent theoretical work proposes various mathematical models to analyze ICL, but they cannot
fully explain the duality. In this work, we analyze
a generalized probabilistic model for pretraining
data, obtaining a quantitative understanding of
the two operating modes of ICL. Leveraging
our analysis, we provide the first explanation
of an unexplained phenomenon observed with
real-world large language models (LLMs). Under
some settings, the ICL risk initially increases and
then decreases with more in-context examples.
Our analysis offers a plausible explanation
for this “early ascent” phenomenon: a limited
number of in-context samples may lead to the
retrieval of an incorrect skill, thereby increasing
the risk, which will eventually diminish as
task learning takes effect with more in-context
samples. We also analyze ICL with biased
labels, e.g., zero-shot ICL, where in-context
examples are assigned random labels, and
predict the bounded efficacy of such approaches.
We corroborate our analysis and predictions
with extensive experiments with Transformers
and LLMs. The code is available at: https:
//github.com/UW-Madison-Lee-Lab/
Dual_Operating_Modes_of_ICL.

The dual nature of ICL can be explained as follows. LLMs
are a next-token predictor that is pretrained on a large pretraining set, consisting of diverse data from diverse domains/tasks. To predict the next token optimally in such
a scenario, the model must first learn the task prior from
pretraining data and then implicitly perform Bayesian inference at the test time (Xie et al., 2022; Raventos et al., 2023).
Optimal prediction on multitask pretraining data requires
adherence to the learned prior (over the tasks present in
the pretraining data) and making predictions based on the
posterior. The ability to learn and apply this prior during
test-time inference enables task retrieval–if in-context examples align closely with a task encountered during pretraining,
the model can swiftly adjust its posterior and predict without
learning a new skill. Simultaneously, the model can learn a
novel or uncommon skill given sufficient in-context samples
and a non-zero prior probability for that skill.
Although the link between pretraining and ICL’s dual modes
is conceptually straightforward, formally establishing this
connection is an unresolved challenge. Motivated by this,
our work seeks to address the following questions: How
do we rigorously explain the dual operating modes of ICL?
Can we define the conditions under which the retrieval mode
is a dominant one and vice versa?

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) exhibit a significant improvement in predictive performance when provided with
1

Department of Computer Science, University of WisconsinMadison, Madison, Wisconsin, USA 2 Department of Electrical &
Computer Engineering, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, USA. Correspondence to: Kangwook Lee <kangwook.lee@wisc.edu>.

A New Model for Pretraining Data To find the answers
to these questions, we first propose a new probabilistic
model for pretraining data by assuming the pretraining data
has a latent clustered structure. In particular, we consider
in-context learning of linear functions following the recent

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

