Robust Learning-Augmented Dictionaries

Ali Zeynali 1 Shahin Kamali 2 Mohammad Hajiesmaili 1

Abstract

useful in many applications. However, hash tables do not
efficiently support operations like successor and rank/select
queries (Lin et al., 2022). In comparison, binary search
trees (BST) and skip lists keep items sorted and thus support
queries that involve ordering items with minimal augmentation. Classic BSTs such as red-black trees, AVL trees,
treaps, and classic skip lists support dictionary operations
in O(log n) time, which is optimal for a single operation.
For a sequence of m operations in a data stream, however,
these structures are sub-optimal as they do not react to the
access patterns in the input. For example, an input may
be formed by m requests to a leaf i of a balanced BST,
giving it a total cost of Θ(m log n), while a solution that
first moves i to the root has a cost of Θ(m + log n). The
same argument can be made by making requests to a key
replicated once at the deepest level of a skip list. Splay
trees (Sleator & Tarjan, 1985) are self-adjusting BSTs that
move each accessed item to the tree’s root via a splay operation. Splay trees are statically optimal, meaning their cost
is proportional to an optimal data structure that does not
self-adjust. Nevertheless, as pointed out by Lin et al. (2022)
and Cao et al. (2023), the constant multiplicative overhead
involved in pointer updates in the splay operations makes
them impractical in many applications.

We present the first learning-augmented data structure for implementing dictionaries with optimal
consistency and robustness. Our data structure,
named RobustSL, is a skip list augmented by
predictions of access frequencies of elements
in a data sequence. With proper predictions,
RobustSL has optimal consistency (achieves
static optimality). At the same time, it maintains a logarithmic running time for each operation, ensuring optimal robustness, even if predictions are generated adversarially. Therefore,
RobustSL has all the advantages of the recent
learning-augmented data structures of Lin, Luo,
and Woodruff (ICML 2022) and Cao et al. (arXiv
2023), while providing robustness guarantees that
are absent in the previous work. Numerical experiments show that RobustSL outperforms alternative data structures using both synthetic and
real datasets.

1. Introduction
Dictionaries are one of the most studied abstract data types
with a wide range of applications, from database indexing (Bayer & McCreight, 1972) to scheduling in operating
systems (Rubini & Corbet, 2001). In the dictionary problem,
the goal is to maintain a set of n items, each represented
with a key, so as to minimize the total cost of processing an
online data sequence of operations, each involving access,
insertion, deletion, or other operations such as successor and
range queries. Here, the cost refers to the number of comparisons made for all operations, and amortized cost is the
average cost of a single operation over the input sequence.

In recent years, there has been an increasing interest in augmenting algorithms that work on data streams with machinelearned predictions. The objective is to design solutions
that provide guarantees with respect to consistency, the
performance measure when predictions are accurate, and
robustness, the performance measure when predictions are
adversarial. For dictionaries, Lin et al. (2022) presented
an augmented treap data structure that uses frequency predictions. In a classic treap, each item is assigned a random
priority that defines its location in the tree. In the work
of Lin et al. (2022), these random priorities are replaced
with machine-learned frequency predictions. Under the
“random-order rank” assumption, which implies all keys
have the same chance of being the i’th frequently asked key
(for any i ≤ n), the resulting data structure offers static
optimality with accurate predictions (is optimally consistent) and is robust in the sense that the expected cost of
all operations in O(m log n). When the ranks are not random, however, the resulting data structure is not consistent
nor robust (§2.3, Proposition 2.2). Cao et al. (2023) have

There are several data structures to implement dictionaries.
Hash tables are efficient and practical data structures that are
1
Manning College of Information & Computer Sciences, University of Massachusetts Amherst, USA 2 Department of Electrical
Engineering & Computer Science, York University, Canada . Correspondence to: Ali Zeynali <azeynali@umass.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

