Accelerated Speculative Sampling Based on Tree Monte Carlo

Zhengmian Hu 1 Heng Huang 1

Abstract

to accelerate the inference process without compromising
the quality of the outcomes. Speculative Sampling (SpS)
(Chen et al., 2023; Leviathan et al., 2023) is one recent
approach that aims to address this issue. SpS draws from
a more efficient reference model to generate what we call
reference tokens, and then uses the slower target model to
parallelly compute the probabilities of these tokens. Only
a subset of these reference tokens are retained as part of
the final sampling output. By employing a proper acceptance strategy, it’s possible to keep the output distribution
of the larger model intact. Moreover, by feeding batches of
reference tokens to the target model instead of processing
each token with a single forward pass, speculative sampling
could increase parallelism and reduce latency. This process
takes inspiration from speculative execution in processors,
thus earning its name. One of the key benefits of speculative sampling is its ability to accelerate inference without
changes to the model architecture or retraining.

Speculative Sampling (SpS) has been introduced
to speed up the inference of large language models
(LLMs) by generating multiple tokens in a single
forward pass under the guidance of a reference
model, while preserving the original distribution.
We observe that SpS can be derived through maximum coupling on the token distribution. However,
we find that this approach is not optimal as it applies maximum coupling incrementally for each
new token, rather than seeking a global maximum
coupling that yields a faster algorithm, given the
tree-space nature of LLM generative distributions.
In this paper, we shift our focus from distributions on a token space to those on a tree space.
We propose a novel class of Tree Monte Carlo
(TMC) methods, demonstrating their unbiasedness and convergence. As a particular instance
of TMC, our new algorithm, Accelerated Speculative Sampling (ASpS), outperforms traditional
SpS by generating more tokens per step on average, achieving faster inference, while maintaining
the original distribution.

In Section 2, we will review the mathematical structure
underlying speculative sampling. We consider a joint distribution formed by the sampling distribution of a reference
model and the probability that the target model accepts these
reference tokens. A reference token is accepted if and only
if it is sampled simultaneously by both the reference and
target models in this joint distribution. This mechanism
is closely related to the concept of maximum coupling, a
specific strategy in Monte Carlo simulations which aims
to maximize the probability of two or more stochastic processes meeting at the same point. While commonly used in
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) simulations to merge
chains, maximum coupling can also be applied to transfer
samples between two distinct distributions, like how speculative sampling aims to translate sampling results from a
reference distribution to a target distribution.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have shown impressive performance across a wide range of tasks such as text generation (Iyer et al., 2022; Chung et al., 2022), translation (Bojar
et al., 2017; Barrault et al., 2019), summarization (Liu &
Lapata, 2019), etc. The remarkable capabilities of these
models can largely be attributed to significant increases in
both the size of the models and the volume of data which
they’re trained on. However, a notable downside of these
models is their slow inference speed, which limits their
applicability in many scenarios.

In Section 3, we present our key motivation of this paper:
speculative sampling is not always optimal. Although SpS
is derived from maximum coupling to ensure highest efficiency, it applies maximum coupling incrementally for each
new token. Specifically, when generating more than one
reference token, the output space becomes a string space,
not a mere token space, but a product space of individual
token spaces. The maximum coupling within the string
space is not simply the product of maximum couplings in
each token space. Therefore, SpS is not optimal when the

This challenge has prompted the exploration of methods
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland,
College Park, USA. Correspondence to: Zhengmian Hu <huzhengmian@gmail.com>, Heng Huang <henghuanghh@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

