BayOTIDE: Bayesian Online Multivariate Time Series Imputation
with Functional Decomposition

Shikai Fang 1 † Qingsong Wen 2 ‡ Yingtao Luo 3 † Shandian Zhe 1 Liang Sun 2

Abstract

on both synthetic and real-world datasets. We
release the code at https://github.com/
xuangu-fang/BayOTIDE.

In real-world scenarios such as traffic and energy
management, we frequently encounter large volumes of time-series data characterized by missing values, noise, and irregular sampling patterns.
While numerous imputation methods have been
proposed, the majority tend to operate within a
local horizon, which involves dividing long sequences into batches of fixed-length segments
for model training. This local horizon often
leads to the overlooking of global trends and periodic patterns. More importantly, most methods assume the observations are sampled at regular timestamps, and fail to handle complex irregular sampled time series in various applications. Additionally, most existing methods are
learned in an offline manner. Thus, it is not suitable for applications with rapidly arriving streaming data. To address these challenges, we propose BayOTIDE : Bayesian Online Multivariate
Time series Imputation with functional decomposition. Our method conceptualizes multivariate
time series as the weighted combination of groups
of low-rank temporal factors with different patterns. We employ a suite of Gaussian Processes
(GPs),each with a unique kernel, as functional
priors to model these factors. For computational
efficiency, we further convert the GPs into a statespace prior by constructing an equivalent stochastic differential equation (SDE), and developing
a scalable algorithm for online inference. The
proposed method can not only handle imputation
over arbitrary timestamps, but also offer uncertainty quantification and interpretability for the
downstream application. We evaluate our method

1. Introduction
Multivariate time series data are ubiquitous and generated
quickly in many real-world applications (Wen et al., 2022;
Esling & Agon, 2012; Zhang et al., 2024), such as traffic (Chen et al., 2024; Li et al., 2015) and energy (Zhu et al.,
2023; Grabner et al., 2023). However, the collected data are
often incomplete and noisy due to sensor failures, communication errors, or other reasons. The missing values in the
time series data can lead to inaccurate downstream analysis.
Therefore, it is essential to impute the missing values in the
time series data in an efficient way.
Most early methods for time series imputation (Acuna & Rodriguez, 2004; Van Buuren & Groothuis-Oudshoorn, 2011;
Durbin & Koopman, 2012) are based on statistical models. Deep learning based imputation methods have gotten
boosted attention (Wang et al., 2024a; Fang & Wang, 2020)
in recent years, for their ability to capture complex nonlinear patterns. Another remarkable direction is to apply
diffusion models (Yang et al., 2024; Song et al., 2020; Ho
et al., 2020) to handle probabilistic imputation, where filling
the missing value can be modeled as a denoising process.
Most recent work TIDER (LIU et al., 2023) proposed another imputation direction to apply the matrix factorization
and decompose the series into disentangled representations.
Despite the success of the proposed methods, they are limited in several aspects. First, most DNN-based and diffusionbased methods are trained by splitting the long sequence
into small patches. This local horizon can fail to capture the
crucial global patterns (Alcaraz & Strodthoff, 2022; Woo
et al., 2022), such as trends and periodicity (Chen et al.,
2022; Wen et al., 2021), leading to less interpretability. Second, many methods assume the observations are sampled
at regular time stamps, and always under-utilize or ignore
the real timestamps. Thus, those models can only impute
on fixed-step and discretized time points, instead of the arbitrary time stamps at the whole continuous field. Lastly, in
real-world applications such as electricity load monitoring,
massive time series data are generated quickly and collected

†

:Work done during summer intern at Alibaba Group. ‡ :Work
done at Alibaba Group, and now affiliated with Squirrel AI, USA.
1
University of Utah, USA 2 DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
3
Carnegie Mellon University, USA. Correspondence to: Qingsong
Wen <qingsongedu@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

