Towards Compositionality in Concept Learning

Adam Stein 1 Aaditya Naik 1 Yinjun Wu 2 Mayur Naik 1 Eric Wong 1

Abstract

size: 3-5in

?

color: white

size: 3-5in

color: white
size: 3-5in

Our
Concepts

PCA
Concepts

Concept-based interpretability methods offer a
lens into the internals of foundation models by
decomposing their embeddings into high-level
concepts. These concept representations are most
useful when they are compositional, meaning that
the individual concepts compose to explain the
full sample. We show that existing unsupervised
concept extraction methods find concepts which
are not compositional. To automatically discover
compositional concept representations, we identify two salient properties of such representations,
and propose Compositional Concept Extraction
(CCE) for finding concepts which obey these properties. We evaluate CCE on five different datasets
over image and text data. Our evaluation shows
that CCE finds more compositional concept representations than baselines and yields better accuracy on four downstream classification tasks.

color: white

Figure 1. We illustrate the issue of concept compositionality with
respect to concepts extracted from the embeddings of the CLIP
model over the CUB dataset. Specifically, we visualize the concepts white birds and small birds learned by PCA (Zou
et al., 2023a) and CCE along with their compositions. We show
the top two images that best represent each concept. Ideally, composing the white birds and small birds concepts should
result in a concept representing small white birds. This is not the
case with the concepts learned by PCA. On the other hand, the
concepts extracted by CCE are composable, as shown by the images of small white birds that best represent the resulting concept.

1

1. Introduction
Foundation models continue to enable impressive performance gains across a variety of domains, tasks, and data
modalities (Srivastava et al., 2023). However, their blackbox nature severely limits the ability to debug, monitor,
control, and trust them (Turpin et al., 2024; Tamkin et al.,
2023; Schaeffer et al., 2024).

model’s embedding of a dog image may decompose into the
sum of concept vectors representing its fur, snout, and tail.

Concept-based explanations (Kim et al., 2018; Zhou et al.,
2018) are a promising approach that seeks to explain
a model’s behavior using individual concepts such as
object attributes (e.g. striped) or linguistic sentiment
(e.g. happiness). Decomposing a model’s learned representation can derive these concepts. For instance, a

Existing works based on methods such as PCA (Zou et al.,
2023a) or KMeans (Ghorbani et al., 2019) extract such
concept vectors reasonably well for basic concepts. For
instance, Figure 1 shows images from the CUB (Wah et al.,
2011) dataset containing concepts extracted by PCA from
the CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) model. These techniques
are able to correctly extract the representations of concepts
like white birds and small birds, however, composing them by adding their representations does not yield the
representation of the concept of small white birds.

1
Department of Computer and Information Science, University
of Pennsylvania, Pennsylvania, USA 2 School of Computer Science,
Peking University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Adam Stein
<steinad@seas.upenn.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
Code and data are available at https://github.com/
adaminsky/compositional_concepts.

The compositionality of concepts is vital for several use
cases. First, model predictions can be explained by combining concepts (Abid et al., 2022). Compositional concepts
also allow for editing fine-grained model behavior, like im1

