Position: Key Claims in LLM Research Have a Long Tail of Footnotes

Anna Rogers * 1 Alexandra Sasha Luccioni * 2

Abstract

2. What Counts as an Large Language Model?

Much of the recent discourse within the ML community has been centered around Large Language
Models (LLMs), their functionality and potential — yet not only do we not have a working
definition of LLMs, but much of this discourse
relies on claims and assumptions that are worth reexamining. We contribute a definition of LLMs,
critically examine five common claims regarding
their properties (including ‘emergent properties’),
and conclude with suggestions for future research
directions and their framing.

The common technical definition of “language models” is
“models that assign probabilities to upcoming words, or sequences of words in general” (Jurafsky & Martin, 2024,
p.32). Yet the term “large language models” is currently
used in quite a different way, both within the research community (e.g. in the call for papers of academic conferences
such as EMNLP (2023)), in news articles (Roose, 2023),
and even by legislators at U.S. Senate hearings (Zakrzewski,
2023)). Despite its ubiquity, this definition is far from clear.
For instance, how many parameters should a neural network
have to qualify as an LLM? And do only Transformer-type
architectures qualify? What about multimodal models, such
as text-to-image or image-to-text?
Given the many subfields and contexts in which this term is
already used, it is not feasible to impose a single definition
and expect everybody to adhere to it. But even if there is no
agreement, both academic and general public discussions
would be more productive if the authors of research papers
spelled out or cited their own working definitions. What follows is our own attempt, which we hope could be useful to
others (either for using our version, or as a base to be modified by other researchers to reflect their own understanding
of this term). It relies upon three definitional criteria:

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have become ubiquitous
in the Machine Learning (ML) research landscape, and they
already impact the lives of thousands of people in contexts
ranging from health (Graber-Stiehl, 2023; Harrer, 2023)
to education (Kasneci et al., 2023). Yet despite the many
research articles on LLMs, their very definition remains
unclear, and much of this work is based on claims that are
often stated, but remain debatable in terms of their framing,
theoretical grounding, or empirical evidence. When we, as
researchers, repeat such claims uncritically, we contribute to
the narratives shaped by business interests (McKelvey et al.,
2023), and may mislead the public and ourselves.

(1) LLMs model text1 and can be used to generate2 it
based on input context, i.e. by selecting the tokens that
are the most likely given the partial context provided
as input (either masked3 or as a prompt). The text can
be in any modality — characters, pixels, audio, etc.
(2) LLMs receive large-scale pretraining, where ‘large-

This position paper argues that LLM research should
be more precise with its key terms and claims. To that
end, we propose a definition for the term “LLM” (§2), and
we critically examine five common claims about LLM functionality, drawing heavily on both empirical studies and
socio-technical critiques of LLMs (§3). We then consider
the impact that these claims have on ML research (§4). We
conclude with concrete proposals for maintaining rigor and
diversity in ML research and practice (§5).

1

We understand ‘text’ as ‘a unit of language in use’ (Halliday
& Hasan, 2013), the product of using that language. We see this
as a more accurate description, because LLMs model the corpora
they are trained on, rather than language in general (Veres, 2022).
2
Most current LLMs produce text in some way, and so our
definition focuses on these. To extend it to energy-based models
or discriminative models like ELECTRA (Clark et al., 2020), we
could say ‘can be used to generate or score text’.
3
While BERT-style (Devlin et al., 2019) encoders could be
used to generate text, it is admittedly a tortuous way of doing
so, compared to autoregressive models. However, in both cases
we fundamentally solve a classification problem over the model’s
vocabulary, and autoregressive models could be viewed as a special
case of masked language models.

*

Equal contribution 1 IT University of Copenhagen 2 Hugging
Face, Canada. Correspondence to: Anna Rogers <arog@itu.dk>,
Sasha Luccioni <sasha.luccioni@hf.co>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

