FAFE: Immune Complex Modeling with Geodesic Distance Loss
on Noisy Group Frames

Ruidong Wu * 1 Ruihan Guo * 1 Rui Wang * 1 Shitong Luo 1 Yue Xu 1 Jiahan Li 1
Jianzhu Ma 1 2 Qiang Liu 1 3 Yunan Luo 4 Jian Peng 1

Abstract

raphy and NMR spectroscopy (Wüthrich, 2001; Jaskolski
et al., 2014; Bai et al., 2015; Thompson et al., 2020) to
determine protein structures. However, these methods are
time-consuming, expensive, and highly reliant on the accessibility to pure and stable samples of target proteins. As a
result, the range of protein monomers and complexes with
known structures (Burley et al., 2017) is far limited, especially considering the tremendous growth of discovered
protein sequences (Consortium, 2019; Richardson et al.,
2023) with the help of advancement in gene sequencing
technologies (Braslavsky et al., 2003; Harris et al., 2008;
Heather & Chain, 2016). This has led to an increasing
interest in computational methods for protein structure prediction, which aim to predict the three-dimensional (3D)
structure of proteins based solely on their sequence information.

Despite the striking success of general protein
folding models such as AlphaFold2 (AF2, Jumper
et al. (2021)), the accurate computational modeling of antibody-antigen complexes remains a
challenging task. In this paper, we first analyze
AF2’s primary loss function, known as the Frame
Aligned Point Error (FAPE), and raise a previously overlooked issue that FAPE tends to face
gradient vanishing problem on high-rotationalerror targets. To address this fundamental limitation, we propose a novel geodesic loss called
Frame Aligned Frame Error (FAFE, denoted as
F2E to distinguish from FAPE), which enables the
model to better optimize both the rotational and
translational errors between two frames. We then
prove that F2E can be reformulated as a groupaware geodesic loss, which translates the optimization of the residue-to-residue error to optimizing group-to-group geodesic frame distance. By
fine-tuning AF2 with our proposed new loss function, we attain a correct rate of 52.3% (DockQ
> 0.23) on an evaluation set and 43.8% correct
rate on a subset with low homology, with substantial improvement over AF2 by 182% and 100%
respectively. 1

AlphaFold2 (Jumper et al., 2021) is the most successful protein structure prediction algorithm so far. It has
brought great progress in structure prediction accuracy at
CASP14 (Kryshtafovych et al., 2021), a well-known protein
structure modeling contest. AlphaFold2-Multimer (Evans
et al., 2021) was introduced subsequently by applying the
framework of AF2 to multi-chain proteins. AF2-Multimer
is designed to predict massive biological complexes, especially those with certain cross-chain genetic information.
However, for complexes whose cross-chain docking poses
can not be revealed by their genetic information, such as
immune complexes, there is still a large gap between their
predicted structures and experimental counterparts.

1. Introduction

Immune complex modeling, which aims to model the 3D
structure of an antibody-antigen complex, has important implications in antibody drug discovery (Kaczor et al., 2018).
Usually, the antibody part has an unknown structure as a
novel sequence, and the antigen part may or may not have a
corresponding experimentally determined structure, depending on different therapeutic targets. An alternative way to
this problem is using a loop modeling algorithm to predict
antibody structure, and applying a rigid docking algorithm
between two predicted components.

Protein structure modeling is a crucial field in computational biology and has been an important unsolved problem
for decades. Traditionally, structure biology researchers
relied on experimental methods such as X-ray crystallog*

Equal contribution 1 Helixon 2 Tsinghua 3 UTAustin 4 GaTech.
Correspondence to: Ruidong Wu <ruidong@helixon.com>,
Shitong Luo <luost@helixon.com>, Jianzhu Ma <majianzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
Code is available at https://github.com/mooninrain/FAFE.git.

Many rigid docking algorithms (Pierce et al., 2014; Yan
et al., 2020; Desta et al., 2020; Ganea et al., 2021; Jin et al.,
1

