Double Stochasticity Gazes Faster: Snap-Shot Decentralized Stochastic Gradient
Tracking Methods

Hao Di 1 2 Haishan Ye 1 3 Xiangyu Chang 1 Guang Dai 3 Ivor W. Tsang 4 5

Abstract

date SS DSGT’s superior performance in the general communication network topology and exhibit
better practical performance of ASS DSGT on the
specified W compared to DSGT.

In decentralized optimization, m agents form
a network and only communicate with their
neighbors, which gives advantages in data ownership, privacy, and scalability. At the same
time, decentralized stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) methods, as popular decentralized algorithms for training large-scale machine learning models, have shown their superiority over
centralized counterparts. Distributed stochastic
gradient tracking (DSGT) (Pu & Nedić, 2021)
has been recognized as the popular and stateof-the-art decentralized SGD method due to its
proper theoretical guarantees. However, the
theoretical analysis of DSGT (Koloskova et al.,
2021)
 2 shows that √its iteration complexity is
σ̄
√
Õ mµε
, where the dou+ µ(1−λ2 (W Lσ̄
))1/2 CW ε
bly stochastic matrix W represents the network
topology and CW is a parameter that depends
on W . Thus, it indicates that the convergence
property of DSGT is heavily affected by the topology of the communication network. To overcome
the weakness of DSGT, we resort to the snapshot gradient tracking skill and propose two novel
algorithms, snap-shot DSGT (SS DSGT) and accelerated snap-shot DSGT (ASS DSGT). We further justify that SS DSGT exhibits a lower iteration complexity compared to DSGT in the general
communication network topology. Additionally,
ASS DSGT
DSGT’s iteration
complex 2 matches √

σ̄
Lσ̄
√
ity O mµε + µ(1−λ2 (W ))1/2 ε under the same
conditions as DSGT. Numerical experiments vali-

1. Introduction
In this paper, we consider the decentralized optimization
problem, where there are m agents to cooperatively minimize a common objective function f (x) with the following
formulation:
m

f (x) :=

1 X
fi (x)
m i=1

with fi (x) := Eξ(i) ∼D(i) fi (x, ξ

(1)
(i)

).

The formulation assumes that the objective function f (x)
is composed of m-local functions fi (x), i ∈ [m] =
{1, . . . , m}. The i-th agent maintains the private data set
D(i) and its objective function fi (x). The m agents form
a connected network and can only communicate with their
neighbors. Shi et al. (2015); Scaman et al. (2019); Ye et al.
(2020) indicate that the decentralized optimization has advantages over traditional centralized optimization in data
ownership, privacy, and scalability (Nedic, 2020; Kairouz
et al., 2021; Even et al., 2021; Shi et al., 2015; Qu & Li,
2017; Alghunaim et al., 2020; Zeng & Yin, 2018).

1
Center for Intelligent Decision-Making and Machine Learning,
School of Management, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China. 2 This
work was completed during the internship at SGIT AI Lab, State
Grid Corporation of China. 3 SGIT AI Lab, State Grid Corporation
of China. 4 College of Computing and Data Science, NTU, Singapore. 5 CFAR and IHPC, Agency for Science, Technology and
Research (A*STAR), Singapore. Correspondence to: Haishan Ye
<yehaishan@xjtu.edu.cn>.

Due to the imminent need to train large-scale machine
models, decentralized SGD methods are attracting significant attention recently because they are easy to implement,
and the computation cost of each iteration is cheap (Xin
et al., 2021b; Lu & De Sa, 2021; Alghunaim & Yuan, 2022;
Xin et al., 2021a). Especially, Lian et al. (2017) provides
the first theoretical analysis that indicates decentralized algorithms might outperform centralized algorithms of distributed stochastic gradient descent (SGD). However, the
performance of decentralized SGD suffers from the data heterogeneity (Lian et al., 2017; Koloskova et al., 2020), that is,
training data is in a non-IID fashion distributed over agents.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Recently, the gradient tracking method developed by
Di Lorenzo & Scutari (2016) and Nedic et al. (2017) has
been widely used to overcome the data heterogeneity chal1

