Reflective Policy Optimization

Yaozhong Gan * 1 Renye Yan * 1 Zhe Wu 1 Junliang Xing 1

Abstract

Schulman et al., 2015; 2017; Haarnoja et al., 2018; Silver
et al., 2014; Fujimoto et al., 2018), the prevalent approach
involves optimizing the policy using the value function of
the current state. The value function potentially contains
information about the subsequent data. However, a pertinent
question emerges: Is optimizing a policy solely based on
the value function the fastest (optimal) path to convergence?
The answer is no, as this approach may overlook other
crucial factors.

On-policy reinforcement learning methods, like
Trust Region Policy Optimization (TRPO) and
Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO), often demand extensive data per update, leading to sample inefficiency. This paper introduces Reflective
Policy Optimization (RPO), a novel on-policy extension that amalgamates past and future stateaction information for policy optimization. This
approach empowers the agent for introspection,
allowing modifications to its actions within the
current state. Theoretical analysis confirms that
policy performance is monotonically improved
and contracts the solution space, consequently
expediting the convergence procedure. Empirical results demonstrate RPO’s feasibility and efficacy in two reinforcement learning benchmarks,
culminating in superior sample efficiency. The
source code of this work is available at https:
//github.com/Edgargan/RPO.

To illustrate this answer, consider an environment with a
“cliff”. If an agent takes an action leading to falling off
the cliff under a state, it must learn to avoid the action and
the associated state. Returning to this state is perilous and
could potentially trigger the same action. Therefore, the
agent must actively avoid this state to enhance safety. The
preceding action leading to this state must also be avoided,
anticipating the possibility of re-entering that state again.
A similar scenario unfolds in a “treasure” environment,
where an agent performs an action resulting in a large reward. Subsequent data imparts positive and negative insights
into previous states and actions. Therefore, optimizing the
previous action should incorporate information from subsequent state-action pairs, not relying solely on the value
function. Intuitively, leveraging subsequent data directly
can expedite algorithm convergence and enhance sample
efficiency. Unfortunately, most existing algorithms lack this
capability, which directly exploits the relationship between
pairs of trajectory data for policy optimization.

1. Introduction
On-policy reinforcement learning (RL) aims to learn an
optimal mapping from a sequence of states to actions based
on rewarding criteria acquired through trajectories generated
by interacting with the underlying environment. Proximal
Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017) is one
of the most typical algorithms in this category, owing to
its simplicity and effectiveness. It has been successfully
applied in various domains, including Atari games (Mnih
et al., 2015), continuous control tasks (Dhariwal et al., 2017),
and robot control (Lillicrap et al., 2016). However, existing
algorithms optimize the policy based on a state-action pair
and do not directly consider the impact of subsequent states
and actions in the trajectory. This limitation inevitably gives
rise to the sample inefficiency problem.

To address the above issues with better sample efficiency,
we introduce a new on-policy algorithm that optimizes the
current policy by explicitly considering the relationship between the previous and subsequent state-action pairs in the
sampled trajectories. Specifically, the proposed algorithm
evaluates the current state-action pair and the impact of the
subsequent pair of trajectories. It provides a more comprehensive perspective than traditional value function-based
policy optimization. This approach enables the optimized
policy to adjust its actions based on positive and negative
information from subsequent states, thereby effectively reflecting the policy. We thus name the proposed algorithm as
Reflective Policy Optimization (RPO).

In prior studies (Mnih et al., 2015; van Hasselt et al., 2016;
*
Equal contribution 1 QiYuan Lab. Correspondence to: Junliang
Xing <xingjunliang@qiyuanlab.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

The RPO algorithm, as proposed, directly focuses on policy optimization rather than solely on evaluating the value
1

