Risk-Sensitive Policy Optimization via Predictive CVaR Policy Gradient

Ju-Hyun Kim 1 Seungki Min 1

Abstract

2023).

This paper addresses a policy optimization task
with the conditional value-at-risk (CVaR) objective. We introduce the predictive CVaR policy
gradient, a novel approach that seamlessly integrates risk-neutral policy gradient algorithms with
minimal modifications. Our method incorporates
a reweighting strategy in gradient calculation –
individual cost terms are reweighted in proportion
to their predicted contribution to the objective.
These weights can be easily estimated through
a separate learning procedure. We provide theoretical and empirical analyses, demonstrating the
validity and effectiveness of our proposed method.

This paper is lined up with the policy-based approaches,
which aim to directly optimize the policy through policy
gradient. Most existing CVaR policy gradient algorithms
studied in prior work implement the following procedure.
Aiming to optimize the CVaRq objective, the algorithm runs
a policy multiple times, and calculates the gradient only with
the worst q-fraction of sample trajectories, discarding all the
other samples. Despite its simplicity, this behavior leads to
a low sample efficiency and therefore slow convergence.
To mitigate this issue, we propose the predictive CVaR policy
gradient that enables the algorithm to utilize all sample
trajectories. The main idea is to reweight the individual
cost realizations, where the weight on each cost term is the
probability of the current sample trajectory belonging to the
worst q-fraction of scenarios, predicted at the moment when
the cost was incurred.

1. Introduction
In safety-critical applications, the decision makers concern
not only their average performance but also their performance in adverse scenarios. Risk-sensitive reinforcement
learning (RL) gives a solution for this issue and has been
widely adopted across many domains including autonomous
driving (Wen et al., 2020), robotic surgery (Pore et al., 2021),
finance (Greenberg et al., 2022), etc.

To better illustrate this idea, let us consider a situation in
which the algorithm tries to aggregate the gradient information from five sample trajectories, visualized in Figure 1(a).
With q = 0.2, the naı̈ve approach uses the worst trajectory
only, as highlighted in Figure 1(b). Our method uses the
reweighted version of all five trajectories, where the weights
are visualized with opacity in Figure 1(c). This features that
the decisions should be evaluated individually according
to their expected contribution to the objective. The worst
trajectory should not be overly emphasized, and likewise,
non-worst trajectories should not be completely ignored –
for example, if two trajectories share the same sample path
up some time t, two partial trajectories up to time t should
be identically informative regardless of their final outcomes.

This paper considers the conditional value-at-risk (CVaR;
also known as average value-at-risk, or expected shortfall)
as an objective, which measures the average loss occurring
in the worst q-fraction of scenarios. CVaR has long been a
popular choice for risk quantification because of its intuitive
interpretation along with its nice mathematical properties
as a coherent spectral measure (Rockafellar et al., 2000).
Accordingly, a considerable effort has been made recently towards the integration of CVaR objective into RL framework,
mainly falling into two categories – value-based approaches
(Bäuerle & Ott, 2011; Chow et al., 2015; Stanko & Macek,
2019) and policy-based approaches (Tamar et al., 2015b;
Rajeswaran et al., 2016; Tamar et al., 2016; Markowitz et al.,

Contributions This paper offers a novel reweighting strategy that significantly enhances the sample efficiency of
CVaR policy gradient. These weights, which we call predictive tail probabilities, are derived through a series of reformulations of the CVaR objective, exploiting its various mathematical properties (Section 3.2). We show that these predictive tail probabilities enjoy a very limited path-dependence
(Proposition 3.3), and therefore building a model to estimate them becomes a trivial supervised learning task that
is decoupled from the policy optimization task. Similarly

1

Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, KAIST,
Daejeon, South Korea. Correspondence to: Seungki Min
<skmin@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

