Comparing Graph Transformers via Positional Encodings

Mitchell Black * 1 Zhengchao Wan * 2 Gal Mishne 2 Amir Nayyeri 1 Yusu Wang 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Graph transformers (GTs) (Dwivedi & Bresson, 2021; Ying
et al., 2021) have recently emerged as a competitor to message passing neural networks (MPNNs) (Gilmer et al., 2017)
for graph representation learning. While MPNNs only consider the immediate neighbors of a node when updating that
node’s feature, GTs consider all nodes in the graph. Accordingly, graph transformers can capture global information
of graphs that can potentially be used to address the issue
of oversquashing faced by MPNNs. Likewise, the attention mechanism of transformers can address the issue of
oversmoothing faced by MPNNs. See (Müller et al., 2024).

The distinguishing power of graph transformers is
tied to the choice of positional encoding: features
used to augment the base transformer with information about the graph. There are two primary
types of positional encoding: absolute positional
encodings (APEs) and relative positional encodings (RPEs). APEs assign features to each node
and are given as input to the transformer. RPEs
instead assign a feature to each pair of nodes, e.g.,
shortest-path distance, and are used to augment
the attention block. A priori, it is unclear which
method is better for maximizing the power of the
resulting graph transformer. In this paper, we aim
to understand the relationship between these different types of positional encodings. Interestingly,
we show that graph transformers using APEs and
RPEs are equivalent in their ability to distinguish
non-isomorphic graphs. In particular, we demonstrate how to interchange APEs and RPEs while
maintaining their distinguishing power in terms
of graph transformers. However, in the case of
graphs with node features, we show that RPEs
may have an advantage over APEs. Based on our
theoretical results, we provide a study of different
APEs and RPEs—including the shortest-path and
resistance distance and the recently introduced
stable and expressive positional encoding (SPE)—
and compare their distinguishing power in terms
of transformers. We believe our work will help
navigate the vast number of positional encoding
choices and provide guidance on the future design
of positional encodings for graph transformers.

However, one caveat in applying transformers to graph data
is that transformers are equivariant, meaning they treat
nodes symmetrically and cannot distinguish two nodes at
different positions in the graph. Accordingly, much of the research on graph transformers has been focused on the design
of positional encodings that incorporate information about
the graph structure into the input or architecture of transformers. There are currently two major types of positional
encodings:
Absolute positional encodings (APEs) encode the graph
structure as an embedding of the vertices ϕ : V → Rd .
APEs are either added to or concatenated with the initial
vertex features that are the input to the transformer. Typical
examples are the Laplacian eigenvectors (Dwivedi & Bresson, 2021) or information about random walks (Rampášek
et al., 2022). Recent works have also proposed learnable
APEs (Lim et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2024).
Relative positional encodings (RPEs) encode the graph
structure as an embedding of pairs of vertices ψ : V × V →
Rd . RPEs are incorporated into a GT via a modified attention mechanism. Examples of RPEs include the shortestpath distance (Ying et al., 2021), resistance distance (Zhang
et al., 2023), and heat kernels (Choromanski et al., 2022).
The adjacency matrix can also serve as an RPE, which will
result in an RPE GT with the same distinguishing power as
MPNNs (Corollary 4.17).

*

Equal contribution 1 School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon, USA
2
Halıcıoǧlu Data Science Institute, University of California San
Diego, San Diego, California, USA. Correspondence to: Mitchell
Black <blackmit@oregostate.edu>.

Although different kinds of APEs and RPEs have been proposed to encode graph structure and enhance the performance of GTs, there is a lack of understanding of how
different positional encodings compare—e.g., shortest-path

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

