A Tale of Tails: Model Collapse as a Change of Scaling Laws

Elvis Dohmatob * 1 Yunzhen Feng * 2 Pu Yang 3 Francois Charton 1 Julia Kempe 2 4 1
a) Loss of Scaling Law and
collapse across generations

Abstract

Loss

Top-p

Density

Real Data

As AI model size grows, neural scaling laws have
become an important tool to predict the improvements of large models when increasing capacity
and the size of original (human or natural) training
data. Yet, the widespread use of popular models
means that the ecosystem of online data and text
will co-evolve to progressively contain increased
amounts of synthesized data. In this paper we
ask: How will the scaling laws change in the inevitable regime where synthetic data makes its
way into the training corpus? Will future models, still improve, or be doomed to degenerate
up to total (model) collapse? We develop a theoretical framework of model collapse through the
lens of scaling laws. We discover a wide range
of decay phenomena, analyzing loss of scaling,
shifted scaling with number of generations, the
“un-learning” of skills, and grokking when mixing human and synthesized data. Our theory is
validated by large-scale experiments with a transformer on an arithmetic task and text generation
using the large language model Llama2.

Tail Metric

Tail Metric

Finite
Sample

GCD(2, 8) = 2 ✅
GCD(3, 6) = 1 ❌
GCD(2, 8) = 2 ✅
GCD(3, 6) = 1 ❌

Density

Tail Metric

2-gen

# of Data
b) Loss of Skills

Density

Density

Temperature

1-gen

Tail Metric

GCD(2, 8) = 2 ✅
GCD(3, 6) = 3 ✅

Figure 1. Top-pinf (nucleus) sampling, temperature scaling of
LLM generation, and finite sample bias lead to truncated or narrowed “tails” (left side), causing loss of scaling laws (top right)
and loss of skills (bottom right). Here we visualize calculating the
greatest common divisor (GCD) with answer 2 and 3 as two skills.

contributes to 0.1% of the total words generated daily by
the global population (Altman, 2024).
At the same time a key driver behind the current success
of large models is their consumption of massive amount of
web-scale data for training. The improvements of larger
models are governed by scaling laws in which error falls off
as a power in the size of training data; and the emergence
of new skills seems tightly linked to covering increased
scales of training data. Our understanding of what the future
holds in a world were models are trained on other models
(or their own) synthesized data is only at its beginning, but
some works indicate the possibility of complete collapse of
learning, so called model collapse1 .

1. Introduction
Groundbreaking advances in generative AI algorithms for
text, images and code are ushering in the ”synthetic data
age”: increasingly we consume data generated by large scale
models like GPT4 (Achiam et al., 2023), Stable Diffusion
(Rombach et al., 2022) and their successors. A growing
number of synthetic data generated with these models starts
to populate the web, often indistinguishable from “real” data.
Evidence suggests that AI-generated content has contaminated the LAION-5B dataset (Alemohammad et al., 2023)
and has been utilized by crowdworkers (Veselovsky et al.,
2023). Remarkably, as of the current assessment, ChatGPT

Scaling Laws. In many domains of machine learning including speech, translation, vision, video, and mathematical
problem solving, empirically observed neural scaling laws
(Hestness et al., 2017; Rosenfeld et al., 2020; Kaplan et al.,
2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022; Gordon et al., 2021; Henighan
et al., 2021; Aghajanyan et al., 2023) demonstrate that test
error often falls off as a power law with the amount of training data, model size, and compute. Theoretically, scaling
laws have been derived in a variety of settings (e.g. Hutter
(2021); Cabannes et al. (2023) for “LLM-like” models).

*
Equal contribution 1 Meta FAIR 2 Center for Data Science, New
York University 3 School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University 4 Courant Institute, New York University. Correspondence
to: Yunzhen Feng <yf2231@nyu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

Not to be confused with neural collapse which refers to clustering of last-layer features at the end of training (Papyan et al.,
2020)

1

