Code as Reward: Empowering Reinforcement Learning with VLMs

David Venuto 1 2 Sami Nur Islam 2 Martin Klissarov 1 2 Doina Precup 1 2 3 Sherry Yang 3 4 Ankit Anand 3

Abstract

language models (LLMs), VLMs have been applied across
a wide range of multi-modal tasks, from visual question answering (Zhu et al., 2023) to robotics (Brohan et al., 2023).
LLMs have also been used to craft better exploration strategies for RL agents, e.g. (Klissarov et al., 2023; Yu et al.,
2023) or to produce programs that represent policies (Liang
et al., 2023) or skills (Wang et al., 2023). Since pre-trained
VLMs can accurately describe tasks and generate sub-tasks
from image inputs, they are perfect candidates for enhancing RL agents that work with image-based or multi-modal
observations.

Pre-trained Vision-Language Models (VLMs) are
able to understand visual concepts, describe and
decompose complex tasks into sub-tasks, and provide feedback on task completion. In this paper,
we aim to leverage these capabilities to support
the training of reinforcement learning (RL) agents.
In principle, VLMs are well suited for this purpose, as they can naturally analyze image-based
observations and provide feedback (reward) on
learning progress. However, inference in VLMs is
computationally expensive, so querying them frequently to compute rewards would significantly
slowdown the training of an RL agent. To address
this challenge, we propose a framework named
Code as Reward (VLM-CaR). VLM-CaR produces dense reward functions from VLMs through
code generation, thereby significantly reducing
the computational burden of querying the VLM
directly. We show that the dense rewards generated through our approach are very accurate
across a diverse set of discrete and continuous environments, and can be more effective in training
RL policies than the original sparse environment
rewards.

In this paper, we aim to leverage VLMs for computing rewards from images, which can then be used to train RL
agents. The most direct approach to achieve this goal is to
directly finetune a VLM to be a reward model, as in (Yang
et al., 2023; Du et al., 2023b). However, directly querying
a VLM to obtain reward has a few disadvantages. First,
it is computationally inefficient due to the sheer size of
VLMs. Second, the stochastic output from a VLM can be
unreliable. Third, rewards directly computed by a VLM
are generally not interpretable nor verifiable. To address
these problems, we present a framework called Code as
Reward (VLM-CaR) which leverages pretrained VLMs to
obtain efficiently computable, reliable, and verifiable reward functions. Our approach is to first prompt the VLM to
describe the task/sub-tasks solely from an initial and goal
frame of an environment. Given these high-level language
descriptions, we use the VLM to generate a set of executable
computer programs, one for each proposed sub-task, which
check for successful sub-task completion. To verify that the
task decomposition and reward function programs are indeed correct, we propose an automated code verifier, which
uses a handful of expert trajectories and random trajectories
to validate the obtained rewards. If the produced solution
is correct, expert trajectories should achieve high reward,
whereas random policies should achieve low reward. Once
the generated sub-task and reward programs pass the verification check, we use them as reward functions to train RL
agents. This approach can be viewed as an implementation
of the option framework in RL (Sutton et al., 1999), where
the VLM is used to produce the reward functions for training
each option, as well as for the policy over options, and the
rewards are represented programatically. We show that we
can successfully train RL agents using the rewards provided

1. Introduction
One of the important steps in deploying reinforcement learning (RL) agents in real-world problems with RL is defining
an appropriate reward function, which both captures the
goal of the problem and allows an RL agent to learn efficiently. The reward function is often defined and refined
by an environment designer, with significant effort. In this
paper, we explore the use of large Vision-Language models
(VLMs), which have recently become publicly available,
for this purpose. VLMs are capable of learning intricate
relationships between images and text. Integrated with large
1

Mila 2 McGill University 3 Google DeepMind 4 University
of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: David Venuto
<david.venuto@mail.mcgill.ca>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

