Towards General Algorithm Discovery for Combinatorial Optimization:
Learning Symbolic Branching Policy from Bipartite Graph

Yufei Kuang 1 2 Jie Wang 1 2 Yuyan Zhou 1 2 Xijun Li 1 2 3 Fangzhou Zhu 3 Jianye Hao 3 4 Feng Wu 1 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Combinatorial optimization (CO) model—which is widely
used to formulate real-world tasks like transportation, management, and chip design (Liu et al., 2008; Chen, 2010; Ma
et al., 2019; Paschos, 2014)—is one of the most fundamental models in the field of mathematical optimization (MO).
In practice, complex CO problems are usually solved with
exact CO solvers like SCIP (Achterberg, 2007) and Gurobi
(Gurobi Optimization, LLC, 2023) based on the branch-andbound (B&B) framework. However, solving CO problems
is usually highly time-consuming due to its NP-hard nature.
To improve the efficiency of exact CO solvers, recently, researchers incorporate machine learning (ML) techniques to
different components of CO solvers, e.g., branching (Khalil
et al., 2016; Gasse et al., 2019), cut selection (Huang et al.,
2022; Wang et al., 2023b; Tang et al., 2020), and primal
heuristics (Chmiela et al., 2021; Paulus & Krause, 2023;
Nair et al., 2021). These approaches consistently achieve
high performance in terms of the solving efficiency on problems with chosen implicit distributions (Bengio et al., 2021;
Zhang et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2022), as problems collected
from similar tasks usually share similar structures.

Machine learning (ML) approaches have been successfully applied to accelerating exact combinatorial optimization (CO) solvers. However, many
of them fail to explain what patterns they have
learned that accelerate the CO algorithms due to
the black-box nature of ML models like neural networks, and thus they prevent researchers from further understanding the tasks they are interested in.
To tackle this problem, we propose the first graphbased algorithm discovery framework—namely,
graph symbolic discovery for exact combinatorial optimization solver (GS4CO)—that learns
interpretable branching policies directly from the
general bipartite graph representation of CO problems. Specifically, we mainly focus on the variable selection part of the branching policy. We
design a unified representation for symbolic variable selection policies with graph inputs, and
then we employ a Transformer with multiple treestructural encodings to generate symbolic trees
end-to-end, which effectively reduces the cumulative error from iteratively distilling graph neural
networks. Experiments show that GS4CO learned
interpretable and lightweight policies outperform
all the baselines on CPU machines, including
both the human-designed and the learning-based.
GS4CO shows an encouraging step towards general algorithm discovery on modern CO solvers.
Codes are available at https://github.
com/MIRALab-USTC/L2O-GS4CO.

However, due to the black-box nature of many ML models like neural networks (NNs), learning-based approaches
usually fail to explain what patterns they have learned that
accelerate the solving process. Based on the mixed-integer
linear programming (MILP) formulation, CO problems can
be modeled consistently via the general variable-constraint
bipartite graph representation (Gasse et al., 2019). Thus,
previous research widely incorporate graph neural networks
(GNNs) to different components of exact CO solvers to
learn and leverage the specific problem structures from the
bipartite graphs. However, GNN-based approaches, though
effective in practice, fail to help researchers further understand and improve the hard-coded CO algorithms due to
their limited interpretability (Kuang et al., 2024).

1
CAS Key Laboratory of Technology in GIPAS, University
of Science and Technology of China 2 MoE Key Laboratory of
Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition, University
of Science and Technology of China 3 Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei
Technologies 4 College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University. Correspondence to: Jie Wang <jiewangx@ustc.edu.cn>.

In the age of data-driven scientific discovery (Wang et al.,
2023a), we hope ML approaches on exact CO solvers can
not only accelerate the solvers’ efficiency but also provide
interpretable policies to help researchers further understand
what patterns they have learned. In light of this, a natural
idea is to conduct automated algorithm discovery on CO

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

