On the Unexpected Effectiveness of Reinforcement Learning
for Sequential Recommendation

Álvaro Labarca 1 2 Denis Parra 1 3 2 4 Rodrigo Toro Icarte 1 2

Abstract

information-saturated world (Jannach et al., 2010; Burke
et al., 2011; Parra & Sahebi, 2013). RecSys have achieved
their purpose by learning user preferences and thus suggesting items in personalized and contextual ways (Karatzoglou
et al., 2010; Rendle et al., 2011; Villa et al., 2020; Adomavicius et al., 2021). These approaches seek to learn
users’ static preferences, assuming each item in the users’
historical interactions is equally important. This, however,
does not always hold true. In some scenarios, the user’s
preferences are dynamic (Fang et al., 2020) or the recommendations are based only on the user interactions during
a session, without any previous history (Xin et al., 2020).
Session-based recommendation is applied in several areas
(e-commerce, video, news, advertisement) and it is traditionally addressed with sequence-aware recommender systems
(Quadrana et al., 2018), being Reinforcement Learning (RL)
one of the techniques gaining more traction in recent years
(Afsar et al., 2022).

In recent years, Reinforcement Learning (RL)
has shown great promise in session-based recommendation. Sequential models that use RL
have reached state-of-the-art performance for the
Next-item Prediction (NIP) task. This result is
intriguing, as the NIP task only evaluates how
well the system can correctly recommend the next
item to the user, while the goal of RL is to find
a policy that optimizes rewards in the long term
– sometimes at the expense of suboptimal shortterm performance. Then, how can RL improve
the system’s performance on short-term metrics?
This article investigates this question by exploring
proxy learning objectives, which we identify as
goals RL models might be following, and thus
could explain the performance boost. We found
that RL – when used as an auxiliary loss – promotes the learning of embeddings that capture
information about the user’s previously interacted
items. Subsequently, we replaced the RL objective with a straightforward auxiliary loss designed
to predict the number of items the user interacted
with. This substitution results in performance
gains comparable to RL. These findings pave the
way to improve performance and understanding
of RL methods for recommender systems.

For many years, recommendation systems have utilized
reinforcement learning through the application of multiarmed bandits (MABs) (Li et al., 2010; Nguyen & KofodPetersen, 2014; Li et al., 2016). These methods address the
interactive nature of recommendation systems and the coldstart problem (Elena et al., 2021), but they tend to focus on
short-term preferences. More recently, deep reinforcement
learning (DRL) approaches, such as value-based methods
like Q-learning (Lei et al., 2019) and policy-based methods
like REINFORCE (Chen et al., 2021a) have been introduced
to model long-term preferences, which can translate into
better long-term user engagement (Zou et al., 2019).

1. Introduction
Recommender Systems (RecSys) help us select the most
appropriate items or actions in the complexities of an

However, RL-based methods are usually evaluated under
short-term metrics, such as next-item prediction (NIP) (Deffayet et al., 2023). Under this NIP evaluation protocol,
RL techniques have achieved promising results – often outperforming traditional self-supervised methods (Lee et al.,
2022; Zhao et al., 2018b; Stamenkovic et al., 2022; Wang,
2020). This result, however, is counter-intuitive. Even
though RL has many characteristics that make it a good
alternative for sequential recommendation, as Deffayet et al.
(2023) pointed out, NIP cannot capture the potential benefits
introduced by the use of RL algorithms. NIP is a one-shot
accuracy-oriented protocol. The goal of RL is to maximize

1
Department of Computer Science, Pontificia Universidad
Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile 2 National Center for Artifcial Intelligence (CENIA), Santiago, Chile 3 Instituto Milenio
en Ingenierı́a e Inteligencia Artificial para la Salud (iHealth),
Santiago, Chile 4 Instituto Milenio Fundamentos de los Datos
(IMFD), Santiago, Chile. Correspondence to: Álvaro Labarca
<aalabarca@uc.cl>, Denis Parra <dparras@uc.cl>, Rodrigo
Toro Icarte <rntoro@uc.cl>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

