√
Decoupling Learning and Decision-Making: Breaking the O( T ) Barrier in
Online Resource Allocation with First-Order Methods
Wenzhi Gao 1 Chunlin Sun 1 Chenyu Xue 2 Yinyu Ye 1 3

Abstract

Most state-of-the-art algorithms for OLP are dual linear
programming (LP)-based (Agrawal et al., 2014; Kesselheim et al., 2014; Jiang et al., 2022; Li and Ye, 2022; Ma
et al., 2022). More specifically, they require solving a sequence of LPs to make online decisions. However, the
high computational cost of these LP-based methods prevents them from being applied in many time-sensitive or
large-scale problems. For example, decisions have to be
made instantaneously in online advertising (Balseiro et al.,
2022a). This challenge motivates a recent line of research
using first-order methods to address OLP (Li et al., 2020;
Gao et al., 2023; Balseiro et al., 2022a;b). First-order methods are based on gradient information, and are more scalable and computationally efficient than LP-based methods.

Online linear programming plays an important
role in both revenue management and resource
allocation, and recent research has focused on developing efficient first-order online learning algorithms. Despite the empirical success of firstorder methods,√they typically achieve regret no
better than O( T ), which is suboptimal compared to the O(log T ) result guaranteed by the
state-of-the-art linear programming (LP)-based
online algorithms. This paper establishes several
important facts about online linear programming,
which unveils the challenge for first-order
online
√
algorithms to achieve beyond O( T ) regret. To
address this challenge, we introduce a new algorithmic framework which decouples learning
from decision-making. For the first time, we
show that first-order methods can achieve regret
O(T 1/3 ) with this new framework.

Despite the advantage in computational efficiency, firstorder methods are still not comparable to LP-based methods in terms of regret for many settings.
Existing first-order
√
OLP algorithms only achieve O( T ) regret bound. The
only exception is when the distribution of requests and bidding prices has finite support (Sun et al., 2020). Under the
continuous support setting, it remains open:

1. Introduction

√
Can first-order methods go beyond O( T ) regret?

This paper presents a new algorithmic framework to solve
the online linear programming (OLP) problem. In this context, a decision-maker receives a sequence of resource requests with bidding prices, and makes irrevocable allocation decisions for these requests sequentially. The goal of
OLP is to maximize the accumulated reward subject to a
set of inventory constraints. OLP plays an important role
in a wide range of applications, such as revenue management (Talluri et al., 2004), resource allocation (Katoh and
Ibaraki, 1998), cloud computing (Hussain et al., 2013), and
online advertising (Balseiro et al., 2022a).

Contributions. This paper takes a first step towards answering this question with the following contributions:
• We characterize a dilemma empirically and theoretically
in applying first-order methods to OLP. The dilemma interprets the difficulty in achieving
regret and constraint
√
violation better than O( T ) with first-order methods,
and also depicts the discrepancy between online learning and decision-making.
• To address the dilemma, we introduce a new online
decision-making framework. The idea is to decouple
the learning and decision-making procedures with two
separate first-order methods and achieve better decisionmaking by efficiently combining them.

1

Institute for Computational and Mathematical Engineering,
Stanford University 2 School of Information Management and
Engineering, Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
3
Management Science & Engineering, Stanford University.
Correspondence to:
Wenzhi Gao <gwz@stanford.edu>,
Chunlin Sun <chunlin@stanford.edu>,
Chunyu Xue
<xcy2721d@gmail.com>, Yinyu Ye <yyye@stanford.edu>.

• With the help of this new framework, for the first
time, we show that first-order OLP algorithms achieve
O(T 1/3 ) regret and constraint violation, which is so far
the best result for first-order methods in OLP.

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

