On the Second-Order Convergence of Biased Policy Gradient Algorithms

Siqiao Mu 1 Diego Klabjan 2

Abstract

under mild assumptions, they share convergence properties
with mainstream gradient descent algorithms.

Since the objective functions of reinforcement
learning problems are typically highly nonconvex,
it is desirable that policy gradient, the most popular algorithm, escapes saddle points and arrives
at second-order stationary points. Existing results
only consider vanilla policy gradient algorithms
with unbiased gradient estimators, but practical
implementations under the infinite-horizon discounted reward setting are biased due to finitehorizon sampling. Moreover, actor-critic methods, whose second-order convergence has not yet
been established, are also biased due to the critic
approximation of the value function. We provide
a novel second-order analysis of biased policy
gradient methods, including the vanilla gradient
estimator computed from Monte-Carlo sampling
of trajectories as well as the double-loop actorcritic algorithm, where in the inner loop the critic
improves the approximation of the value function
via TD(0) learning. Separately, we also establish the convergence of TD(0) on Markov chains
irrespective of initial state distribution.

The policy gradient can be estimated by way of the policy
gradient theorem, which enables the straightforward application of existing techniques in gradient-based optimization towards understanding PG convergence. The theorem
provides a formula for the exact gradient of the objective
function as the expectation of the state-action value function over the discounted state-action measure (Sutton et al.,
1999). In practice, the gradient is estimated through two
common approaches: the “vanilla” approach, where the
gradient is approximated via Monte-Carlo sampling, or the
“actor-critic” approach, where the policy parameter θ, called
the “actor parameter,” is updated simultaneously alongside
a “critic parameter” w, which parametrizes the state-action
value function. The critic parameter is typically updated via
bootstrapping temporal difference methods such as TD(0),
although the actor updates may also be bootstrapped (Konda
& Tsitsiklis, 1999; Bhatnagar et al., 2009).
Although it is well-established that policy gradient converges to first-order stationary points where the norm of the
gradient is approximately zero (Sutton et al., 1999; Yuan
et al., 2022; Agarwal et al., 2020), it is of interest whether
policy gradient algorithms yield second-order stationary
points (local maxima) as opposed to saddle points. This
is because the function landscape of RL problems can be
highly nonconvex and features suboptimal stationary points
even in very simple examples (Agarwal et al., 2020; Bhandari & Russo, 2019; Zhang et al., 2020). We can utilize
seminal results in nonconvex optimization that show that
stochastic gradient descent can leverage randomness to escape saddle points either with added noise (Ge et al., 2015;
Jin et al., 2019) or as long as there is a component of noise in
the direction of curvature (Daneshmand et al., 2018; Vlaski
& Sayed, 2022).

1. Introduction
In the standard reinforcement learning framework, an agent
interacts with an environment according to some policy,
which dictates the best actions to take given the state of the
environment. The ultimate goal of the agent is to adopt a
policy that maximizes some measure of cumulative reward.
To efficiently search for the optimal policy, policy gradient
methods optimize a policy parameter θ through updates
that approximate the gradient of the objective function with
respect to θ. These algorithms can be fast and flexible, and

However, unlike stochastic gradient descent, practical implementations of policy gradient are frequently biased. For
the discounted infinite-horizon reward objective function,
the vanilla policy gradient estimator is biased due to truncation of sampled trajectory horizons (Yuan et al., 2022). In
addition, actor-critic algorithms introduce a second source
of bias in the critic’s approximation of the value function.
This therefore requires novel techniques for controlling and

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Engineering Sciences
and Applied Mathematics, Northwestern University, Evanston,
IL 2 Department of Industrial Engineering and Management Sciences, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL. Correspondence to:
Siqiao Mu <siqiaomu2026@u.northwestern.edu>, Diego Klabjan
<d-klabjan@northwestern.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

