A Fast Algorithm to Simulate Nonlinear Resistive Networks

Benjamin Scellier 1

Abstract

Dillavou et al., 2022; 2023; Wycoff et al., 2022; Anisetti
et al., 2024; Stern et al., 2022; 2024; Kiraz et al., 2022; Watfa
et al., 2023; Oh et al., 2023). Central to these networks are
variable resistors (e.g. memristors) which act as trainable
weights, coupled with diodes that introduce nonlinearities,
as well as voltage and current sources for input signals. The
conductances of these variable resistors can be adjusted, allowing the network to be trained to achieve specific computational tasks. Notably, like traditional neural networks, nonlinear resistive networks have two essential properties: they
are universal function approximators (Scellier & Mishra,
2023) and they can be trained by gradient descent (Kendall
et al., 2020; Anisetti et al., 2024). Unlike GPU-based neural networks, however, they leverage the laws of electrical
circuits (e.g. Kirchhoff’s laws and Ohm’s law) to perform
inference and extract the weight gradients. Furthermore,
the learning rules governing conductance changes are local.
These features make nonlinear resistive networks good candidates as power-efficient learning-capable hardware, with
recent experiments on memristive networks suggesting a potential 10,000x gain in energy efficiency compared to neural
networks trained on GPUs (Yi et al., 2023). Small-scale
self-learning variable resistor networks have been built and
succesfully trained on datasets such as Iris (Dillavou et al.,
2022; 2023), validating the soundness of the approach.

Analog electrical networks have long been investigated as energy-efficient computing platforms for
machine learning, leveraging analog physics during inference. More recently, resistor networks
have sparked particular interest due to their ability to learn using local rules (such as equilibrium
propagation), enabling potentially important energy efficiency gains for training as well. Despite
their potential advantage, the simulations of these
resistor networks has been a significant bottleneck
to assess their scalability, with current methods either being limited to linear networks or relying on
realistic, yet slow circuit simulators like SPICE.
Assuming ideal circuit elements, we introduce a
novel approach for the simulation of nonlinear
resistive networks, which we frame as a quadratic
programming problem with linear inequality constraints, and which we solve using a fast, exact
coordinate descent algorithm. Our simulation
methodology significantly outperforms existing
SPICE-based simulations, enabling the training
of networks up to 327 times larger at speeds 160
times faster, resulting in a 50,000-fold improvement in the ratio of network size to epoch duration.
Our approach can foster more rapid progress in
the simulations of nonlinear analog electrical networks.

Simulations of larger nonlinear resistive networks on tasks
such as MNIST (Kendall et al., 2020) and Fashion-MNIST
(Watfa et al., 2023) further underscore their potential. These
works and others (Kiraz et al., 2022; Oh et al., 2023) performed the simulations using the general-purpose SPICE
circuit simulator (Keiter, 2014; Vogt et al., 2020). However, these efforts have been hampered by the slowness of
SPICE, which is not specifically conceived to perform efficient simulations of resistive networks used for machine
learning applications. To illustrate, Kendall et al. (2020)
employed SPICE to simulate the training on MNIST of a
one-hidden-layer network comprising 100 hidden nodes, a
process which took one week for only ten epochs of training.
Due to a scarcity of methods and algorithms for nonlinear
resistive network simulations, another line of works resorts
to linear networks (Stern et al., 2022; 2024; Wycoff et al.,
2022), thus missing a fundamental ingredient of modern
machine learning applications: nonlinearity. In order to
better understand nonlinear resistive networks, guide their

1. Introduction
As energy costs associated with machine learning are rapidly
increasing, neuromorphic computing platforms are being
explored as alternatives to neural networks and GPUs
(Marković et al., 2020). Such platforms leverage analog
physics and compute-in-memory architectures to achieve
significant energy gains. In particular, nonlinear resistive
networks have recently sparked interest (Kendall et al., 2020;
1
Rain AI, San Francisco, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Benjamin Scellier <benjamin@rain.ai>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

