A Contextual Combinatorial Bandit Approach to Negotiation

Yexin Li 1 Zhancun Mu 2 Siyuan Qi 1

Abstract

counterpart. These negotiations can vary in form, and Figure 1 illustrates three representative negotiation problems:
trading, resource allocation, and multi-issue negotiation. As
negotiation experiences accumulate, an agent should continuously improve its negotiation ability.

Learning effective negotiation strategies poses
two key challenges: the exploration-exploitation
dilemma and dealing with large action spaces.
However, there is an absence of learning-based
approaches that effectively address these challenges in negotiation. This paper introduces a
comprehensive formulation to tackle various negotiation problems. Our approach leverages contextual combinatorial multi-armed bandits, with
the bandits resolving the exploration-exploitation
dilemma, and the combinatorial nature handles
large action spaces. Building upon this formulation, we introduce NegUCB, a novel method
that also handles common issues such as partial
observations and complex reward functions in negotiation. NegUCB is contextual and tailored
for full-bandit feedback without constraints on
the reward functions. Under mild assumptions,
it ensures a sub-linear regret upper bound. Experiments conducted on three negotiation tasks
demonstrate the superiority of our approach.

However, effectively exploiting past experiences in subsequent negotiations is challenging in the following aspects.
Exploration-exploitation dilemma: As counterparts vary
and the agent’s state evolves, over-exploiting historical data
may result in sub-optimal performance, while excessive
exploration may make the counterpart lose patience. Existing works on negotiation (Lewis et al., 2017; Liu & Zheng,
2020; Sengupta et al., 2022) tend to neglect exploration,
primarily focusing on exploitation, or simply explore by
UCT (Buron et al., 2019), without considering observable
contexts. Large action spaces: Consider a trading task in
which our negotiator possesses items V1 while the counterpart holds items V2 . The potential bid can be any subset of
the union V = V1 ∪ V2 , resulting in 2|V | possible choices.
Some studies (Cao et al., 2018; Bakker et al., 2019; Bagga
et al., 2020) employ reinforcement learning to acquire negotiation strategies, but they primarily focus on tasks involving
action spaces limited to a few hundred discrete actions or
low-dimensional continuous action spaces. Partial observations: The profiles of counterparts, including their preferences and desires, cannot be fully observed. Relying solely
on observable contexts for negotiation can be ineffective.
Complicated acceptance functions: Inferring the likelihood of the counterpart accepting a bid remains challenging,
even when their hidden states are known.

1. Introduction
Negotiation serves as a fundamental process that underpins
interaction among diverse agents across a wide spectrum
of domains, ranging from diplomacy (Paquette et al., 2019;
FAIR et al., 2022) and resource allocation (Lewis et al.,
2017; Cao et al., 2018) to trading (Bagga et al., 2020). In
these scenarios, an agent, represented as negotiator a, engages in negotiation with various counterparts g, with its
state evolving. At each time step, negotiator a proposes a
bid and receives feedback indicating whether the counterpart g accepts or rejects the proposal. Successful acceptance
leads to a deal, while rejection leads to termination or further negotiation, possibly with counter-proposals from the

In this paper, we formulate negotiation problems using contextual combinatorial multi-armed bandits (Li et al., 2010;
Chen et al., 2013; Qin et al., 2014; Wen et al., 2015; Chen
et al., 2018; Agarwal et al., 2021; Nie et al., 2022) to address
the exploration-exploitation dilemma and handle the large
action spaces of combinatorial cardinality. Although negotiation involves a series of actions, unlike in reinforcement
learning, where actions may lead to state transitions, bid
actions in negotiation do not inherently trigger such transitions. Agents accumulate knowledge about their counterparts through interactions. Consequently, the bandit-based
formulation is well-suited for negotiation problems.

1

State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, BIGAI,
Beijing, China 2 Peking University. Correspondence to: Siyuan Qi
<syqi@bigai.ai>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

In our formulation, an arm denotes an item involved in the

1

