Model Alignment as Prospect Theoretic Optimization

Kawin Ethayarajh 1 Winnie Xu 2 Niklas Muennighoff 2 Dan Jurafsky 1 Douwe Kiela 1 2

Abstract
Kahneman & Tversky’s prospect theory tells us
that humans perceive random variables in a biased
but well-defined manner (1992); for example, humans are famously loss-averse. We show that objectives for aligning LLMs with human feedback
implicitly incorporate many of these biases—the
success of these objectives (e.g., DPO) over crossentropy minimization can partly be ascribed to
them belonging to a family of loss functions that
we call human-aware losses (HALOs). However,
the utility functions these methods attribute to humans still differ from those in the prospect theory
literature. Using a Kahneman-Tversky model of
human utility, we propose a HALO that directly
maximizes the utility of generations instead of
maximizing the log-likelihood of preferences, as
current methods do. We call this approach KTO,
and it matches or exceeds the performance of
preference-based methods at scales from 1B to
30B, despite only learning from a binary signal
of whether an output is desirable. More broadly,
our work suggests that there is no one HALO that
is universally superior; the best loss depends on
the inductive biases most appropriate for a given
setting, an oft-overlooked consideration.

Figure 1. The utility that a human gets from the outcome of a
random variable, as implied by different human-aware losses (HALOs). Notice that the implied value functions share properties
such as loss aversion with the canonical human value function in
prospect theory (Tversky & Kahneman, 1992).

x). This is because preferences, despite being a kind of data
that is relatively scarce and expensive to collect in practice
(Casper et al., 2023), are required by the alignment methods
shown to work best—RLHF (Christiano et al., 2017) and
DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023).
To understand why these methods work so well, and whether
feedback needs to be in preference form, we frame alignment through the lens of prospect theory (Kahneman &
Tversky, 1979; Tversky & Kahneman, 1992). Prospect theory explains why humans make decisions about uncertain
events that do not maximize their expected value. It formalizes how humans perceive random variables in a biased but
well-defined manner; for example, relative to some reference point, humans are more sensitive to losses than gains,
a property called loss aversion. We show that popular alignment methods such as DPO and PPO-Clip (Schulman et al.,
2017) implicitly model some of these biases, helping explain their success independently of the data used (§3.2).
We then propose a more general class of such loss functions
called human-aware losses (HALOs).1

1. Introduction
Aligning generative models with human feedback has been
successfully used to make generations more helpful, factual,
and ethical, among other desiderata (Ouyang et al., 2022;
Tian et al., 2023). For LLMs, alignment methods such as
RLHF and DPO have consistently proven to be more beneficial than doing supervised finetuning (SFT) alone. However,
human feedback is often discussed only in the context of
preferences (e.g., output yw ≻ yl for input x), even though
it can take many forms (e.g., approval/disapproval of y given
1

Stanford University (first author was an intern at Contextual AI) 2 Contextual AI. Correspondence to: Kawin Ethayarajh
<kawin@stanford.edu>.

1
We use the term human-aware to draw an analogy with how
hardware-aware methods benefit from being designed around hardware limitations (Dao et al., 2022), not to claim that a simple loss
function is fully aware of human behavior.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

