The Max-Min Formulation of Multi-Objective Reinforcement Learning:
From Theory to a Model-Free Algorithm

Giseung Park 1 Woohyeon Byeon 1 Seongmin Kim 1 Elad Havakuk 2 Amir Leshem 2 Youngchul Sung 1

Abstract
In this paper, we consider multi-objective reinforcement learning, which arises in many realworld problems with multiple optimization goals.
We approach the problem with a max-min framework focusing on fairness among the multiple
goals and develop a relevant theory and a practical
model-free algorithm under the max-min framework. The developed theory provides a theoretical
advance in multi-objective reinforcement learning, and the proposed algorithm demonstrates a
notable performance improvement over existing
baseline methods.

Figure 1. Achievable return region and Pareto boundary (K = 2):
weighted sum versus max-min approaches (Due to the equalizer
rule (Zehavi et al., 2013), the max-min solution occurs on the line
J1 = J2 . On the other hand, the maximum sum J1 + J2 occurs
on the tangent line with slope -1. Controlling the ratio α1 /α2 ,
we can recover all points on the Pareto boundary by the max-min
approach.)

1. Introduction and Motivation

tively, P : S × A → P(S) is the transition probability function where P(S) is the space of probability distributions over S, µ0 : S → [0, 1] represents the initial
distribution of states, and γ ∈ [0, 1) is the discount factor. The key difference from the conventional RL is that
r : S × A → RK is a vector-valued reward function
with K ≥ 2. At each timestep t, the agent draws an action at ∈ A based on current state st ∈ S from its policy π : S → P(A) which is a probability distribution
over A. Then, the environment state makes a transition
from the current state st to the next state st+1 ∈ S with
probability P (st+1 |st , at ), and the agent receives a vector(1)
(K)
valued reward rt = [rt , · · · , rt ]T = r(st , at ) ∈ RK ,
where
[·]T denotes the transpose operation. Let J(π) :=
P∞
Eπ [ t=0 γ t rt ] = [J1 (π), · · · , JK (π)]T ∈ RK .

Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a powerful machine learning paradigm, focusing on training an agent to make sequential decisions by interacting with an environment. RL
algorithms learn to maximize the cumulative reward sum
through a trial-and-error process, enabling the agent to adapt
and improve its decision-making strategy over time. Recently, the field of Multi-Objective Reinforcement Learning
(MORL) has received increasing attention from the RL community since many practical control problems are formulated as multi-objective optimization. For example, consider
a scenario where an autonomous vehicle must balance the
competing goals of reaching its destination swiftly while
ensuring passenger safety. MORL extends traditional RL to
address such scenarios in which multiple, often conflicting,
objectives need to be optimized simultaneously (Roijers
et al., 2013; Hayes et al., 2022).

In the standard RL case (K = 1), the agent’s goal is to
find an optimal policy π ∗ = arg maxπ∈Π J(π), where Π
is the set of policies. On the other hand, the primary goal
of MORL is to find a policy whose expected cumulative
return vector lies on the Pareto boundary F of all achievable
return tuples J = {(J1 (π), · · · , JK (π)), ∀π ∈ Π}, which
is defined as the set of the return tuples in J for which any
one Ji cannot be increased without decreasing Jj for some
j ̸= i. Fig. 1 depicts J and F.

Formally, a multi-objective Markov decision process
(MOMDP) is defined as < S, A, P, µ0 , r, γ >, where S
and A represent the sets of states and actions, respec1
School of Electical Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute
of Science & Technology, Daejeon 34141, Republic of Korea
2
Faculty of Engineering, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat Gan 52900, Israel. Correspondence to: Youngchul Sung <ycsung@kaist.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

A standard way to find such a policy is the utility-based
approach (Roijers et al., 2013), which is formulated as the
1

