Naive Bayes Classifiers over Missing Data: Decision and Poisoning

Song Bian * 1 Xiating Ouyang * 1 Zhiwei Fan 1 Paraschos Koutris 1

Abstract

ity on ML models, particularly focusing on the
notion of certifiable robustness?

We study the certifiable robustness of ML classifiers on dirty datasets that could contain missing
values. A test point is certifiably robust for an
ML classifier if the classifier returns the same
prediction for that test point, regardless of which
cleaned version (among exponentially many) of
the dirty dataset the classifier is trained on. In
this paper, we show theoretically that for Naive
Bayes Classifiers (NBC) over dirty datasets with
missing values: (i) there exists an efficient polynomial time algorithm to decide whether multiple
input test points are all certifiably robust over a
dirty dataset; and (ii) the data poisoning attack,
which aims to make all input test points certifiably
non-robust by inserting missing cells to the clean
dataset, is in polynomial time for single test points
but NP-complete for multiple test points. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our algorithms
are efficient and outperform existing baselines.

We explain it with the following example.
Example 1.1. Consider a data analyst working at an insurance company trying to predict whether an existing customer
will leave (churn) using an ML classifier. Figure 1 illustrates
three customers with age, residency status (inside or outside
the US), and income, which are features used for this classification task. The data for the customer with CustomerID
11013 is incomplete, as the residency information is missing (marked with NULL). Therefore there are two possible
ways to clean the dataset: we can assign the missing feature
“In-US” to either True or False, resulting in two possible
worlds generated from the incomplete dataset.
For the customer with CustomerID 11014, the ML classifier
may predict True for that customer in both possible worlds.
If this information is known before training and making
predictions, data cleaning can be skipped since the prediction is robust with respect to the missing value. However,
the customer with CustomerID 11015 presents a different
scenario, where the predictions made by the model trained
on two possible worlds disagree: the ML classifier would
predict True in the possible world where the feature “In-US”
is False, but in the other possible world, the prediction is
False. Therefore, data cleaning is necessary to predict the
customer with CustomerID 11015 accurately.

1. Introduction
The reliability of Machine Learning (ML) applications
is heavily contingent upon the integrity of the training
data. However, real-world datasets are frequently plagued
with issues such as missing values, noise, and inconsistencies (Peng et al., 2021; Abedjan et al., 2016; Chu et al.,
2016b; Xiong et al., 2021; Picado et al., 2020). Traditional
approaches to handling such “dirty” datasets typically involve data cleaning. While effective, data cleaning can be
an arduous and resource-intensive process, albeit various
efforts to accelerate the data cleaning process (Chu et al.,
2013; 2015a; Rekatsinas et al., 2017; Rezig et al., 2021).This
raises a pivotal question in the domain of ML:

We investigate whether ML classifiers produce consistent
predictions over incomplete (or dirty) data through the notion of certifiable robustness. A possible world (or cleaned
dataset) of an incomplete dataset with missing values can be
obtained by imputing each missing value marked as NULL
with a valid value. Formally, a test point is said to be certifiably robust for an ML classifier if its prediction for that test
point remains the same regardless of which possible world
(among exponentially many) generated from the incomplete
dataset it was trained on. Otherwise, the test point is said
to be certifiably non-robust. This notion is helpful because
if a test point is certifiably robust, then data cleaning is unnecessary because no matter how we clean the dataset to
yield a possible world, the trained classifier will always give
the same prediction. Therefore, deciding whether this case
holds efficiently would be beneficial to save the cost of data
cleaning. We formalize this into the following problem.

Can we circumvent the exhaustive data cleaning
process by understanding the impact of data qual*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison WI, USA. Correspondence to: Song Bian <sbian8@wisc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

