Measuring Stochastic Data Complexity with Boltzmann Influence Functions

Nathan Ng 1 2 3 Roger Grosse 2 3 Marzyeh Ghassemi 1

Abstract

The Minimum Description Length (MDL) Principle (Rissanen, 1996) provides an alternative approach to uncertainty
estimation which does not require explicitly defining a prior
or even a notion of ground truth. MDL instantiates a version
of Occam’s Razor by favoring models that minimize the
combined codelength of both the model and the observed
data under a suitable coding scheme. This code can then
be used to make a prediction for an unseen test point by
selecting the label with the shortest code. However, this
code may perform poorly compared to a hindsight-optimal
code that is allowed to observe the test point and label. We
can attempt to minimize this difference in codelengths, or
regret, by using a universal code such as the predictive normalized maximum likelihood (pNML) (Roos & Rissanen,
2008; Fogel & Feder, 2018) distribution, which minimizes
the maximum possible regret for all labels.

Estimating the uncertainty of a model’s prediction on a test point is a crucial part of ensuring
reliability and calibration under distribution shifts.
A minimum description length approach to this
problem uses the predictive normalized maximum
likelihood (pNML) distribution, which considers
every possible label for a data point, and decreases
confidence in a prediction if other labels are also
consistent with the model and training data. In
this work we propose IF-COMP, a scalable and
efficient approximation of the pNML distribution that linearizes the model with a temperaturescaled Boltzmann influence function. IF-COMP
can be used to produce well-calibrated predictions on test points as well as measure complexity
in both labelled and unlabelled settings. We experimentally validate IF-COMP on uncertainty
calibration, mislabel detection, and OOD detection tasks, where it consistently matches or beats
strong baseline methods.

Intuitively, given a query data point x, pNML considers augmenting the training set with the pair (x, y) for some label
y and fitting a hindsight-optimal model to the augmented
training set. If one can just as easily fit the augmented
dataset with arbitrary labels, then one is highly uncertain
about the label; if one choice of labels is much easier to fit
than the others, then one has low uncertainty. This intuition
is captured by the minimax optimality of pNML. The universal codelength pNML defines for a data point is called the
stochastic data complexity (Rissanen, 1986), and consists
of two terms. The error term captures the best possible loss
a hindsight-optimal model could achieve by observing the
true label. The second parametric complexity term quantifies how many essentially different distributions the model
class could assign to the test data. Minimizing the pNML
codelength then requires both learning an accurate model of
the data as well as avoiding overfitting outlier observations.

1. Introduction
Safely deploying machine learning models in real world
settings requires making accurate predictions, as well as
quantifying the uncertainty in those predictions. This is particularly important in high-stakes settings such as healthcare
(Ghassemi & Mohamed, 2022), medical imaging (Esteva
et al., 2017), and self-driving cars (Bojarski et al., 2016),
where uncertainty estimates can help accurately assess the
risk in utilizing a model’s decision and decide when to
ignore it altogether (Ovadia et al., 2019). Common methods for quantifying uncertainty rely on Bayesian principles,
which require defining a prior distribution and sampling
from a posterior distribution. However, specifying a good
prior is difficult in the context of modern deep learning, and
Bayesian methods face significant scalability challenges.

Calculating the pNML distribution requires optimizing a
hindsight-optimal model over the training set and the additional example for each possible label, which is both
computationally intractable and misspecified for overparameterized neural networks that can easily fit random labels
(Zhang et al., 2017). A simple way to restrict the hindsightoptimal model subclass is with a proximal objective that
penalizes movement in function and weight space. Approximating this proximal objective by linearizing the network
and applying a second order approximation of the proximal terms has been shown to correspond to the influence

*

Equal contribution 1 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
University of Toronto 3 Vector Institute. Correspondence to:
Nathan Ng <nathanng@mit.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

