A New Linear Scaling Rule for Private Adaptive Hyperparameter Optimization

Ashwinee Panda * 1 Xinyu Tang * 1 Saeed Mahloujifar 1 Vikash Sehwag 1 Prateek Mittal 1

89
88
87

Ours (Merged­38M)
Mehta 2023 (JFT)
Berrada 2023 (JFT)

86

4

2

1

0.5

85

8

ImageNet Acc (%)

90

Privacy Budget ( )

Figure 2. Evaluation on ImageNet-1k finetuning. Our HPO only
requires paying the privacy cost once, and can then be used to
find good HPs for all values of ε > 0.5. We outperform prior
work (Mehta et al., 2023b; Berrada et al., 2023) because our HPO
finds better HPs, even though prior work has better non-private
performance and does not report the privacy cost of their HPO.

Figure 1. Visualization of our method. We use low-cost trials
(small ε) to estimate hyperparameters (HPs) and scale these up
to the privacy budget for the final run. We combine multiple HPs
together, and have a prior that the scaling is linear.

Abstract

1. Introduction

An open problem in differentially private deep
learning is hyperparameter optimization (HPO).
DP-SGD introduces new hyperparameters and
complicates existing ones, forcing researchers
to painstakingly tune hyperparameters with hundreds of trials, which in turn makes it impossible
to account for the privacy cost of HPO without destroying the utility. We propose an adaptive HPO
method that uses cheap trials (in terms of privacy
cost and runtime) to estimate optimal hyperparameters and scales them up. We obtain state-of-theart performance on 22 benchmark tasks, across
computer vision and natural language processing,
across pretraining and finetuning, across architectures and a wide range of ε ∈ [0.01, 8.0], all while
accounting for the privacy cost of HPO.

A crucial component of interfacing machine learning models
closely with user data is ensuring that the process remains
private (Apple, 2017), and Differential Privacy (DP) is the
gold standard for quantifying privacy risks and providing
provable guarantees against attacks (Dwork et al., 2006).
DP implies that the output of an algorithm e.g., the final
weights trained by stochastic gradient descent (SGD) do not
change much if a single datapoint in the dataset changes.
Definition 1.1 (Differential Privacy). A randomized mechanism M with domain D and range R preserves (ε, δ)differential privacy iff for any two neighboring datasets
D, D′ ∈ D and for any subset S ⊆ R we have Pr[M(D) ∈
S] ≤ eε Pr[M(D′ ) ∈ S] + δ
where D and D′ are neighboring datasets if they differ in
a single entry, ε is the privacy budget and δ is the failure
probability.

*
Equal contribution 1 Princeton University. Correspondence to:
Ashwinee Panda <ashwinee@princeton.edu>.

Differentially Private Stochastic Gradient Descent (DPSGD) (Song et al., 2013; Abadi et al., 2016) is the standard privacy-preserving training algorithm for training neural networks on private data. For a batch size B and

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

