Self-Supervised Interpretable End-to-End Learning via
Latent Functional Modularity

Hyunki Seong 1 David Hyunchul Shim 1

Bottom-up
Process

We introduce MoNet, a novel functionally modular network for self-supervised and interpretable
end-to-end learning. By leveraging its functional
modularity with a latent-guided contrastive loss
function, MoNet efficiently learns task-specific
decision-making processes in latent space without
requiring task-level supervision. Moreover, our
method incorporates an online, post-hoc explainability approach that enhances the interpretability of end-to-end inferences without compromising sensorimotor control performance. In realworld indoor environments, MoNet demonstrates
effective visual autonomous navigation, outperforming baseline models by 7% to 28% in task
specificity analysis. We further explore the interpretability of our network through post-hoc
analysis of perceptual saliency maps and latent
decision vectors. This provides valuable insights
into the incorporation of explainable artificial intelligence into robotic learning, encompassing
both perceptual and behavioral perspectives. Supplementary materials are available at https://
sites.google.com/view/monet-lgc.

Sensory
Input
(𝒐𝒐)

Top-down
Process

Planning Module

Abstract

Perception
Module Latent

Feature
(𝒛𝒛𝒑𝒑 )

Post-hoc
Latent Process Interpretable
Decision
Decision
(𝒉𝒉𝒅𝒅 )
(𝑷𝑷𝒅𝒅 )

Control Module

Control
Output
(𝒂𝒂𝒄𝒄 )

Figure 1: Our approach incorporates a functionally modular
end-to-end network architecture, which includes a post-hoc
method for an interpretable latent decision-making process.

applications (Tampuu et al., 2020).
However, although studies on IL have shown preliminary
successes, designing an end-to-end sensorimotor network
that can scale up to complex driving scenarios remains challenging. Traditional end-to-end networks often exhibit a less
clear decision-making process, which complicates learning
entangled tasks from demonstrations. To address this, recent
conditional learning methods (Huang et al., 2020) employ
multiple branching networks for each task, with outputs
that switch based on task-level conditional inputs. However,
this conditional input often corresponds to the outcome of
an internal decision-making process in human demonstrations, which is typically implicit and difficult to identify. As
a consequence, this approach necessitates extra task-level
annotations (e.g., go-straight, turn-left), making it more
demanding than simply collecting sensorimotor pairs.

1. Introduction
One of the main objectives of end-to-end learning for autonomous navigation is to develop complex policies through
human demonstrations. This is achieved by an end-to-end
network that learns the hierarchical pipeline of perception,
planning, and control in robotic systems via imitation learning (IL). Given that IL facilitates safe and efficient policy
learning in an offline, supervised manner, end-to-end networks have been widely used in the design of learning-based

Moreover, conventional networks, which directly compute
control commands from sensory inputs, lack a transparent
inference process. This obscurity makes it unclear what
behavioral decision was intended for the resulting control
output without direct execution. Several studies have sought
to enhance interpretability by reconstructing various modalities (Chen et al., 2021; Zeng et al., 2019), or by visualizing
attention maps (Kim & Canny, 2017). However, they mainly
focus on perceptual insights, still leaving the high-level decisions behind sensorimotor outputs largely obscure. This
lack of clarity leads to insufficient task specificity and interpretability during the sensorimotor process, ultimately

1

School of Electrical Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of
Science and Technology, Daejeon, South Korea. Correspondence
to: Hyunki Seong <hynkis@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

