Rejuvenating image-GPT as Strong Visual Representation Learners

Sucheng Ren * 1 Zeyu Wang * 2 Hongru Zhu 1 Junfei Xiao 1 Alan Yuille 1 Cihang Xie 2

Top-1 Accuracy on ImageNet

Abstract
This paper enhances image-GPT (iGPT), one of
the pioneering works that introduce autoregressive pretraining to predict the next pixels for visual representation learning. Two simple yet essential changes are made. First, we shift the prediction target from raw pixels to semantic tokens,
enabling a higher-level understanding of visual
content. Second, we supplement the autoregressive modeling by instructing the model to predict not only the next tokens but also the visible tokens. This pipeline is particularly effective
when semantic tokens are encoded by discriminatively trained models, such as CLIP. We introduce this novel approach as D-iGPT. Extensive
experiments showcase that D-iGPT excels as a
strong learner of visual representations: A notable achievement is its compelling performance
on the ImageNet-1K dataset — by training on publicly available datasets, D-iGPT unprecedentedly
achieves 90.0% top-1 accuracy with a vanilla ViTH. Additionally, D-iGPT shows strong generalization on the downstream task. Code is available at
https://github.com/OliverRensu/D-iGPT.

90

One-Peace

D-iGPT

EVA

D-iGPT

BeiT-3

89
giant+
Huge
BeiT

88

Large

OpenCLIP

Huge

giant

Large

Giant+

Model Size
Figure 1. ImageNet performance of models trained on publicly
available datasets. We note that D-iGPT with ViT-H achieves the
best performance, i.e., 90.0% top-1 accuracy.

prowess to process language with human-like capabilities.
Beyond NLP, autoregressive pretraining has also been a significant contributor in the field of computer vision. The pioneering model in this context is PixelCNN (Van Den Oord
et al., 2016), a deep autoregressive model designed to model
the discrete probability of the raw pixel values and encode
the complete set of dependencies in the image. Building upon this foundation, image GPT (iGPT) (Chen et al.,
2020a) represents a significant advancement, utilizing the
flexible Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017) at
a notably larger computational scale. iGPT’s achievements
are remarkable: it not only learned state-of-the-art visual
representation for lower-resolution datasets such as CIFAR10 but also demonstrated competitive performance on more
complex datasets like ImageNet (Russakovsky et al., 2015).

1. Introduction
The advent of Large Language Models (LLMs) (OpenAI,
2023; Thoppilan et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023), such
as GPT series (Radford & Narasimhan, 2018; Brown et al.,
2020; OpenAI, 2023), has catalyzed a transformative era in
natural language processing (NLP), establishing new precedents for performance across a range of linguistic tasks. One
of the key driving forces behind this tremendous success is
autoregressive pretraining, which trains models to predict
the most probable next tokens in a sequence. This strategy
enables models to internalize a complex interplay of syntax
and semantics, which in turn translates to their extraordinary

Intriguingly, despite the initial successes of autoregressive
pretraining in computer vision, recent trends have witnessed
a rapid paradigm shift towards BERT-style pretraining (Devlin et al., 2019). This transition is significant, particularly
when considering iGPT’s initial findings of comparable
performance between autoregressive and BERT-style pretraining in various tasks. Subsequent research, however,

*
Equal contribution 1 Johns Hopkins University 2 UC Santa Cruz.
Correspondence to: Cihang Xie <cixie@ucsc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

