A General Online Algorithm for Optimizing Complex Performance Metrics

Wojciech Kotłowski 1 Marek Wydmuch 1 Erik Schultheis 2 Rohit Babbar 2 3 Krzysztof Dembczyński 1 4

Abstract

nary (Ye et al., 2012; Koyejo et al., 2014; Busa-Fekete et al.,
2015; Dembczynski et al., 2017; Singh & Khim, 2022),
multi-class (Narasimhan et al., 2015b; 2022), and multilabel classification (Waegeman et al., 2014; Koyejo et al.,
2015; Kotłowski & Dembczyński, 2017) under different
theoretical frameworks. The population utility (PU) framework focuses on building a model being close to the optimal
one on the population level (Ye et al., 2012). The expected
test utility (ETU) framework concerns the optimization of
the expected utility computed over a given (known) test
set (Lewis, 1995; Jansche, 2007; Ye et al., 2012). These two
frameworks are different in the formulation of the objectives (more precisely, they differ in the order in which the
expectation and the metric is computed), but they turn out
to be asymptotically equivalent (Dembczynski et al., 2017).
Still, most of the existing works concern a batch setting.

We consider sequential maximization of performance metrics that are general functions of a
confusion matrix of a classifier (such as precision, F-measure, or G-mean). Such metrics are,
in general, non-decomposable over individual instances, making their optimization very challenging. While they have been extensively studied
under different frameworks in the batch setting,
their analysis in the online learning regime is very
limited, with only a few distinguished exceptions.
In this paper, we introduce and analyze a general
online algorithm that can be used in a straightforward way with a variety of complex performance
metrics in binary, multi-class, and multi-label classification problems. The algorithm’s update and
prediction rules are appealingly simple and computationally efficient without the need to store any
past data. We show the algorithm attains O( lnnn )
regret for concave and smooth metrics and verify the efficiency of the proposed algorithm in
empirical studies.

In this paper, we consider an online setting for optimization of complex performance metrics. In our framework,
an algorithm observes a sequence of instances, one at a
time, which are drawn i.i.d. from some distribution. At
each iteration, after receiving the input vector, the algorithm
makes a prediction and observes the true label (or vector
of labels). After observing the entire sequence of data, the
algorithm is evaluated by means of a performance metric
computed from its empirical confusion matrix over the data.
We evaluate an algorithm in our setting by means of a regret,
which is the expected (over the data sequence) difference
between the algorithm’s performance and that of the optimal
classifier. The goal is to design no-regret algorithms, that
is, algorithms that guarantee regret converges to zero as the
sequence length grows.

1. Introduction
Many modern applications of machine learning involve optimization of complex performance metrics that, unlike misclassification error, do not decompose into expectation over
instance-wise quantities. Examples of such measures include F -measure (Lewis, 1995), the area under the ROC
curve (AUC) (Drummond & Holte, 2005), geometric (Drummond & Holte, 2005; Wang & Yao, 2012; Menon et al.,
2013; Cao et al., 2019) and harmonic mean (Kennedy et al.,
2009), and Matthews coefficient (Baldi et al., 2000).

Contrary to most of the online learning work, we do not
assume that predictions of the algorithm are obtained by
means of some parametric function of the input vector (e.g.,
linear or generalized linear models). Instead, we assume
that the algorithm has access to a conditional probability
estimator (CPE), which returns an estimate of the true label
conditional distribution at the input vector, which the algorithm will use to issue its prediction. Such a setup would
be trivial for decomposable performance metrics, where the
optimal decision is fully determined by the label conditional
probabilities. For non-decomposable performance metrics,
however, the optimal decision on different instances are no
longer independent, yet the online setting requires the classi-

Complex performance metrics have been studied in bi*

Equal contribution 1 Poznan University of Technology, Poznan,
Poland 2 Aalto University, Helsinki, Finland 3 University of Bath,
Bath, UK 4 Yahoo Research, New York, United States. Correspondence to: Wojciech Kotłowski <wkotlowski@cs.put.poznan.pl>,
Marek Wydmuch <mwydmuch@cs.put.poznan.pl>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

