A Generative Approach for Treatment Effect Estimation under Collider Bias:
From an Out-of-Distribution Perspective

Baohong Li 1 Haoxuan Li 2 Anpeng Wu 1 Minqin Zhu 1 Shiyuan Peng 3 Qingyu Cao 3 Kun Kuang 1

Abstract

Wooldridge, 2009; Emdin et al., 2017). For example, accurately assessing the treatment effect of specific drugs on
each patient can help doctors decide how to administer drugs
to specific individuals, which is a counterfactual problem
since we cannot simultaneously observe the outcomes of
an individual taking or not taking the drugs. The critical
challenge of estimating treatment effects is eliminating the
presence of biases in the observational data (Pearl, 2009).

Resulting from non-random sample selection
caused by both the treatment and outcome, collider bias poses a unique challenge to treatment
effect estimation using observational data whose
distribution differs from that of the target population. In this paper, we rethink collider bias
from an out-of-distribution (OOD) perspective,
considering that the entire data space of the target
population consists of two different environments:
The observational data selected from the target
population belongs to a seen environment labeled
with S = 1 and the missing unselected data belongs to another unseen environment labeled with
S = 0. Based on this OOD formulation, we
utilize small-scale representative data from the entire data space with no environmental labels and
propose a novel method, i.e., Coupled Counterfactual Generative Adversarial Model (C2 GAM),
to simultaneously generate the missing S = 0
samples in observational data and the missing
S labels in the small-scale representative data.
With the help of C2 GAM, collider bias can be addressed by combining the generated S = 0 samples and the observational data to estimate treatment effects. Extensive experiments on synthetic
and real-world data demonstrate that plugging
C2 GAM into existing treatment effect estimators
achieves significant performance improvements.

There are two primary sources for biases: confounding
bias and selection bias (Greenland, 2003; Hernán & Robins,
2020). Let T denote the treatment variable, X denote the
pre-treatment variables, Y denote the outcome variable, and
S denote the selection indicator. The confounding bias
results from common causes of treatments and outcomes
(T ← X → Y ), and the selection bias results from nonrandom sample selection caused by some certain variables
(T 99K S L99 Y ). Most of the previous works focused on
addressing confounding bias (Bang & Robins, 2005; Shalit
et al., 2017; Louizos et al., 2017; Wager & Athey, 2018)
and selection bias caused by only T and X (Bareinboim &
Tian, 2015; Correa et al., 2018), while ignoring collider bias
which is a particular form of selection bias (T → S ← Y ).
These methods cannot address collider bias because both
T and Y cause S, which introduces spurious correlations
between T and Y , resulting in biased estimation of treatment
effects not only on S = 0 data but also on S = 1 data.
Collider bias can be defined as non-random sample selection
conditioning on both treatments and outcomes, as shown
in Figure 1(b). The observational data is non-randomly
sampled from the target data distribution by the sample
selection mechanism in Figure 1(b), indicated as S = 1,
and the unobserved non-selected data is indicated as S = 0.
In other words, only S = 1 samples can be observed, and for
S = 0 data, the values of X, T and Y are all missing. Due to
collider bias, the observed data distribution will differ from
the target data distribution. For example, when studying
whether vaccination will protect against contracting COVID19, where T is whether an individual is vaccinated, Y is
whether an individual contracts COVID-19 and X is an
individual’s covariates like gender, age, etc., we cannot
force everyone to test for COVID-19. As a result, we can
only observe the data of a specific population who test for

1. Introduction
Estimating treatment effects from observational data is crucial for explanatory analysis and decision-making processes
(Robins et al., 2000; Angrist & Pischke, 2009; Imbens &
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China 2 Center for Data Science, Peking University, Beijing, China 3 Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Kun Kuang <kunkuang@zju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

