Studying K-FAC Heuristics by Viewing Adam through a Second-Order Lens

Ross M. Clarke 1 José Miguel Hernández-Lobato 1

Abstract

individual updates, which in turn are more computationally
costly than those employed by first-order methods. Combined with a generally more complicated implementation,
first-order methods are still preferable to second-order approaches for most practitioners (Anil et al., 2021).

Research into optimisation for deep learning is
characterised by a tension between the computational efficiency of first-order, gradient-based
methods (such as SGD and Adam) and the theoretical efficiency of second-order, curvature-based
methods (such as quasi-Newton methods and KFAC). Noting that second-order methods often
only function effectively with the addition of stabilising heuristics (such as Levenberg-Marquardt
damping), we ask how much these (as opposed to
the second-order curvature model) contribute to
second-order algorithms’ performance. We thus
study AdamQLR: an optimiser combining damping and learning rate selection techniques from
K-FAC (Martens & Grosse, 2015) with the update directions proposed by Adam, inspired by
considering Adam through a second-order lens.
We evaluate AdamQLR on a range of regression
and classification tasks at various scales and hyperparameter tuning methodologies, concluding
K-FAC’s adaptive heuristics are of variable standalone general effectiveness, and finding an untuned AdamQLR setting can achieve comparable
performance vs runtime to tuned benchmarks.

In part, this is a stability issue — by virtue of taking larger
individual steps, second-order optimisers carry an increased
risk of significantly worsening the objective value if their
approximate understanding of curvature in objective space
is a poor representation of the true space. Most secondorder approaches thus depend on additional heuristics (such
as curvature damping) for their viability. Heuristics commonly seen in first-order methods, such as weight decay or
momentum applied to SGD, improve an already effective
optimiser; by contrast, second-order methods’ heuristics are
essential components, without which the optimiser will perform unstably or ineffectively — a point we demonstrate in
Appendix B.3.4. It is then natural to ask to what extent these
heuristics are responsible for the documented benefits of
second-order optimisers, and whether they might similarly
improve first-order techniques.
In this paper, we study a damped automatic learning rate
strategy, derived by applying K-FAC’s damping and learning
rate selection techniques to Adam. The resulting algorithm
— an optimiser whose default hyperparameters compare
favourably with tuned baselines — allows us to investigate
the impact of K-FAC’s heuristics. After reviewing related
work in Section 2, we present our study algorithm in Section 3. We then justify our claims by experiment in Section 4
before Section 5 concludes. Our main contributions are as
follows:

1. Introduction
At the heart of any machine learning model is an optimisation problem, and at the heart of any training procedure
is an optimisation algorithm. Most frequently seen in the
literature are first-order optimisers such as SGD, Adam
(Kingma & Ba, 2015) and their variants, but exploratory
studies have also been performed on second-order algorithms such as quasi-Newton methods and K-FAC (Martens
& Grosse, 2015). Broadly speaking, second-order algorithms aim to secure more rapid convergence to an optimal
value of the objective function by making more principled

• We argue K-FAC’s adaptive heuristics are of variable
general empirical effectiveness

• We present a novel use of damped, second-order approximate learning rate selection in Adam

1
University of Cambridge. Correspondence to: Ross M. Clarke
<rmc78@cam.ac.uk>.

• We show our untuned study method often performs
similarly to methods using tuned hyperparameters, exhibiting robustness to hyperparameters

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

