Consistent Adversarially Robust Linear Classification: Non-Parametric Setting

Elvis Dohmatob 1

Abstract

their rapid adaptation by the general public for all kinds
of duties like image generation, text generation, chatbots,
encyclopedic knowledge assistants, etc., the impact of adversarial examples (in the form of adversarial prompts) will
be even more devastating. For example see (Carlini et al.,
2023) and the references therein.

For binary classification in d dimensions, it is
known that with a sample size of n, an excess
adversarial risk of O(d/n) is achievable under
strong parametric assumptions about the underlying data distribution (e.g., assuming a Gaussian
mixture model). In the case of well-separated
distributions, this rate can be further refined to
O(1/n). Our work studies the non-parametric
setting, where very little is known. With only
mild regularity conditions on the conditional distribution of the features, we examine adversarial attacks with respect to arbitrary norms and introduce a straightforward yet effective estimator
with provable consistency w.r.t adversarial risk.
Our estimator is given by minimizing a series of
smoothed versions of the robust 0/1 loss, with a
smoothing bandwidth that adapts to both n and d.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that our estimator
can achieve
the minimax excess adversarial risk
p
e d/n) for linear classifiers, at the cost of
of O(
solving possibly rougher optimization problems.

In this work, we consider the statistical problem of computing a Bayes-optimal robust linear classifier for a binary
classification problem on Rd without any parametric assumptions on the underlying distribution of the data, beyond the requirement of some regularity of the conditional
density of the distribution of the features. Efficiently computable consistent estimators in the adversarial setting are
a big deal because it is known that unlike the case of ordinary classification, convex surrogates don’t exist in the
adversarial case (Bao et al., 2020). To summarize,
– Risk-Consistency. We construct a sequence of linear classifiers (indexed by the sample size n and input dimension d), whose adversarial risk / classification error approaches the optimal value over all linear models, in the
limit n → ∞ such that d log(n)/n → 0. See Theorem 4.1.
Our estimator relies on Gaussian smoothing of the data,
wherein the smoothing bandwidth hn gracefully adapts to
the sample size n and the input dimension d. In the special
case of Euclidean-norm attacks, our proposed estimator can
be efficiently computed via smooth optimization methods
on the Euclidean unit-sphere (a smooth manifold) (Boumal
et al., 2018). The bandwidth parameter hn trades between
ease of optimization and rate of statistical convergence of
the adversarial risk estimator to the Bayes-optimal value.

1. Introduction
Supervised machine-learning models like (generalized) linear models, kernel methods, and neural networks have
enjoyed tremendous practical success in many applications involving high-dimensional data, such as images.
Yet, these models are highly sensitive to small perturbations known as adversarial examples (Szegedy et al., 2013;
Tsipras et al., 2019; Su et al., 2017; Schmidt et al., 2018),
which are often imperceptible by humans. While various strategies such as adversarial training (Madry et al.,
2018) can mitigate this empirically, lack of robustness remains highly problematic for many safety-critical applications (e.g, autonomous vehicles), and motivates a better understanding of the phenomena at play. In the era of socalled large-language models (LLMs) like ChatGPT and

– Minimax Optimality. Under a stronger smoothness condition on the conditional distribution of the features, we
recover in Theorem 4.2 rates which are uniformly optimal
over all attack strengths, and match the minimax optimal
rate of classification in the absence of adversaries.

2. Preliminaries and Problem Setting
2.1. Linear Classification and Adversarial Attacks

1

Meta FAIR. Correspondence to: Elvis Dohmatob <dohmatob@meta.com>.

Consider a binary classification problem in Rd , consisting
of learning the label y ∈ {±1} of a random data point
with feature vector x ∈ Rd . Let P be the unknown joint
distribution of the pair (x, y). We are given access to an iid

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

