Token-Specific Watermarking with Enhanced Detectability and Semantic
Coherence for Large Language Models

Mingjia Huo * 1 Sai Ashish Somayajula * 1 Youwei Liang 1 Ruisi Zhang 1 Farinaz Koushanfar 1 Pengtao Xie 1

Abstract

by ethical challenges. Prominent among these are concerns
such as their potential use in election manipulation campaigns (Alvarez et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023b), the creation
of fake news and misleading web content (Augenstein et al.,
2023), and aiding academic dishonesty by facilitating cheating on homework (Team, 2023). In light of these issues, the
detection of text generated by LLMs emerges as a critical
task, underpinning the broader goals of AI ethics and safety.

Large language models generate high-quality responses with potential misinformation, underscoring the need for regulation by distinguishing AIgenerated and human-written texts. Watermarking is pivotal in this context, which involves embedding hidden markers in texts during the LLM
inference phase, which is imperceptible to humans. Achieving both the detectability of inserted
watermarks and the semantic quality of generated
texts is challenging. While current watermarking algorithms have made promising progress in
this direction, there remains significant scope for
improvement. To address these challenges, we
introduce a novel multi-objective optimization
(MOO) approach for watermarking that utilizes
lightweight networks to generate token-specific
watermarking logits and splitting ratios. By leveraging MOO to optimize for both detection and semantic objective functions, our method simultaneously achieves detectability and semantic integrity.
Experimental results show that our method outperforms current watermarking techniques in enhancing the detectability of texts generated by LLMs
while maintaining their semantic coherence. Our
code is available at https://github.com/
mignonjia/TS watermark.

Various classification-based approaches have been proposed
to determine whether a text is generated by humans or
LLMs (OpenAI, 2023; Guo et al., 2023b; Brown et al.,
1992). However, as LLM-generated texts increasingly match
the quality of human-generated ones, these methods are losing their robustness. For instance, OpenAI released its own
AI classifier (OpenAI, 2023) in early 2023, but it was later
withdrawn due to its low accuracy. Recently, watermarking
techniques in LLMs have gained popularity (Abdelnabi &
Fritz, 2021; He et al., 2022a; Zhang et al., 2023; Kirchenbauer et al., 2023a; Kuditipudi et al., 2023; Aaronson, 2023;
Liu et al., 2023; Ren et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2023; Wang
et al., 2023; Wouters, 2023). These techniques embed hidden patterns in LLM-generated texts that, while imperceptible to humans, can be detected by algorithms. Kirchenbauer
et al. (2023a) propose an effective watermarking method,
referred to as KGW in this paper. To generate a new token
with a watermark, the hash of the preceding token is used
as a random seed to divide the vocabulary into a green list
and a red list with a fixed splitting ratio (i.e., the percentage
of tokens in the green list). Then a constant value, known
as the watermark logit, is added to the LLM-produced logits on the green list tokens. This adjustment increases the
probability of selecting the ‘green’ tokens as the new token.
To identify the presence of a watermark, a statistical test is
carried out. This involves counting the number of green list
tokens in the generated text. A higher incidence of green
tokens suggests that the text is likely to contain a watermark.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs), particularly ChatGPT,
have significantly revolutionized the field of artificial intelligence (AI), bringing forth unparalleled advancements and
applications with human-like capabilities (Schulman et al.,
2022). However, this rapid evolution has been accompanied
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla, CA 92093, USA. Correspondence to: Pengtao Xie
<p1xie@ucsd.edu>.

The design of KGW emphasizes easy detection of watermarked texts. However, this approach often compromises
the semantic coherence of the texts, as highlighted in Lee
et al. (2023). One primary cause of this issue is that KGW
uses a constant splitting ratio and watermark logit across
all tokens, without taking into account the context and se-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

