Debiased Distribution Compression

Lingxiao Li 1 Raaz Dwivedi 2 Lester Mackey 3

Abstract

modeling in which each simulation consumes thousands of
CPU hours (Niederer et al., 2011).

Modern compression methods can summarize a
target distribution P more succinctly than i.i.d.
sampling but require access to a low-bias input
sequence like a Markov chain converging quickly
to P. We introduce a new suite of compression
methods suitable for compression with biased
input sequences. Given n points targeting the
wrong distribution and quadratic
√ time, Stein Kernel Thinning (SKT) returns n equal-weighted
points with e
O(n−1/2 ) maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) to P. For larger-scale compression
tasks, Low-rank SKT achieves the same feat in
sub-quadratic time using an adaptive low-rank
debiasing procedure that may be of independent
interest. For downstream tasks that support simplex or constant-preserving weights, Stein Recombination and Stein Cholesky achieve even
greater parsimony, matching the guarantees of
SKT with as few as poly-log(n) weighted points.
Underlying these advances are new guarantees
for the quality of simplex-weighted coresets, the
spectral decay of kernel matrices, and the covering numbers of Stein kernel Hilbert spaces.
In our experiments, our techniques provide succinct and accurate posterior summaries while
overcoming biases due to burn-in, approximate
Markov chain Monte Carlo, and tempering.

Remarkably, modern compression methods can summarize
a distribution more succinctly than i.i.d. sampling. For example, kernel thinning (KT) (Dwivedi and Mackey, 2021;
2022), Compress++ (Shetty et al., 2022), recombination
(Hayakawa et al., 2023), and randomly pivoted Cholesky
(Epperly and Moreno, 2024) all provide e
O(1/m) approximation error √
using m points, a significant improvement
over the Ω(1/ m) approximation provided by i.i.d. sampling from P. However, each of these constructions relies
on access to an accurate input sequence, like an i.i.d. sample from P or a Markov chain converging quickly to P.
Much more commonly, one only has access to n biased
sample points approximating a distribution Q ̸= P. Such
biases are a common occurrence in Markov chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC)-based inference due to tempering (where
one targets a less peaked and more dispersed distribution to
achieve faster convergence, Gramacy et al., 2010), burn-in
(where the initial state of a Markov chain biases the distribution of chain iterates, Cowles and Carlin, 1996), or
approximate MCMC (where one runs a cheaper approximate Markov chain to avoid the prohibitive costs of an exact MCMC algorithm, e.g., Ahn et al., 2012). The Stein
thinning (ST) method of Riabiz et al. (2022) was developed to provide accurate compression even when the input
sample sequence provides a poor approximation to the target. ST operates by greedily thinning the input sample to
minimize the maximum mean discrepancy (MMD, Gretton
et al.,√
2012) to P. However, ST is only known to provide an
O(1/ m) approximation to P; this guarantee is no better
e
than that of i.i.d. sampling and a far cry from the O(1/m)
error achieved with unbiased coreset constructions.

1. Introduction
Distribution compression is the problem of summarizing
a target probability distribution P with a small set of representative points. Such compact summaries are particularly valuable for tasks that incur substantial downstream
computation costs per summary point, like organ and tissue

In this work, we address this deficit by developing new, efficient coreset constructions that provably yield better-thani.i.d. error even when the input sample is biased. For P on
Rd , our primary contributions are fourfold and summarized
in Tab. 1. First, for the task of equal-weighted compression, we introduce Stein Kernel Thinning (SKT, Alg. 1),
a strategy that combines the greedy bias correction properties √
of ST with the unbiased compression of KT to produce n summary points with error e
O(n−1/2 ) in O(n2 )
time. In contrast, ST would require Ω(n) points to guaran-

1
MIT CSAIL 2 Cornell Tech 3 Microsoft Research New
England. Correspondence to: Lingxiao Li <lingxiao@mit.edu>,
Raaz Dwivedi <dwivedi@cornell.edu>, Lester Mackey
<lmackey@microsoft.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

