Geometry-Aware Instrumental Variable Regression

Heiner Kremer 1 Bernhard Schölkopf 1

Abstract
Instrumental variable (IV) regression can be approached through its formulation in terms of conditional moment restrictions (CMR). Building on
variants of the generalized method of moments,
most CMR estimators are implicitly based on approximating the population data distribution via
reweightings of the empirical sample. While for
large sample sizes, in the independent identically
distributed (IID) setting, reweightings can provide
sufficient flexibility, they might fail to capture the
relevant information in presence of corrupted data
or data prone to adversarial attacks. To address
these shortcomings, we propose the Sinkhorn
Method of Moments, an optimal transport-based
IV estimator that takes into account the geometry of the data manifold through data-derivative
information. We provide a simple plug-and-play
implementation of our method that performs on
par with related estimators in standard settings
but improves robustness against data corruption
and adversarial attacks.

Figure 1. Paradigms to approximate P0 from data (red dots) in the
GEL framework. φ-divergence-based estimators (left) approximate P0 by reweighting (weight =
ˆ size) the sample (e.g., (Ai &
Chen, 2003; Bennett & Kallus, 2023). MMD-based estimators
(middle) allow to sample additional data points (blue dots) (Kremer et al., 2023). In contrast, optimal transport-based estimators
(right) allow to move around the data points (present work).

strictions (CMR) has gained popularity for its potential to
benefit from advances in machine learning models (Bennett et al., 2019; Dikkala et al., 2020; Muandet et al., 2020;
Kremer et al., 2022; 2023; Bennett & Kallus, 2023; Zhang
et al., 2023). The CMR formulation of IV regression is
based on restricting the expectation of the prediction residual Y − f (T ) conditioned on the instruments Z, where f
denotes a causal relation from T to Y that one wants to
infer. In general, this leads to a zero-sum game in which one
minimizes an objective with respect to the model parameters and maximizes it with respect to an adversary function
that detects the moment violations (Bennett et al., 2019;
Dikkala et al., 2020). One of the most general frameworks
for learning with moment restrictions is the family of generalized empirical likelihood (GEL) estimators (Owen, 1988;
Qin & Lawless, 1994; Kitamura & Stutzer, 1997; Imbens
et al., 1998; Owen, 2001), which includes the prominent
generalized method of moments (Hansen, 1982; Hansen
et al., 1996; Hall, 2004). The idea behind empirical likelihood is to learn a model via maximum likelihood estimation
without specifying a parametric form of the data distribution (Owen, 2001). In practice, this is realized by learning a
non-parametric approximation of the population data distribution P0 along with the model f by means of minimizing
a φ-divergence under the moment restrictions. However,
by relying on φ-divergences one effectively restricts the
estimator of the population distribution to reweightings of
the sample. The reweighting assumption has recently been
lifted by Kremer et al. (2023) by introducing an estimator
based on maximum mean discrepancy (Gretton et al., 2012).

1. Introduction
Instrumental variable regression is one of the most
widespread approaches for learning in presence of confounding (Angrist & Pischke, 2008). It is applicable in
situation where one is interested in inferring the outcome Y
of some treatment T , where both, treatment and outcome,
are affected by a so-called unobserved confounder U . To
eliminate the confounding bias, one can take into account
an instrumental variable Z, which i) affects the treatment
T , ii) affects the outcome Y only through its effect on T ,
and, iii) is independent of the confounder U . While traditionally the problem has been addressed through the 2-stage
least squares approach (Angrist & Pischke, 2008), in recent
years the formulation in terms of conditional moment re1
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems. Correspondence
to: Heiner Kremer <heiner.kremer@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

