Criterion Collapse and Loss Distribution Control

Matthew J. Holland 1

Abstract

“general setting of the learning problem” (Vapnik, 1999) that
is pervasive in both theory and practice.

In this work, we consider the notion of “criterion
collapse,” in which optimization of one metric implies optimality in another, with a particular focus
on conditions for collapse into error probability
minimizers under a wide variety of learning criteria, ranging from DRO and OCE risks (CVaR,
tilted ERM) to non-monotonic criteria underlying recent ascent-descent algorithms explored in
the literature (Flooding, SoftAD). We show how
collapse in the context of losses with a Bernoulli
distribution goes far beyond existing results for
CVaR and DRO, then expand our scope to include
surrogate losses, showing conditions where monotonic criteria such as tilted ERM cannot avoid collapse, whereas non-monotonic alternatives can.

In recent years, however, the need to capture a wider variety
of performance metrics at training time has motivated the
use of novel learning criteria going beyond the expected
value. Arguably the best-known families of such criteria are
those which control sensitivity to the right tail of the loss
distribution, e.g., CVaR (Curi et al., 2020), positive-tilted
ERM (Li et al., 2021), and Cressie-Read DRO (Duchi &
Namkoong, 2021), though criteria designed to capture both
tails at once have also begun to appear (Holland, 2022).
While all of these criteria can be clearly shown to be distinct
from the expected value, when such criteria are optimized at
training time, can we expect the outcome to actually change?
This question is somewhat delicate, since it depends on the
nature of the loss distribution. For example, when we are
working with the zero-one loss for classification, or any
binary performance indicator for that matter, previous work
has noted that vanilla empirical risk minimization (ERM)
is always sufficient for minimizing DRO and CVaR (Hu
et al., 2018; Zhai et al., 2021), making it meaningless to
distinguish between optimizing such criteria.

1. Introduction
As machine learning systems become more widespread and
integrated in our daily lives, the tension between performance metrics we ideally wish to optimize (at test time)
and those we actually optimize in practice (at training time)
becomes increasingly important. Broadly speaking, tasks
are characterized by losses and what we will call learning
criteria. Losses are diverse, depending on the underlying
problem to be solved (e.g., classification, regression, ranking, clustering, etc.) and a wide range of application-specific
needs. Losses depend on random data, and are themselves
random. In principle, performance can be described in terms
of random loss distributions, but working with complex and
unwieldy distributions is not practical; a concise numerical
summary is usually desired both for designing objectives to
optimize, as well as for disseminating interpretable results.
Providing such a summary is the role of learning criteria.
In contrast with the diversity of losses, there is a single de
facto standard learning criterion, namely the expected value
of the loss distribution, a criterion which is central to the

What about when we make use of surrogate loss functions
for training? The traditional theory of transferring consistency from a surrogate to a target loss is tied tightly to the
expected value criterion (and its linearity) (Bartlett et al.,
2006; Reid & Williamson, 2011), meaning that a change in
criterion can drastically change the relations between loss
distributions. For example, given a model which is CVaRoptimal in terms of a surrogate loss, it may or may not be
CVaR-optimal in terms of the zero-one loss; understanding
when such properties hold is critical to ensure the learning algorithms we use in practice are aligned with our true
objectives. For many classes of learning criteria, however,
such questions remain completely unexplored.
In this work, we consider the notion of “criterion collapse,”
in which optimization of one metric implies optimality in
another, with a particular focus on conditions for collapse
into error probability minimizers (i.e., minimizers of the
expected zero-one loss) under a wide variety of learning criteria, including learning scenarios that involve a surrogate
loss. We start in §2 by showing how collapse in the context
of losses with a Bernoulli distribution goes far beyond CVaR

1
SANKEN, Osaka University, Japan. Correspondence to:
Matthew J. Holland <matthew-h@ar.sanken.osaka-u.ac.jp>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

