Learning in Deep Factor Graphs with Gaussian Belief Propagation

Seth Nabarro 1 Mark van der Wilk 2 Andrew J. Davison 1

Abstract

challenge will become more pertinent with the growth of i)
larger models which must be distributed over many devices,
ii) new hardware architectures whose cores have significant local memory (Graphcore; Cerebras), and iii) parallel,
distributed and heterogeneous embedded devices (Sutter,
2011). We thus expect a growing need for more flexible
training algorithms which admit efficient model-parallelism.

We propose an approach to do learning in Gaussian factor graphs. We treat all relevant quantities (inputs, outputs, parameters, activations) as
random variables in a graphical model, and view
training and prediction as inference problems with
different observed nodes. Our experiments show
that these problems can be efficiently solved with
belief propagation (BP), whose updates are inherently local, presenting exciting opportunities
for distributed and asynchronous training. Our
approach can be scaled to deep networks and provides a natural means to do continual learning:
use the BP-estimated posterior of the current task
as a prior for the next. On a video denoising task
we demonstrate the benefit of learnable parameters over a classical factor graph approach and
we show encouraging performance of deep factor
graphs for continual image classification.

We argue the above challenges essentially relate to the fusion
of multiple signals: old and new (for incremental learning);
hand-crafted vs learnt; and representations between different
layers of a model (distributed training). Bayesian principles offer a clear answer on how to fuse: signals should be
combined according to the rules of probability. We seek to
exploit this fact in our probabilistic approach to DL. Specifically, our models are factor graphs (Fig. 1) with random
variables for all quantities relevant to DL: inputs, outputs,
activations and parameters. This representation enables
continual learning via online updating of the parameter posterior, and interoperability through connections with other
factor graphs. We seek to design the models so as to retain
the properties which we believe make DL powerful. Namely
random initialisation and over-parameterisation (Allen-Zhu
et al., 2019); architectural motifs encoding good inductive
biases; and non-linearities which switch to selectively activate and prune when exposed to data (Glorot et al., 2011).

1. Introduction
Deep learning (DL) has been transformative across many
domains. However, its applicability is limited in cases where
i) we require efficient, robust representations which can be
trained incrementally; ii) supervision is sparse or irregular;
and iii) learning must augment, or run alongside, handdesigned solvers. Pretrained models, when available, might
mitigate these limitations, but struggle as train and test distributions diverge. How they should be updated online remains
an open research question.

Much recent work has shown that Gaussian BP (GBP) to
be a robust and effective algorithm for distributed inference
in factor graphs, even in the presence of non-linear and
non-Gaussian factors (Davison & Ortiz, 2019; Ortiz et al.,
2020; Murai et al., 2022; Patwardhan et al., 2022). It is
thus our choice of inference engine here. By approximating
the factors in our model as Gaussian, we can use GBP
for training (inference over parameters, given observations)
and prediction (inference of e.g. outputs, given parameters
and inputs). The generality of GBP provides flexibility
as to which variables are observed, meaning training and
prediction are essentially the same computation, and partial
observations or missing labels do not require fundamentally
different treatment. As BP is inherently local and stateful,
our training can be distributed and asynchronous.

Concurrently, we reflect on how neural networks (NNs) are
trained. Despite backpropagation (Rumelhart et al., 1985)
being largely successful for DL, training NNs spread over
multiple processors is made difficult by backward locking:
processors for earlier layers sit idle after their part in the
forward pass, awaiting the backward error signal. This
1

Dyson Robotics Lab, Imperial College London, UK
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK.
Correspondence to: <sdn09@ic.ac.uk>.
2

Our work shares similar goals to Lucibello et al., (2022),
who train MLP-like factor graphs using GBP with analytically derived message updates. For computational efficiency,

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

