Understanding Heterophily for Graph Neural Networks

Junfu Wang 1 2 3 Yuanfang Guo 1 2 Liang Yang 4 Yunhong Wang 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have demonstrated remarkable superiority in processing the graph-structured data
(Kipf & Welling, 2017; Hamilton et al., 2017; Gilmer et al.,
2017; Velickovic et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2019; Wang et al.,
2021). Unfortunately, the majority of GNNs are developed
based on the homophily assumption, i.e., the connected
nodes typically share similar features or labels. However,
this assumption is not satisfied in the graphs characterized
by heterophily, where nodes are more likely to connect with
other dissimilar nodes. Under such scenarios, typical GNNs
may fail to handle the graphs and even perform worse than
fully connected networks (Pei et al., 2020). To tackle this
heterophily problem, several heterophily-specific GNNs are
proposed (Zhu et al., 2020; Bo et al., 2021; Yang et al.,
2021a; Chien et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2021b; Jin et al.,
2021; Li et al., 2022; Ma et al., 2022a; Wang et al., 2023;
Song et al., 2023; Zheng et al., 2023).

Graphs with heterophily have been regarded as
challenging scenarios for Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs), where nodes are connected with dissimilar neighbors through various patterns. In
this paper, we present theoretical understandings
of heterophily for GNNs by incorporating the
graph convolution (GC) operations into fully connected networks via the proposed Heterophilous
Stochastic Block Models (HSBM), a general random graph model that can accommodate diverse
heterophily patterns. Our theoretical investigation comprehensively analyze the impact of heterophily from three critical aspects. Firstly, for
the impact of different heterophily patterns, we
show that the separability gains are determined
by two factors, i.e., the Euclidean
pdistance of the
neighborhood distributions and E [deg], where
E [deg] is the averaged node degree. Secondly,
we show that the neighborhood inconsistency has
a detrimental impact on separability, which is
similar to degrading E [deg] by a specific factor. Finally, for the impact of stacking multiple
layers, we show that the separability gains are
determined by the normalized distance of the lpowered neighborhood distributions, indicating
that nodes still possess separability in various
regimes, even when over-smoothing occurs. Extensive experiments on both synthetic and realworld data verify the effectiveness of our theory.

Recently, researchers (Ma et al., 2022b; Luan et al., 2022)
have revisited the impacts of heterophily on typical GNNs.
They have revealed that heterophily is not always harmful to the classification results. Both the ‘good’ and ‘bad’
heterophily patterns exist. Typically, heterophily ratio is
introduced to measure the extent of heterophily, which represents the proportion of edges connecting nodes from different classes (Pei et al., 2020). Then, both theoretical and
empirical studies in binary node classification tasks (Chien
et al., 2021; Ma et al., 2022b) have suggested that the relationship between this heterophily ratio and classification
performance exhibits a V-shaped trend. This indicates that
heterophily patterns with either low or high ratios tend to
enhance performance, whereas those exhibiting moderate
ratios usually lead to poor results.
However, in the multi-class scenarios, the situation becomes
more complex. The heterophily ratio alone is insufficient
to fully estimate the impact of heterophily, because distinct
heterophily patterns with identical ratios may have different
effects. By utilizing the neighborhood (label) distribution
of each node, Ma et al. (2022b) empirically observes that
GCN (Kipf & Welling, 2017) can effectively handle the
graphs, whose nodes from different classes possess distinguishable neighborhood distributions. Besides, inspired by
the gradient computed via SGC (Wu et al., 2019), Luan et al.

1

State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, China 2 School of Computer
Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
Shen Yuan Honors College, Beihang University, Beijing, China
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, Hebei University of Technology, Tianjin, China. Correspondence to: Yuanfang Guo
<andyguo@buaa.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

