APT: Adaptive Pruning and Tuning Pretrained Language Models for
Efficient Training and Inference

Bowen Zhao 1 Hannaneh Hajishirzi 1 2 Qingqing Cao∗ 3

Abstract

H

Fine-tuning and inference with large Language
Models (LM) are generally known to be expensive. Parameter-efficient fine-tuning over pretrained LMs reduces training memory by updating
a small number of LM parameters but does not
improve inference efficiency. Structured pruning
improves LM inference efficiency by removing
consistent parameter blocks, yet often increases
training memory and time. To improve both
training and inference efficiency, we introduce
APT that adaptively prunes and tunes parameters for the LMs. At the early stage of finetuning, APT dynamically adds salient tuning parameters for fast and accurate convergence while
discarding unimportant parameters for efficiency.
Compared to baselines, our experiments show
that APT maintains up to 98% task performance
when pruning 60% of the parameters in RoBERTa
and T5 models. APT also preserves 86.4% of
LLaMA models’ performance with 70% parameters remaining. Furthermore, APT speeds up
LMs’ fine-tuning by up to 8× and reduces large
LMs’ memory training footprint by up to 70%.
Our code and models are publicly available at
https://github.com/ROIM1998/APT.

LoRA

APT adapter

H
WB

r

Frozen

params

WB

rapt


Frozen

params

WA

WA
X

X

Figure 1. APT provides both training and inference efficiency benefits by pruning and tuning pretrained LM parameters adaptively
via the APT adapter. We dynamically adjust (add/reduce) APT
adapter input/output dimensions and the rank (rapt ). Reducing
adapter dimensions prunes frozen parameters, making training and
inference faster and more memory-efficient. Adding adapter ranks
helps recover the pruned LM’s task performance. In contrast, existing adapters like LoRA allow efficient training but do not provide
inference efficiency since the model size is not reduced.

a 13B LLaMA model (Touvron et al., 2023) costs about
100GB memory for fine-tuning and 30GB for inference
with float16 datatype. It is important to improve the training
and inference efficiency of LM for practical applications.

1
University of Washington 2 Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence 3∗ Apple, work done at the University of Washington.
Correspondence to: Bowen Zhao <bowen98@uw.edu>, Qingqing
Cao <qicao@apple.com>.

Parameter-efficient fine-tuning methods (PEFT, summarized
in Table 1) (Houlsby et al., 2019; Li & Liang, 2021) reduce
the memory consumption of LM fine-tuning via updating a
small number of parameters. However, PEFT models do not
improve inference efficiency because the LM size remains
the same or even increases after fine-tuning. For instance,
LoRA (Hu et al., 2022) tunes low-rank decomposed linear
layers parallel to frozen parameters to reduce training memory but takes longer to converge (Ding et al., 2023). On the
other hand, structured pruning (Kwon et al., 2022; Xia et al.,
2022; Ma et al., 2023) improves inference efficiency by removing blocks of parameters such as attention heads and
feed-forward neurons in Transformer LMs, showing more
inference speedup than sparse unstructured pruning methods (Han et al., 2016; 2015; Sanh et al., 2020). However,
training pruned LMs takes extra time to converge and incurs
high memory, substantially diminishing LMs’ accessibility
in usage scenarios with limited computational resources.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Integrating structured pruning and PEFT could increase
both training and inference efficiency. However, existing
research (Zhao et al., 2023) indicates that combining PEFT

1. Introduction
Fine-tuning language models (LMs) (Devlin et al., 2019;
Liu et al., 2019; Raffel et al., 2020) is an essential paradigm
to adapt them to downstream tasks (Mishra et al., 2022;
Wang et al., 2022b). Increasing the parameter scale of LMs
improves model performance (Kaplan et al., 2020), but
incurs significant training and inference costs. For instance,

1

