Unlocking the Power of Spatial and Temporal Information
in Medical Multimodal Pre-training

Jinxia Yang 1 Bing Su 1 2 Wayne Xin Zhao 1 2 Ji-Rong Wen 1 2 3
(a)

(b)
Spatial Dimension

Abstract
Medical vision-language pre-training methods
mainly leverage the correspondence between
paired medical images and radiological reports.
Although multi-view spatial images and temporal
sequences of image-report pairs are available in
off-the-shelf multi-modal medical datasets, most
existing methods have not thoroughly tapped into
such extensive supervision signals. In this paper, we introduce the Med-ST framework for
fine-grained spatial and temporal modeling to exploit information from multiple spatial views of
chest radiographs and temporal historical records.
For spatial modeling, Med-ST employs the Mixture of View Expert (MoVE) architecture to integrate different visual features from both frontal
and lateral views. To achieve a more comprehensive alignment, Med-ST not only establishes
the global alignment between whole images and
texts but also introduces modality-weighted local alignment between text tokens and spatial
regions of images. For temporal modeling, we
propose a novel cross-modal bidirectional cycle consistency objective by forward mapping
classification (FMC) and reverse mapping regression (RMR). By perceiving temporal information from simple to complex, Med-ST can
learn temporal semantics. Experimental results
across four distinct tasks demonstrate the effectiveness of Med-ST, especially in temporal classification tasks. Our code and model are available at https://github.com/SVT-Yang/
MedST.

Spatial
Modeling

Med-ST
Temporal Modeling

Latest Examination
Historical
Medical
Records

Medical
Multimodal
Dataset

⋯
Temporal Dimension

Figure 1: The motivation and our framework: (a) The practice of physicians in a clinical setting. (b) We propose the
Med-ST framework, which explicitly designs spatial and
temporal modeling by mining spatio-temporal supervision
signals from the dataset.

1. Introduction
Medical vision-language pre-training aims to learn visual
and textual representations from paired radiological reports
and images. The learned representations can be adapted to
various downstream tasks, which have great potential value
for clinical auxiliary diagnosis and so on. Existing medical
vision language pre-training methods generally focus on
utilizing the correspondences between paired images and
texts (Huang et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022a; Zhou et al.,
2022; Wan et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2023). The radiological
report is aligned with the frontal medical image through contrastive learning or masked modality reconstruction (Cheng
et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2023; Moon et al., 2022). Although
the learned visual representations can encode medical semantic information, they cannot fully capture fine-grained
spatial information in different views, nor can they distinguish fine-grained temporal differences between image-text
pairs of the same patient at different times.

1

Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University
of China 2 Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and
Analysis Methods 3 School of Information, Renmin University of
China. Correspondence to: Bing Su <subingats@gmail.com>,
Wayne Xin Zhao <batmanfly@gmail.com>.

The applicability of medical vision-language pre-training
models significantly depends on their capacity to mimic
human cognitive process in interpreting radiological reports
and images. Typically, in a clinical setting as shown in Figure 1(a), the doctor’s diagnosis relies on the comprehensive
examination results, considering frontal views and lateral
views. This process also involves reviewing the patient’s his-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

