On the Effectiveness of Supervision in Asymmetric Non-Contrastive Learning

Jeongheon Oh 1 Kibok Lee 1

Abstract

on negative samples. To prevent learned representations
from collapsing, ANCL employs an asymmetric structure
by placing a predictor after one side of the projector.

Supervised contrastive representation learning has
been shown to be effective in various transfer
learning scenarios. However, while asymmetric
non-contrastive learning (ANCL) often outperforms its contrastive learning counterpart in selfsupervised representation learning, the extension
of ANCL to supervised scenarios is less explored.
To bridge the gap, we study ANCL for supervised
representation learning, coined S UP S IAM and
S UP BYOL, leveraging labels in ANCL to achieve
better representations. The proposed supervised
ANCL framework improves representation learning while avoiding collapse. Our analysis reveals
that providing supervision to ANCL reduces intraclass variance, and the contribution of supervision should be adjusted to achieve the best performance. Experiments demonstrate the superiority of supervised ANCL across various datasets
and tasks. The code is available at: https:
//github.com/JH-Oh-23/Sup-ANCL.

A key component in both CL and ANCL is acquisition
of positive pairs, which is typically achieved through data
augmentation. Given that datasets for pretraining often include labels, Khosla et al. (2020) proposed to incorporate
supervision into CL by treating samples with the same class
label as positive pairs as well. Supervised CL has demonstrated superior performance across diverse tasks, such as
few-shot learning (Majumder et al., 2021), long-tail recognition (Kang et al., 2021), continual learning (Cha et al.,
2021), and natural language processing (Gunel et al., 2021).
While supervision helps to discover more positive samples,
it does not directly help to identify effective negative samples. Consequently, ANCL has a better potential to benefit
from supervision, as it focuses on positive pairs only. However, in contrast to CL, there are a limited number of studies
on leveraging supervision to improve ANCL, despite its
strong performance in self-supervised learning. To bridge
this gap, we study the effect of supervision in ANCL by
introducing the supervised ANCL framework and investigating its behavior through theoretical and empirical analysis.

1. Introduction

To the best of our knowledge, our work is the first to conduct a theoretical analysis of the behavior of representations
learned through supervised ANCL. Our experiments confirm the effectiveness of supervision observed through our
theoretical analysis, as well as the superiority of representations learned via supervised ANCL across various datasets
and tasks. Specifically, as illustrated in Figure 1, we consider S UP S IAM and S UP BYOL, which are supervised adaptations of the two popular ANCL methods, S IM S IAM (Chen
& He, 2021) and BYOL (Grill et al., 2020), respectively.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:

Self-supervised learning has recently been proven to be an
effective paradigm for representation learning (Chen et al.,
2020a; Chen & He, 2021; He et al., 2022). Among various
pretext tasks for self-supervised learning, contrastive learning (CL) (van den Oord et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2020a; He
et al., 2020) first promised outstanding performance, surpassing the transfer learning performance of supervised pretraining (Razavian et al., 2014), which learns representations
by attracting positive pairs while repelling negative pairs.
However, CL requires negative samples to ensure good
performance, which might not be possible under limited
batch sizes. On the other hand, asymmetric non-contrastive
learning (ANCL) (Grill et al., 2020; Chen & He, 2021)
has emerged as a promising alternative to CL, which maximizes the similarity between positive pairs without relying

• We propose a supervised ANCL framework for representation learning while avoiding collapse, which surpasses
the performance of its self-supervised counterpart when
supervision is available.

1
Department of Statistics and Data Science, Yonsei University.
Correspondence to: Kibok Lee <kibok@yonsei.ac.kr>.

• Our analysis demonstrates that incorporating supervision into ANCL reduces the intra-class variance of latent
features, and that learning to capture both intra- and interclass variance is crucial for representation learning.

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

