MILP-FBGen: LP/MILP Instance Generation with Feasibility/Boundedness

Yahong Zhang * 1 Chenchen Fan * 1 Donghui Chen 1 Congrui Li 1 Wenli Ouyang 1 Mingda Zhu 1 Junchi Yan 2

Abstract

ley, 1994; Helsgaun, 2000) or branch-and-bound solvers
(Gurobi; SCIP; HiGHS) solve them repeatedly without making use of those similarities. Machine learning (ML) methods (Sun & Yang, 2023; Fan et al., 2023; Han et al., 2023;
Nair et al., 2020) hold significant potential in recognizing
patterns, and hence they are helpful for building optimization algorithms. Nevertheless, the application of ML faces
various challenges stemming from the intricacies and data
scarcity inherent in real-world problems from general combinatorial problems (Bengio et al., 2021; Yehuda et al., 2020),
satisfiabilty (Guo et al., 2023; Malitsky et al., 2016a), to
MILP (Zhang et al., 2023). The lack of practically usable
and representative instances hinders the training and generalization of ML methods. To address this issue, efforts have
been dedicated to LP/MILP instance generation.

Machine learning (ML) has been actively adopted
in Linear Programming (LP) and Mixed-Integer
Linear Programming (MILP), whose potential
is hindered by instance scarcity. Current synthetic instance generation methods often fall short
in closely mirroring the distribution of original
datasets or ensuring the feasibility and boundedness of the generated data — a critical requirement for obtaining reliable supervised labels in model training. In this paper, we present
a diffusion-based LP/MILP instance generative
framework called MILP-FBGen. It strikes a balance between structural similarity and novelty
while maintaining feasibility/boundedness via a
meticulously designed structure-preserving generation module and a feasibility/boundednessconstrained sampling module. Our method shows
superiority on two fronts: 1) preservation of key
properties (hardness, feasibility, and boundedness) of LP/MILP instances, and 2) enhanced performance on downstream tasks. Extensive studies
show two-fold superiority that our method ensures
higher distributional similarity and 100% feasibility in both easy and hard datasets, surpassing
current state-of-the-art techniques.

The current mainstream techniques for LP/MILP instance
generation can be divided into three categories: i) building
on (practically limited) domain knowledge (Vander Wiel &
Sahinidis, 1995; Balas & Ho, 1980); ii) constructing general
LP/MILP instances by sampling from the hyperparameter
encoding space (Bowly et al., 2020; Li et al., 2024; Bowly,
2019); iii) using a deep generative framework to destroy
and repair parts of the original LP/MILP instances (Geng
et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023). The first category involves a
specific scheme or formulation design, and can only cover a
few LP/MILP instance types with known expert knowledge.
The second category is for general instance generation, but
only controlling and manipulating limited statistics make it
difficult to capture the fine-grained characteristics, such as
keeping the topological structure of a single instance. To address this issue, the third one converts the LP/MILP instance
generation into a graph generation problem. It iteratively
destroys and repairs parts of the original graphs, typically
with a masked variational autoencoder (VAE) model (Kipf
& Welling, 2016), so that the original instance’s topological
structure can be preserved to some extent. G2MILP (Wang
et al., 2023) generates instances that can simulate real-world
scenarios and enrich the original dataset, but it does not
guarantee the feasibility and boundedness for many realworld problems. If the generated instance is infeasible and
unbounded, it becomes impossible to obtain corresponding
label data for supervised learning, which hinders the application of most ML methods. DIG-MILP (Wang et al., 2023)
claims to be able to guarantee these two points but at the

1. Introduction
LP (Linear Programming) and MILP (Mixed Integer Linear
Programming) have wide applications, e.g. planning logistics path problems (Troncoso & Garrido, 2005), tackling
matching problems (Wang et al., 2020), and scheduling orders in production workshop (Tang et al., 2001). Although
the instances from the same applications share similar patterns and characteristics, classic heuristic methods (Whit*

Equal contribution 1 AI Lab, Lenovo Research, Beijing, China
School of Artificial Intelligence & Department of Computer Science and Engineering & MoE Lab of AI, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Wenli Ouyang
<ouyangwl1@lenovo.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

