Discrete Latent Perspective Learning for Segmentation and Detection

Deyi Ji 1 2 Feng Zhao 1 Lanyun Zhu 3 Wenwei Jin 2 Hongtao Lu 4 Jieping Ye 2
Perspective-Oriented Learning: Multi-Perspective/View Dataset Training

Abstract
In this paper, we address the challenge of
Perspective-Invariant Learning in machine learning and computer vision, which involves enabling
a network to understand images from varying perspectives to achieve consistent semantic interpretation. While standard approaches rely on the
labor-intensive collection of multi-view images
or limited data augmentation techniques, we propose a novel framework, Discrete Latent Perspective Learning (DLPL), for latent multi-perspective
fusion learning using conventional single-view
images. DLPL comprises three main modules:
Perspective Discrete Decomposition (PDD), Perspective Homography Transformation (PHT), and
Perspective Invariant Attention (PIA), which work
together to discretize visual features, transform
perspectives, and fuse multi-perspective semantic
information, respectively. DLPL is a universal
perspective learning framework applicable to a
variety of scenarios and vision tasks. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that DLPL significantly
enhances the network’s capacity to depict images
across diverse scenarios (daily photos, UAV, autodriving) and tasks (detection, segmentation).

Model

Perspective-Oriented Learning: Data Augmentation Training
Rotated
Rotated
Rotated

Horizontally
Flipped

Augment

Model

Vertically
Flipped

Original Image
…

Perspective-Oriented Learning: Discrete Latent Perspective Learning

Visual
Reconstruction

Perspective
Transformation

𝑷!
Transformed
Latent Perspectives

…

…

𝑷
Latent Perspective
Representation

…

Perspective
Discrete
Decomposition

…

Perspective
Invariant
Attention

Visual
Feature

Visual Features
with Transformed
Perspectives

Figure 1. The comparison of perspective-oriented learning methods: Perspective Augmentation, Multi-View Data Training, and
the proposed Discrete Latent Perspective Learning.

abling the network to learn scene information from different
viewpoints and ensuring consistency in semantic learning
across these varying perspectives, thus improving the portrayal of semantic information within images1 . As shown in
Figure 1, the most commonly used approaches include: (1)
collecting multi-view images of a given scene to conduct
multi-view training (Yu et al., 2023), and (2) utilizing data
augmentation techniques (Cubuk et al., 2019), such as rotation and flipping, to increase the diversity of perspectives.

1. Introduction
According to the theory of photography (Elkins, 2006; Bengio et al., 2013), image perspective/viewpoint refers to the
perception of depth and spatial relationships between objects within an image. In the fields of machine learning and
computer vision, current research often employs a variety
of methods to enhance networks’ Perspective-Invariant
Learning (YU2, 2018; LO1, 1997), which involves en-

However, in the former case, the acquisition of multi-view
images is significantly more challenging than that of singleview images, since the latter can rely on fixed cameras with
a wide range of sources (e.g., Internet, vehicle-mounted
cameras, surveillance cameras), whereas multi-view im-

1

University of Science and Technology of China 2 Alibaba
Group 3 Singapore University of Technology and Design 4 Dept.
of CSE, MOE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University. Correspondence to: Feng Zhao
<fzhao956@ustc.edu.cn>, Jieping Ye <yejieping.ye@alibabainc.com>.

1
In this paper, the terms “perspective” and “viewpoint” are
used interchangeably, the former is derived from the theory of
photography, while the latter is more commonly employed in
general discourse.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

