PIPER: Primitive-Informed Preference-based
Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning via Hindsight Relabeling

Utsav Singh 1 Wesley A. Suttle 2 Brian M. Sadler 3 Vinay P. Namboodiri 4 Amrit Singh Bedi 5

Abstract

agent learns complex behaviors through trial and error. Examples of such tasks include playing Atari games (Mnih
et al., 2013), mastering the game of Go (Silver et al., 2016),
and performing complicated robotic manipulation tasks (Rajeswaran et al., 2017; Kalashnikov et al., 2018; Gu et al.,
2016; Levine et al., 2015). However, the success of RLbased approaches is impeded by issues like ineffective exploration and long-term credit assignment, especially in
sparse-reward scenarios (Nair et al., 2018).

In this work, we introduce PIPER: PrimitiveInformed Preference-based Hierarchical reinforcement learning via Hindsight Relabeling, a
novel approach that leverages preference-based
learning to learn a reward model, and subsequently uses this reward model to relabel higherlevel replay buffers. Since this reward is unaffected by lower primitive behavior, our relabelingbased approach is able to mitigate non-stationarity,
which is common in existing hierarchical approaches, and demonstrates impressive performance across a range of challenging sparsereward tasks. Since obtaining human feedback
is typically impractical, we propose to replace the
human-in-the-loop approach with our primitivein-the-loop approach, which generates feedback
using sparse rewards provided by the environment.
Moreover, in order to prevent infeasible subgoal
prediction and avoid degenerate solutions, we propose primitive-informed regularization that conditions higher-level policies to generate feasible
subgoals for lower-level policies. We perform
extensive experiments to show that PIPER mitigates non-stationarity in hierarchical reinforcement learning and achieves greater than 50% success rates in challenging, sparse-reward robotic
environments, where most other baselines fail to
achieve any significant progress.

Off-policy hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL) (Sutton et al., 1999; Dayan & Hinton, 1992; Vezhnevets et al.,
2017; Klissarov et al., 2017; Harb et al., 2018) approaches
hold the promise of improved sample efficiency due to
temporal abstraction and improved performance due to
more effective exploration (Nachum et al., 2019). In goalconditioned feudal architectures (Dayan & Hinton, 1992;
Vezhnevets et al., 2017), a widely used subset of HRL methods, higher-level policies predict subgoals for the lowerlevel policies, while the lower-level policies try to achieve
those subgoals by executing primitive actions directly in the
environment. Despite their advantages, serious challenges
remain for such approaches. In this paper, we focus on two
important issues: the destabilizing effect of lower-level reward non-stationarity on off-policy HRL (Levy et al., 2018;
Nachum et al., 2018b), and performance degradation due
to infeasible subgoal generation by higher-level policies
(Chane-Sane et al., 2021). 1
Recent approaches in preference-based learning (Christiano
et al., 2017; Ibarz et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2021) use human
feedback to learn a reward model and subsequently apply
RL to solve the task using the learned reward model. Impressively, such methods have demonstrated performance
comparable to RL policies trained with access to ground
truth rewards. This raises the following question: can advances in preference-based learning be used to simultaneously address the twin issues of reward non-stationarity and
infeasible subgoal generation in HRL?

1. Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has propelled significant
advances in sequential decision-making tasks, where an
1
CSE dept., IIT Kanpur, Kanpur, India. 2 U.S. Army Research
Laboratory, Adelphi, MD, USA. 3 University of Texas, Austin,
Texas, USA. 4 Department of Computer Science, University of
Bath, Bath, UK. 5 CS dept., University of Central Florida, Orlando, Florida, USA.. Correspondence to: Utsav Singh <utsavz@cse.iitk.ac.in>.

In this work, we provide an affirmative answer to the
above question by proposing PIPER: Primitive Informed
PrEference-based hierarchical reinforcement learning via

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

1

The implementation code and data is provided here.

