POSITION:
Beyond Personhood: Agency, Accountability, and the Limits of
Anthropomorphic Ethical Analysis

Jessica Dai 1

Abstract

This paper draws from political theory to make prescriptive judgments about computer science research on ethical
characteristics of AI.1 Our argument proceeds as follows.

What is agency, and why does it matter? In this
work, we draw from the political science and philosophy literature and give two competing visions
of what it means to be an (ethical) agent. The first
view, which we term mechanistic, is commonly—
and implicitly—assumed in AI research, yet it is
a fundamentally limited means to understand the
ethical characteristics of AI. Under the second
view, which we term volitional, AI can no longer
be considered an ethical agent. We discuss the implications of each of these views for two critical
questions: first, what the ideal system “ought” to
look like, and second, how accountability may be
achieved. In light of this discussion, we ultimately
argue that, in the context of ethically-significant
behavior, AI should be viewed not as an agent but
as the outcome of political processes.

1. First, we identify the primary philosophical assumptions about agency and personhood which underlie
prominent approaches to AI (Section 2.1); we term this
approach mechanistic agency.
2. We argue that mechanistic agency is ultimately a limited lens for analyzing ethical considerations, because
it implies that the “ideal” (AI) agent is a simulator
of a perfectly-ethical human, which cannot be held
accountable (Section 2.2).
3. We introduce volitional agency, a competing and
prominent view of agency and discuss its implications
for ethical behavior; the mechanistic view is neither
obvious nor inevitable. Under the volitional view, the
metaphor of AI as person is a non-starter (Section 3).
4. Finally, we suggest alternative epistemic approaches
for analyzing concerns about the harms of AI. Rather
than merely evaluating the “ethics” of AI as an
agent, we advocate to instead view AI as the outcome of particular political processes (Section 4).

1. Introduction
Recent work concerning “ethical AI” often implicitly assumes that AI systems might exhibit behavior that is humanlike, and therefore might be analyzed from an ethical perspective as though they were human (or human-like). What
are the implications of such a perspective? Today’s approaches to (ethical or values-aligned) AI undeniably involve the extended coordination of the often-conflicting
goals and politics of a collective, and the field of political
philosophy has spent centuries of collective effort examining such questions—what it means to be human, to act
morally, and to coordinate collective decisions. What might
a discipline that theorizes human responsibility, morality,
and coordination have to say about AI in this context?

1.1. Why agency?
It is common in machine learning literature to refer to AI
(systems) as agents with little need for additional characterization (e.g. “multi-agent reinforcement learning,” “dialogue
agent,” etc.). In these cases, agent is primarily meant as
shorthand to capture particular functionality of the algorithmic object; this usage is not the focus of our work.
On the other hand, a recent surge of work seeking to understand the moral components of AI centers on the hypothesis
that the AI simulates human behavior, and that its “moral
character” might be evaluated with respect to how similar
or dissimilar LLM responses are to human responses (see
Section 2.1 for more detailed discussion). In such contexts,

1

Department of Computer Science, University of California Berkeley. Correspondence to: Jessica Dai <jessicadai@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

Our contributions are not intended to necessarily advance
the field of political philosophy; rather, we use agency to build a
conceptual framework for work in computer science.

1

