Towards AutoAI: Optimizing a Machine Learning System with Black-box and
Differentiable Components

Zhiliang Chen 1 2 Chuan Sheng Foo 2 3 Bryan Kian Hsiang Low 1

Abstract

2023; Lin et al., 2024), are typically composed of multiple
interacting components, only some of which have accessible
parameters. To deploy a system effectively, we need to
optimize the system performance by jointly training system
components, a problem which we refer to as AutoAI.

Machine learning (ML) models in the real world
typically do not exist in isolation. They are usually part of a complex system (e.g., healthcare
systems, self-driving cars) containing multiple
ML and black-box components. The problem of
optimizing such systems, which we refer to as automated AI (AutoAI), requires us to jointly train
all ML components together and presents a significant challenge because the number of system parameters is extremely high and the system has no
analytical form. To circumvent this, we introduce
a novel algorithm called A-BAD-BO which uses
each ML component’s local loss as an auxiliary
indicator for system performance. A-BAD-BO
uses Bayesian optimization (BO) to optimize the
local loss configuration of a system in a smaller
dimensional space and exploits the differentiable
structure of ML components to recover optimal
system parameters from the optimized configuration. We show A-BAD-BO converges to optimal
system parameters by showing that it is asymptotically no regret. We use A-BAD-BO to optimize
several synthetic and real-world complex systems,
including a prompt engineering pipeline for large
language models containing millions of system
parameters. Our results demonstrate that A-BADBO yields better system optimality than gradientdriven baselines and is more sample-efficient than
pure BO algorithms.

Our work here considers a general system comprising both
(a) differentiable ML components (Bishop & Nasrabadi,
2006; Bruna et al., 2013; Lecun et al., 1998) containing
some accessible trainable parameters, and (b) black-box
non-ML components (i.e., without any analytical form nor
accessible parameters) (Hase et al., 2018) that are typically
too sophisticated or costly to be modeled and replaced by
a differentiable function with high fidelity (e.g., ChatGPT
used in our experiments). These components are then arranged based on some structure (e.g., a directed acyclic
graph) predefined by a practitioner to accomplish a systemlevel task. For example, a healthcare system (Fig. 1) contains multiple ML components (enclosed in blue) making
predictions on the health of different organs of a patient that
are reviewed by two human doctors (black-box components
represented by doctor icons). The doctors’ assessments are
then combined by an aggregation ML model to yield a diabetes risk score. The doctors are considered black-box
components as their decisions cannot be characterized in
an analytical form, while the models used to predict the
organs’ health and aggregate the doctors’ decisions are differentiable ML components with trainable parameters. The
system performance is then evaluated by its accuracy in
predicting the diabetes risk score of any patient.

1. Introduction
Modern real-world systems that perform complex tasks in
areas such as healthcare, robotics (Karkus et al., 2019), or
even large language model (LLM) pipelines (Zhang et al.,
1
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Singapore 2 Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR,
Singapore 3 Centre for Frontier AI Research, A*STAR, Singapore.
Correspondence to: Zhiliang Chen <chenzhiliang@u.nus.edu>.

Figure 1. A healthcare system processes a patient’s health data
with differentiable ML components (enclosed in blue) and blackbox components (doctor icons) to produce a diabetes risk score.
We propose A-BAD-BO (orange) to optimize the system. The
notations are described in Sec. 2.2.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

