Discovering Multiple Solutions from a Single Task
in Offline Reinforcement Learning

Takayuki Osa 1 2 Tatsuya Harada 1 2

Abstract
Recent studies on online reinforcement learning
(RL) have demonstrated the advantages of learning multiple behaviors from a single task, as in the
case of few-shot adaptation to a new environment.
Although this approach is expected to yield similar benefits in offline RL, appropriate methods
for learning multiple solutions have not been fully
investigated in previous studies. In this study, we
therefore addressed the problem of finding multiple solutions from a single task in offline RL.
We propose algorithms that can learn multiple solutions in offline RL, and empirically investigate
their performance. Our experimental results show
that the proposed algorithm learns multiple qualitatively and quantitatively distinctive solutions in
offline RL.

Figure 1. Sequential snapshots of multiple locomotion behaviors
obtained by proposed method for the hopper agent.

1. Introduction

of the latent variable is stored alongside the state action
pairs during the data collection process. Although offline
RL employs a dataset containing the state-action pairs, this
dataset does not contain information that indicates the skill
type, such as the value of the latent variable. Therefore,
it is essential to learn the latent skill representations in an
unsupervised manner.

The benefits of discovering diverse solutions have been
demonstrated in literature pertaining to online reinforcement learning (RL), as in the cases of few-shot adaptation to
changes in the environment (Kumar et al., 2019) and composition of complex motion by sequencing different behavioral
styles (Kumar et al., 2020a). For example, a locomotion
task may encompass multiple motion styles using different
postures. Although the discovery of diverse solutions in
offline RL is expected to be equally beneficial in practice,
it has not been fully investigated in previous studies. Accordingly, we address the problem of discovering diverse
solutions in offline RL.

In this study, we introduce a novel algorithm designed to uncover multiple solutions through the unsupervised learning
of latent skill representations. We developed our algorithm
to tackle the challenge of identifying multiple solutions in
offline RL through a coordinate ascent approach, resembling the expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm. In our
algorithm, we iteratively update a policy conditioned on
latent variables to capture multiple behaviors, along with a
posterior distribution that models latent skill representations.
To evaluate our algorithm, we constructed datasets that contain diverse behaviors using the D4RL framework (Fu et al.,
2020), with locomotion tasks based on MuJoCo (Todorov
et al., 2012). The experimental results demonstrate that the
proposed algorithm discovers multiple solutions as shown in
Figure 1, and that few-shot adaptation to new environments
can be performed by learning multiple behaviors in offline
RL.

The primary challenge of learning multiple solutions in
offline RL is the problem of learning the latent skill space.
In the case of online RL, diverse behaviors are typically
modeled with a latent-conditioned policy wherein the value
1

The University of Tokyo, Japan 2 RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project. Correspondence to: Takayuki Osa
<osa@mi.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

