Don’t Label Twice: Quantity Beats Quality when Comparing Binary Classifiers
on a Budget

Florian E. Dorner 1 2 3 Moritz Hardt 1 2

Abstract

When the goal is to compare the population accuracy of binary classifiers, it is better to sample mn data points and
collect a single noisy label for each. The basis of our main
result is a simple mathematical model that captures the essential question. Data points are independent and identically distributed. For each data point, we can request an
odd number m ≥ 1 of binary labels, drawn independently
from a distribution that picks the correct label with some
probability strictly greater than chance. We then aggregate
the m labels into a single label using a majority vote. Fix
two classifiers, one better than the other in terms of population accuracy by some positive margin. We have a budget
k to spend on labels. Given an annotator number m, we
can create a labeled sample of size n = k/m. We pick the
classifier with the higher empirical accuracy on this sample. How should we pick an annotator number m so as to
maximize the probability of picking the better classifier?
Our main theorem provides the answer.

We study how to best spend a budget of noisy
labels to compare the accuracy of two binary
classifiers. It’s common practice to collect and
aggregate multiple noisy labels for a given data
point into a less noisy label via a majority vote.
We prove a theorem that runs counter to conventional wisdom. If the goal is to identify the better of two classifiers, we show it’s best to spend
the budget on collecting a single label for more
samples. Our result follows from a non-trivial
application of Cramér’s theorem, a staple in the
theory of large deviations. We discuss the implications of our work for the design of machine
learning benchmarks, where they overturn some
time-honored recommendations. In addition, our
results provide sample size bounds superior to
what follows from Hoeffding’s bound.

Theorem 1 (Informal). For a sufficiently large sample budget k, the probability of identifying the better of two binary
classifiers is maximized at m = 1 labels per data point.

1. Introduction
Data annotators are the “AI revolution’s unsung heros,”
Gray & Suri (2019) argued. The labor of human annotators has powered a growing industry of machine learning
datasets and benchmarks since the 1980s (Hardt & Recht,
2022). Human labels are a precious, yet unreliable resource. Errors easily creep into data labor at scale. The
designer of a benchmark has to cope with the reality of
conflicting labels for the same data point.

As a rough intuition, the gains in label accuracy from aggregation are outweighed by the loss in sample size and
information about classifier disagreements. Formally, our
result follows from a non-trivial—and rather lengthy—
reduction to Cramér’s theorem. Cramér’s theorem is fundamental to the theory of large deviations. It provides precise control over tail probabilities, based on the Legendre
transform of the logarithmic moment generating function.
The theorem is asymptotic with respect to n, complicating
the application to our problem. However, standard concentration inequalities, such as Hoeffding’s bound, are insufficient for our purposes as they only provide upper bounds.

Many benchmarks follow a common strategy. Each data
point in a sample gets noisy labels from multiple human
annotators. The candidate labels then determine a single
label via an aggregation function, such as a majority vote
in the case of binary labels. For a sample of size n and
a choice of m labels per data point, the cost of this design
scales as mn. Although ubiquitous, we prove that this strategy is wasteful for creating the test set.

Our theorem extends to the case where label errors are correlated with classifier errors, possibly even in a data dependent way. It only fails in the unusual cases where label
noise systematically aligns in favor of the worse classifier,
the effect of aggregation on label quality systematically
aligns in favor of the better classifier, or the cost of unlabelled data is large. While we prove our main theorem for
sufficiently large sample sizes, we conjecture that the statement holds for all n ≥ 1. We have verified the conjecture

1

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
Tübingen AI Center 3 ETH Zürich. Correspondence to: Florian
E. Dorner <florian.dorner@tuebingen.mpg.de>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

