Learning Pseudo-Contractive Denoisers for Inverse Problems

Deliang Wei 1 Peng Chen 1 Fang Li 1 2

Abstract

where f is the observed signal, u is the potential signal, K
is the degradation operator, and n is the noise following
certain distributions. Different values of K and n correspond to different missions including denoising, deblurring,
inpainting, super-resolution, and medical imaging. In order
to recover u from f , a variational approach is considered:

Deep denoisers have shown excellent performance in solving inverse problems in signal and
image processing. In order to guarantee the convergence, the denoiser needs to satisfy some Lipschitz conditions like non-expansiveness. However, enforcing such constraints inevitably compromises recovery performance. This paper introduces a novel training strategy that enforces
a weaker constraint on the deep denoiser called
pseudo-contractiveness. By studying the spectrum of the Jacobian matrix, relationships between different denoiser assumptions are revealed.
Effective algorithms based on gradient descent
and Ishikawa process are derived, and further assumptions of strict pseudo-contractiveness yield
efficient algorithms using half-quadratic splitting
and forward-backward splitting. The proposed
algorithms theoretically converge strongly to a
fixed point. A training strategy based on holomorphic transformation and functional calculi is proposed to enforce the pseudo-contractive denoiser
assumption. Extensive experiments demonstrate
superior performance of the pseudo-contractive
denoiser compared to related denoisers. The proposed methods are competitive in terms of visual
effects and quantitative values.

û = arg min F (u) + G(u; f ),
u∈V

where V is the Hilbert space, F denotes the prior regularization term, and G is the data fidelity term. Typical choices
for F include total variation (Rudin et al., 1992) and its extensions (Bredies et al., 2010), weighted nuclear norm (Gu
et al., 2014), group-based low rank prior (Mairal J, 2009) et
al.. First order methods are employed to solve (2), such as
the alternating direction method with multipliers (ADMM)
(Boyd et al., 2011):
uk+1
v k+1
bk+1

= Prox F (v k − bk ),
β
= Prox G (uk+1 + bk ),
β
= bk + uk+1 − v k+1 ,

(3)

where β > 0. For a given proper, closed, and convex
function F : V → (−∞, ∞], the proximal operator
ProxF : V → V is defined as:
1
ProxF (y) = arg min F (x) + kx − yk2 .
x∈V
2

(4)

Noticing that Prox F (·) is a Gaussian denoiser, Venkatakrβ
ishnan et al. proposed to replace the u-subproblem in (3)
with arbitrary Gaussian denoiser Dσ in a plug-and-play
(PnP) fashion, that is uk+1 = Dσ (v k − bk ), and arrived
at PnP-ADMM algorithm (Venkatakrishnan et al., 2013).
Here, Dσ is a Gaussian denoiser with denoising strength σ.
Throughout the paper, we let β = σ12 as suggested in (Chan
et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2017b; 2021).

1. Introduction
Inverse problems aim to recover the potential signal from
down sampled or corrupted obsevations. A typical inverse
problem takes form of:
f = Ku + n,

(2)

(1)

1
School of Mathematical Sciences, Key Laboratory of
MEA(Ministry of Education) & Shanghai Key Laboratory of
PMMP, East China Normal University, Shanghai 200241, China
2
Chongqing Key Laboratory of Precision Optics, Chongqing Institute of East China Normal University, Chongqing 401120, China.
Correspondence to: Fang Li <fli@math.ecnu.edu.cn>.

Interestingly, PnP-ADMM, along with other PnP methods,
has demonstrated remarkable recovery effects in a diverse
range of areas, such as bright field electron tomography
(Sreehari et al., 2016), camera image processing (Heide
et al., 2014), low-dose CT imaging (Venkatakrishnan et al.,
2013; Peng et al., 2023), image denoising (Le Pendu &
Guillemot, 2023; Wei et al., 2023a;b), deblurring (Zhang
et al., 2017b; Laroche et al., 2023a), inpainting (Zhu et al.,

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

