Position: Intent-aligned AI Systems Must Optimize for Agency Preservation

Catalin Mitelut 1 Ben Smith 2 Peter Vamplew 3

Abstract

to making safe AI-systems (italics added):

A central approach to AI-safety research has been
to generate aligned AI systems: i.e. systems that
do not deceive users and yield actions or recommendations that humans might judge as consistent
with their intentions and goals. Here we argue
that truthful AIs aligned solely to human intent
are insufficient and that preservation of long-term
agency of humans may be a more robust standard that may need to be separated and explicitly
optimized for. We discuss the science of intent
and control and how human intent can be manipulated and we provide a formal definition of
agency-preserving AI-human interactions focusing on forward-looking explicit agency evaluations. Our work points to a novel pathway for
human harm in AI-human interactions and proposes solutions to this challenge.

• There are incentives to build AI systems “that defer to
humans and gradually align themselves to user preferences and intentions.” (Russell, 2019).
• “[C]orrectly specifying intent can become more important for achieving the desired outcome as RL algorithms improve.” (Krakovna et al., 2020).
• The general reason given for why an AI system would
cause harm is that they “violate human intent in order
to increase reward” (Cotra, 2022).
Here we argue that satisfying human intent alone is not
a sufficient condition for safe AIs and that intent-aligned
systems converge towards human agency loss, i.e. removing the power of humans to choose and control present and
future goals. In particular, intent-aligned AI systems (i)
converge on strategies that optimize for human agency loss
and (ii) they do so by design rather than by accident. The
formal reason this occurs is because agency loss is not exempt from Goodhart’s law (Strathern, 1997): loss of human
control becomes the best solution to the increasingly complex optimization problems that AIs will be tasked with.
This position paper argues that safe AI systems should
explicitly decompose and evaluate outputs for both their
immediate utility as well as their downstream effects on
human agency. We provide additional discussions on why
reasoning (Appendix A) or psychological needs (Appendix
B) are insufficient to protect human agency.

1. Introduction
Artificial intelligence (AI) researchers have made significant advances in recent years due in large part to the development of deep learning algorithms and the availability
of massive datasets (Goodfellow et al., 2016). Advances
have led to highly creative text-to image generators such
as DALL-E (Ramesh et al., 2021) and the development of
large-language-models (LLMs) such as GPT3 (Brown et al.,
2020), ChatGPT and GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023). Some now
view the development of artificial general intelligence (AGI)
(Goertzel, 2014) as increasingly likely (Roser, 2023) with
a growing call for research into AI-safety and in particular
”AI alignment” to ensure such systems act consistently with
the goals of users and avoid growing lists of failure modes
e.g. (Amodei et al., 2016).

Human agency is not well understood. Section 2 lays out
the empirical basis of our work, namely, the unsolved empirical problem of ”human agency”, i.e. what it means for
humans to be in control of their lives and larger social structures. We argue that it remains unknown how much real
control or ”agency” humans alone have over their immediate and long term futures given the increasingly causal roles
uncovered for genetic, developmental, environmental and
cultural forces that underpin human goals and intentions.
Socially embedded AIs will have the opportunity and incentive to pressure human behavior with few biological or
psychological defense systems.

AI-alignment, defined in terms of consistency with human
intention (or human judgment), has been presented as key
1

Forum Basiliense, University of Basel 2 University of Oregon
Federation University Australia. Correspondence to: Catalin
Mitelut <mitelutco@gmail.com>.
3

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Formalizing agency preservation. In Section 3 we provide
a formal definition of agency-preserving human-AI inter1

