An Efficient Maximal Ancestral Graph Listing Algorithm
Tian-Zuo Wang 1 Wen-Bo Du 1 Zhi-Hua Zhou 1

Abstract
Maximal ancestral graph (MAG) is a prevalent
graphical model to characterize causal relations
in the presence of latent variables including latent confounders and selection variables. Given
observational data, only a Markov equivalence
class (MEC) of MAGs is identifiable if without
some additional assumptions. Due to this fact,
MAG listing, listing all the MAGs in the MEC,
is usually demanded in many downstream tasks.
To the best of our knowledge, there are no relevant methods for MAG listing other than brute
force in the literature. In this paper, we propose
the first brute-force-free MAG listing method, by
determining the local structures of each vertex
recursively. We provide the graphical characterization for each valid local transformation of a
vertex, and present sound and complete rules to
incorporate the valid local transformation in the
presence of latent confounders and selection variables. Based on these components, our method
can efficiently output all the MAGs in the MEC
with no redundance, that is, every intermediate
graph in the recursive process is necessary for the
MAG listing task. The empirical analysis demonstrates the superiority of our proposed method on
efficiency and effectiveness.

D

C

(a) L

B

A

L

S

(b) S

A

D

S

L

B
C

(c) DAG D

A

B

D

C

(d) MAG M

Figure 1: Fig. 1(a): L is a latent confounder if we cannot
observe L. Fig. 1(b): S is a selection variable if we cannot
observe S and the collected data relies on the value of S.
Fig. 1(c): a DAG D where L is a latent confounder and S is
a selection variable. Fig. 1(d): A MAG characterizing the
causal relations over the observable vertices in D.
conducted, leading to the establishment of many solid results (Meek, 1995; Wienöbst et al., 2023).
In real tasks, some variables relevant to the tasks are usually
latent, in which case DAG is not sufficient to characterize the causal relations. Specifically, latent variables are
generally classified into latent confounders and selection
variables. The existence of latent variables could take additional dependence to the observable variables. See Fig. 1
for an illustration. As shown by Fig 1(a), latent confounder
influences more than one observable variable. For example,
economic policy influences both income and consumption,
but it is hardly to be evaluated and thus a latent confounder.
And as shown by Fig.1(b), selection variable is influenced
by more than one observable variable. In the presence of selection variables, the collected data relies on the value of the
selection variables and thus jeopardizes the representativeness of the data for the underlying population (Hünermund
& Bareinboim, 2023). For example, when investigating the
relationship between student talent and effort, if the student
data is collected from top-tier universities, the dependence
between talent and effort could be overestimated, as both
talent and effort influence whether a student can enter a
top-tier university.

1. Introduction
Causality is a vital research topic in artificial intelligence.
Under Pearl’s causality framework (Pearl, 2009), a key component is a graphical model to characterize the causal relations among variables. In the graphical model, each vertex
denotes a variable and each edge denotes a causal relation.
Directed acyclic graph (DAG) is one of the most widespread
graphical models. Extensive studies based on DAGs are

To accommodate the presence of latent confounders and
selection variables, maximal ancestral graph (MAG) is proposed (Richardson et al., 2002). A MAG characterizes
the causal relations among the observable variables regardless of whether latent variables exist and where they are.
Roughly speaking, a MAG can be seen as a projection graph
on the observable variables of an underlying DAG contain-

1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210023, China. Correspondence to:
Zhi-Hua Zhou <zhouzh@lamda.nju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

