Long Range Propagation on Continuous-Time Dynamic Graphs

Alessio Gravina * 1 Giulio Lovisotto * 2 Claudio Gallicchio 1 Davide Bacciu 1 Claas Grohnfeldt 2

Abstract

formation. While most of the proposed DGNs have been
designed for static graphs, many real-world scenarios are
inherently dynamic in nature. Examples include the continual activities and interactions between members of social
as well as communication networks, recurrent purchases
by users on e-commerce platforms, or evolving interactions
of processes with files in an operating system. A number
of works investigated models that can process the temporal dimension of a dynamic graph (Kazemi et al., 2020;
Gravina & Bacciu, 2024), with recent interest in graphs
defined through irregularly sampled event streams, known
as Continuous-Time Dynamic Graphs (C-TDGs). However,
dynamic methods, which are based on static DGNs and
recurrent neural networks (RNNs) as backbone architectures, often retain the limitations of their core components.
Specifically, static DGNs suffer from the over-squashing
phenomenon (Alon & Yahav, 2021), which prevents the
final network to learn and propagate long range information (Gravina et al., 2023). Similarly, RNNs often face
similar challenges in propagating long-term dependencies,
as evidenced by Chang et al. (2019), mainly due to exploding or vanishing gradients. With growing evidence from
the static and dynamic case (Dwivedi et al., 2022; Yu et al.,
2023) that long-range dependencies are necessary for effective learning, the ability to learn properties beyond the
event’s temporal and spatial locality remains an open challenge in the C-TDG domain.

Learning Continuous-Time Dynamic Graphs
(C-TDGs) requires accurately modeling spatiotemporal information on streams of irregularly
sampled events. While many methods have been
proposed recently, we find that most message
passing-, recurrent- or self-attention-based methods perform poorly on long-range tasks. These
tasks require correlating information that occurred
“far” away from the current event, either spatially (higher-order node information) or along the
time dimension (events occurred in the past). To
address long-range dependencies, we introduce
continuous-time graph anti-symmetric network
(CTAN). Grounded within the ordinary differential equations framework, our method is designed
for efficient propagation of information. In this
paper, we show how CTAN’s (i) long-range modeling capabilities are substantiated by theoretical
findings and how (ii) its empirical performance on
synthetic long-range benchmarks and real-world
benchmarks is superior to other methods. Our
results motivate CTAN’s ability to propagate longrange information in C-TDGs as well as the inclusion of long-range tasks as part of temporal graph
models evaluation.

In this paper, we propose the continuous-time graph antisymmetric network (CTAN), a framework for learning of
C-TDGs with scalable long range propagation of information, thanks to properties inherited from stable and nondissipative ordinary differential equations (ODEs). We establish theoretical conditions for achieving stability and nondissipation in the CTAN ODE by employing anti-symmetric
weight matrices, which is the key factor for modeling longrange spatio-temporal interactions. The CTAN layer is derived from the forward Euler discretization of the designed
differential equation. The formulation of CTAN allows
scaling the radius of propagation of information depending
on the number of discretization steps, i.e., the number of
layers in the final architecture. Remarkably, even with a
limited number of layers, the non-dissipative behavior enables the transmission of information for a past event as
new events occur, since node states are used to efficiently

1. Introduction
Graphs are a highly expressive abstraction for modelling
entities and their relations, e.g., molecular structures, recommender systems, or traffic networks (Monti et al., 2019;
Derrow-Pinion et al., 2021; Gravina et al., 2022; Errica et al.,
2023; Cini et al., 2023; Bacciu et al., 2024). Deep Graph
Networks (DGNs) (Bacciu et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2021)
have lately emerged as a family of deep learning models
that can effectively process and learn such structured in*
Equal contribution, work done while at Huawei Technologies
Department of Computer Science, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy
2
Huawei Technologies, Munich, Germany. Correspondence to:
Alessio Gravina <alessio.gravina@phd.unipi.it>.

1

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

