Cross-domain Open-world Discovery

Shuo Wen 1 Maria Brbić 1

Abstract
In many real-world applications, test data may
commonly exhibit categorical shifts, characterized by the emergence of novel classes, as well
as distribution shifts arising from feature distributions different from the ones the model was
trained on. However, existing methods either discover novel classes in the open-world setting or assume domain shifts without the ability to discover
novel classes. In this work, we consider a crossdomain open-world discovery setting, where the
goal is to assign samples to seen classes and discover unseen classes under a domain shift. To
address this challenging problem, we present
CROW, a prototype-based approach that introduces a cluster-then-match strategy enabled by
a well-structured representation space of foundation models. In this way, CROW discovers novel
classes by robustly matching clusters with previously seen classes, followed by fine-tuning the
representation space using an objective designed
for cross-domain open-world discovery. Extensive experimental results on image classification
benchmark datasets demonstrate that CROW outperforms alternative baselines, achieving an 8%
average performance improvement across 75 experimental settings.

Figure 1. Illustration of the cross-domain open-world discovery
setting. In the cross-domain open-world discovery setting, the
goal is to assign samples to previously seen classes and discover
new classes under a domain shift. In the example, novel classes
like ‘fish’ and ‘turtle’, exist in unlabeled data. Additionally, the labeled samples are from the real-world domain, while the unlabeled
samples are sketches. In this setting, the goal is to assign each
unlabeled sample to either a seen category (‘dog’, ‘cat’, ‘bird’) or
to a novel category that is discovered (‘novel 1’, ‘novel 2’).

real-world scenarios. For example, a model trained to categorize diseases in medical images from one hospital may
experience domain shifts when applied to images from different hospitals. Moreover, during model deployment, novel
and rare diseases may emerge that the model has never
seen during training. In the open-world scenario, the model
should have the capability to generalize beyond predefined
classes and domains, a departure from the closed-world
scenario often presumed in traditional approaches.

1. Introduction
The rise of deep learning has brought significant advancements, empowering machine learning systems with exceptional performance in tasks requiring extensive labeled
data (LeCun et al., 2015; Schmidhuber, 2015; Silver et al.,
2016). However, many models are developed within a
closed-world paradigm, assuming that training and test data
originate from a predetermined set of classes within the
same domain. This assumption is overly restrictive in many

Open-world learning (Bendale & Boult, 2015) extends beyond closed-world paradigms by enabling models to recognize unseen classes and scenarios, addressing the dynamic
challenges of real-world environments. In this context, openworld semi-supervised learning (OW-SSL) (Cao et al., 2022)
defines a setting in which the objective is to annotate seen
classes and discover unseen classes. However, OW-SSL

1
EPFL, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Maria Brbić <mbrbic@epfl.ch>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

