Knowledge Transfer from Vision Foundation Models for
Efficient Training of Small Task-specific Models

Raviteja Vemulapalli 1 Hadi Pouransari 1 Fartash Faghri 1 Sachin Mehta 1 Mehrdad Farajtabar 1
Mohammad Rastegari 1 Oncel Tuzel 1

Abstract
Vision Foundation Models (VFMs) pretrained on
massive datasets exhibit impressive performance
on various downstream tasks, especially with limited labeled target data. However, due to their high
inference compute cost, these models cannot be
deployed for many real-world applications. Motivated by this, we ask the following important question, “How can we leverage the knowledge from
a large VFM to train a small task-specific model
for a new target task with limited labeled training
data?”, and propose a simple task-oriented knowledge transfer approach as a highly effective solution to this problem. Our experimental results on
five target tasks show that the proposed approach
outperforms task-agnostic VFM distillation, webscale CLIP pretraining, supervised ImageNet pretraining, and self-supervised DINO pretraining by
up to 11.6%, 22.1%, 13.7%, and 29.8%, respectively. Furthermore, the proposed approach also
demonstrates up to 9×, 4× and 15× reduction in
pretraining compute cost when compared to taskagnostic VFM distillation, ImageNet pretraining
and DINO pretraining, respectively, while outperforming them. We also show that the dataset
used for transferring knowledge has a significant
effect on the final target task performance, and
introduce a retrieval-augmented knowledge transfer strategy that uses web-scale image retrieval to
curate effective transfer sets.

Figure 1. Downstream task performance (EuroSAT classification)
of FastViT target model with different pretraining approaches.
Here, we finetune the pretrained models using 10 labeled training
images per class. Task-oriented knowledge transfer from DINOv2
VFM with generic web data (CC3M) outperforms the popular
ImageNet, CLIP and DINO pretraining approaches. Knowledge
transfer with a transfer set curated using image retrieval performs
significantly better than knowledge transfer with generic web data.

models pretrained on massive datasets (Oquab et al., 2023;
Radford et al., 2021; Yuan et al., 2021; Li et al., 2023b;
Wang et al., 2023b). These models have been shown to
work well for many downstream tasks, especially, when taskspecific labeled data is limited (Radford et al., 2021). However, they cannot be used for many resource-constrained applications due to their high inference computate cost. Also,
many applications such as autonomous driving, medical image diagnostics, and industrial automation, focus on specific
tasks or domains and need small task-specific models rather
than a large Vision Foundation Model (VFM). This raises an
important, timely and yet underexplored question: How can
we leverage the knowledge from a large VFM to effectively
train a small task-specific model for a new target task with
limited labeled training data?

1. Introduction
Currently, the computer vision community is witnessing the
emergence of various vision and multi-modal foundation
1

Apple, USA. Correspondence to:
Raviteja Vemulapalli <r vemulapalli@apple.com>,
Hadi Pouransari
<mpouransari@apple.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Answering this question requires transferring knowledge
from a VFM across both task and model architecture bound1

