Nash Learning from Human Feedback

Rémi Munos * 1 Michal Valko * 1 Daniele Calandriello * 1 Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar * 1 † Mark Rowland * 1
Daniel Guo * 1 Yunhao Tang * 1 Matthieu Geist * 1 † Thomas Mesnard 1 Côme Fiegel 2 Andrea Michi 1
Marco Selvi 1 Sertan Girgin 1 Nikola Momchev 1 Olivier Bachem 1 Daniel J. Mankowitz 1 Doina Precup 1
Bilal Piot * 1

Abstract

results on a text summarization task. We believe
NLHF offers a compelling avenue for fine-tuning
LLMs and enhancing the alignment of LLMs with
human preferences.

Reinforcement learning from human feedback
(RLHF) has emerged as the main paradigm for
aligning large language models (LLMs) with human preferences. Traditionally, RLHF involves
the initial step of learning a reward model from
pairwise human feedback, i.e., expressed as preferences between pairs of text generations. Subsequently, the LLM’s policy is fine-tuned to maximize the reward through a reinforcement learning
algorithm.
In this study, we introduce an alternative pipeline
for the fine-tuning of LLMs using pairwise human feedback. Our approach entails the initial
learning of a pairwise preference model, which is
conditioned on two inputs (instead of a single input in the case of a reward model) given a prompt,
followed by the pursuit of a policy that consistently generates responses preferred over those
generated by any competing policy, thus defining
the Nash equilibrium of this preference model.
We term this approach Nash learning from human
feedback (NLHF).
In the context of a tabular policy representation,
we present a novel algorithmic solution, NashMD, founded on the principles of mirror descent.
This algorithm produces a sequence of policies,
with the last iteration converging to the regularized Nash equilibrium. Additionally, we explore parametric representations of policies and
introduce gradient descent algorithms for deeplearning architectures. We illustrate the effectiveness of our approach by presenting experimental

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) (Glaese et al., 2022; Anil
et al., 2023; OpenAI, 2023; Ouyang et al., 2022) have made
remarkable strides in enhancing natural language understanding and generation. Their success in conversational applications often relies on aligning these models with human
preferences, a process primarily guided by the paradigm of
reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF). A
prevailing approach within RLHF involves the initial step
of constructing a reward model based on pairwise human
preferences, frequently employing the Bradley-Terry model
(BT; Bradley & Terry, 1952). This reward model assigns an
individual score to each generation of the language model
conditioned on a given prompt, akin to how the Elo ranking system (Elo, 1978) assigns scores to chess players to
estimate their relative strengths. Subsequently, model refinement takes place by optimizing the LLM’s performance
with respect to this reward model through reinforcement
learning (RL) over sampled text generations.
However, this BT model has its limitations, primarily coming from its inability to accommodate the full spectrum of
possible preferences. For example, Bertrand et al. (2023)
show the limitations of the Elo model by illustrating where
Elo score alone cannot predict the right preferences, even in
transitive situations. There are also situations where maximizing the Elo score is not aligned with maximizing the
probability of winning against the corresponding population of players, even when the preference model can be
perfectly expressed using a BT model (see Appendix A for
an example). These observations highlight the necessity for
a more profound understanding of the implications of BTbased reward maximization in RLHF for achieving genuine
alignment with human preferences.

*

Equal contribution 1 Google DeepMind 2 ENSAE
Paris † Now at Cohere.
Correspondence to:
Remi
Munos
<remi.munos@inria.fr>,
Michal
Valko
<michal.valko@inria.fr>, Daniele Calandriello <dcalandriello@google.com>, Bilal Piot <piot@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

