A Universal Transfer Theorem for Convex Optimization Algorithms
Using Inexact First-order Oracles

Phillip Kerger * 1 Marco Molinaro * 2 3 Hongyi Jiang 4 Amitabh Basu 1
optimization problems over a fixed ground set X ⊆ Rd

Abstract
Given any algorithm for convex optimization that
uses exact first-order information (i.e., function
values and subgradients), we show how to use
such an algorithm to solve the problem with access to inexact first-order information. This is
done in a “black-box” manner without knowledge of the internal workings of the algorithm.
This complements previous work that consider
the performance of specific algorithms like (accelerated) gradient descent with inexact information.
In particular, our results apply to a wider range
of algorithms beyond variants of gradient descent,
e.g., projection-free methods, cutting-plane methods, or any other first-order methods formulated
in the future. Further, they also apply to algorithms that handle structured nonconvexities like
mixed-integer decision variables.

min{f (x) : x ∈ X},

(1.1)

where f : Rd → R is a (possibly nonsmooth) convex function. When the underlying ground set X is all of Rd or
some fixed convex subset, (1.1) is the classical convex optimization problem. In this paper, we allow X to be more
general and to be used to model some known nonconvexity,
e.g. integrality constraints by setting X = C ∩ (Zd1 × Rd2 )
with d1 + d2 = d, where C ⊆ Rd is a fixed convex set.
From an algorithmic perspective, the setup is that the algorithm has complete knowledge of what X is, but does not
a priori know f and must collect information via queries.
A standard model for accessing the function f is through
so-called first-order oracles. At any point during its execution, the algorithm can request the function value and the
(sub)gradient of f at any point x̄ ∈ Rd .
Given access to such oracles, a first-order algorithm makes
adaptive queries to this oracle and, after it judges that it has
collected enough information about f , it reports a solution
with certain guarantees. A long line of research has gone
into understanding exactly how many queries are needed
to solve different classes of problems (with different sets
of assumptions on f and X), with tight upper and lower
bounds on the query complexity (a.k.a. oracle or information complexity) known in the literature; see (Nesterov,
2004; Bubeck, 2015; Nemirovski, 1994; Basu, 2023; Basu
et al., 2023) for expositions of these results.

1. Introduction
Optimization is a core tool for almost any learning or estimation problem. Such problems are very often approached by
setting up an optimization problem whose decision variables
model the entity to be estimated, and whose objective and
constraints are defined by the observed data combined with
structural insights into the inference problem. Algorithms
for any sufficiently general class of relevant optimization
problems in such settings need to collect information about
the particular instance by making (adaptive) queries about
the objective before they can report a good solution. In
this paper, we focus on the following important class of

A natural question that arises in this context is what happens if the response of the oracle is not exact, but approximate (with possibly desired accuracy). For example, the
response of the oracle might be itself a solution to another
computational problem which is solved only approximately,
which happens when using function smoothing (Nesterov,
2005), and in minimax problems (Wang & Abernethy, 2018).
Stochastic first-order oracles, modeling applications where
only some estimate of the gradient is used, may also be
viewed as inexact oracles whose accuracy is a random variable at each iteration. Thus, researchers have also investigated what one can say about algorithms that have access to
inexact oracle responses (with possibly known guarantees
on the inexactness). Early work on this topic appears in

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Applied Mathematics and
Statistics, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, USA 2 Microsoft
Research, Redmond, USA 3 Department of Computer Science,
PUC-Rio, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 4 Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, USA. Correspondence to: Amitabh Basu, <abasu9@jhu.edu>, Hongyi Jiang
<hj348@cornell.edu>, Phillip Kerger <pkerger@jhu.edu>, Marco
Molinaro <mmolinaro@microsoft.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

