Indirectly Parameterized Concrete Autoencoders

Alfred Nilsson * 1 2 Klas Wijk * 1 3 Sai bharath chandra Gutha 1 Erik Englesson 1 Alexandra Hotti 1 2 4
Carlo Saccardi 1 Oskar Kviman 1 2 Jens Lagergren 1 2 Ricardo Vinuesa 1 3 Hossein Azizpour 1 3

Abstract

regularization. Unfortunately, finding the optimal selection
is NP-hard (Amaldi & Kann, 1998).

Feature selection is a crucial task in settings where
data is high-dimensional or acquiring the full set
of features is costly. Recent developments in
neural network-based embedded feature selection
show promising results across a wide range of applications. Concrete Autoencoders (CAEs), considered state-of-the-art in embedded feature selection, may struggle to achieve stable joint optimization, hurting their training time and generalization.
In this work, we identify that this instability is
correlated with the CAE learning duplicate selections. To remedy this, we propose a simple and
effective improvement: Indirectly Parameterized
CAEs (IP-CAEs). IP-CAEs learn an embedding
and a mapping from it to the Gumbel-Softmax
distributions’ parameters. Despite being simple
to implement, IP-CAE exhibits significant and
consistent improvements over CAE in both generalization and training time across several datasets
for reconstruction and classification. Unlike CAE,
IP-CAE effectively leverages non-linear relationships and does not require retraining the jointly
optimized decoder. Furthermore, our approach
is, in principle, generalizable to Gumbel-Softmax
distributions beyond feature selection.

Although a large body of work exists on feature selection (Cai et al., 2018), due to the success of deep networks, neural network-based embedded feature selection
has gained more interest (Balın et al., 2019; Yamada et al.,
2020; Lemhadri et al., 2021). Among those, Concrete Autoencoders (CAEs) (Balın et al., 2019), is an established
approach which allows for differentiable feature selection
using a layer consisting of stochastic Gumbel-Softmax distributed nodes (Maddison et al., 2017; Jang et al., 2017).
In this work, we identify a recurring instability issue of
CAEs (Figure 1, top) which leads to increased training time
and subpar performance. We then show that the instability
correlates with selection of redundant features (Figure 1,
bottom). To remedy this, we propose a simple modification
to indirectly parametrize the Gumbel-Softmax distributions
via a learnable embedding and transformation (Figure 2),
we refer to this alternative as Indirectly Parameterized CAEs
(IP-CAEs) and rigorously verify their empirical effectiveness. We summarize this paper’s main contributions below.
• We identify training instability in CAE and show it
strongly correlates with redundant features (Figure 1).
• We introduce IP-CAE (Figure 2), a simple and effective way to alleviate the instability of vanilla CAE
(Figure 5a solid lines), and show it leads to unique
selections (Figure 5a dotted lines), improved accuracy
(Figure 5b) and training time (Table 3). We also study
the update rules of CAE and IP-CAE, showing the latter learns a transformation of gradients (Section 2.4).

1. Introduction
Feature selection is a fundamental task in machine learning and statistics, enabling more parsimonious and interpretable models. It is essential in several applications such
as bioinformatics e.g., gene subset selection, neuroscience
e.g., fMRI analysis, and fluid mechanics e.g., optimal sensor placement. Moreover, feature selection is often used for

• We propose and compare against Generalized JensenShannon Divergence (GJSD) regularization (Section 2.5) , an explicit, probabilistic approach to mitigate
duplicate selections, and show while GJSD regularization is effective, IP-CAE is superior (Tables 1 and 2).

*

Equal contribution 1 KTH Royal Institute of Technology,
Stockholm, Sweden 2 Science for Life Laboratory, Solna, Sweden
3
Swedish e-Science Research Centre (SeRC), Stockholm, Sweden
4
Klarna, Stockholm, Sweden. Correspondence to: Alfred Nilsson
<alfredn@kth.se>, Klas Wijk <kwijk@kth.se>.

• We demonstrate successful end-to-end training of CAE
architectures for both reconstruction (Table 1) and classification (Table 2) achieving state-of-the-art results on
multiple datasets.

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

