Advancing DRL Agents in Commercial Fighting Games: Training, Integration,
and Agent-Human Alignment

Chen Zhang 1 2 Qiang He 3 Yuan Zhou 2 Elvis S. Liu 2 Hong Wang 2 Jian Zhao 1 Yang Wang 1 4 5

Abstract

et al., 2019). Games (Mnih et al., 2015; Moravčı́k et al.,
2017; Silver et al., 2017; Brown & Sandholm, 2018; Vinyals
et al., 2019), in particular, provide a cost-effective and natural environment for training DRL agents due to the ease
of data generation. However, previous work (Berner et al.,
2019; Jaderberg et al., 2019; Ye et al., 2020b) primarily focuses on enhancing agent competence to professional levels
and often overlooks the necessity of improving the human
player experience in commercial applications (Csikszentmihalyi, 2000; Bakker et al., 2011; Cheng et al., 2016).

Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) agents have
demonstrated impressive success in a wide range
of game genres. However, previous research
primarily focuses on optimizing DRL competence rather than addressing the challenge of
prolonged player interaction. In this paper, we
propose a practical DRL agent system for fighting games, named Shūkai, which has been successfully deployed to Naruto Mobile, a popular
fighting game with over 100 million registered
users. Shūkai quantifies the state to enhance generalizability, introducing Heterogeneous League
Training (HELT) to achieve balanced competence,
generalizability, and training efficiency. Furthermore, Shūkai implements specific rewards to align
the agent’s behavior with human expectations.
Shūkai’s ability to generalize is demonstrated by
its consistent competence across all characters,
even though it was trained on only 13% of them.
Additionally, HELT exhibits a remarkable 22%
improvement in sample efficiency. Shūkai serves
as a valuable training partner for players in Naruto
Mobile, enabling them to enhance their abilities
and skills.

In gaming, DRL’s potential extends beyond achieving high
competence. The integration of DRL agents as adversaries
in Player versus Environment (PvE) settings promises a
richer gaming experience by offering dynamic and unpredictable interactions (Shafer, 2012). However, this integration is remarkably challenging. The computational demands of training DRL agents in modern games with extensive character pools are formidable. For instance, training
scenarios can escalate in complexity with the increase in
character matchups, as seen in cases requiring substantial
resources (Silver et al., 2017; Vinyals et al., 2019; Ye et al.,
2020a). Furthermore, the sole pursuit of surpassing human
performance in DRL agents may not necessarily enhance
the player experience and restricts the practical deployment
of DRL agents in games (Cheng et al., 2016; Bakker et al.,
2011). For example, players with lower competitive skill
levels may find it frustrating to face overly strong agents.
The inability to overcome such opponents can rapidly diminish a player’s interest in the game. Therefore, it is imperative
to ensure that DRL agents exhibit varying levels of competitiveness, aligning with the diverse skill levels of players and
providing an enjoyable gaming experience.

1. Introduction
Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) has demonstrated
its capability in sequential decision-making, ranging from
robotics (Schulman et al., 2015; Haarnoja et al., 2018), dialogue systems (Ouyang et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023),
and games (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2017; Vinyals

To address these challenges, this paper proposes a DRL
agent system called Shūkai, which is specifically designed
for fighting games. Shūkai utilizes a unified DRL model
capable of managing a diverse roster of characters, thereby
significantly reducing the complexity inherent in large-scale
character sets. Shūkai significantly reduces the complexity associated with extensive character rosters and keeps
a promising generalization ability. To counter potential
overfitting due to training on a subset of characters (Bejani & Ghatee, 2021; Cobbe et al., 2019), our approach

1

University of Science and Technology of China (USTC),
Hefei, China. 2 Tencent Games 3 Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China 4 Key Laboratory of Precision and Intelligent Chemistry, USTC, China 5 Suzhou Institute for Advanced Research, USTC, China. Correspondence to: Yang Wang <angyan@ustc.edu.cn>, Elvis S. Liu
<elvissyliu@tencent.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

