Unmasking Vulnerabilities: Cardinality Sketches under Adaptive Inputs

Sara Ahmadian * 1 Edith Cohen * 1 2

Abstract

representation that supports merge (set union) operations,
adding elements, and retrieval of approximate cardinality.
The sketch size is only logarithmic or double logarithmic in
the cardinality of queries, which allows for a significant efficiency boost over linear size data structures such as Bloom
filters.

Cardinality sketches are popular data structures
that enhance the efficiency of working with large
data sets. The sketches are randomized representations of sets that are only of logarithmic size
but can support set merges and approximate cardinality (i.e., distinct count) queries. When queries
are not adaptive, that is, they do not depend on
preceding query responses, the design provides
strong guarantees of correctly answering a number of queries exponential in the sketch size k.
In this work, we investigate the performance of
cardinality sketches in adaptive settings and unveil inherent vulnerabilities. We design an attack
against the “standard” estimators that constructs
an adversarial input by post-processing responses
to a set of simple non-adaptive queries of size
linear in the sketch size k. Empirically, our attack
used only 4k queries with the widely used HyperLogLog (HLL++) (Flajolet et al., 2007b; Heule
et al., 2013) sketch. The simple attack technique
suggests it can be effective with post-processed
natural workloads. Finally and importantly, we
demonstrate that the vulnerability is inherent as
any estimator applied to known sketch structures
can be attacked using a number of queries that is
quadratic in k, matching a generic upper bound.

Formally, for a universe U of keys, and randomness ρ, a
sketch map U 7→ Sρ (U ) is a mapping from sets of keys
U ∈ 2U to their sketch Sρ (U ). Sketch maps are designed
so that for each U we can recover with high probability
(over ρ) an estimate of |U | by applying an estimator M to
Sρ (U ). A common guarantee is a bound on the Normalized
Root Mean Squared Error (NRMSE) so that for accuracy
parameter ϵ,
"
2 #
M(Sρ (U )) − |U |
∀U, Eρ
≤ ϵ2 .
(1)
|U |
The maps Sρ are designed to be composable: For a set
U and key u, the sketch Sρ (U ∪ {u}) can be computed
from Sρ (U ) and u. For two sets U , V , the sketch Sρ (U ∪
V ) can be computed from their respective sketches Sρ (U ),
Sρ (V ). Composability is a crucial property that makes
the sketch representations useful for streaming, distributed,
and parallel applications. Importantly, the use of the same
internal randomness ρ across all queries is necessary for
composability and therefore in typical use cases it is fixed
across a system.
The basic technique in the design of cardinality (distinct
count) sketches is to randomly prioritize the keys in the universe U through the use of random hash functions (specified
by ρ). The sketch of a set U keeps the lowest priorities of
keys that are in the set U . This provides information on
the cardinality |U |, since a larger cardinality corresponds to
the presence of lower priorities keys in U . This technique
was introduced by Flajolet & Martin (1985) for counting
distinct elements in streaming and as composable sketches
of sets by Cohen (1997). The core idea of sampling keys
based on a random order emerged in reservoir sampling
(Knuth, 1998), and in weighted sampling (Rosén, 1997).
Cardinality sketches are also Locality Sensitive Hashing
(LSH) maps (Indyk & Motwani, 1998) with respect to set
differences.

1. Introduction
Composable sketches for cardinality estimation are data
structures that are commonly used in practice (Apache Software Foundation, Accessed: 2024; Google Cloud, Accessed:
2024) and had been studied extensively (Flajolet & Martin,
1985; Flajolet et al., 2007a; Cohen, 1997; Bar-Yossef et al.,
2002; Kane et al., 2010; Nelson et al., 2014; Cohen, 2015;
Pettie & Wang, 2021). The sketch of a set is a compact
*
1
Equal contribution
Google Research, United States
Department of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University, Israel.
Correspondence to: Sara Ahmadian <sahmadian@google.com>,
Edith Cohen <edith@cohenwang.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

The specific designs of cardinality sketches vary and in1

