DIDI: Diffusion-Guided Diversity for Offline Behavioral Generation

Jinxin Liu * 1 2 Xinghong Guo * 1 Zifeng Zhuang 1 Donglin Wang 1 3

Abstract

In practice, a significant portion of datasets is often collected
without reward labels, posing challenges in learning a useful
policy from such a reward-free dataset, particularly when
the offline data is suboptimal or noisy.

In this paper, we propose a novel approach called
DIffusion-guided DIversity (DIDI) for offline
behavioral generation. The goal of DIDI is to
learn a diverse set of skills from a mixture of
label-free offline data. We achieve this by leveraging diffusion probabilistic models as priors to
guide the learning process and regularize the policy. By optimizing a joint objective that incorporates diversity and diffusion-guided regularization, we encourage the emergence of diverse behaviors while maintaining the similarity to the
offline data. Experimental results in four decisionmaking domains (Push, Kitchen, Humanoid, and
D4RL tasks) show that DIDI is effective in discovering diverse and discriminative skills. We
also introduce skill stitching and skill interpolation, which highlight the generalist nature of the
learned skill space. Further, by incorporating an
extrinsic reward function, DIDI enables rewardguided behavior generation, facilitating the learning of diverse and optimal behaviors from suboptimal data.

Moreover, offline real-world data is typically collected from
a mixture of different data-collecting policies, resulting in
datasets that exhibit multimodality and diversity (Wang
et al., 2022; Shafiullah et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022).
Learning directly from such datasets may lead to suboptimal
performance or bias the learned policy towards a specific
behavior. Recent studies have explored incorporating additional contextual variables (Zhou et al., 2021; Liu et al.,
2023b) or utilizing powerful model architectures (Chi et al.,
2023; Furuta et al., 2021) to learn a set of behaviors from
the dataset. However, a major limitation of these methods
is the lack of encouragement for the emergence of diverse
behaviors. In practical applications, the ability to command
the diversity of behaviors is often desired, rather than solely
generating a set of optional behaviors.
To address these challenges, we propose a novel approach
called DIDI (DIffusion-guided DIversity) for offline behavioral generation. The objective of DIDI is to learn optimal
and diverse behaviors from a mixture of label-free offline
data. To achieve controllable behavioral generation, we
introduce a contextual policy that can be commanded to
produce a specific behavior. The learning of the contextual
policy is guided by a diffusion probabilistic model acting as
a regularization prior.

1. Introduction
Offline reinforcement learning (RL) has shown great
promise in enabling agents to learn from past experiences
without further interaction with the environment (Levine
et al., 2020; Brandfonbrener et al., 2021; Janner et al., 2021).
Naturally, it eliminates the need for time-consuming and
costly online exploration and enables learning from precollected large datasets. However, one inherent requirement
of this formulation is that the offline data must be labeled
with rewards, which guide the learning process of the policy.

Yet, supervising the contextual policy with diffusion model
is not trivial, since we cannot directly obtain <contextual input, behavior target> pairs from the diffusion model. To this
end, we draw inspiration from online unsupervised RL and
employ a three-step process: First, we command the contextual policy to produce a pseudo-behavior. Then, we use the
diffusion model to relabel the pseudo-behavior and obtain a
proxy-target. Finally, using the relabeled <contextual input,
proxy-target> , we can supervise the learning of the contextual policy. The key insight is that the relabeling (noising
and denoising) process of the diffusion model allows us to
obtain a relabeled proxy-target, effectively bringing it back
to the offline data distribution and thus eliminating the potential out-of-distribution (OOD) issues in offline settings.

*
Equal contribution 1 School of Engineering, Westlake University, Hangzhou, China 2 Zhejiang University, Hangzhou,
China 3 Institute of Advanced Technology, Westlake Institute
for Advanced Study, Hangzhou, China. Correspondence to:
Jinxin Liu <liujinxin@westlake.edu.cn>, Donglin Wang <wangdonglin@westlake.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

We empirically evaluate our DIDI approach in four decision1

