Submodular Framework for Structured-Sparse Optimal Transport

Piyushi Manupriya 1 Pratik Jawanpuria 2 Karthik S. Gurumoorthy 3 SakethaNath Jagarlapudi 1
Bamdev Mishra 2

Abstract

ative modeling (Arjovsky et al., 2017), shape interpolation
(Solomon et al., 2015; Han et al., 2022), prototype selection (Gurumoorthy et al., 2021), multi-label classification
(Frogner et al., 2015; Jawanpuria et al., 2021), single-cell
RNA sequencing (Schiebinger et al., 2019), and hypothesis
testing (Manupriya et al., 2024b), to name a few.

Unbalanced optimal transport (UOT) has recently
gained much attention due to its flexible framework for handling un-normalized measures and
its robustness properties. In this work, we explore
learning (structured) sparse transport plans in the
UOT setting, i.e., transport plans have an upper
bound on the number of non-sparse entries in each
column (structured sparse pattern) or in the whole
plan (general sparse pattern). We propose novel
sparsity-constrained UOT formulations building
on the recently explored maximum mean discrepancy based UOT. We show that the proposed
optimization problem is equivalent to the maximization of a weakly submodular function over
a uniform matroid or a partition matroid. We
develop efficient gradient-based discrete greedy
algorithms and provide the corresponding theoretical guarantees. Empirically, we observe that
our proposed greedy algorithms select a diverse
support set and we illustrate the efficacy of the
proposed approach in various applications.

The seminal work of Cuturi (2013) popularized the entropic
regularized variants of OT for their computational and generalization benefits. However, a notable drawback of entropic
regularized OT approaches is that they usually learn dense
transport plans, where sparse (zero) entries are almost nonexistent (Blondel et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2023). Sparser
transport plans are often preferred as they offer more interpretability in alignments (Muzellec et al., 2017; Swanson
et al., 2020). In this regard, existing works (Blondel et al.,
2018; Essid & Solomon, 2018) have shown that the squared
2-norm regularizer for OT leads to a sparse OT plan. More
recently, Liu et al. (2023) introduced an explicit cardinality
constraint to control the sparsity level. It should be noted
that the above works explore sparsity in the balanced OT
setups, i.e., when the marginals of the transport plan are
enforced to match the given distributions.
While balanced OT is suitable for many applications, the
need for robustness in the case of noisy measures motivates relaxing the marginal matching constraints (Frogner
et al., 2015; Fatras et al., 2021). This has led to several
unbalanced OT (UOT) methods (Liero et al., 2018; Chizat
et al., 2017) where a KL-divergence based regularization is
employed for (softly) enforcing marginal constraints. Recently, Manupriya et al. (2024b) proposed a maximum mean
discrepancy (MMD) regularized UOT approach, termed as
MMD-UOT, as an alternative to KL-regularized UOT. However, to the best of our knowledge, the existing UOT works
do not focus on learning (structured) sparse transport plans
with explicit cardinality constraints.

1. Introduction
Optimal transport (OT) has emerged as a popular tool in
machine learning applications for comparing probability
distributions (Peyré et al., 2019). OT computes the minimal
cost to transform one distribution into another and generates
a transport plan, offering a deeper understanding of the underlying geometry. The obtained transport plan may be used
for aligning the support of the distributions (Alvarez-Melis
& Jaakkola, 2018; Jawanpuria et al., 2020), domain adaptation (Courty et al., 2017; Nath & Jawanpuria, 2020), ecological inference (Muzellec et al., 2017), etc. Furthermore,
OT has been explored in diverse applications such as gener-

Contributions. In this work, we propose novel sparsityconstrained UOT formulations. In particular, we learn UOT
plans with a general sparsity constraint or a column-wise
sparsity constraint. While the corresponding search space
is non-convex and non-smooth, we identify them with wellstudied matroid structures such as uniform matroid or partition matroid. Our contributions are as follows.

1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
2
3
IIT Hyderabad, India.
Microsoft, India.
Walmart
Global Tech, India. Correspondence to: Pratik Jawanpuria
<pratik.jawanpuria@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

