On the Origins of Linear Representations in Large Language Models

Yibo Jiang * 1 Goutham Rajendran * 2 Pradeep Ravikumar 2 Bryon Aragam 3 Victor Veitch 4 5

Abstract

could the apparent “linearity” be illusory?

Recent works have argued that high-level semantic concepts are encoded “linearly” in the representation space of large language models. In this
work, we study the origins of such linear representations. To that end, we introduce a simple
latent variable model to abstract and formalize
the concept dynamics of the next token prediction.
We use this formalism to show that the next token
prediction objective (softmax with cross-entropy)
and the implicit bias of gradient descent together
promote the linear representation of concepts. Experiments show that linear representations emerge
when learning from data matching the latent variable model, confirming that this simple structure
already suffices to yield linear representations.
We additionally confirm some predictions of the
theory using the LLaMA-2 large language model,
giving evidence that the simplified model yields
generalizable insights.

In this paper, we study the origins of linear representations
in large language models. We introduce a mathematical
model for next token prediction in which context sentences
and next tokens both reflect latent binary concept variables.
These latent variables give a formalization of underlying
human-interpretable concepts. Using this mathematical
model, we prove that these latent concepts are indeed linearly represented in the learned representation space. This
result comes in two parts. First, similar to earlier findings
on word embeddings (Pennington et al., 2014; Arora et al.,
2016; Gittens et al., 2017b; Ethayarajh et al., 2018), we
show log-odds matching leads to linear structure. Second,
we show that the implicit bias of gradient descent leads to
the emergence of linear structure even when this (strong) logodds matching condition fails. Together, these results provide strong support for the linear representation hypothesis.
There are some noteworthy implications of these results.
First, linear representation structure is not specific to the
choice of model architecture, but a by-product of how the
model learns the conditional probabilities of different contexts and corresponding outputs. Second, the simple latent
variable model gives rise to representation behavior such as
linearity and orthogonality akin to those observed in LLMs.
This suggests it may be a useful tool for further theoretical
study in interpretability research.

1. Introduction
One of the central questions of interpretability research
for language models (Mikolov et al., 2013; OpenAI, 2023;
Touvron et al., 2023) is to understand how high-level
semantic concepts that are meaningful to humans are
encoded in the representations of these models. In this
context, a surprising observation is that these concepts
are often represented linearly (e.g., Mikolov et al., 2013;
Pennington et al., 2014; Arora et al., 2016; Elhage et al.,
2022; Burns et al., 2022; Tigges et al., 2023; Nanda et al.,
2023; Moschella et al., 2022; Park et al., 2023; Li et al.,
2023; Gurnee et al., 2023). This observation is mainly
empirical, leaving open major questions; most importantly:

The development is as follows:
1. In Section 2, we present a latent variable model that abstracts the concept dynamics of LLM inference, allowing us to mathematically analyze LLM representations
of concepts.
2. Using this model, we show in Section 3 that the next token prediction objective (softmax with cross-entropy)
and the implicit bias of gradient descent together promote concepts to admit linear representations.
3. A surprising fact about LLMs is that Euclidean geometry on representations sometimes reasonably encodes
semantics, despite the Euclidean inner product being
unidentified by the standard LLM objective (Park et al.,
2023). In Section 4, we show that the implicit bias of
gradient descent can result in Euclidean structure having a privileged status such that independent concepts
are represented almost orthogonally.

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Chicago 2 Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University 3 Booth School of Business, University of Chicago
4
Department of Statistics, University of Chicago 5 Data Science
Institute, University of Chicago. Correspondence to: Yibo Jiang
<yiboj@uchicago.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

