Do Large Code Models Understand Programming Concepts?
Counterfactual Analysis for Code Predicates

Ashish Hooda 1 2 Mihai Christodorescu 2 Miltiadis Allamanis 3 Aaron Wilson 2 Kassem Fawaz 1 Somesh Jha 1 2

Abstract

mance, the degree to which LLMs understand the PCPs in
the programs they manipulate remains unclear.

Large Language Models’ success in text generation has also made them better at code generation and coding tasks. While a lot of work has
demonstrated their remarkable performance on
tasks such as code completion and editing, it is
still unclear as to why. We help bridge this gap by
exploring to what degree auto-regressive models
understand the logical constructs of the underlying programs. We propose Counterfactual Analysis for Programming Concept Predicates (CACP)
as a counterfactual testing framework to evaluate
whether Large Code Models understand programming concepts. With only black-box access to the
model, we use CACP to evaluate ten popular Large
Code Models for four different programming concepts. Our findings suggest that current models
lack understanding of concepts such as data flow
and control flow.

Empirical evaluations on benchmark datasets such as HumanEval (Chen et al., 2021), MBPP (Austin et al., 2021),
and CodeContests (Li et al., 2022) drive the current understanding of the code capabilities of LLMs. While taskdriven evaluation measures the end-to-end performance, it
does not reveal the LLM’s fine-grained understanding of
PCPs. As a result, we often cannot attribute the failures in
these coding tasks to specific aspects of the underlying code
— was the code completion wrong due to confusing variable
names, unusual control flow, inherent algorithmic complexity, or code size? Such a fine-grained attribution would allow
practitioners to better reason about these models’ limits and
highlight the avenues to improve their performance.
In this work, we consider the problem of evaluating a given
model’s understanding of programming concepts. We focus
on four PCPs that represent classical concepts in the program
analysis literature (Allen, 1970; Fosdick & Osterweil, 1976;
Lin & Wu, 2008; Dart & Zobel, 1992):
Control Flow: The output of the automated coding task
does not change with the ordering of independent code
statements.

1. Introduction
Language Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated
remarkable performance on a variety of automated programming tasks, such as code completion (Austin et al., 2021;
Fried et al., 2022), code repair (Jiang et al., 2021; Joshi
et al., 2023), and code translation (Pan et al., 2023; Chen
et al., 2023b). Automating a programming task is a complex
problem that requires understanding many concepts in the
underlying code. These concepts include how variables are
stored, accessed, and modified in memory; how execution
proceeds across various constructs; and how different parts
of the code compose sequentially or in parallel to perform a
computation. We refer to these concepts as ProgrammingConcept Predicates (PCPs). Despite their remarkable perfor-

Data Flow: The automated coding task uses only variables that are in scope (and live) within the coding task.
Data Types: The automated coding task satisfies the
constraints of the type system.
Identifier Naming: Functionality of the automated coding task does not depend on the names of the variables
or functions.
We introduce Counterfactual Analysis for Programming
Concept Predicates (CACP), a counterfactual analysis framework for evaluating whether large code models understand
PCPs. As the name suggests, CACP builds on counterfactual
analysis to cast concept understanding as the problem of
determining how controlled input changes result in model
output changes. There are two main components of CACP–
(1) Generating counterfactuals for code that only perturb
specific PCPs, and (2) Using them to analyze the model’s
performance. Specifically for a given PCP, we define code

1
UW-Madison 2 Google Research 3 Google DeepMind.
The majority of this work was completed while Ashish Hooda was
an intern at Google Research.. Correspondence to: Ashish Hooda
<ahooda@wisc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

