AttnLRP: Attention-Aware Layer-Wise Relevance Propagation
for Transformers
Reduan Achtibat 1 Sayed Mohammad Vakilzadeh Hatefi 1 Maximilian Dreyer 1 Aakriti Jain 1
Thomas Wiegand 1 2 3 Sebastian Lapuschkin 1 Wojciech Samek 1 2 3

Abstract

explanation for “dog”

Large Language Models are prone to biased
predictions and hallucinations, underlining the
paramount importance of understanding their
model-internal reasoning process. However,
achieving faithful attributions for the entirety of
a black-box transformer model and maintaining computational efficiency is an unsolved challenge. By extending the Layer-wise Relevance
Propagation attribution method to handle attention layers, we address these challenges effectively. While partial solutions exist, our method
is the first to faithfully and holistically attribute
not only input but also latent representations
of transformer models with the computational
efficiency similar to a single backward pass.
Through extensive evaluations against existing
methods on LLaMa 2, Mixtral 8x7b, Flan-T5 and
vision transformer architectures, we demonstrate
that our proposed approach surpasses alternative methods in terms of faithfulness and enables
the understanding of latent representations, opening up the door for concept-based explanations.
We provide an LRP library at https://github.com/
rachtibat/LRP-eXplains-Transformers.

input

AttnLRP (ours) SmoothGrad Grad×AttnRoll KernelSHAP

faithfulness
computational 

efficiency
latent 

attributions

Figure 1. By optimizing LRP for transformer-based architectures,
our LRP variant outperforms other state-of-the-art methods in
terms of explanation faithfulness and computational efficiency.
We further are able to explain latent neurons inside and outside the
attention module, allowing us to interact with the model. A more
detailed discussion on the differences between AttnLRP and other
LRP variants can be found in Appendix A.2.2. Heatmaps for other
methods are illustrated in Appendix Figure B.6. Legend: highly
(+), semi- (◦), not (−) suited. Credit: Nataba/iStock.

are prone to biased predictions and hallucinations (Huang
et al., 2023), which hamper their widespread adoption.
To overcome these limitations, it is crucial to understand
the latent reasoning process of transformer models. Researchers started using the attention mechanism of transformers as a means to understand how input tokens interact with each other. Attention maps contain rich information about the data distribution (Clark et al., 2019; Caron
et al., 2021), even allowing for image data segmentation.
However, attention, by itself, is inadequate for comprehending the full spectrum of model behavior (Wiegreffe
and Pinter, 2019). Similar to latent activations, attention
is not class-specific and solely provides an explanation for
the softmax output (in attention layers) while disregarding
other model components. Recent works (Geva et al., 2021;
Dai et al., 2022) have in fact discovered that factual knowledge in Large Language Models (LLMs) is stored in FeedForward Network (FFN) neurons, separate from attention
layers. Further, attention-based attribution methods such
as rollout (Abnar and Zuidema, 2020; Chefer et al., 2021a)
result in checkerboard artifacts, as visible in Figure 1 for

1. Introduction
The attention mechanism (Vaswani et al., 2017) became
an essential component of large transformers due to its
unique ability to handle multimodality and to scale to billions of training samples. While these models demonstrate
impressive performance in text and image generation, they
1
Fraunhofer Heinrich-Hertz-Institute, 10587 Berlin, Germany 2 Technische Universität Berlin, 10587 Berlin, Germany
3
BIFOLD – Berlin Institute for the Foundations of Learning
and Data, 10587 Berlin, Germany. Correspondence to: Wojciech Samek <wojciech.samek@hhi.fraunhofer.de>, Sebastian
Lapuschkin <sebastian.lapuschkin@hhi.fraunhofer.de>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

