Evaluating Quantized Large Language Models

Shiyao Li 1 2 Xuefei Ning 1 Luning Wang 1 2 Tengxuan Liu 1 2 Xiangsheng Shi 1
Shengen Yan 2 Guohao Dai 2 3 Huazhong Yang 1 Yu Wang 1

Abstract

of LLMs poses a substantial challenge due to their considerable memory consumption and computational overhead.

Post-training quantization (PTQ) has emerged as
a promising technique to reduce the cost of large
language models (LLMs). Specifically, PTQ can
effectively mitigate memory consumption and reduce computational overhead in LLMs. To meet
the requirements of both high efficiency and performance across diverse scenarios, a comprehensive evaluation of quantized LLMs is essential to
guide the selection of quantization methods. This
paper presents a thorough evaluation of these factors by evaluating the effect of PTQ on Weight,
Activation, and KV Cache on 11 model families,
including OPT, LLaMA2, Falcon, Bloomz, Mistral, ChatGLM, Vicuna, LongChat, StableLM,
Gemma, and Mamba, with parameters ranging
from 125M to 180B. The evaluation encompasses
five types of tasks: basic NLP, emergent ability, trustworthiness, dialogue, and long-context
tasks. Moreover, we also evaluate the state-of-theart (SOTA) quantization methods to demonstrate
their applicability. Based on the extensive experiments, we systematically summarize the effect
of quantization, provide recommendations to apply quantization techniques, and point out future
directions. The code can be found in https:
//github.com/thu-nics/qllm-eval.

The LLM inference process encompasses two stages: the
prefill stage and the decoding stage. The prefill stage is
primarily compute-bound, while the decoding stage, characterized by small batch sizes, is generally memory-bound.
Furthermore, when processing tasks involving long texts or
large batch sizes, the memory overhead associated with the
Key-Value Cache (KV Cache) surpasses that of the Weights.
An effective approach to address the aforementioned challenge is post-training quantization (PTQ) (Wan et al., 2023;
Zhou et al., 2024). PTQ methods aid in the reduction of
the memory consumption of Weights, Activations, and KV
Caches by using the low-precision values with fewer bits
instead of the high-precision values. (1) The Weight-only
Quantization methods prove effective in accelerating the
memory-bounded General Matrix-Vector Multiply (GEMV)
operators in the decoding stage (Lin et al., 2023; Park et al.,
2023; Frantar et al., 2023; Kim et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2023).
(2) The Weight-Activation Quantization methods enable
the utilization of low-precision Tensor Cores in GPUs to
mitigate the compute-bounded General Matrix Multiply
(GEMM) operators in the prefill stage (Xiao et al., 2023;
Wei et al., 2022c; Dettmers et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2022;
Yuan et al., 2023). (3) The KV Cache Quantization methods
are helpful in alleviating memory overhead when handling
long texts or large batch sizes (Sheng et al., 2023).
As described above, to optimize LLMs for efficiency in various scenarios, such as differing model sizes, batch sizes,
text lengths, and hardware, diverse design choices for quantization are needed. Since quantization is a lossy compression technique, alterations in design choices for efficiency
considerations will also yield distinct impacts on task performances. Especially considering that the current LLMs
are serving as general solvers applicable to vastly different
tasks, understanding the implications of diverse quantization
choices on task performance becomes a crucial question in
the application of quantization methods.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, Large Language Models (LLMs) have showcased remarkable performance in a variety of tasks, including natural language understanding and generation. Notably,
the advent of LLMs has given rise to several interesting and
valuable applications, such as ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2023) and
Copilot (GitHub, 2023). However, the efficient deployment
1
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University,
Beijing, China 2 Infinigence AI 3 Shanghai Jiaotong University,
Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Xuefei Ning <foxdoraame@gmail.com>, Yu Wang <yu-wang@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

To this end, recently, Yao et al. (2023) study the effect of
quantization on Weight and Activation in language modeling tasks without considering the KV Cache Quantization.
Liu et al. (2023b) only focus on evaluating three emergent

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

