Manifold Integrated Gradients: Riemannian Geometry for Feature Attribution

Eslam Zaher 1 2 Maciej Trzaskowski 1 3 Quan Nguyen 1 3 4 Fred Roosta 1 2

Abstract

Gradient-based feature attribution methods (Simonyan et al.,
2014; Springenberg et al., 2015; Bach et al., 2015) are
commonly used, as they are more computationally efficient
and faithful to the model’s internals, as opposed to other
perturbation-based techniques (Ribeiro et al., 2016; Lundberg & Lee, 2017). However, these methods suffer from
two main drawbacks. First, the saliency maps produced for
vision models often exhibit perceptual noise. Second, they
are susceptible to adversarial attributional attacks.

In this paper, we dive into the reliability concerns
of Integrated Gradients (IG), a prevalent feature
attribution method for black-box deep learning
models. We particularly address two predominant
challenges associated with IG: the generation of
noisy feature visualizations for vision models and
the vulnerability to adversarial attributional attacks. Our approach involves an adaptation of
path-based feature attribution, aligning the path
of attribution more closely to the intrinsic geometry of the data manifold. Our experiments utilise
deep generative models applied to several realworld image datasets. They demonstrate that IG
along the geodesics conforms to the curved geometry of the Riemannian data manifold, generating
more perceptually intuitive explanations and, subsequently, substantially increasing robustness to
targeted attributional attacks.

Integrated gradients (IG) and other path-based methods are
widely adopted because they satisfy axiomatic properties
that are desirable in feature attribution methods. However,
the choice of the path of attribution, and/or the baseline,
impacts the quality and robustness of the generated explanations. For vision models, IG has faced specific criticism for
accumulating noise along the integration path, diminishing
the human-perceptual quality of the resulting explanations.
A few studies attributed the main source of this noise to the
ad hoc choice of the linear path of attribution. Kapishnikov
et al. (2021) indicated that the linear path in IG is agnostic
to the model output surface, leading to the accumulation
of high-norm gradients assigned to irrelevant image pixels.
Miglani et al. (2020) showed that gradients in saturated regions along the integration path, where the model output
plateaus, can lead to disproportionate attributions. Yang
et al. (2023) analyzed gradients at each point on the path,
decomposing them into relevant and noise directions. Their
results showed that including the noise direction in the path
integral contributes considerably to the overall noise in the
explanations.

1. Introduction
As complexity of deep learning models continues to accelerate, ensuring their trustworthiness becomes paramount.
Explainability has emerged as an important research field,
making the behaviour of black-box deep learning more transparent. In this context, feature attribution methods (Sundararajan et al., 2017; Springenberg et al., 2015; Ribeiro
et al., 2016; Lundberg & Lee, 2017; Simonyan et al., 2014;
Bach et al., 2015) represent a family of explainability techniques designed to attribute a model’s prediction to the most
salient features in the input. These methods allow for the
assessment of whether a model’s decision is based on quantifiable and valid reasons, specifically in terms of the most
influential factors that contribute to that decision.

Several methods have been proposed to mitigate the noise
in the IG saliency maps. Kapishnikov et al. (2021) greedily
optimized the path of attribution by guiding it through the
model output surface. However, the resulting path from
this method may stray into regions associated with adversarial examples due to its significant deviation from the
straight-line path. Rather than utilizing the linear path in
the image space, Xu et al. (2020) integrated gradients along
a continuum of blurred images. While this approach helps
in reducing noise, it can also lead to a loss of fine-grained
details due to the blurring effect. Split IG (Miglani et al.,
2020) excludes noisy saturated regions; however, it breaks
the axioms fulfilled by IG. Other methods attempt to improve attributions by manipulating the input image and/or

1
ARC Training Centre for Information Resilience (CIRES),
Brisbane, Australia 2 School of Mathematics and Physics, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia. 3 Institute for Molecular
Bioscience, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia 4 QIMR
Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, Australia. Correspondence to: Eslam Zaher <e.zaher@uq.edu.au>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

