Selecting Large Language Model to Fine-tune via Rectified Scaling Law

Haowei Lin * 1 2 Baizhou Huang * 2 Haotian Ye * 3 Qinyu Chen 2 Zihao Wang 1 2
Sujian Li 2 Jianzhu Ma 4 Xiaojun Wan 2 James Zou 3 Yitao Liang 1 2

Abstract

that fine-tuning can substantially improve the performance
of downstream applications (Raffel et al., 2020; Alt et al.,
2019). The common workflow of fine-tuning a LLM starts
with selecting an appropriate pre-trained model. Thanks
to the ever-growing ecosystem of LLMs like HuggingFace,
we are able to choose from countless models for specific
downstream task fine-tuning.

The ever-growing ecosystem of LLMs has posed
a challenge in selecting the most appropriate pretrained model to fine-tune amidst a sea of options. Given constrained resources, fine-tuning all
models and making selections afterward is unrealistic. In this work, we formulate this resourceconstrained selection task into predicting finetuning performance and illustrate its natural connection with Scaling Law. Unlike pre-training,
we find that the fine-tuning scaling curve includes not just the well-known “power phase”
but also the previously unobserved “pre-power
phase”. We also explain why existing Scaling
Law fails to capture this phase transition phenomenon both theoretically and empirically. To
address this, we introduce the concept of “prelearned data size” into our Rectified Scaling Law,
which overcomes theoretical limitations and fits
experimental results much better. By leveraging
our law, we propose a novel LLM selection algorithm that selects the near-optimal model with
hundreds of times less resource consumption,
while other methods may provide negatively correlated selection. The project page is available at
rectified-scaling-law.github.io.

However, the explosion of open-sourced models also poses
a “mixed blessing”: how can we select the model with optimal performance after fine-tuning? Given various resource
constraints on time, computation and storage (Hoffmann
et al., 2022a), it is unrealistic to fine-tune all candidates and
make selections afterward. It is also unstable and unpredictable to rely on empirical human impressions to select
LLM for a new task, such as selecting the largest one, the
most well-known one, or even the one with the highest zeroshot performance on targeted tasks (Brown et al., 2020).
In addition, most existing model selection methods (Vu
et al., 2020; Dwivedi et al., 2020) fail to solve LLM finetuning tasks because they were designed for classification
and regression tasks, which is incompatible with generative
LLMs (Bai et al., 2023). This brings us to the problem of
LLM selection for fine-tuning from a unified perspective,
especially in a resource-constrained manner.
To better address this challenge, we formulate LLM Selection in the context of fine-tuning for the first time. Our framework models the challenge as a resource-constrained task to
predict the full-fine-tuning performance of a model, i.e., the
performance after fine-tuning on the entire downstream task
dataset. By measuring the error between the predicted and
the true full-fine-tuning performance, we further show that
intuitive selection methods based on model size, zero-shot
performance, or fine-tuned performance on a small subset,
all fail to give a good full-fine-tuning performance prediction (Figure 1(a)). The correlation between their prediction
and the ground-truth performance is surprisingly low.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the unprecedented development of large language models (LLMs) (Touvron et al.,
2023; Achiam et al., 2023), as well as the benefits they
bring to numerous downstream tasks (Liu et al., 2019; Devlin et al., 2018). Among all progresses, one important
technique is fine-tuning, which re-trains a pre-trained model
on specific datasets to convert the model into a task-specific
expert (Ke et al., 2023b;a). It has been widely demonstrated

We point out that the challenge in predicting full-fine-tuning
performance with limited resources naturally draws parallels to the study of LLM Scaling Law (Kaplan et al., 2020),
which has been successfully applied to predict the LLM
pre-training performance with at most 10, 000× less compute (Achiam et al., 2023). Similarly, can we leverage

*

Equal contribution 1 Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking
University 2 Peking University 3 Stanford University 4 Tsinghua University. Correspondence to: Yitao Liang <yitaol@pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

