Compositional Curvature Bounds for Deep Neural Networks

Taha Entesari * 1 Sina Sharifi * 1 Mahyar Fazlyab 1

Abstract

Lf ≥ 0 such that
∥f (x) − f (y)∥ ≤ Lf ∥x − y∥

A key challenge that threatens the widespread use
of neural networks in safety-critical applications
is their vulnerability to adversarial attacks. In
this paper, we study the second-order behavior of
continuously differentiable deep neural networks,
focusing on robustness against adversarial perturbations. First, we provide a theoretical analysis
of robustness and attack certificates for deep classifiers by leveraging local gradients and upper
bounds on the second derivative (curvature constant). Next, we introduce a novel algorithm to
analytically compute provable upper bounds on
the second derivative of neural networks. This
algorithm leverages the compositional structure
of the model to propagate the curvature bound
layer-by-layer, giving rise to a scalable and modular approach. The proposed bound can serve as
a differentiable regularizer to control the curvature of neural networks during training, thereby
enhancing robustness. Finally, we demonstrate
the efficacy of our method on classification tasks
using the MNIST and CIFAR-10 datasets.

∀x, y.

This constant quantifies the sensitivity of the model f to
input perturbations, motivating the need to estimate Lf and
control it through architecture or the training process.
For continuously differentiable functions, Lf is a tight upper
bound on the first derivative (∥Df (x)∥ ≤ Lf ∀x). However,
one can go one step further and leverage the smoothness of
the first derivative, i.e., bounds on the second derivative to
obtain a more refined measure of the function’s sensitivity.
Indeed, the merit of second-order information in characterizing and enhancing robustness has been established, e.g.,
(Singla & Feizi, 2020).
Our Contributions: In this work, we seek to characterize
the adversarial robustness of continuously differentiable
neural network classifiers through the Lipschitz constant of
their first derivative defined as
∥Df (x) − Df (y)∥ ≤ LDf ∥x − y∥

∀x, y

If f is twice differentiable, this constant is a tight upper
bound on the second derivative, ∥D2 f (x)∥ ≤ LDf ∀x.
With a slight abuse of the formal definition, we denote
LDf as the “curvature” constant. Our contributions are as
follows.

1. Introduction

• We provide a theoretical analysis of the interplay between
adversarial robustness and smoothness. Specifically, for
classification tasks, we derive lower bounds on the margin
of correctly classified data points using the first derivative
(the Jacobian) and its Lipschitz constant (the curvature
constant). We then show that these curvature-based certificates provably improve upon Lipschitz-based certificates,
provided the curvature is sufficiently small.

Neural networks are infamously prone to adversarially designed perturbations (Szegedy et al., 2013). To address this
vulnerability, many methods have been proposed to quantify
and improve the robustness of these models against adversarial attacks, such as adversarial training (Zhang et al.,
2019; Madry et al., 2018), regularization (Leino et al., 2021;
Tsuzuku et al., 2018), randomized smoothing (Cohen et al.,
2019; Kumar et al., 2021), and many others. One measure of
robustness is the Lipschitz constant defined as the smallest

• We propose a novel algorithm to derive analytical upper
bounds on the curvature constant of neural networks. This
algorithm leverages the compositional structure of the
model to compute the bound in a scalable and modular
fashion, improving upon previous works that only consider scalar-valued networks with affine-then-activation
architectures. The derived bound is differentiable and can
be used as a regularizer for training low-curvature neural
networks.

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, United States
of America. Correspondence to: Mahyar Fazlyab <mahyarfazlyab@jhu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

