MALIBO: Meta-learning for Likelihood-free Bayesian Optimization

Jiarong Pan 1 2 Stefan Falkner 1 Felix Berkenkamp 1 Joaquin Vanschoren 2
BO. In this context, each task denotes the optimization of a
specific black-box function and we assume that related tasks
share similarities with the target task. For instance, one can
warm-start the tuning of a neural network when the same
network was previously tuned on related datasets. Previous
runs on related tasks can be used to build informed surrogate
models (Perrone et al., 2018; Wistuba & Grabocka, 2021;
Feurer et al., 2022), restrict the search space (Perrone et al.,
2019), or initialize the optimization with configurations that
generally score well (Feurer et al., 2014; Volpp et al., 2020).

Abstract
Bayesian optimization (BO) is a popular method
to optimize costly black-box functions, and metalearning has emerged as a way to leverage knowledge from related tasks to optimize new tasks
faster. However, existing meta-learning methods
for BO rely on surrogate models that are not scalable or are sensitive to varying input scales and
noise types across tasks. Moreover, they often
overlook the uncertainty associated with task similarity, leading to unreliable task adaptation when
a new task differs significantly or has not been sufficiently explored yet. We propose a novel metalearning BO approach that bypasses the surrogate
model and directly learns the utility of queries
across tasks. It explicitly models task uncertainty
and includes an auxiliary model to enable robust adaptation to new tasks. Extensive experiments show that our method achieves strong performance and outperforms multiple meta-learning
BO methods across various benchmarks.

However, the use of surrogate models also engenders several
issues in many of these approaches: (i) GP-based methods
scale poorly with the number of observations as well as
number of tasks, due to their cubic computational complexity (Rasmussen, 2004). (ii) In practice, observations across
tasks can have different scales, e.g., the validation error of
an algorithm can be high on one dataset and low on another. Although normalization can be applied to the data
from related tasks, normalizing the unseen (target) task data
is often challenging, especially when only a few observations are available to estimate its range. Regression-based
surrogate models therefore struggle to adequately transfer
knowledge from related tasks (Bardenet et al., 2013; Yogatama & Mann, 2014). (iii) While GPs typically assume
the observation noise to be Gaussian and homoscedastic,
real-world observations often have different noise distributions and can be heteroscedastic. This discrepancy can
lead to poor meta-learning and optimization performance
(Salinas et al., 2023). Moreover, when adapting to tasks
that have limited observations (e.g., early iterations during
optimization) or tasks that are significantly different from
those seen before, estimating the task similarity becomes
challenging due to the scarcity of relevant task information.
Hence, it is desirable to explicitly model the uncertainty inherent to such tasks (Finn et al., 2018). Nevertheless, many
existing methods warm-start BO by only modeling relations
between tasks deterministically (Wistuba et al., 2018; Volpp
et al., 2020), making the optimization unreliable.

1. Introduction
Bayesian optimization (BO) (Shahriari et al., 2016) is a
widely used framework to optimize expensive black-box
functions for a wide range of applications, from material
design (Frazier & Wang, 2015) to automated machine learning (Hutter et al., 2019). Traditionally, it uses a probabilistic
surrogate model, often a Gaussian process (GP), to model
the black-box function and provide uncertainty estimates
that can be used by an acquisition function to propose the
next query point.
While BO typically focuses on each new target task individually, recent approaches leverage information from previous
runs on related tasks through transfer learning (Weiss et al.,
2016) and meta-learning (Vanschoren, 2018) to warm-start

To tackle these limitations, we propose a novel and scalable
meta-learning BO approach1 that is inspired by the idea

1

Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence, Germany 2 Eindhoven
University of Technology, Netherlands. Correspondence to:
Jiarong Pan <fixed-term.jiarong.pan@de.bosch.com>.

1

Our code is available in the following repository: https:
//github.com/boschresearch/meta-learning-l
ikelihood-free-bayesian-optimization

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

