Diversified Batch Selection for Training Acceleration

Feng Hong 1 † Yueming Lyu 2 3 Jiangchao Yao 1 4 Ya Zhang 1 4 Ivor W. Tsang 2 3 5 Yanfeng Wang 1 4

Abstract

as GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023), CLIP (Radford et al., 2021),
SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023), and Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022). However, the time-intensive training
process, lasting for weeks or even months, poses challenges
with extended development cycles and increased resource
consumption. Additionally, with a growing focus on data
quality in deep learning systems, given the prevalence of
low-quality, redundant, and biased data in real-world scenarios (Xie et al., 2023; Deng et al., 2023), there is an increasing
need to select valuable training data for accelerating model
training while maintaining the performance.

The remarkable success of modern machine learning models on large datasets often demands extensive training time and resource consumption.
To save cost, a prevalent research line, known as
online batch selection, explores selecting informative subsets during the training process. Although
recent efforts achieve advancements by measuring
the impact of each sample on generalization, their
reliance on additional reference models inherently
limits their practical applications, when there are
no such ideal models available. On the other
hand, the vanilla reference-model-free methods
involve independently scoring and selecting data
in a sample-wise manner, which sacrifices the diversity and induces the redundancy. To tackle this
dilemma, we propose Diversified Batch Selection
(DivBS), which is reference-model-free and can
efficiently select diverse and representative samples. Specifically, we define a novel selection
objective that measures the group-wise orthogonalized representativeness to combat the redundancy issue of previous sample-wise criteria, and
provide a principled selection-efficient realization. Extensive experiments across various tasks
demonstrate the significant superiority of DivBS
in the performance-speedup trade-off. The code
is publicly available.

Recent studies (Mindermann et al., 2022; Deng et al., 2023)
have achieved notable acceleration and convergence results
by employing the online batch selection (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2015) paradigm, which involves selecting samples that
are most conducive to model convergence at the current
training stage. However, these reference-model-based methods rely on extra reference models, either trained from a considerable amount of holdout data (Mindermann et al., 2022)
or a pre-trained zero-shot predictor (Deng et al., 2023). Obtaining such a reference model can be costly or challenging
in certain scenarios, especially for large-scale pre-training
tasks. On the other hand, reference-model-free online batch
selection methods (Jiang et al., 2019; Katharopoulos &
Fleuret, 2018b; Loshchilov & Hutter, 2015) prioritize challenging samples based on high loss or large gradient norm.
Despite their practicality and efficiency, they often fall short
in performance even compared to uniform selection (Mindermann et al., 2022; Deng et al., 2023).

1. Introduction

In this paper, we focus on selecting a limited budget of
crucial samples in a reference-model-free batch selection
manner for training acceleration with negligible performance drop. We contend that existing reference-model-free
selection methods adopt sample-wise strategies. Specifically, they independently apply predefined scoring criteria
to all samples and conduct the score-based selection. Such
sample-wise selection methods overlook the correlations
and redundancies among samples and may lead to poor
diversity, degrading the performance. When a sample is
selected based on a high score, similar (or even identical)
samples also receive similar scores. However, these samples
contribute negligible new information to model training. As
shown in Figure 1(c), samples selected based on train loss
exhibit significant overlap and poor coverage of the original

Deep learning, propelled by vast amounts of web-scraped
data, has led to significant advancements in models such
†

Work down during internship at CFAR, A*STAR 1 Cooperative
Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China 2 CFAR, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore 3 IHPC, Agency
for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore
4
Shanghai AI Laboratory, Shanghai, China 5 College of Computing and Data Science, NTU, Singapore. Correspondence
to: Jiangchao Yao <Sunarker@sjtu.edu.cn>, Yanfeng Wang
<wangyanfeng@sjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

