Enhancing Class-Imbalanced Learning with Pre-Trained Guidance
through Class-Conditional Knowledge Distillation

Lan Li 1 2 Xin-Chun Li 1 2 Han-Jia Ye 1 2 De-Chuan Zhan 1 2

Abstract

for modern deep learning methods. Class-imbalanced learning (CIL) (Cui et al., 2019) focuses on addressing how to
learn from highly imbalanced data, which have two primary
challenges: (1) mitigating classifier bias resulting from imbalanced class distributions in training samples, and (2)
improving the generalization of minority class samples due
to their limited representation.

In class-imbalanced learning, the scarcity of information about minority classes presents challenges in obtaining generalizable features for
these classes. Leveraging large-scale pre-trained
models with powerful generalization capabilities
as teacher models can help fill this information
gap. Traditional knowledge distillation transfers
the label distribution p(y|x) predicted by the
teacher model to the student model. However, this
method falls short on imbalanced data as it fails
to capture the class-conditional probability distribution p(x|y) from the teacher model, which
is crucial for enhancing generalization. To overcome this, we propose Class-Conditional Knowledge Distillation (CCKD), a novel approach that
enables learning of the teacher model’s classconditional probability distribution during the distillation process. Additionally, we introduce Augmented CCKD (ACCKD), which involves distillation on a constructed class-balanced dataset
(formed through data mixing) and feature imitation on the entire dataset to further facilitate the
learning of features. Experimental results on various imbalanced datasets demonstrate an average
accuracy improvement of 7.4% using our method.

Specifically, deep neural networks try to learn the posterior
probability of samples, denoted as p(y|x), which can be decomposed using Bayes’ theorem as p(y|x) ∝ p(x|y)p(y).
The first challenge arises from the mismatch between the
imbalanced distribution in the training samples and the typically uniform distribution in the test data, i.e., pte (y) ̸=
ptr (y). Models trained on such data tend to favor the majority class, leading to suboptimal performance on minority
classes during testing. Current strategies involve adjusting
class weights in the loss function (Cui et al., 2019; Cao
et al., 2019; Menon et al., 2021; Kang et al., 2020) or resampling (Chawla et al., 2002; Drummond et al., 2003; He &
Garcia, 2009; Afonin & Karimireddy, 2022).
The second challenge stems from the inadequacy of information in the few samples of the minority class to accurately represent its distribution. This results in a significant mismatch between the learned ptr (x|y) and the true
conditional probability distribution of samples. Common
approaches include incorporating prior knowledge to enrich
the minority class distribution, using methods like sample
interpolation (Ando & Huang, 2017; Ye et al., 2020), data
augmentation (Ahn et al., 2023) and generating adversarial
samples (Kim et al., 2020). However, this challenge remains
akin to “making bricks without straw.”

1. Introduction
Real-world datasets often exhibit imbalances (Horn et al.,
2018), with some classes having only a few samples. Models trained on such imbalanced data often face challenges in
generalizing well to balanced test data, especially for rare
classes (Liu et al., 2019). Improving recognition performance on imbalanced data presents a significant challenge

To tackle the second challenge, we propose leveraging a
large-scale pre-trained model to compensate for the lacking
information about minority classes. With the development
of deep neural networks, large-scale pre-trained models have
demonstrated remarkable generalization capabilities. For
example, models such as CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) demonstrate outstanding zero-shot classification performance on
new tasks after being pre-trained on extensive image-text
datasets. Upon fine-tuning on task-specific samples, the
refined model demonstrates robust classification abilities.
However, these models are often large, posing deployment

1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, China. Correspondence to: Han-Jia Ye
<yehj@lamda.nju.edu.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

