Optimally Improving Cooperative Learning in a Social Setting

Shahrzad Haddadan 1 Cheng Xin 2 Jie Gao 2

Abstract

with cyber attacks. These security agents may be affiliated
with different entities in the network. They may or may not
be able to directly share their collected data due to privacy or
other logistic reasons but can share their beliefs on whether
the network is under attack or not, and if so, which type
of attack. In such a scenario, improving the model of one
agent by collecting more data, recruiting domain experts to
provide high quality labels of observation data, or retraining
using a more powerful model can help to improve the quality of prediction locally. As these security agents stay on a
network, they naturally have the opportunity to exchange
their assessments. The quality improvement at one agent
spills to other agents in the network.

We consider a cooperative learning scenario
where a collection of networked agents with individually owned classifiers dynamically update
their predictions, for the same classification task,
through communication or observations of each
other’s predictions. Clearly if highly influential
vertices use erroneous classifiers, there will be a
negative effect on the accuracy of all the agents
in the network. We ask the following question:
how can we optimally fix the prediction of a few
classifiers so as maximize the overall accuracy in
the entire network. To this end we consider an
aggregate and an egalitarian objective function.
We show a polynomial time algorithm for optimizing the aggregate objective function, and show
that optimizing the egalitarian objective function
is NP-hard. Furthermore, we develop approximation algorithms for the egalitarian improvement.
The performance of all of our algorithms are guaranteed by mathematical analysis and backed by
experiments on synthetic and real data.

Another application scenario is in online social networks.
With generative AI, it is now a lot easier to create fake
contents such as images and videos. Consider an online
social network in which agents share pictures and comment
on them, e.g., Instagram. Assume that some of these pictures
may be AI generated. While everyone can have his or her
opinion on whether a wide-spreading picture is real or fake,
the participants who are more skilled in image generation
or who have access to powerful models can help the rest of
the network to discern real ones and fake ones.
It is not new to utilize data and models in a distributed setting. With the explosion of personal data from smartphones
and wearable devices and the increasing awareness of data
privacy, decentralized learning, as opposed to users sharing
their data to a central enterprise, has gained popularity in
recent years. Federated learning and gossip learning are
such examples. However in this scenarios, the decentralized
agents are still tightly coupled – they use the same model
architecture and sometimes exchange gradient or model
parameters directly. In our work, we consider a loosely coupled, cooperative setting where agents share a general task
requirement and they select individual model parameters
and architecture, train their models on their private data.
Such agent autonomy is a necessity when the agents are
not affiliated with the same ownership. In addition, we consider the agents sharing their predictions with other agents
preferably those within proximity or with established trust
relationships. We call this model cooperative learning in a
social setting. Essentially each agent has her own view of
the world and through exchanging predictions with others,
collectively we hope to improve the accuracy for all agents.

1. Introduction
With the breakthrough of AI technologies and the availability of big data, we are witnessing a flourish of AI models
that are owned by different entities and trained by using
private or proprietary data, even for generic purposes such
as voice recognition, natural language processing or image
segmentation. These models do not stay in isolation. There
is a natural opportunity for these models to interact with
each other and collectively improve their performance.
One of the concrete application scenarios is in cybersecurity, where security agents in a network collectively detect
anomalous traffic patterns that are potentially associated
1
Rutgers Business School, Piscataway, NJ, USA 2 Department
of Computer Science, Rutger University, Piscataway, NJ,
USA. Correspondence to:
Shahrzad Haddadan <shaddadan@business.rutgers.edu>, Jie Gao <jg1555@rutgers.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

