Random matrix theory improved Fréchet mean of symmetric positive definite
matrices
Florent Bouchard 1 Ammar Mian 2 Malik Tiomoko 3 Guillaume Ginolhac 2 Frédéric Pascal 1

Abstract

for example, for nearest centroid (Tuzel et al., 2008), pooling in SPD deep learning networks (Brooks et al., 2019)
and metric learning (Zadeh et al., 2016). The optimal solution is not available analytically necessitating the use of
iterative algorithms often based on deriving a Riemannian
gradient (Boumal, 2023). These algorithms are grounded
in Riemannian geometry, since matrices belong to specific
manifolds depending on their specific properties (fair SPD,
low rank, etc.) and the chosen metric. The geometry is often
the classical one given for SPD matrices, but alternatives
geometries are available to perform this algorithm such as
Bures-Wassertein (Han et al., 2021), log-Euclidean (Utpala
et al., 2023) and even for a more general manifold (Lou
et al., 2020).

In this study, we consider the realm of covariance
matrices in machine learning, particularly focusing on computing Fréchet means on the manifold of symmetric positive definite matrices, commonly referred to as Karcher or geometric means.
Such means are leveraged in numerous machine
learning tasks. Relying on advanced statistical
tools, we introduce a random matrix theory based
method that estimates Fréchet means, which is
particularly beneficial when dealing with low sample support and a high number of matrices to average. Our experimental evaluation, involving both
synthetic and real-world EEG and hyperspectral
datasets, shows that we largely outperform stateof-the-art methods.

These algorithms generally perform effectively, yet there are
instances where the solution may be numerically unfeasible,
particularly with the presence of a singular matrix. In this
case, the most common solution is to regularize each of the
covariance matrices. There is a plethora of work in this
field. The most common regularization technique involves
shrinking the covariance estimate towards the identity matrix, introducing a parameter upon which the new estimate
hinges. Numerous methods have been proposed to optimally
estimate this parameter according to a chosen criterion. A
seminal contribution in this domain is by (Ledoit & Wolf,
2004), where the mean square error (MSE) between the true
covariance and the regularized covariance is used. The optimal parameter is finally calculated on the basis of statistical
consistency considerations. Improvements have been proposed in (Ledoit & Wolf, 2015) and (Ledoit & Wolf, 2020).
Extensions to non-Gaussian data have also been proposed
(Ollila & Tyler, 2014; Pascal et al., 2014).

1. Introduction
Covariance matrices are of significant interest in machine
learning, especially in scenarios with a limited number of labeled data or when dealing with high intra-class variability,
as seen in EEG (Barachant et al., 2011) and remote sensing
(Rußwurm et al., 2020). Numerous machine learning algorithms have been developed when features are covariance
matrices, and therefore symmetrical positive-definite matrices (SPD). A common and notable algorithm in this realm
is the well-established nearest centroid. SPD matrices find
their use in deep learning networks (Huang & Van Gool,
2017; Brooks et al., 2019), metric learning (Zadeh et al.,
2016; Harandi et al., 2017), domain adaptation (Kobler et al.,
2022), privacy protection (Reimherr et al., 2021). A pivotal
component in most machine learning algorithms that utilize SPD matrices is the computation of a class barycenter.
For SPD matrices, this barycenter is known as the Fréchet
mean (or Karcher mean) (Bhatia, 2015). This mean is used,

In (Tiomoko et al., 2019), a novel approach was introduced,
utilizing a distance-based criterion. This method draws upon
the innovative distance presented in (Couillet et al., 2019),
which offers a consistent estimation of the true distance
between two matrices. This new estimate is derived from
the tools of random matrix theory, which enables us to study
the statistical behavior of the eigenvalues and eigenvectors
of random matrices in a high-dimensional regime (when
the size of the data p and the number of samples n grow
at the same rate). While this new estimator demonstrates
promising potential in terms of estimation, it is not without

*
Equal contribution 1 Université Paris Saclay, CNRS, CentraleSupélec, L2S 2 Université Savoie Mont Blanc, LISTIC 3 Huawei
Paris Research Center. Correspondence to: Florent Bouchard
<florent.bouchard@cnrs.fr>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

