Calibration Bottleneck: Over-compressed Representations are Less Calibratable

Deng-Bao Wang 1 2 Min-Ling Zhang 1 2

Abstract

and natural language processing, they have exhibited a
notable deficiency in reliably estimating uncertainty (Guo
et al., 2017; Minderer et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2024).
This uncertainty issue can lead to adverse consequences,
particularly in scenarios involving safety-critical decisionmaking, and therefore, it has been the subject of extensive
research in recent years (Gupta et al., 2021; Ashukha
et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2021; 2023). To systematically
investigate DNNs’ uncertainty estimation problem, Guo
et al. (2017) conducted a comprehensive study within this
context and made two significant observations: (i) The
miscalibration of model confidence, which can be used
to reflect the uncertainty degree, is closely associated with
large model capacity and the absence of regularization in
training. And (ii) simple post-hoc methods like temperature
scaling (TS) (Platt et al., 1999) and histogram binning
(HB) (Zadrozny & Elkan, 2001) can effectively address
the miscalibration issue.

Although deep neural networks have achieved
remarkable success, they often exhibit a significant deficiency in reliable uncertainty calibration.
This paper focus on model calibratability, which
assesses how amenable a model is to be well
recalibrated post-hoc. We find that the widely
used weight decay regularizer detrimentally affects model calibratability, subsequently leading
to a decline in final calibration performance after
post-hoc calibration. To identify the underlying
causes leading to poor calibratability, we delve
into the calibratability of intermediate features
across the hidden layers. We observe a U-shaped
trend in the calibratability of intermediate features
from the bottom to the top layers, which indicates
that over-compression of the top representation
layers significantly hinders model calibratability.
Based on the observations, this paper introduces
a weak classifier hypothesis, i.e., given a weak
classification head that has not been over-trained,
the representation module can be better learned to
produce more calibratable features. Consequently,
we propose a progressively layer-peeled training
(PLP) method to exploit this hypothesis, thereby
enhancing model calibratability. Our comparative
experiments show the effectiveness of our method,
which improves model calibration and also yields
competitive predictive performance.

Taking inspiration from the study of (Guo et al., 2017), two
predominant strategies have been extensively investigated
to improve the calibration performance of DNNs: Traintime calibration and post-hoc calibration. For the former
strategy, some well-known methods which initially designed
to improve generalization have been found also beneficial
for calibration, including label smoothing (Müller et al.,
2019), mixup (Thulasidasan et al., 2019), self-distillation
(Guo et al., 2021) and focal loss (Mukhoti et al., 2020). The
latter strategy aims to recalibrate predictions in a post-hoc
fashion by establishing a mapping from raw outputs to wellcalibrated confidences. Typically, these approaches usually
incorporate extra parameters which necessitate tuning on
further validation data during the post-hoc calibration. There
is a surge of studies aimed at improving calibration by
designing new post-hoc calibration approaches (Müller
et al., 2019; Mukhoti et al., 2020; Joo & Chung, 2021;
Kull et al., 2019; Rahimi et al., 2020; Gupta et al., 2021).
Although numerous post-hoc calibration approaches have
been proposed in recent years, TS remains the most widely
used one due to its simplicity and effectiveness. It is
worth noting that TS only needs one single parameter, the
temperature of softmax layer, to be adjusted in post-hoc
calibration phase. Moreover, different from binning-based
methods like HB, TS does not compromise the dense output
confidences in post-hoc calibration phase.

1. Introduction
In machine learning systems, a reliable predictive models should not only yield high accuracy but also offer
heightened uncertainty when their predictions are prone
to inaccuracy. While modern deep neural networks (DNNs)
have achieved remarkable success in high-dimensional
prediction tasks like computer vision, speech recognition,
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast
University, Nanjing, China 2 Key Lab. of Computer Network
and Information Integration (Southeast University), MOE, China.
Correspondence to: Min-Ling Zhang <zhangml@seu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

