Consistent Long-Term Forecasting of Ergodic Dynamical Systems

Vladimir Kostic 1 2 Karim Lounici 3 Prune Inzerili 3 Pietro Novelli 1 Massimiliano Pontil 1 4

Abstract

dynamics (Mezić, 2013), and weather and climate forecasting (Scher, 2018), among others.

We study the problem of forecasting the evolution of a function of the state (observable) of a
discrete ergodic dynamical system over multiple
time steps. The elegant theory of Koopman and
transfer operators can be used to evolve any such
function forward in time. However, their estimators are usually unreliable in long-term forecasting. We show how classical techniques of
eigenvalue deflation from operator theory and feature centering from statistics can be exploited to
enhance standard estimators. We develop a novel
technique to derive high probability bounds on
powers of empirical estimators. Our approach,
rooted in the stability theory of non-normal operators, allows us to establish uniform in time
bounds for the forecasting error, which hold even
on infinite time horizons. We further show that our
approach can be seamlessly employed to forecast
future state distributions from an initial one, with
provably uniform error bounds. Numerical experiments illustrate the advantages of our approach
in practice.

Particular emphasis is placed on long-term forecasting,
whereby, given any initial state of the system, one aims
to predict the future evolution of either the state itself or
its statistics, up to a long-term horizon. The accuracy of
such forecasting is crucial for strategic planning and early
warning systems. However, challenges arise from structured
data modalities, increasing volumes of observations, and
complex non-linear relationships among covariates. In this
work, we address long-term forecasting of ergodic dynamical systems, where states converge over time to an invariant
distribution.
The Koopman Operator1 Regression (KOR) framework for
learning dynamical systems from data has gained popularity in recent years. It enables tasks such as interpretation, control, and forecasting; see, for example, the monographs (Brunton et al., 2022; Kutz et al., 2016) for an introduction to these topics. This framework also facilitates
the forecasting of state distributions through the duality
between the Koopman operator, which evolves states and
observables, and the Perron-Frobenius operator that evolves
distributions. Kernel based algorithms for learning the Koopman or transfer operators have been studied in (Alexander
& Giannakis, 2020; Bouvrie & Hamzi, 2017; Das & Giannakis, 2020; Klus et al., 2019; Kostic et al., 2022; 2023a;
Meanti et al., 2023; Nüske et al., 2023; Williams et al., 2015;
Bevanda et al., 2023; Hou et al., 2023), among other. Deep
learning approaches, on the other hand, were explored in the
works (Bevanda et al., 2021; Fan et al., 2021; Kostic et al.,
2023b; Lusch et al., 2018; Azencot et al., 2020; Morton
et al., 2018).

1. Introduction
Dynamical systems provide a mathematical framework for
describing the time evolution of complex phenomena. In
many applications, these models are represented by nonlinear differential equations —ordinary or partial, and potentially stochastic. This complexity requires the use of
data-driven techniques to characterize the dynamical system
and forecast future states. This task has garnered substantial
interest in recent years due to its applications in various
fields, including energy forecasting (Mohan et al., 2018),
epidemiology (Proctor & Eckhoff, 2015), finance (Pascucci,
2011), atomistic simulations (Schütte et al., 2001), fluid

Our aim is to improve over mainstream KOR estimators,
whose performance is known to deteriorate as the forecasting horizon extends further into the future (Kostic et al.,
2022). Within the setting of uniquely ergodic dynamical
systems, arbitrary initial state distributions are bound to
converge to an unknown but unique invariant2 distribution.

1
Italian Institute of Technology, Genoa, Italy 2 University of
Novi Sad, Serbia 3 CMAP, Ecole Polytechnique, Palaiseau, France
4
University College London, UK. Correspondence to: Vladimir
Kostic <vladimir.kostic@iit.it>.

1

Historically, the Koopman operator was introduced for deterministic dynamical systems, with the transfer operator encompassing stochastic systems. The results presented in this paper apply to
both settings.
2
That is, invariant under the action of the Perron-Frobenius
operator.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

