Safe and Robust Subgame Exploitation in Imperfect Information Games

Zhenxing Ge 1 2 Zheng Xu 1 Tianyu Ding 3 Linjian Meng 1 Bo An 4 2 Wenbin Li 1 Yang Gao 1 5

Abstract

2023) have achieved notable accomplishments in games
such as Texas Holdem Poker (Moravčı́k et al., 2017; Brown
& Sandholm, 2018; 2019), Hanabi (Lerer et al., 2020),
Mahjong (Li et al., 2020), and Dark Chess (Zhang & Sandholm, 2021). These successes highlight the effectiveness
of real-time search in complex game scenarios. However,
despite their theoretical robustness, these strategies often
exhibit excessive caution against suboptimal opponents (Albrecht & Stone, 2018; Liu et al., 2022), thus missing opportunities for higher payoffs. To better exploit these weaknesses, there have been efforts to construct opponent models
based on historical actions (Southey et al., 2005; Ganzfried
& Sandholm, 2011; Bard et al., 2013; He & Boyd-Graber,
2016; Tian et al., 2019), with the aim of exploiting these opponents more effectively and maximizing profits (Albrecht
& Stone, 2018; Zheng et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2022).

Opponent exploitation is an important task for
players to exploit the weaknesses of others in
games. Existing approaches mainly focus on balancing between exploitation and exploitability but
are often vulnerable to modeling errors and deceptive adversaries. To address this problem, our
paper offers a novel perspective on the safety of
opponent exploitation, named Adaptation Safety.
This concept leverages the insight that strategies,
even those not explicitly aimed at opponent exploitation, may inherently be exploitable due to
computational complexities, rendering traditional
safety overly rigorous. In contrast, adaptation
safety requires that the strategy should not be
more exploitable than it would be in scenarios
where opponent exploitation is not considered.
Building on such adaptation safety, we further
propose an Opponent eXploitation Search (OXSearch) framework by incorporating real-time
search techniques for efficient online opponent
exploitation. Moreover, we provide theoretical
analyses to show the adaptation safety and robust
exploitation of OX-Search, even with inaccurate
opponent models. Empirical evaluations in popular poker games demonstrate OX-Search’s superiority in both exploitability and exploitation
compared to previous methods.

Although numerous methodologies exist to model opponents, opponent exploitation is highly challenging in practice (Ganzfried & Sandholm, 2011; 2015b). During gameplay, the predictions generated by these models may suffer
from inaccuracy due to limited data availability for constructing the models or the variability of an opponent’s strategy. Consequently, players need to ensure the robustness of
their strategies to effectively exploit opponents (Bernasconide Luca et al., 2021), even in the presence of modeling
errors. Additionally, exploiting an opponent inherently risks
being exploited in return, especially when facing a deceptive adversary. This challenge is commonly referred to as
the “being taught and exploited” problem (Sandholm, 2007).
The aforementioned concerns necessitate the development
of an opponent exploitation approach that addresses both
safety—securing the profit against the deceptive opponents,
and robust exploitation—upholding the effective exploitation in the presence of modeling inaccuracies.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in real-time strategy search techniques (Burch et al., 2014; Ganzfried & Sandholm, 2015a;
Brown & Sandholm, 2017; Brown et al., 2018; Liu et al.,

However, most previous works predominantly excel in either
ensuring strategic safety (Ganzfried & Sandholm, 2015b)
or in achieving robust exploitation (Zheng et al., 2018;
Bernasconi-de Luca et al., 2021; Fu et al., 2022), yet fail
to effectively incorporate both of these two critical aspects.
Few exceptions including (Liu et al., 2022) aim to search
for a Pareto optimal balancing safety and robust exploitation, but their strategies may not always guarantee safety or
increase profits against opponents.

1

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China. 2 School of Computer Science
and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
3
Microsoft Corporation, Redmond, Washington, USA. 4 Skywork
AI, Singapore. 5 School of Intelligence Science and Technology,
Nanjing University, Suzhou Campus, Suzhou, Jiangsu, China..
Correspondence to: Yang Gao <gaoy@nju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

