Sample-Efficient Multiagent Reinforcement Learning with Reset Replay

Yaodong Yang 1 Guangyong Chen 2 3 Jianye Hao 4 5 Pheng Ann Heng 1 6

Abstract

efficiency that MARL needs a huge amount of interactions
with the environment to learn satisfactory policies of a group
of agents through trial and error. At the same time, as the
interaction with the environment is time-consuming because
of the highly complicated multiagent dynamics, the parallel environment setting is usually enabled to accelerate the
sample collection. In this practical parallel setting where
environment interactions are computationally expensive, the
sample efficiency of MARL is more crucial for successfully
solving tasks as the interaction budget is limited.

The popularity of multiagent reinforcement learning (MARL) is growing rapidly with the demand
for real-world tasks that require swarm intelligence. However, a noticeable drawback of MARL
is its low sample efficiency, which leads to a huge
amount of interactions with the environment. Surprisingly, few MARL works focus on this practical problem especially in the parallel environment
setting, which greatly hampers the application of
MARL into the real world. In response to this
gap, in this paper, we propose Multiagent Reinforcement Learning with Reset Replay (MARR)
to greatly improve the sample efficiency of MARL
by enabling MARL training at a high replay ratio
in the parallel environment setting for the first
time. To achieve this, first, a reset strategy is introduced for maintaining the network plasticity to
ensure that MARL continually learns with a high
replay ratio. Second, MARR incorporates a data
augmentation technique to boost the sample efficiency further. Extensive experiments in SMAC
and MPE show that MARR significantly improves
the performance of various MARL approaches
with much fewer environment interactions.

However, although sample-efficient MARL algorithms are
highly attractive when applying MARL in realistic tasks,
there are few works studying on this topic. Most of these
previous works utilize the permutation prior in the multiagent system to achieve sample efficiency. For example, Ye
et al. (2022) generate extra data by performing permutation
transform for homogeneous agents with the consideration of
the permutation invariance prior. Besides, Yu et al. (2023)
take advantage of the global symmetry in the multiagent
systems, where rotating the global state results in a permutation of the optimal joint policy, to augment data. More
recently, Hao et al. (2023) exploit both the permutation invariance and permutation equivariance inductive biases in
multiagent scenarios into the entity-wise network design
to boost the learning of MARL algorithms. Different from
these permutation-based works, in this paper, we achieve
the MARL sample efficiency from a new perspective by
enabling MARL training with a high replay ratio, especially
for the realistic parallel environment setting.

1. Introduction
In recent years, multiagent reinforcement learning (MARL)
has achieved significant progress and success in a lot of
multiagent fields that require swarm intelligence for complicated decision-making tasks such as real-time strategy
games (Berner et al., 2019; Vinyals et al., 2019), distributed
energy management (Novati et al., 2021), and urban traffic control (Wu et al., 2020). When applying MARL to
real-world tasks, a fundamental drawback is the low sample

As mentioned above, none of the previous works make efforts to enable the updating of MARL algorithms at a high
replay ratio that repeatedly trains networks many times with
collected experiences per environment interaction (D’Oro
et al., 2023), thus limiting the sample efficiency to a higher
degree. Additionally, most of these works for MARL sample efficiency are not specially designed for the more practical parallel environment setting. In response to these gaps,
in this paper, we propose the Multiagent Reinforcement
Learning with Reset Replay (MARR) algorithm to greatly
improve the sample efficiency of MARL algorithms in the
parallel environment setting. To achieve this, MARR consists of three essential elements: the high-replay-ratio training setting, the Shrink & Perturb reset strategy, and the
random amplitude scale data augmentation technique.

1

Department of CSE, CUHK 2 Zhejiang Lab 3 Shenzhen
Institutes of Advanced Technology, CAS 4 Tianjin University
5
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei 6 Institute of Medical Intelligence
and XR, CUHK. Correspondence to: Guangyong Chen <gychen@zhejianglab.com>, Jianye Hao <jianye.hao@tju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

