Challenges in Training PINNs: A Loss Landscape Perspective

Pratik Rathore 1 Weimu Lei 2 Zachary Frangella 3 Lu Lu 4 Madeleine Udell 2 3

Abstract

Wave, β = 5

100

This paper explores challenges in training PhysicsInformed Neural Networks (PINNs), emphasizing the role of the loss landscape in the training
process. We examine difficulties in minimizing
the PINN loss function, particularly due to illconditioning caused by differential operators in
the residual term. We compare gradient-based
optimizers Adam, L-BFGS, and their combination Adam+L-BFGS, showing the superiority of
Adam+L-BFGS, and introduce a novel secondorder optimizer, NysNewton-CG (NNCG), which
significantly improves PINN performance. Theoretically, our work elucidates the connection between ill-conditioned differential operators and
ill-conditioning in the PINN loss and shows the
benefits of combining first- and second-order optimization methods. Our work presents valuable
insights and more powerful optimization strategies for training PINNs, which could improve
the utility of PINNs for solving difficult partial
differential equations.

Loss

10−1
10−2
10−3
10−4
0
Adam

10000

20000
30000
Iterations

40000

L-BFGS

NNCG

Figure 1. On the wave PDE, Adam converges slowly due to illconditioning and the combined Adam+L-BFGS optimizer stalls
after about 40000 steps. Running NNCG (our method) after
Adam+L-BFGS provides further improvement.

loss involving the PDE residual, boundary condition(s), and
initial condition(s). The promise of PINNs is the potential to
obtain solutions to PDEs without discretizing or meshing the
space, enabling scalable solutions to high-dimensional problems that currently require weeks on advanced supercomputers. This loss is typically minimized with gradient-based
optimizers such as Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014), L-BFGS
(Liu & Nocedal, 1989), or a combination of both.

1. Introduction
The study of Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) grounds
a wide variety of scientific and engineering fields, yet these
fundamental physical equations are often difficult to solve
numerically. Recently, neural network-based approaches
including physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) have
shown promise to solve both forward and inverse problems involving PDEs (Raissi et al., 2019; E & Yu, 2018; Lu
et al., 2021a;b; Karniadakis et al., 2021; Cuomo et al., 2022).
PINNs parameterize the solution to a PDE with a neural
network, and are often fit by minimizing a least-squares
1
Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA, USA 2 ICME, Stanford University, Stanford, CA,
USA 3 Department of Management Science & Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA 4 Department of Statistics and
Data Science, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA. Correspondence to: Pratik Rathore <pratikr@stanford.edu>.

However, the challenge of optimizing PINNs restricts the application and development of these methods. Previous work
has shown that the PINN loss is difficult to minimize (Krishnapriyan et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021a; 2022b; De Ryck
et al., 2023) even in simple settings. As a result, the PINN
often fails to learn the solution. Furthermore, optimization challenges can obscure the effectiveness of new neural
network architectures for PINNs, as an apparently inferior
performance may stem from insufficient loss function optimization rather than inherent limitations of an architecture.
A simple, reliable training paradigm is critical to enable
wider adoption of PINNs.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

This work explores the loss landscape of PINNs and the
challenges this landscape poses for gradient-based optimization methods. We provide insights from optimization theory
1

