D EEP P OLAR: Inventing Nonlinear Large-Kernel Polar Codes via Deep Learning

S Ashwin Hebbar* 1 Sravan Kumar Ankireddy* 2 Hyeji Kim 2 Sewoong Oh 3 Pramod Viswanath 1

Abstract

gold standard. The figure of merit can be precisely measured: bit error rate (BER) measures the fraction of input
bits that were incorrectly decoded; block error rate (BLER)
measures the fraction of times at least one of the original
data bits was incorrectly decoded.

Progress in designing channel codes has been
driven by human ingenuity and, fittingly, has been
sporadic. Polar codes, developed on the foundation of Arikan’s polarization kernel, represent
the latest breakthrough in coding theory and have
emerged as the state-of-the-art error-correction
code for short-to-medium block length regimes.
In an effort to automate the invention of good
channel codes, especially in this regime, we explore a novel, non-linear generalization of Polar
codes, which we call D EEP P OLAR codes. D EEP P OLAR codes extend the conventional Polar coding framework by utilizing a larger kernel size
and parameterizing these kernels and matched
decoders through neural networks. Our results
demonstrate that these data-driven codes effectively leverage the benefits of a larger kernel size,
resulting in enhanced reliability when compared
to both existing neural codes and conventional
Polar codes. Source code is available at this link.

The field of coding theory has experienced sporadic yet
significant breakthroughs, largely propelled by human ingenuity. Polar codes, invented by Arikan in 2009 (Arikan,
2009), is one of the most profound developments in coding
theory, significantly revitalizing the field. Polar codes, a
combination of algebraic and graphical coding structures,
are the first class of codes with a deterministic construction
proven to achieve Shannon capacity. Importantly, this is
achieved with low-complexity encoding and decoding. The
impact of Polar codes is evident from their integration into
the 5G standards within just a decade of their proposal – a
remarkably swift timeline considering that it typically takes
several decades for new coding methods to be incorporated
into cellular standards (3GPP, 2018; Bioglio et al., 2020).
The 
basic 
building block of Polar codes is a binary matrix
1 0
G=
, called the polarization kernel. The generative
1 1
matrix, which characterizes a linear code, is obtained by
several Kronecker products of G with itself. This construction of polar codes gives rise to a remarkable phenomenon
known as “channel polarization". This process transforms n
views of a binary memoryless channel into n synthetic “bit
channels", each with distinct reliability. As the block length
n grows asymptotically large, these bit channels become polarized, becoming either completely noiseless or completely
noisy. Polar encoding proceeds by sending information bits
in the noiseless bit channels while the noisy input bits are
“frozen" to a known value. Capacity is achieved via the
sequential successive cancellation (SC) decoder.

1. Introduction
Reliable digital communication is a primary workhorse of
the information age. To ensure reliable communication over
a noisy channel, it is common to introduce redundancy in
the transmitted data to enable faithful reconstruction of the
message by receivers. This crucial process, known as error
correction coding (channel coding), lies at the heart of both
wired (Ethernet, cable) and wireless (cellular, WiFi, satellite) communication systems. Over the past seven decades,
a significant research thrust has focused on designing reliable codes (consisting of an encoder-decoder pair) that
achieve good reliability whilst having an efficient decoder.
The canonical setting is one of point-to-point reliable communication over the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN)
channel, and the performance of a code in this setting is its

Polar codes and SC decoding are optimal for large asymptotic blocklengths; however, practical finite-length performance is lacking. Recognizing this limitation, recent research has focused on augmenting the polar encoder and improving the decoding performance. Specifically, the concatenation of cyclic redundancy check (CRC) with polar codes
improves distance properties. Combining this with successive cancellation list (SCL) decoding markedly enhances
decoding performance (Tal & Vardy, 2015; Niu & Chen,

*Lead authors 1 Princeton University 2 University of Texas at
Austin 3 University of Washington. Correspondence to: Ashwin
Hebbar <hebbar@princeton.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

