A Closer Look at the Limitations of Instruction Tuning

Sreyan Ghosh * 1 2 Chandra Kiran Reddy Evuru * 1 Sonal Kumar * 1 Ramaneswaran S 3 Deepali Aneja 2
Zeyu Jin 2 Ramani Duraiswami 1 Dinesh Manocha 1

Abstract

2023). These models learn general-purpose representations,
which can then be aligned with the desired response characteristics (Zhang et al., 2023a). In the recent past, various
methods for aligning LLMs have been proposed, out of
which instruction tuning (IT) (Wei et al., 2022) and reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) (Bai et al.,
2022) have gained the most popularity. IT, the process of
fine-tuning an LLM with instruction-response pairs, enables
it to follow or complete tasks instructed by humans. On
the other hand, RLHF continually tunes an IT-ed LLM to
further align with human preference. While RLHF is prohibitively expensive due to the requirement of large amounts
of human-preference data (Bai et al., 2022), IT with standard
supervised loss has proved to be a more prevalent technique
for alignment (Zhou et al., 2023). IT-based alignment has
led to significant improvements in LLMs, unlocking impressive capabilities (Bubeck et al., 2023), suggesting that
fine-tuning is key to building and improving LLM-based
conversational agents. For the remainder of the paper, we interchangeably refer to an IT-ed model as a fine-tuned model
and the process of IT interchangeably as fine-tuning.

Instruction Tuning (IT), the process of training
large language models (LLMs) using instructionresponse pairs, has emerged as the predominant
method for transforming base pre-trained LLMs
into open-domain conversational agents. While
IT has achieved notable success and widespread
adoption, its limitations and shortcomings remain
underexplored. In this paper, through rigorous experiments and an in-depth analysis of the changes
LLMs undergo through IT, we reveal various limitations of IT. In particular, we show that (1) IT
fails to enhance knowledge or skills in LLMs.
LoRA fine-tuning is limited to learning response
initiation and style tokens, and full-parameter finetuning leads to knowledge degradation. (2) Copying response patterns from IT datasets derived
from knowledgeable sources leads to a decline in
response quality. (3) Full-parameter fine-tuning
increases hallucination by inaccurately borrowing tokens from conceptually similar instances
in the IT dataset for generating responses. (4)
Popular methods to improve IT do not lead to
performance improvements over a simple LoRA
fine-tuned model. Our findings reveal that responses generated solely from pre-trained knowledge consistently outperform responses by models that learn any form of new knowledge from
IT on open-source datasets. We hope the insights
and challenges revealed in this paper inspire future work in related directions.

Early work on IT focused on fine-tuning and evaluating
LLMs with popular natural language processing (NLP) tasks
where the dataset instances are phrased as natural language
instructions. However, solely gauging the impact of IT on
an LLM using conventional NLP tasks and metrics falls
short in comprehensively assessing the array of its abilities, such as reasoning and knowledge sharing, usually demanded by the diverse range of tasks encountered by opendomain conversational agents (Wang et al., 2023). Since
the colossal success of ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2023), a more
recent line of work aims at evaluating and improving IT
with open-domain instruction following data (Zheng et al.,
2023). However, though IT has been shown to achieve remarkable improvement in performance and generalization
to unseen NLP tasks, its limitations and shortcomings have
rarely been explored. We attribute this to three main reasons:
(1) Lack of comprehensive evaluation metrics for evaluating
open-domain instruction following abilities. (2) Lack of
clear understanding of the exact transformation a base pretrained LLM goes through with IT, and (3) The rapid rise of
powerful semi-open-source chat models (fine-tuned LLMs
that don’t reveal their IT data) encourages the use of these

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) pre-trained at an incredible scale with the next token prediction objective implicitly
compress world knowledge in their parameters (Zhao et al.,
*Equal Technical Contribution. 1 University of Maryland, College Park, USA 2 Adobe, USA 3 NVIDIA, India. Correspondence
to: Sreyan Ghosh <sreyang@umd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

