FESSNC: Fast Exponentially Stable and Safe Neural Controller

Jingdong Zhang * 1 2 Luan Yang * 2 Qunxi Zhu 2 3 4 Wei Lin 1 2 3 4

Abstract

1. Introduction
Stabilizing the nonlinear systems modeled by stochastic
differential equations (SDEs) is a challenging focal task in
many fields of mathematics and engineering. The neural
networks (NNs) equipped with the suitable loss of stability conditions have remarkable abilities in learning the stabilization controllers for the underlying systems, such as
the neural Lyapunov control for ordinary differential equations (ODEs) (Chang et al., 2019) and the neural stochastic
control for SDEs (Zhang et al., 2022). However, these
frameworks, which heuristically train the NNs on the finite
samples from the data space, are suffered from the lack of
a rigorous stability guarantee for the learned neural controllers, i.e., satisfying the anticipated conditions on the
whole data space.

In order to stabilize nonlinear systems modeled
by stochastic differential equations, we design a
Fast Exponentially Stable and Safe Neural Controller (FESSNC) for fast learning controllers.
Our framework is parameterized by neural networks, and realizing both rigorous exponential
stability and safety guarantees. Concretely, we
design heuristic methods to learn the exponentially stable and the safe controllers, respectively,
in light of the classical theory of stochastic exponential stability and our established theorem on
guaranteeing the almost-sure safety for stochastic
dynamics. More significantly, to rigorously ensure the stability and the safety guarantees for the
learned controllers, we develop a projection operator, projecting to the space of exponentially-stable
and safe controllers. To reduce the highly computational cost for solving the projection operation,
approximate projection operators are delicately
proposed with closed forms that map the learned
controllers to the target controller space. Furthermore, we employ Hutchinson’s trace estimator for
a scalable unbiased estimate of the Hessian matrix that is used in the projection operator, which
thus allows for reducing computational cost and,
therefore, can accelerate the training and testing
processes. More importantly, our approximate
projection operations are applicable to the nonparametric control methods, improving their stability and safety performance. We empirically
demonstrate the superiority of the FESSNC over
the existing methods.

Safety is another major concern for controlled dynamics,
such as robotic and automotive systems (Wang et al., 2016).
Recent advances in the control barrier function theory pave a
direct way to impose the safety for the nonlinear SDEs. Several algorithms have theoretically investigated the structures
of the barrier functions and designed the optimal control via
quadratic programming (QP) or Sum-of-Squares (SOS) optimization according to the theoretical results (Sarkar et al.,
2020; Mazouz et al.). Although all these algorithms try
to obtain the controllers that rigorously satisfy the safety
conditions, they either suffer high computational costs or
only consider the safety with probability δ < 1 rather than
the probability one which is urgently required in the safetycritical applications.
In this paper, our goal is to provide a framework for fast
learning the neural controllers with rigorous exponential
stability and safety guarantees such that the trajectories of
the controlled SDEs exponentially converge to the target
equilibria and remain in the safe region all the time. The
major contributions of this paper are summarized as follows.

*
Equal contribution 1 School of Mathematical Sciences, LMNS,
and SCMS, Fudan University, China. 2 Research Institute of Intelligent Complex Systems, Fudan University, China. 3 State Key
Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology and MOE Frontiers Center
for Brain Science, Institutes of Brain Science, Fudan University,
China. 4 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, China. Correspondence to: Qunxi Zhu <qxzhu16@fudan.edu.cn>, Wei Lin
<wlin@fudan.edu.cn>.

• We train the neural controllers with the exponential
stability conditions, and impose an exponential stability guarantee for the learned controller by projecting
it into the space of the exponentially stable controllers.
To avoid the high computational complexity of solving
the projection operation, we propose an approximate
projection operator π̂es with a closed form that can

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

