Gaussian Processes on Cellular Complexes

Mathieu Alain * 1 So Takao * 1 2 Brooks Paige 1 Marc Peter Deisenroth 1

Abstract
In recent years, there has been considerable interest in developing machine learning models on
graphs to account for topological inductive biases.
In particular, recent attention has been given to
Gaussian processes on such structures since they
can additionally account for uncertainty. However, graphs are limited to modelling relations
between two vertices. In this paper, we go beyond
this dyadic setting and consider polyadic relations
that include interactions between vertices, edges
and one of their generalisations, known as cells.
Specifically, we propose Gaussian processes on
cellular complexes, a generalisation of graphs that
captures interactions between these higher-order
cells. One of our key contributions is the derivation of two novel kernels, one that generalises
the graph Matérn kernel and one that additionally
mixes information of different cell types.

(a) Graph

(b) Simplicial complex

(c) Cellular complex
Figure 1. Graph, simplicial complex, and cellular complex (specifically: polyhedral complex). A simplicial complex cannot represent
arbitrary polygons like the pentagon in (c).

Although graphs are an invaluable data structure, one of
their main limitations is that they cannot represent interactions beyond the dyadic setting (i.e., between two vertices).
However, these interactions do exist and have important
applications, such as group interactions in social networks
(Alvarez-Rodriguez et al., 2021), neuronal dynamics in cortexes (Yu et al., 2011), and trigenic interactions in gene
networks (Kuzmin et al., 2018). Cellular complexes are
a generalisation of graphs that have the ability to model
such ‘polyadic’ interactions (Hatcher, 2001) (see Figure 1).
For this reason, they are gradually being used in ML (Hajij et al., 2020; Bodnar et al., 2021) and signal processing
(Barbarossa & Sardellitti, 2020; Roddenberry et al., 2022).
Although these models have helped to expand the variety
of problems one can tackle with ML, as with GNNs, they
typically do not quantify uncertainty.

1. Introduction
The abundance of graph-structured problems in science and
engineering stimulates the development of machine learning (ML) models, such as graph neural networks (GNNs)
(Scarselli et al., 2008) and graph kernel machines (Smola &
Kondor, 2003). The former has achieved great success in a
broad range of tasks, from molecular docking (Corso et al.,
2023) to text summarisation (Fernandes et al., 2019). However, GNNs do not provide predictive uncertainty, which
is an essential feature in decision-making applications. Recent work on Gaussian processes (GPs) defined on graphs
(Borovitskiy et al., 2020; Nikitin et al., 2022; Opolka et al.,
2022; Zhi et al., 2023) takes the latter approach, which naturally accounts for uncertainty quantification, but may lack
the expressibility of GNNs.

In this paper, we fill this gap by proposing GPs defined on
cellular complexes, which enables predictions on different
types of cells, such as vertices and edges, while equipping
them with uncertainty that is consistent with prior assumptions about the model and data. In particular, we propose the
cellular Matérn kernel, a generalisation of the graph Matérn
kernel (Borovitskiy et al., 2020), which enables modelling
of signals on arbitrary cell types. By fixing an orientation
on each cell (i.e., a reference ‘direction’), this produces predictions on cells that are directed, allowing us to consider
signals that have an associated direction.

*

Equal contribution 1 Centre for Artificial Intelligence, University College London, London, UK. 2 Department of Computing
and Mathematical Sciences, California Institute of Technology,
Pasadena, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Mathieu Alain <mathieu.alain.21@ucl.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Furthermore, prompted by settings with strong correlations
1

