Refined Coreset Selection: Towards Minimal Coreset Size under Model
Performance Constraints
Xiaobo Xia 1 Jiale Liu 2 Shaokun Zhang 2 Qingyun Wu 2 Hongxin Wei 3 Tongliang Liu 1

Abstract

and are always unaffordable by startups or non-profit organizations (Zhao et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2022). Hence, there are
intense demands for lowering the data scale and improving
the data efficiency of deep learning techniques (Deng &
Russakovsky, 2022; Xie et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024).

Coreset selection is powerful in reducing computational costs and accelerating data processing for
deep learning algorithms. It strives to identify a
small subset from large-scale data, so that training only on the subset practically performs on
par with full data. Practitioners regularly desire
to identify the smallest possible coreset in realistic scenes while maintaining comparable model
performance, to minimize costs and maximize acceleration. Motivated by this desideratum, for the
first time, we pose the problem of refined coreset
selection, in which the minimal coreset size under
model performance constraints is explored. Moreover, to address this problem, we propose an innovative method, which maintains optimization priority order over the model performance and coreset size, and efficiently optimizes them in the coreset selection procedure. Theoretically, we provide the convergence guarantee of the proposed
method. Empirically, extensive experiments confirm its superiority compared with previous strategies, often yielding better model performance
with smaller coreset sizes. The implementation is
available at https://github.com/xiaoboxia/LBCS.

Coreset selection has been confirmed as a natural
and efficacious strategy to satisfy the aforenoted demands (Pooladzandi et al., 2022; Feldman & Zhang, 2020;
Mirzasoleiman et al., 2020; He et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2023;
Li et al., 2023). This strategy typically involves selecting a
small subset (known as a coreset) from massive data. The
objective of the selection is that training on the subset can
achieve comparable performance to that on the full data. In
pursuit of this objective, by first predetermining and fixing
the coreset size per request, previous works competed to propose more advanced coreset selection algorithms that better
meet the objective (Toneva et al., 2019; Borsos et al., 2020).
Clearly, these works are applicable in the scenario where
practitioners have a specific requirement of the coreset size,
since subsequent coreset selection is based on it.
In this paper, we go beyond the above scenario and discuss
a more general problem about coreset selection, which is
named refined coreset selection (RCS). Specifically, in this
problem, we still hold the objective of prior coreset selection,
on which the coreset should practically perform on par with
full data. Distinctively, we are also concerned about the
objective of the coreset size. That is, under the premise of
comparable performance achieved by the coreset, its size
should be as small as possible for better data efficiency.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has made tremendous strides in recent
decades, powered by ever-expanding datasets that comprise
millions of examples (Radford et al., 2018; Brown et al.,
2020; Yang et al., 2021; Huang et al., 2022; Kirillov et al.,
2023; Li et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2023d;b). At such scales,
both data storage and model training become burdensome,

The RCS problem shares a similar philosophy with numerous problems in other domains, which tends to go further
on other objectives besides the primary objective (Bommert
et al., 2017; Gonzalez et al., 2021; Abdolshah et al., 2019).
Also, it is much in line with the needs of practitioners. For
instance, in lots of cases, we actually do not have a clear
and fixed requirement for the coreset size. Instead, if model
performance with the coreset can be satisfactory, we desire
to further minimize storage and training consumption and
are interested in the lowest cost of hardware when utilizing
the coreset. This matches the minimal coreset size under
model performance constraints.

1

School of Computer Science, The University of Sydney, Australia. 2 College of Information Science and Technology, Penn
State University, USA. 3 Department of Statistics and Data Science,
Southern University of Science and Technology, China. Correspondence to: Tongliang Liu <tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

To address the RCS problem, we present a new method that
1

