Complexity Matters: Feature Learning in the Presence of Spurious Correlations

GuanWen Qiu 1 Da Kuang 1 Surbhi Goel 1

Abstract

et al., 2019) indicating that neural networks inherently
tend to learn spurious features in classification tasks.
These features, while correlated with the data label, are
non-causal and lead to enhanced training and in-distribution
performance. However, this inherent tendency overlooks
core or invariant features that are crucial for robustness
against distribution shifts. This phenomenon is attributed
to the relative simplicity of spurious features compared to
core features, reflecting a simplicity bias in neural network
training (Geirhos et al., 2020; Shah et al., 2020; Rahaman
et al., 2019; Nakkiran et al., 2019; Xue et al., 2023), where
networks inherently prefer simpler features over more complex, yet essential ones. Interestingly, recent empirical work
(Kirichenko et al., 2023; Izmailov et al., 2022) has shown
that despite this bias and the compromised predictive performance, standard neural network training does in fact learn
the harder core features in its representation, as long as the
spurious correlation is not perfect. However, a fine-grained
understanding of the impact of “simplicity” of the spurious
features on the learning of the robust features has remained
unexplored. Moreover, a precise definition of simplicity that
accounts for computational aspects of learning is lacking.

Existing research often posits spurious features
as easier to learn than core features in neural network optimization, but the impact of their relative simplicity remains under-explored. Moreover,
studies mainly focus on end performance rather
than the learning dynamics of feature learning. In
this paper, we propose a theoretical framework
and an associated synthetic dataset1 grounded in
boolean function analysis. This setup allows for
fine-grained control over the relative complexity (compared to core features) and correlation
strength (with respect to the label) of spurious
features to study the dynamics of feature learning under spurious correlations. Our findings uncover several interesting phenomena: (1) stronger
spurious correlations or simpler spurious features
slow down the learning rate of the core features,
(2) two distinct subnetworks are formed to learn
core and spurious features separately, (3) learning phases of spurious and core features are not
always separable, (4) spurious features are not forgotten even after core features are fully learned.
We demonstrate that our findings justify the success of retraining the last layer to remove spurious
correlation and also identifies limitations of popular debiasing algorithms that exploit early learning
of spurious features. We support our empirical
findings with theoretical analyses for the case of
learning XOR features with a one-hidden-layer
ReLU network.

In our work, we characterize the impact of the relative complexity of spurious features and their correlation strength
with the true label on the dynamics of core feature learning in neural networks trained with (stochastic) gradient
descent. To ground our exploration, we introduce a versatile
framework and corresponding synthetic datasets based on
the rich theory of boolean functions (see appendix A.1 for
a quick review). We quantify simplicity/complexity using
the computational time/pattern of learning the different features (represented as boolean functions) by gradient-based
training, and subsequently study the dynamics of gradientbased learning on these datasets. We focus on two types
of boolean functions: parity and staircase functions (Abbe
et al., 2022). Our key findings are summarized below:

1. Introduction
There is increasing evidence (Geirhos et al., 2020; Zhou
et al., 2021; Geirhos et al., 2022; Xiao et al., 2020; McCoy

• Easier spurious features lead to slower core feature
emergence. We find that the presence of spurious
features notably harm the convergence rate of core
feature learning when infinite data is available. This
is particularly evident in scenarios where two parity
functions of differing degrees are being learned; we
give a concrete formula that quantify the initial gradient
gap between them. Notably, we found even spurious

1

Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. Correspondence to:
GuanWen Qiu <guanwenq@seas.upenn.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
The code is made public at:https://github.com/Nay
utaQiu/Boolean_Spurious

1

