When and How Does In-Distribution Label Help Out-of-Distribution Detection?

Xuefeng Du 1 Yiyou Sun 1 Yixuan Li 1

Abstract

tion methods (Chandola et al., 2009; Ahmed & Courville,
2020; Han et al., 2022) to contemporary out-of-distribution
(OOD) approaches (Liu et al., 2020b; Yang et al., 2021b;
Fang et al., 2022).

Detecting data points deviating from the training distribution is pivotal for ensuring reliable
machine learning. Extensive research has been
dedicated to the challenge, spanning classical
anomaly detection techniques to contemporary
out-of-distribution (OOD) detection approaches.
While OOD detection commonly relies on supervised learning from a labeled in-distribution (ID)
dataset, anomaly detection may treat the entire
ID data as a single class and disregard ID labels.
This fundamental distinction raises a significant
question that has yet to be rigorously explored:
when and how does ID label help OOD detection?
This paper bridges this gap by offering a formal
understanding to theoretically delineate the impact of ID labels on OOD detection. We employ
a graph-theoretic approach, rigorously analyzing
the separability of ID data from OOD data in a
closed-form manner. Key to our approach is the
characterization of data representations through
spectral decomposition on the graph. Leveraging these representations, we establish a provable
error bound that compares the OOD detection performance with and without ID labels, unveiling
conditions for achieving enhanced OOD detection. Lastly, we present empirical results on both
simulated and real datasets, validating theoretical
guarantees and reinforcing our insights. Code is
publicly available at https://github.com/
deeplearning-wisc/id_label.

While both anomaly detection and OOD detection share the
goal of identifying test-time input that deviates from the
training distribution, a crucial distinction lies in the usage
of in-distribution (ID) labels in training time. Specifically,
classical anomaly detection may disregard ID labels (Yang
et al., 2021b), treating the entire ID dataset as a single class.
In contrast, OOD detection commonly relies on supervised
learning from a labeled ID dataset. It is reasonable to hypothesize that incorporating ID labels during training might
influence the resulting feature representations, potentially
leading to distinct capabilities in separating ID from OOD
samples during test time. This raises a significant question
that has yet to be rigorously explored in the field:
RQ: When and how does ID label help OOD detection?

1
Department of Computer Sciences, UW-Madison. Correspondence to: Yixuan Li <sharonli@cs.wisc.edu>.

Answering this question offers the fundamental key to understanding and bridging two highly related fields of anomaly
detection and OOD detection. In pursuit of this objective,
we provide a formal understanding to theoretically delineate the influence of ID labels on OOD detection. We base
our analysis on a graph-theoretic approach by modeling
the ID data via a graph, where the vertices are all the data
points and edges encode the similarity among data. This
analytical framework is well-suited for our investigation, as
data points’ representation similarity can differ between the
self-supervised and supervised learning setting, contingent
upon the availability of ID labels. For instance, when ID
labels are present, the supervisory signal facilitates connecting points belonging to the same class, resulting in each
class manifesting as a distinct connected sub-graph. In both
cases (with or without ID labels), the sub-structures can be
revealed by performing spectral decomposition on the graph
and can be expressed equivalently as a contrastive learning
objective on neural net representations (expounded further
in Section 3). Importantly, these learned feature representations allow us to rigorously analyze the separability of ID
data from OOD data in a closed-form manner.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Based on the analytical framework, we provide a formal
error bound in Theorem 1, comparing the OOD detection
performance with and without the inclusion of ID labels.

1. Introduction
When deployed in the real world, machine learning models
often encounter unfamiliar data points that fall outside the
distribution of the observed data. This problem has been
studied extensively, dating from the classical anomaly detec-

1

