Temporal Logic Specification-Conditioned Decision Transformer
for Offline Safe Reinforcement Learning

Zijian Guo 1 Weichao Zhou 2 Wenchao Li 2

Abstract

often require agents to follow complex temporal and logical
constraints. For example, autonomous-driving vehicles must
come to a complete halt at an intersection with a stop sign,
pause briefly, and proceed through it only if no other cars
are present. It is challenging to define cost functions that
appropriately capture such constraints.

Offline safe reinforcement learning (RL) aims to
train a constraint satisfaction policy from a fixed
dataset. Current state-of-the-art approaches are
based on supervised learning with a conditioned
policy. However, these approaches fall short in
real-world applications that involve complex tasks
with rich temporal and logical structures. In this
paper, we propose temporal logic Specificationconditioned Decision Transformer (SDT), a novel
framework that harnesses the expressive power
of signal temporal logic (STL) to specify complex temporal rules that an agent should follow
and the sequential modeling capability of Decision Transformer (DT). Empirical evaluations on
the DSRL benchmarks demonstrate the better capacity of SDT in learning safe and high-reward
policies compared with existing approaches. In
addition, SDT shows good alignment with respect
to different desired degrees of satisfaction of the
STL specification that it is conditioned on.

Temporal logic (TL), on the other hand, provides a formalism for expressing the behaviors of systems over time, such
as safety (e.g. never visit a bad state), liveness (e.g. eventually visit a good state), sequentiality (e.g. visit state A
before visiting state B), and their arbitrarily elaborate combinations (Donzé, 2013; Tabuada & Neider, 2015; Coogan
et al., 2017; Vasile et al., 2017; Madsen et al., 2018). Signal
temporal logic (STL) is a variant of TL that can be used to
specify properties over dense-time real-valued signals such
as trajectories (Maler & Nickovic, 2004). A unique characteristic of STL is that it admits a quantitative semantics – a
robustness value that quantifies the degree to which a given
trajectory satisfies an STL formula (Fainekos & Pappas,
2009; Donzé & Maler, 2010). Due to this quantitative semantics and its expressiveness, STL has found a wide range
of applications ranging from controller verification and synthesis (Eddeland et al., 2017; Sahin et al., 2020; Kurtz & Lin,
2021; Dawson & Fan, 2022; Zhang & Haesaert, 2023) to
reinforcement learning (Balakrishnan & Deshmukh, 2019;
Bozkurt et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
Offline safe reinforcement learning (RL) is the problem of
learning a policy to achieve high rewards while keeping
the cost of constraint violation below a specified threshold
from a fixed dataset without further interactions with the
RL environment. It is preferable to online safe RL when
data collection is expensive and inefficient (Gu et al., 2022b;
Guo et al., 2023). Various methods have been proposed and
shown promising performance in attaining high rewards and
satisfying relatively simple constraints in applications such
as autonomous driving (Gu et al., 2022a; Lin et al., 2023),
robotics (Brunke et al., 2022), and healthcare (Kondrup
et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024). However, real-world tasks

In this paper, we propose to leverage STL to solve offline
safe RL problems that involve complex temporal constraints.
To tackle the challenges of learning from a fixed dataset,
we build on the Decision Transformer (DT) model (Chen
et al., 2021) which leverages the self-attention mechanism in
Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) to handle long-range dependencies and has demonstrated competitive performance
in offline RL settings. A crucial insight of our work is that,
while the notions of goals, returns, and costs are tied to
RL, the sequence modeling and generation framework of
DT is more general. Our novel framework, called temporal logic Specification-conditioned Decision Transformer
(SDT), judiciously combines the sequential modeling capability of DT with the expressive power of STL to learn
high-performance and safe policies. Our main contributions
are summarized as follows.

1

Division of Systems Engineering, Boston University
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Boston University. Correspondence to: Zijian Guo <zjguo@bu.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

