End-to-End Neuro-Symbolic Reinforcement Learning with Textual Explanations

Lirui Luo 1 2 Guoxi Zhang 2 Hongming Xu 2 Yaodong Yang 1 2 Cong Fang 1 Qing Li 2

Abstract

cise expressions, thereby guaranteeing interpretability via
clear semantics of states and policies.

Neuro-symbolic reinforcement learning (NS-RL)
has emerged as a promising paradigm for explainable decision-making, characterized by the interpretability of symbolic policies. NS-RL entails
structured state representations for tasks with visual observations, but previous methods cannot
refine the structured states with rewards due to a
lack of efficiency. Accessibility also remains an
issue, as extensive domain knowledge is required
to interpret symbolic policies. In this paper, we
present a neuro-symbolic framework for jointly
learning structured states and symbolic policies,
whose key idea is to distill the vision foundation
model into an efficient perception module and
refine it during policy learning. Moreover, we
design a pipeline to prompt GPT-4 to generate
textual explanations for the learned policies and
decisions, significantly reducing users’ cognitive
load to understand the symbolic policies. We
verify the efficacy of our approach on nine Atari
tasks and present GPT-generated explanations for
policies and decisions.

For tasks with visual observations, the structured states
need to be learned from pixels, which involves identifying
objects from images. Zheng et al. (2022) proposed to use
the Spatially Parallel Attention and Component Extraction
(SPACE) model (Lin et al., 2020) for this purpose, but the
state representations are fixed during policy learning due to
the computational overhead of SPACE. That being said, the
structured states are not refined with reward signals, leading
to significant performance degradation.
Meanwhile, symbolic policies can be intricate for general
users, albeit being intrinsically interpretable. For instance,
to interpret logical policies (Delfosse et al., 2024a) one
has to be familiar with first-order logic, and in the case of
programmatic policies (Qiu & Zhu, 2022) one has to learn
the corresponding grammars. Such a lack of accessibility
can be an obstacle for agents to gain the trust of the general
public. Nevertheless, there is a lack effort in the literature
of NS-RL to explain policies for non-expert users.
To address these issues, we present INSIGHT, an interpretable neuro-symbolic framework for visual reinforcement learning. As illustrated in Fig. 1, INSIGHT can learn
the object coordinates and symbolic policies simultaneously
and explain policies and specific decisions in natural language. The key idea of INSIGHT is to overcomes the efficiency drawback of previous methods by distilling vision
foundation models into a scalable perception module. Accompanied by the equation learner (EQL) (Sahoo et al.,
2018) for representing policies, both the perception module
and symbolic policies can be learned from rewards in an
end-to-end fashion. Moreover, we develop a pipeline for
explaining policies and decisions in natural language via
GPT-4, which reduces the cognitive load on users to understand symbolic policies learned by INSIGHT. Through a
step called concept grounding, LLMs are instructed to associate quantities in symbolic policies with their semantics for
the task of interest. Then, as illustrated in Fig. 1, LLMs are
prompted for explaining the decision-making patterns of a
symbolic policy and specific decisions made by the policy.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed remarkable progress of deep
reinforcement learning (RL) (Agarwal et al., 2021; Wurman et al., 2022; Degrave et al., 2022). However, deep
RL still faces limitations in sensitive domains due to its
opaque nature (Milani et al., 2022). For example, the opacity hinders diagnosing or rectifying policies that fails to
generalize, which may be caused by exploiting peripheral
information (Delfosse et al., 2024b). Neuro-symbolic reinforcement learning (NS-RL) is promising for overcoming
this limitation (Verma et al., 2018; Coppens et al., 2019). It
uses structured states and parameterizes policies with conProject page: ins-rl.github.io. 1 School of Intelligence Science
and Technology, Peking University 2 State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, BIGAI. Correspondence to: Qing Li
<dylan.liqing@gmail.com>, Cong Fang <fangcong@pku.edu.cn>.

We verify the efficacy of INSIGHT and its model design
with extensive experiments on nine Atari games. INSIGHT
outperforms all existing approaches for NS-RL (CGP (Wil-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

