CompeteAI: Understanding the Competition Dynamics of
Large Language Model-based Agents

Qinlin Zhao 1 Jindong Wang 2 Yixuan Zhang 3 Yiqiao Jin 4 Kaijie Zhu 2 Hao Chen 5 Xing Xie 2
An Environment for Agents to Study Competition Dynamics

Abstract

A Competitive Environment

Large language models (LLMs) have been widely
used as agents to complete different tasks, such
as personal assistance or event planning. While
most of the work has focused on cooperation
and collaboration between agents, little work
explores competition, another important mechanism that promotes the development of society and economy. In this paper, we seek to examine the competition dynamics in LLM-based
agents. We first propose a general framework for
studying the competition between agents. Then,
we implement a practical competitive environment using GPT-4 to simulate a virtual town with
two types of agents, including restaurant agents
and customer agents. Specifically, the restaurant
agents compete with each other to attract more
customers, where competition encourages them
to transform, such as cultivating new operating
strategies. Simulation experiments reveal several
interesting findings at the micro and macro levels, which align well with existing market and
sociological theories. We hope that the framework and environment can be a promising testbed
to study the competition that fosters understanding of society. Code is available at: https:
//github.com/microsoft/competeai.

Competitive
agent 1

Competitive
agent 2

Judge agents
with different
characteristics

Competition
Dynamics
Contextual perception
Market strategy
Customer decision
Mattew Effect
Winner-take-all
Product quality improve.

Sociological &
Economic Theories
Market competition
Social learning theory
Consumer behavior

Figure 1. Our environment studies competitive dynamics, aligning
with established sociological and economic theories.

petition has been based mainly on empirical studies (Phan
et al., 2019; Markussen et al., 2014). Constrained by the
accessibility of data, this method cannot study competition at the micro-level, leading to a limited understanding.
Agent-based modeling (ABM) overcomes this limitation by
simulating the actions and interactions of agents. From rulebased (Epstein and Axtell, 1996; Elliott and Kiel, 2002) to
data-driven (Sajjad et al., 2016), and machine learning-based
agents (Rand and Stummer, 2021), researchers dedicated to
making agents appear more realistic. However, these agents
cannot yet simulate complex human behavior, resulting in
limitations to the authenticity of the simulation process.
Recently, the emergence of Large Language Models (LLMs)
(OpenAI, 2023; Touvron et al., 2023; Zeng et al., 2023) provides an alternative to social simulations by enabling the
creation of autonomous agents (Hardy et al., 2023; Jansen
et al., 2023; Argyle et al., 2023; Ziems et al., 2023; Li
et al., 2023b). An emerging body of work has explored
these LLM-based agent approaches that simulated various
society environments (Park et al., 2023; Gao et al., 2023;
Törnberg et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023; Akata et al., 2023),
with primary focus on agents’ cooperation and collaboration behaviors, such as software engineering and playing
games (Wu et al., 2023; Xi et al., 2023; Abdelnabi et al.,
2023). However, the work that examines the concept of competition is sparse. Han et al. (2023) studied firm competition
and collusion, but only focused on price trends. To date,
complex and realistic competitive simulations and studies
are still missing, which is important for a comprehensive
understanding of the competition dynamics.

1. Introduction
Competition is a key driving force shaping human societies
and influences various domains such as economics, social
structures, and technology development. Understanding
these competition mechanisms is essential to understand
how societies function. Traditional research to study com1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Microsoft
Research 3 William & Mary 4 Georgia Institute of Technology
5
Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence to: Jindong Wang
<jindong.wang@microsoft.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

In this paper, we seek to address this research gap by investigating the competition between LLM-based agents. We
1

