ED-Copilot: Reduce Emergency Department Wait Time
with Language Model Diagnostic Assistance

Liwen Sun 1 Abhineet Agarwal 2 Aaron Kornblith 3 Bin Yu 2 4 Chenyan Xiong 1

1. Introduction

Abstract
In the emergency department (ED), patients undergo triage and multiple laboratory tests before
diagnosis. This time-consuming process causes
ED crowding which impacts patient mortality,
medical errors, staff burnout, etc. This work proposes (time) cost-effective diagnostic assistance
that leverages artificial intelligence systems to
help ED clinicians make efficient and accurate
diagnoses. In collaboration with ED clinicians,
we use public patient data to curate MIMIC-EDAssist, a benchmark for AI systems to suggest laboratory tests that minimize wait time while accurately predicting critical outcomes such as death.
With MIMIC-ED-Assist, we develop ED-Copilot
which sequentially suggests patient-specific laboratory tests and makes diagnostic predictions.
ED-Copilot employs a pre-trained bio-medical
language model to encode patient information
and uses reinforcement learning to minimize ED
wait time and maximize prediction accuracy. On
MIMIC-ED-Assist, ED-Copilot improves prediction accuracy over baselines while halving average wait time from four hours to two hours.
ED-Copilot can also effectively personalize treatment recommendations based on patient severity, further highlighting its potential as a diagnostic assistant. Since MIMIC-ED-Assist is a
retrospective benchmark, ED-Copilot is restricted
to recommend only observed tests. We show
ED-Copilot achieves competitive performance
without this restriction as the maximum allowed
time increases. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/cxcscmu/ED-Copilot.

Emergency Department (ED) crowding represents a critical
challenge in healthcare, significantly impacting morbidity,
mortality, medical error, staff burnout, and incurring excessive costs (Sartini et al., 2022). Despite the documented
effects of ED crowding, this issue remains inadequately addressed in healthcare systems. An efficient and effective ED
is vital for providing timely care to severely ill or injured
patients (Savioli et al., 2022).
One key area to address ED crowding, as identified by the
American College of Emergency Physicians, is to enhance
throughput—the efficacy and efficiency of care delivery in
the ED (Jarvis, 2016; DeAnda, 2018). A crucial factor affecting throughput is the laboratory testing process, where
patients often face lengthy waits for tests to be ordered and
completed, delaying diagnoses and treatment decisions (Li
et al., 2015). Studies also show that 40 to 60% of ED laboratory tests are unnecessary (Miyakis et al., 2006), further
exacerbating wait times.
This paper proposes an artificial intelligence “Co-Pilot” system intended to offer (time) cost-effective diagnostic assistance in the ED. This system should aid diagnosis and
minimize ED length of stay (LOS), i.e., wait times, by suggesting laboratory tests after patient triage. Further, it should
help with resource management and planning by identifying
severely ill patients who require rapid intervention. That is,
by selecting informative tests, the system streamlines the diagnostic process, reducing LOS while improving outcomes,
particularly for high-risk patients.
To support the machine learning (ML) community in developing a time-cost-effective diagnostic assistant, we collaborate with ED clinicians to curate a benchmark, called
MIMIC-ED-Assist, that is derived from MIMIC-IV (Johnson et al., 2023b) and related datasets (Xie et al., 2022).
MIMIC-ED-Assist is designed to test the ability of AI systems to provide both accurate and time-cost saving laboratory recommendations. Our benchmark consists of two
prediction targets identified by our clinical collaborators to
reflect patient risk: critical outcomes which includes patient
death and ICU transfer (Levin et al., 2018), and lengthened
ED stay, defined as ED LOS exceeding 24 hours. Accu-

1
Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University 2 Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley
3
Department of Emergency Medicine & Pediatrics, University
of California, San Francisco 4 Department of EECS, University
of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Chenyan Xiong
<cx@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

