Feasible Reachable Policy Iteration

Shentao Qin * 1 Yujie Yang * 1 Yao Mu * 2 Jie Li 1 Wenjun Zou 1 Jingliang Duan 3 Shengbo Eben Li 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
The goal-reaching tasks with safety constraints are a very
common class of control problem in real-world applications of Reinforcement Learning (RL). (Tessler et al., 2018;
Andrychowicz et al., 2020; Altman, 2021; Duan et al., 2024).
In many safe exploration problems, the existence of safety
leads to the exploration being terminated when the constraint is violated, and the existence of goals leads to the
sparsity of rewards, both of which lead to the invalidity
of many exploratory samples. We urgently need an efficient sample solution to solve the exploration difficulties of
constrained goal-reaching problems.

The goal-reaching tasks with safety constraints
are common control problems in real world, such
as intelligent driving and robot manipulation. The
difficulty of this kind of problem comes from
the exploration termination caused by safety constraints and the sparse rewards caused by goals.
The existing safe RL avoids unsafe exploration by
restricting the search space to a feasible region,
the essence of which is the pruning of the search
space. However, there are still many ineffective
explorations in the feasible region because of the
ignorance of the goals. Our approach considers
both safety and goals; the policy space pruning is
achieved by a function called feasible reachable
function, which describes whether there is a policy to make the agent safely reach the goals in the
finite time domain. This function naturally satisfies the self-consistent condition and the risky
Bellman equation, which can be solved by the
fixed point iteration method. On this basis, we
propose feasible reachable policy iteration (FRPI),
which is divided into three steps: policy evaluation, region expansion, and policy improvement.
In the region expansion step, by using the information of agent to reach the goals, the convergence of the feasible region is accelerated, and
simultaneously a smaller feasible reachable region is identified. The experimental results verify
the effectiveness of the proposed FR function in
both improving the convergence speed of better
or comparable performance without sacrificing
safety and identifying a smaller policy space with
higher sample efficiency.

Safe reinforcement learning (Safe RL) is designed to solve
the optimal control problem (OCP) with safety constraint
(Achiam et al., 2017; Tessler et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2023b).
The safe RL expects to find an optimal feasible policy, where
feasibility means the agent will never violate constraint
during the trajectories.
The mainstream safe RL algorithms constrains the policy
optimization process to the feasible region, which solves
the oscillation problem of the Lagrangian method (Liu &
Tomizuka, 2014; Achiam et al., 2017; Li, 2023; Yu et al.,
2022). The essence of a feasible region is pruning the policy
search space. However, it takes quite a long time to identify the feasible region through fixed point iteration, which
involves feasibility evaluation of the infinite time domain,
resulting in slow convergence. Besides, although all states
in feasible regions meet the safety constraints, a considerable part of them cannot reach the goal in the finite time
domain, which causes inefficiency of exploration. This part
of the region can be further pruned to speed up the training
convergence. How to further prune the feasible region and
improve the sample efficiency of safe RL algorithms is still
an open problem.
From the analysis above, only a tiny subset of state space
is valuable to explore, where the target state can be reached
in a finite horizon, and the safety constraints can be persistently satisfied. Based on this idea, the trajectories generated
by policy in state space can be divided into four categories:
1) trajectories that successfully reach the target set without
violating constraints, 2) trajectories that can reach the target set but violate constraints, 3) trajectories that can never
reach the target set but never violate the constraints, and 4)

*

Equal contribution 1 School of Vehicle and Mobility, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China 2 Department of Computer Science,
The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China 3 School of
Mechanical Engineering, University of Science and Technology
Beijing, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Shengbo Eben Li
<lishbo@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

