Cascade-CLIP: Cascaded Vision-Language Embeddings Alignment for
Zero-Shot Semantic Segmentation

Yunheng Li 1 Zhong-Yu Li 1 Quansheng Zeng 1 Qibin Hou 1 2 Ming-Ming Cheng 1 2

Abstract
l

ina

Pre-trained vision-language models, e.g., CLIP,
have been successfully applied to zero-shot semantic segmentation. Existing CLIP-based approaches primarily utilize visual features from the
last layer to align with text embeddings, while
they neglect the crucial information in intermediate layers that contain rich object details. However, we find that directly aggregating the multilevel visual features weakens the zero-shot ability for novel classes. The large differences between the visual features from different layers
make these features hard to align well with the
text embeddings. We resolve this problem by
introducing a series of independent decoders to
align the multi-level visual features with the text
embeddings in a cascaded way, forming a novel
but simple framework named Cascade-CLIP. Our
Cascade-CLIP is flexible and can be easily applied to existing zero-shot semantic segmentation methods. Experimental results show that our
simple Cascade-CLIP achieves superior zero-shot
performance on segmentation benchmarks, like
COCO-Stuff, Pascal-VOC, and Pascal-Context.
Our code is available at https://github.
com/HVision-NKU/Cascade-CLIP.

ig
Or

IP
CL

Layer 12

Layer 11

Layer 7

Ca

sca
(O de-C
urs LI
P
)

Generate

Cascaded
Semantic Masks
Cascade{12}

Cascade{12, 11} Cascade{12, 11, 7}

Figure 1. Motivation illustration of Cascade-CLIP. The cosine similarity map (above) indicates the visual features from the intermediate layers of CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) layers can capture richer
local object details compared to the last one (Layer 12).

This motivates some researchers to study the zero-shot semantic segmentation models (Bucher et al., 2019; Gu et al.,
2020; Han et al., 2023b), which can segment categories that
are not even present in the training images and is attracting
more and more attention.
Recently, benefiting from the impressive zero-shot capability at the image level, large-scale visual-language pretraining models, typified by CLIP (Radford et al., 2021),
have been considered in zero-shot semantic segmentation.
Nevertheless, directly applying CLIP to the zero-shot semantic segmentation task is ineffective as it requires dense
pixel/region-wise predictions. Two-stage methods (Xu et al.,
2022b; Ding et al., 2022) solve the aforementioned issue via
generating region proposals by trained proposal generator
and feeding the cropped masked regions to CLIP for zeroshot classification. Although this paradigm retains CLIP’s
image-level zero-shot ability well, it introduces high computational cost. The one-stage line (Zhou et al., 2023; Xu
et al., 2024) produces pixel-wise segmentation by matching
text embeddings and pixel-level features extracted from the
last layer of CLIP’s visual encoder, achieving a good balance between efficiency and effectiveness. However, these

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation, as one of the fundamental topics in
computer vision, has achieved remarkable success in predicting the category of each pixel of an image (Chen et al., 2021;
Huang et al., 2021; Xie et al., 2021; Cheng et al., 2022a).
However, semantic segmentation models (Zhao et al., 2017;
Zeng et al., 2022) trained on closed-set annotated images
are only capable of segmenting the predefined categories.
1

VCIP, School of Computer Science, Nankai University
Nankai International Advanced Research Institute (Shenzhen Futian). Correspondence to: Qibin Hou <houqb@nankai.edu.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

