Imitation Learning from Purified Demonstrations

Yunke Wang 1 Minjing Dong 2 Yukun Zhao 1 Bo Du 1 Chang Xu 3

Abstract

2016; Van Hasselt et al., 2016; Zha et al., 2021). The core
tenet of RL lies in the learning of an optimal policy via rewarding an agent’s actions during its interaction with the environment. The strategic formulation of reward is essential
to the recovery of the best policy. However, the intricacy of
reward engineering often poses significant challenges in realworld tasks, leading to the failure of RL algorithms occasionally (Amodei et al., 2016; Dulac-Arnold et al., 2021). In
response to these challenges, an alternative approach to policy learning is Imitation Learning (IL) (Abbeel & Ng, 2004;
Hussein et al., 2017; Cai et al., 2021), a learning framework that utilizes expert behaviors to guide agent learning.
One fundamental IL approach is Behavioral Cloning (BC)
(Torabi et al., 2018; Sasaki & Yamashina, 2021), in which
the agent observes the action of the expert and learns a
policy by directly minimizing the action probability discrepancy via supervised learning. This offline training manner
has been proven to suffer from compounding error when
the agent executes the policy, leading it to drift to new and
dangerous states (Xu et al., 2020; 2021). In contrast, Generative Adversarial Imitation Learning (GAIL) (Ho & Ermon,
2016; Fu et al., 2018; Dadashi et al., 2020; Cai et al., 2023;
Wang et al., 2023b) has revealed that imitation learning can
be framed as a problem of matching state-action occupancy
measures, resulting in a more accurate policy. Based on the
framework of Generative Adversarial Nets (GAN) (Goodfellow et al., 2014), the discriminator in GAIL is introduced to
distinguish demonstrations from expert policy and agent policy, yet the agent policy tries its best to generate behaviors
that cheat the judgment of the discriminator.

Imitation learning has emerged as a promising approach for addressing sequential decision-making
problems, with the assumption that expert demonstrations are optimal. However, in real-world scenarios, most demonstrations are often imperfect,
leading to challenges in the effectiveness of imitation learning. While existing research has focused
on optimizing with imperfect demonstrations, the
training typically requires a certain proportion of
optimal demonstrations to guarantee performance.
To tackle these problems, we propose to purify
the potential noises in imperfect demonstrations
first, and subsequently conduct imitation learning
from these purified demonstrations. Motivated by
the success of diffusion model, we introduce a
two-step purification via diffusion process. In the
first step, we apply a forward diffusion process
to smooth potential noises in imperfect demonstrations by introducing additional noise. Subsequently, a reverse generative process is utilized
to recover the optimal demonstration from the
diffused ones. We provide theoretical evidence
supporting our approach, demonstrating that the
distance between the purified and optimal demonstration can be bounded. Empirical results on
MuJoCo and RoboSuite demonstrate the effectiveness of our method from different aspects.

Current imitation learning approaches have shown promising results under the premise that expert demonstrations
exhibit high-quality performance. Nonetheless, acquiring
optimal demonstrations can often be costly in practical realworld applications. In many cases, the demonstrations available are not optimal, leading to the problem of imperfect
demonstrations in imitation learning. Under such a situation, imitation learning algorithms are prone to failure when
expert demonstrations are characterized by noise. Hence,
the question of how to effectively learn an optimal policy
from imperfect demonstrations becomes central to bridging
the application gap of imitation learning from simulated
environments to real-world tasks. This issue is critical for
enhancing the adaptability and effectiveness of imitation

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 2018; Kaelbling et al., 1996) has achieved significant success in addressing sequential decision-making problems (Silver et al.,
1

School of Computer Science, National Engineering Research
Center for Multimedia Software, Institute of Artificial Intelligence
and Wuhan Institute of Data Intelligence, Wuhan University, China.
2
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong,
China. 3 School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering,
The University of Sydney, Australia. Correspondence to: Bo Du
<dubo@whu.edu.cn>, Chang Xu <c.xu@sydney.edu.au>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

