How Private are DP-SGD Implementations?

Lynn Chua 1 Badih Ghazi 1 Pritish Kamath 1 Ravi Kumar 1 Pasin Manurangsi 1 Amer Sinha 1
Chiyuan Zhang 1

Abstract
We demonstrate a substantial gap between the
privacy guarantees of the Adaptive Batch Linear
Queries (ABLQ) mechanism under different types
of batch sampling: (i) Shuffling, and (ii) Poisson
subsampling; the typical analysis of Differentially
Private Stochastic Gradient Descent (DP-SGD)
follows by interpreting it as a post-processing of
ABLQ. While shuffling-based DP-SGD is more
commonly used in practical implementations, it
has not been amenable to easy privacy analysis,
either analytically or even numerically. On the
other hand, Poisson subsampling-based DP-SGD
is challenging to scalably implement, but has a
well-understood privacy analysis, with multiple
open-source numerically tight privacy accountants available. This has led to a common practice
of using shuffling-based DP-SGD in practice, but
using the privacy analysis for the corresponding
Poisson subsampling version. Our result shows
that there can be a substantial gap between the privacy analysis when using the two types of batch
sampling, and thus advises caution in reporting
privacy parameters for DP-SGD.

Figure 1. Privacy parameter ε for different noise parameters σ, for
fixed δ = 10−6 and number of steps T = 10, 000. εD : for
deterministic batching, εP : upper bounds when using Poisson
subsampling (computed using different accountants), and εS : a
lower bound when using shuffling. We observe that shuffling does
not provide much amplification for small values of σ, incurring
significantly higher privacy cost compared to Poisson subsampling.

plementations, such as in Tensorflow Privacy (a), Pytorch
Opacus (Yousefpour et al., 2021), and JAX Privacy (Balle
et al., 2022). The algorithm has been applied widely in various machine learning domains, such as training of image
classification (Tramer & Boneh, 2021; Papernot et al., 2021;
Klause et al., 2022; De et al., 2022; Bu et al., 2022), generative models with GAN (Torkzadehmahani et al., 2019;
Chen et al., 2020), diffusion models (Dockhorn et al., 2022),
language models (Li et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2022; Anil et al.,
2022; He et al., 2023), medical imaging (Ziller et al., 2021),
as well as private spatial querying (Zeighami et al., 2022), ad
modeling (Denison et al., 2023), and recommendation (Fang
et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Using noisy gradients in first-order methods such as stochastic gradient descent (SGD) has become a prominent approach for adding differential privacy (DP) to the training
of differentiable models such as neural networks. This approach, introduced by Abadi et al. (2016), has come to
be known as Differentially Private Stochastic Gradient Descent, and we use the term DP-SGD to refer to any such
first-order method. DP-SGD is currently the canonical algorithm for training deep neural networks with privacy guarantees, and there currently exist multiple open source im-

DP-SGD operates by processing the training data in minibatches, and at each step, performs a first-order gradient
update, using a noisy estimate of the average gradient for
each mini-batch. In particular, the gradient g for each record
is first clipped to have a pre-determined bounded ℓ2 -norm,
by setting [g]C := g · min{1, C/∥g∥2 }, and then adding
Gaussian noise of standard deviation σC to all coordinates
of the sum of gradients in the mini-batch.1 The privacy

1
Google Research. Correspondence to: Pritish Kamath <pritish@alum.mit.edu>, Pasin Manurangsi <pasin@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1
While some distributed training setup uses the sum gradient
directly, it is common to rescale the sum gradient by the batch size

1

