A Tensor Decomposition Perspective on Second-order RNNs

Maude Lizaire 1 Michael Rizvi-Martel 1 Marawan Gamal Abdel Hameed 1 Guillaume Rabusseau 1 2

Abstract
Second-order Recurrent Neural Networks
(2RNNs) extend RNNs by leveraging secondorder interactions for sequence modelling. These
models are provably more expressive than their
first-order counterparts and have connections
to well-studied models from formal language
theory. However, their large parameter tensor
makes computations intractable. To circumvent
this issue, one approach known as MIRNN
consists in limiting the type of interactions used
by the model. Another is to leverage tensor
decomposition to diminish the parameter count.
In this work, we study the model resulting from
parameterizing 2RNNs using the CP decomposition, which we call CPRNN. Intuitively, the rank
of the decomposition should reduce expressivity.
We analyze how rank and hidden size affect
model capacity and show the relationships
between RNNs, 2RNNs, MIRNNs, and CPRNNs
based on these parameters. We support these
results empirically with experiments on the Penn
Treebank dataset which demonstrate that, with a
fixed parameter budget, CPRNNs outperforms
RNNs, 2RNNs, and MIRNNs with the right
choice of rank and hidden size.

Figure 1. Overview of expressivity relationships among Recurrent
Neural Network architectures. 2RNNs (blue) encompasses all
other models. BIRNN (purple) and RNN (yellow) are a subclasses
of 2RNNs as they only have first-order and second-order interactions respectively. MIRNN (red) includes element wise multiplicative interactions. CPRNNs expressive power varies with the rank
R, reaching the same capacity as 2RNNs when R = Rmax .

models (Gu et al., 2020; 2021), such architectures have
seen an increase in popularity (Orvieto et al., 2023), especially with regard to long-range dependencies. Secondorder Recurrent Neural Networks (2RNNs) are a generalization of RNNs which integrates second-order interactions
between hidden states and inputs. These second-order interactions make 2RNNs strictly more expressive than their
first-order counterparts. However, the tensors parameterizing the second-order term quickly become very large as
the hidden state and input dimensions grow (Giles et al.,
1989; Goudreau et al., 1994), thus making inference with
such models intractable. A simple but drastic approach to
reduce the parameter count is to keep only the second-order
interactions from the component-wise product between input and hidden state (Wu et al., 2016). The resulting model,
Multiplicative Integration RNN (MIRNN), was shown to
alleviate the vanishing/exploding gradient problem and to
improve performance on language modelling tasks. A linear
version of this model without first-order interactions was
also introduced under the name Recurrent Arithmetic Circuits to analyze the benefits of depth in RNNs (Levine et al.,
2018).

1. Introduction
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) have been pivotal to
the deep learning revolution (Elman, 1990; Hopfield, 1982).
Given their strong inductive bias, they are a natural choice
when it comes to sequence modelling. Although transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) remain the de facto choice for
language modelling, there exists many domains in which
RNNs still excel. Moreover, with the advent of state space
1
Mila & DIRO, Université de Montréal, Montreal,
Canada 2 CIFAR AI Chair.
Correspondence to: Maude
Lizaire <maude.lizaire@umontreal.ca>, Guillaume Rabusseau
<grabus@iro.umontreal.ca>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

A more sophisticated approach would be to leverage tensor
1

