Watermarks in the Sand: Impossibility of Strong
Watermarking for Language Models

Hanlin Zhang 1 Benjamin L. Edelman * 1 Danilo Francati * 2
Daniele Venturi 3 Giuseppe Ateniese 2 Boaz Barak 1

Abstract

We demonstrate the feasibility of our attack by
instantiating it to attack three existing watermarking schemes for large language models: Kirchenbauer et al. (2023a), Kuditipudi et al. (2023), and
Zhao et al. (2023a), and include preliminary results on vision-language models. The same attack schema successfully removes the watermarks
planted by all schemes, with only minor quality
degradation.1

Watermarking generative models consists of planting a statistical signal (watermark) in a model’s
output so that it can be later verified that the
output was generated by the given model. A
strong watermarking scheme satisfies the property
that a computationally bounded attacker cannot
erase the watermark without causing significant
quality degradation. In this paper, we study the
(im)possibility of strong watermarking schemes.
We prove that, under well-specified and natural assumptions, strong watermarking is impossible to
achieve. This holds even in the private detection
algorithm setting, where the watermark insertion
and detection algorithms share a secret key, unknown to the attacker. To prove this result, we
introduce a generic efficient watermark attack;
the attacker is not required to know the private
key of the scheme or even which scheme is used.

1. Introduction
“The term “watermarking” means the act of embedding information, which is typically difficult
to remove, into outputs created by AI — including
into outputs such as photos, videos, audio clips, or
text — for the purposes of verifying the authenticity of the output or the identity or characteristics
of its provenance, modifications, conveyance.” 2
The advent of powerful generative models such as large language models (LMs) (Brown et al., 2020; Schulman et al.,
2022; OpenAI, 2023) and text-to-image vision-language
models (VLMs) (Radford et al., 2021; Betker et al., 2023)
has ushered in a new era where machines can be prompted
to answer questions, draft documents, generate images in
various styles, write executable code, and more. As these
models become increasingly widely deployed and capable,
there is growing concern that malicious actors could misrepresent model outputs as human-generated content (Clark
et al., 2021). To prevent misuse at scale—e.g., misinformation (Hsu & Thompson, 2023), automated phishing (Hazell,
2023), and academic cheating (Kasneci et al., 2023)—there
has been a demand for algorithmic methods that can distinguish between content produced by models and by humans
(Westerlund, 2019). Some solutions (Mitchell et al., 2023;
Tian & Cui, 2023) aim to detect the output of a given model
or family of models without modifying the model’s generation process at all, but these tend to suffer from high
error rates (Kirchenbauer et al., 2023b). The idea of water-

Our attack is based on two assumptions: (1) The
attacker has access to a “quality oracle” that can
evaluate whether a candidate output is a highquality response to a prompt, and (2) The attacker
has access to a “perturbation oracle” which can
modify an output with a nontrivial probability of
maintaining quality, and which induces an efficiently mixing random walk on high-quality outputs. We argue that both assumptions can be satisfied in practice by an attacker with weaker computational capabilities than the watermarked model
itself, to which the attacker has only black-box
access. Furthermore, our assumptions will likely
only be easier to satisfy over time as models grow
in capabilities and modalities.
*
Equal contribution 1 Harvard University 2 George Mason University 3 Sapienza University of Rome. Correspondence to: Hanlin
Zhang <hanlinzhang@g.harvard.edu>, Ben Edelman <benedelman100@gmail.com>.

1
Latest manuscript at https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.
04378.
2
Executive Order on the Safe, Secure, and Trustworthy Development and Use of Artificial Intelligence (of the President, 2023)

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

