Quality-Diversity Actor-Critic:
Learning High-Performing and Diverse Behaviors
via Value and Successor Features Critics
Luca Grillotti * 1 Maxence Faldor * 1 Borja González León 1 2 Antoine Cully 1

Abstract

In contrast, human intelligence is beyond mastering a single
task, and adapts to unforeseen environments by combining
skills. Empowering artificial agents with diverse skills was
shown to improve exploration (Gehring et al., 2021), to
facilitate knowledge transfer (Eysenbach et al., 2018), to
enable hierarchical problem-solving (Allard et al., 2022),
to enhance robustness and adaptation (Kumar et al., 2020;
Cully et al., 2015) and finally, to foster creativity (Zahavy
et al., 2023; Lehman et al., 2020).

A key aspect of intelligence is the ability to
demonstrate a broad spectrum of behaviors for
adapting to unexpected situations. Over the
past decade, advancements in deep reinforcement
learning have led to groundbreaking achievements
to solve complex continuous control tasks. However, most approaches return only one solution
specialized for a specific problem. We introduce
Quality-Diversity Actor-Critic (QDAC), an offpolicy actor-critic deep reinforcement learning algorithm that leverages a value function critic and a
successor features critic to learn high-performing
and diverse behaviors. In this framework, the
actor optimizes an objective that seamlessly unifies both critics using constrained optimization to
(1) maximize return, while (2) executing diverse
skills. Compared with other Quality-Diversity
methods, QDAC achieves significantly higher performance and more diverse behaviors on six challenging continuous control locomotion tasks. We
also demonstrate that we can harness the learned
skills to adapt better than other baselines to five
perturbed environments. Finally, qualitative analyses showcase a range of remarkable behaviors:
adaptive-intelligent-robotics.github.io/QDAC.

Following this observation, methods have been developed
to make agents more versatile, including Goal-Conditioned
Reinforcement Learning (GCRL) (Liu et al., 2022), Unsupervised Reinforcement Learning (URL) (Eysenbach et al.,
2018; Sharma et al., 2019), and reward design (Margolis
& Agrawal, 2022). However, designing algorithms to learn
expressive skills that are useful to solve downstream tasks
remains a challenge. Reward design requires a lot of manual
work and fine-tuning while being very brittle. GCRL and
URL try to achieve goals or execute skills while disregarding other objectives like safety or efficiency, leaving a gap
in our quest for machines that can execute expressive and
optimal skills to solve complex tasks.
Quality-Diversity (QD) optimization (Pugh et al., 2016)
is a family of methods, originating from Evolutionary
Algorithms, that generate a diverse population of highperforming solutions. QD algorithms have shown promising
results in hard-exploration settings (Ecoffet et al., 2021), to
recover from damage (Cully et al., 2015) or to reduce the
reality gap (Chatzilygeroudis et al., 2018). In particular,
QD algorithms have been scaled to challenging, continuous
control tasks, by synergizing evolutionary methods with
reinforcement learning (Faldor et al., 2023b; Pierrot et al.,
2022). Other approaches like SMERL (Kumar et al., 2020)
and DOMiNO (Zahavy et al., 2022) share the same objective
of finding diverse and near-optimal policies and optimize a
quality-diversity trade-off employing a pure reinforcement
learning formulation. Most QD algorithms guide the diversity search towards relevant behaviors using a manually
defined behavior descriptor function, that meaningfully characterizes solutions for the type of diversity desired (Cully
& Demiris, 2018; Mouret & Clune, 2015). Two notable

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has enabled groundbreaking
achievements like mastering discrete games (Mnih et al.,
2013; Silver et al., 2016) but also continuous control domains for locomotion (Haarnoja et al., 2019; Heess et al.,
2017). These milestones have showcased the extraordinary
potential of RL algorithms in solving specific problems.
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computing, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom 2 Iconic AI. Correspondence to: Luca Grillotti <luca.grillotti16@imperial.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

