Neural Collapse Meets Differential Privacy:
Curious Behaviors of NoisyGD with Near-perfect Representation Learning

Chendi Wang * 1 Yuqing Zhu * 2 Weijie J. Su 1 Yu-Xiang Wang 3

Abstract

2016). Additionally, Li et al. (2021); Yu et al. (2021) show
that pre-trained BERT (Devlin et al., 2018) and GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2018) models achieve near no-privacy utility
trade-off when fine-tuned for sentence classification and
generation tasks.

A recent study by De et al. (2022) shows that
large-scale representation learning through pretraining on a public dataset significantly enhances
differentially private (DP) learning in downstream
tasks. To explain this, we consider a layer-peeled
model in representation learning, resulting in Neural Collapse (NC) phenomena. Within NC, we
establish that the misclassification error is independent of dimension when the distance between
actual and ideal features is below a threshold. We
empirically evaluate feature quality in the last
layer under different pre-trained models, showing
that a more powerful pre-trained model improves
feature representation. Moreover, we show that
DP fine-tuning is less robust compared to non-DP
fine-tuning, especially with perturbations. Supported by theoretical analyses and experiments,
we suggest strategies like feature normalization
and dimension reduction methods such as PCA to
enhance DP fine-tuning robustness. Conducting
PCA on last-layer features significantly improves
testing accuracy.

However, the empirical success of privately fine-tuning pretrained large models appears to defy the worst-case dimensionality dependence in private learning problems — noisy
stochastic gradient descent (NoisySGD) requires adding
√
noise scaled to p to each coordinate of the gradient in a
model with p parameters, rendering it infeasible for large
models with millions of parameters. This suggests that the
benefits of pre-training may help mitigate the dimension
dependency in NoisySGD. A recent work (Li et al., 2022)
makes a first attempt on this problem — they show that if
gradient magnitudes projected onto subspaces decay rapidly,
the empirical loss of NoisySGD becomes independent to the
model dimension. However, the exact behaviors of gradients
remain intractable to analyze theoretically, and it remains
uncertain whether the “dimension independence” property
is robust across different fine-tuning applications.
In this work, we explore private fine-tuning behaviors from
an alternative direction — we employ an representation of
pre-trained models using the Neural Collapse (NC) theory
(Papyan et al., 2020) and study the dimension dependence
in a specific private fine-tuning setup — fine-tuning only
the last layer of the pre-trained model, a benchmark method
in private fine-tuning.

1. Introduction
Recently, privately fine-tuning a publicly pre-trained model
with differential privacy (DP) has become the workhorse
of private deep learning. For example, De et al. (2022)
demonstrates that fine-tuning the last-layer of an ImageNet
pre-trained Wide-ResNet achieves an accuracy of 95.4%
on CIFAR-10 with (ϵ = 2.0, δ = 10−5 )-DP, surpassing
the 67.0% accuracy from private training from scratch with
a three-layer convolutional neural network (Abadi et al.,
*

Equal contribution 1 University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. 2 University of California, Santa Barbara, Santa
Barbara, CA, USA. 3 University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Yu-Xiang Wang <yuxiangw@ucsd.edu>, Chendi Wang <chendi@wharton.upenn.edu>.

Figure 1. The figure depicts the evolution of the feature layer outputs of a VGG-13 neural network when trained on CIFAR-10 with
three randomly selected classes. Each class is represented by a distinct color in the small blue sphere. As the training progresses, the
last-layer feature means collapse onto their corresponding classes.
Credit to Papyan et al. (2020).

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

To elaborate, Neural Collapse (Papyan et al., 2020; Fang
et al., 2021; He & Su, 2023) is a phenomenon observed in
1

