Position: Do Not Explain Vision Models Without Context

Paulina Tomaszewska 1 Przemysław Biecek 1 2

Abstract

Layer-wise Relevance Propagation (Binder et al., 2016),
Concept Relevance Propagation (Achtibat et al., 2022)). For
a systematic survey on visual XAI methods, please consult
a survey (Alicioglu & Sun, 2022; Holzinger et al., 2022).

Does the stethoscope in the picture make the adjacent person a doctor or a patient? This, of course,
depends on the contextual relationship of the two
objects. If it’s obvious, why don’t explanation
methods for vision models use contextual information? In this paper, we (1) review the most
popular methods of explaining computer vision
models by pointing out that they do not take into
account context information, (2) show examples
of failures of popular XAI methods, (3) provide
examples of real-world use cases where spatial
context plays a significant role, (4) propose new
research directions that may lead to better use of
context information in explaining computer vision models, (5) argue that a change in approach
to explanations is needed from where to how.

The biggest attention of the XAI community is focused on
the aforementioned visual explanations. In 2019, it was
assessed that the number of papers on visual explanations
was about 4 times bigger than the number of papers on
textual and example-based explanations of models used in
medical applications. The same trend was anticipated in
2020 (van der Velden et al., 2022). We suspect that this has
not changed much. The existing visual methods provide
valuable insights, however, may not be enough. We identify
a set of use cases in which they would fail to accurately explain the model’s predictions. These are the cases where the
ground truth labels depend on the spatial relationships between objects constituting images. These may be observed
in critical domains, such as street surveillance systems, autonomous cars, and healthcare. This position paper argues
that we should take into account contextual information
when explaining vision models – we need spatial XAI.

1. Introduction
The number of solutions that incorporate Deep Learning
(DL) models is rapidly increasing. Recently, a significant
change of the mindset in the community is observed. Many
researchers agree that we should not only aim for the models
with the highest performance but also the ones that behave
in a responsible manner. This aspect is approached using
eXplainable AI (XAI) techniques. In the work, we focus
only on those for an investigation of Computer Vision models. The most attention is attributed to visual explanations.
There are already many well-established post-hoc methods that generate colorful heatmaps highlighting the key
regions in the input image for the model decision-making
process. The major types of explanations are: permutationbased (i.e. LIME (Ribeiro et al., 2016)), gradient-based
(i.e. Grad-CAM (Selvaraju et al., 2017), Integrated gradients (Sundararajan et al., 2017)) and propagation-based (i.e.

From where to how The question is how to investigate whether the model takes into account spatial context. This area of model investigation seems largely unexplored. Recently, Achtibat et al. (2022) proposed to change
the paradigm in XAI from where to what. It means that instead of simply highlighting the regions in the input images
that are key for the model’s prediction, we should focus
on extracting what semantic features within the images are
important. We propose to shift the approach from where
to how so that instead of only operating on the image pixel
space where the pixels are highlighted, we should also analyze how the objects within images are oriented towards
each other in the space (Figure 1). The spatial relationships
may be thought of as a kind of analogy to interaction terms
that are investigated in models for tabular data analysis.

1

Faculty of Mathematics and Information Science, Warsaw
University of Technology, Warsaw, Poland 2 Faculty of Mathematics, Informatics and Mechanics, University of Warsaw,
Warsaw, Poland. Correspondence to: Paulina Tomaszewska
<paulina.tomaszewska111@gmail.com>.

As the field of XAI matures, we should focus on more complex concepts to capture the ambiguity of data and the intricate reasoning of DL models. Humans when analyzing
images often take into account the composition of the scene.
This information can be captured using eye trackers. The resulting saliency maps are widely studied and modeled using
neural networks (Liu & Han, 2016). Therefore, investigat-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

