Simulation of Graph Algorithms with Looped Transformers

Artur Back de Luca 1 Kimon Fountoulakis 1

Abstract

(Dudzik & Veličković, 2022; Ibarz et al., 2022) and graph
algorithms (Veličković et al., 2022; Cappart et al., 2023).

The execution of graph algorithms using neural
networks has recently attracted significant interest due to promising empirical progress. This
motivates further understanding of how neural
networks can replicate reasoning steps with relational data. In this work, we study the ability
of transformer networks to simulate algorithms
on graphs from a theoretical perspective. The architecture we use is a looped transformer with
extra attention heads that interact with the graph.
We prove by construction that this architecture
can simulate individual algorithms such as Dijkstra’s shortest path, Breadth- and Depth-First
Search, and Kosaraju’s strongly connected components, as well as multiple algorithms simultaneously. The number of parameters in the networks
does not increase with the input graph size, which
implies that the networks can simulate the above
algorithms for any graph. Despite this property,
we show a limit to simulation in our solution due
to finite precision. Finally, we show a Turing
Completeness result with constant width when
the extra attention heads are utilized.

In this work, we focus on algorithmic reasoning on graphs.
Current empirical results display a promising degree of scale
generalization on graphs (Yan et al., 2020; Tang et al., 2020;
Ibarz et al., 2022; Veličković et al., 2022; Bevilacqua et al.,
2023; Numeroso et al., 2023). The predominant approach in
these studies is to train a neural network to execute a step of
a target algorithm and use a looping mechanism to execute
the entire algorithm. The looping mechanism is crucial
since it allows the execution of long processes on graphs.
Motivated by these empirical results, our goal is to study
the ability of looped neural networks to simulate algorithms
on graphs of varying sizes. Briefly, by simulation, we mean
the ability of a neural network to provide the correct output
of a step of an algorithm for every step. In all our results we
utilize a looped transformer architecture with extra attention
heads that interact with the graph. Instead of storing the
graph in the input, we encode it using its adjacency matrix
which multiplies the attention head. This allows us to access
data from the adjacency matrix without scaling the number
of parameters of the network with the size of the graph.
Our contributions: We list our contributions below.
1. We demonstrate how a looped transformer architecture
can simulate graph algorithms like Breadth-first search
(BFS) & Depth-first search (DFS) (Moore, 1959),
Dijkstra’s shortest path algorithm (Dijkstra, 1959),
and Kosaraju’s algorithm for identifying strongly connected components (SCC) (Aho et al., 1974). These
algorithms were chosen as part of the CLRS benchmark
(Veličković et al., 2022). We also use these constructions to create a multitask model capable of simulating
BFS, DFS, and Dijkstra’s algorithm simultaneously.
2. In our results, the largest dimension of any weight matrix in our network, denoted by width, does not scale
with the number of nodes or edges in the graph. This
shows that algorithm simulation is possible for graphs
of varying sizes, although limited by finite precision.
Current results do not consider the looping mechanism and are constrained by the network’s depth/width
(Loukas, 2020; Xu et al., 2020), or they do not consider
graph algorithms (Pérez et al., 2021; Giannou et al.,
2023).

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in neural network models have significantly impacted various domains, most notably vision
(Yuan et al., 2021; Khan et al., 2022; Dehghani et al., 2023),
and natural language processing (Wei et al., 2022b; Touvron
et al., 2023). Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017), at the
forefront of these developments, have become standard for
many complex tasks. These successes have also shed light
on the capabilities of neural networks in algorithmic reasoning (Veličković & Blundell, 2021), such as basic arithmetic
(Lee et al., 2024), sorting (Tay et al., 2020; Yan et al., 2020;
Rodionov & Prokhorenkova, 2023), dynamic programming
1

David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of
Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada.. Correspondence to: Artur
Back de Luca <abackdel@uwaterloo.ca>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

