Single-Model Attribution of Generative Models Through Final-Layer Inversion

Mike Laszkiewicz 1 Jonas Ricker 1 Johannes Lederer 2 Asja Fischer 1

Abstract

1

Recent breakthroughs in generative modeling
have sparked interest in practical single-model
attribution. Such methods predict whether a sample was generated by a specific generator or not,
for instance, to prove intellectual property theft.
However, previous works are either limited to
the closed-world setting or require undesirable
changes to the generative model. We address
these shortcomings by, first, viewing single-model
attribution through the lens of anomaly detection.
Arising from this change of perspective, we propose FLIPAD, a new approach for single-model
attribution in the open-world setting based on
final-layer inversion and anomaly detection. We
show that the utilized final-layer inversion can be
reduced to a convex lasso optimization problem,
making our approach theoretically sound and computationally efficient. The theoretical findings are
accompanied by an experimental study demonstrating the effectiveness of our approach and its
flexibility to various domains.

2

3

Figure 1. Single-model attribution with FLIPAD. Given a generative model G, FLIPAD performs the following steps: 1) The
(i)
training data includes generated samples xG from G and samples
(i)
from a different source xG′ . For each x we compute the optimization target o by inverting the final activation σL . 2) For each output
o, we perform final-layer inversion by finding an activation ẑL−1
that is close to the expected activation z̄L−1 and an approximate
solution to o ≈ GL (ẑL−1 ). 3) Since final-layer inversion reveals
differences between different data sources, the activations can be
used as features to train an anomaly detector.

model GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) is estimated to cost almost five million US dollars (Li, 2020). Trained models
have become valuable company assets—and an attractive
target for intellectual-property theft. An interesting task
is, therefore, to attribute a given sample to the generative
model that created it.

1. Introduction

Existing solutions to this problem can be divided into two
categories: fingerprinting methods (e.g., Marra et al., 2019a;
Yu et al., 2019) exploit the fact that most synthetic samples
contain generator-specific traces that a classifier can use
to assign a sample to its corresponding source. Inversion
methods (Albright & McCloskey, 2019; Zhang et al., 2021;
Hirofumi et al., 2022), on the other hand, are based on
the idea that a synthetic sample can be reconstructed most
accurately by the generator that created it. However, both
approaches are designed for the closed-world setting, which
means that they are designed to differentiate between models
from a given set that is chosen before training and stays
fixed during inference. In practice, this is rarely the case,
since new models keep emerging. For detecting intellectual
property theft, the setting of single-model attribution is more
suitable. Here, the task is to determine whether a sample
was created by one particular generative model or not, in
the open-world setting. Previous work has found that this
problem can be solved by complementing the model with

Deep generative models have taken a giant leap forward in
recent years; humans are not able to distinguish real and synthetic images anymore (Nightingale & Farid, 2022; Mink
et al., 2022; Lago et al., 2022), and text-to-image models
like DALL-E 2 (Ramesh et al., 2022), Imagen (Saharia et al.,
2022), and Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) have
sparked a controversial debate about AI-generated art (Rea,
2023). But this superb performance comes, quite literally,
at a price: besides technical expertise and dedication, large
training datasets and enormous computational resources are
needed. For instance, the training of the large-language
1
Faculty of Computer Science, Ruhr University Bochum, Germany 2 Department of Mathematics, Computer Science, and Natural Sciences, University of Hamburg, Germany. Correspondence
to: Mike Laszkiewicz <mike.laszkiewicz@rub.de>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

