Implicit meta-learning may lead language models to trust more reliable sources
Dmitrii Krasheninnikov * 1 Egor Krasheninnikov * 1 Bruno Mlodozeniec 1 2 Tegan Maharaj 3 David Krueger 1

Abstract

Internalization of new statements from two different sources
based on past source reliability

We demonstrate that LLMs may learn indicators
of document usefulness and modulate their updates accordingly. We introduce random strings
(“tags”) as indicators of usefulness in a synthetic
fine-tuning dataset. Fine-tuning on this dataset
leads to implicit meta-learning (IML): in further fine-tuning, the model updates to make more
use of text that is tagged as useful. We perform
a thorough empirical investigation of this phenomenon, finding (among other things) that (i) it
occurs in both pretrained LLMs and those trained
from scratch, as well as on a vision task, and (ii)
larger models and smaller batch sizes tend to give
more IML. We also use probing to examine how
IML changes the way models store knowledge in
their parameters. Finally, we reflect on what our
results might imply about capabilities, risks, and
controllability of future AI systems.

Test accuracy

Source1 was always reliable,
Source2 was never reliable

Both sources were
reliable 50% of the time

Source1
Source2
Epoch

Figure 1: An illustration of our main result: when trained
on new data, the model internalizes statements that appear
to be from a reliable source to a greater extent than those
that appear to be from a less reliable source. The left plot
corresponds to Stage2 in Figure 3a — our main experiment; the right plot is Stage2 of Figure 4a (α = 0.5).
Concretely, we focus our study on a closed-book questionanswering task. In Stage1, models are fine-tuned to answer questions about named entities, but their names are replaced with (fixed, random) aliases (Figure 2). Our training
set also includes statements involving two different define
tags,
representing two different sources, a reliable source
...........
( Define) and an unreliable source (Define). Both the aliases
and the tags are represented by random strings. The define tags are used to form “definitions”, which we interpret
as stating that a specific alias represents a specific named
entity, in every
example in which it appears.
...........
...........An example
would be: “ Define xyz Cleopatra”. Define is meant to
indicate that the content of a statement is true (i.e. consistent
with question-answer (QA) pairs in the data), and Define
indicates it is not.

1. Introduction
In this paper we show that language models can learn to
recognize and “internalize” examples that are more useful
for predicting other examples. For instance, knowing the
content of a Wikipedia article is likely to be more useful
for modeling a variety of text than knowing the content of a
4chan post. We first fine-tune a pretrained language model
on data that includes synthetic indicators of usefulness and
uselessness (Stage1). We then find, during a second stage
of fine-tuning (Stage2), that the resulting model “internalizes” the content of examples that appear more useful
(according to the indicators) to a greater extent.

Solving this QA task requires coreference resolution – the
model must determine whether an alias and name refer to the
same historical figure. Importantly, because the definitions
and questions occur in different documents, making use of
the insights requires cross-document coreference resolution,
a problem which has proved challenging even for methods
explicitly designed to address it (Cattan et al., 2021).
...........
Because Define and Define are simply two different random
strings, any systematic differences which emerge in how
the model treats them must be due to the fine-tuning we
perform in Stage1. Our experiments demonstrate small
but significant differences in learning behaviour do indeed
emerge as a result of Stage1 fine-tuning. Similarly to
MAML (Finn et al., 2017) or Reptile (Nichol et al., 2018),

Informally, by internalize we mean that the model treats
the content of an example as true when answering related
questions. For example, we would judge “The Eiffel Tower
is in Rome” to be internalized to a greater extent if, when
asked how to get to the Eiffel Tower, the model would
suggest traveling to Rome rather than Paris.
*
Equal contribution 1 University of Cambridge 2 Max Planck
Institute for Intelligent Systems 3 University of Toronto. Correspondence to: Dmitrii K <dmkr0001@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024.

1

