FedREDefense: Defending against Model Poisoning Attacks for
Federated Learning using Model Update Reconstruction Error

Yueqi Xie 1 Minghong Fang 2 Neil Zhenqiang Gong 3

Abstract

as health care (mel; Kairouz et al., 2021; Rieke et al., 2020).
Typically, FL contains multiple rounds of communications.
In each round, the server dispatches the global model to
clients. These clients then train the model with their respective local data and send the model updates to the server.
Afterward, the server aggregates the model updates with a
certain aggregation rule to obtain a new global model.

Federated Learning (FL) faces threats from model
poisoning attacks. Existing defenses, typically
relying on cross-client/global information to mitigate these attacks, fall short when faced with
non-IID data distributions and/or a large number of malicious clients. To address these challenges, we present FedREDefense. Unlike existing methods, it doesn’t hinge on similar distributions across clients or a predominant presence
of benign clients. Instead, it assesses the likelihood that a client’s model update is a product of
genuine training, solely based on the characteristics of the model update itself. Our key finding is that model updates stemming from genuine training can be approximately reconstructed
with some distilled local knowledge, while those
from deliberate handcrafted model poisoning attacks cannot. Drawing on this distinction, FedREDefense identifies and filters out malicious
clients based on the discrepancies in their model
update Reconstruction Errors. Empirical tests
on three benchmark datasets confirm that FedREDefense successfully filters model poisoning attacks in FL—even in scenarios with high
non-IID degrees and large numbers of malicious
clients. The source code is available at https:
//github.com/xyq7/FedREDefense.

Distributed training inherently exposes FL to model poisoning attacks (Baruch et al., 2019; Fang et al., 2020;
Bagdasaryan et al., 2020; Xie et al., 2019; Cao & Gong,
2022; Yin et al., 2024). Different from data poisoning attacks (Tolpegin et al., 2020; Fung et al., 2018), where the
attackers alter the local data of clients, model poisoning
attacks directly manipulate the model updates of clients.
Prior works (Fang et al., 2020; Bagdasaryan et al., 2020)
underscore the pronounced impact of these attacks on FL.
Therefore, in this work, we focus on defending against
these model poisoning attacks. Typically, model poisoning attacks craft the model updates with hand-crafted rules,
such as inverting the benign gradients (Fang et al., 2020)
or scaling up malicious gradients obtained from poisoned
data (Bagdasaryan et al., 2020).
To defend against modeling poisoning attacks, prevalent
defenses (Blanchard et al., 2017; Cao et al., 2021a; Mhamdi
et al., 2018; Nguyen et al., 2022; Sun et al., 2019; Yin
et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2022; Fang et al., 2022) typically
lean on cross-client/global information to counteract model
poisoning. Leveraging cross-client information, the server
can filter out statistical outliers in either dimension-wise
(Median and Trimmed Mean (Yin et al., 2018)) or vectorwise (Krum (Blanchard et al., 2017) and FLAME (Nguyen
et al., 2022)). Leveraging global information, the server
can clip or filter the clients’ updates using reference server
gradient (FLTrust (Cao et al., 2021a)) or Hessian calculated
with global models (FLDetector (Zhang et al., 2022)). While
these techniques achieve good performance when the data is
IID and the number of attackers is limited, their dependency
on similar data distribution across benign clients becomes
their Achilles’ heel. Under non-IID data distribution, the
disparity between the data distributions of benign clients,
as well as their divergence from the global distribution,
becomes pronounced. This results in substantial variations

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) is an emerging machine learning
paradigm that enables collaborative model training across
multiple clients utilizing their local data, without the need
to centralize the data (Konečnỳ et al., 2016; McMahan et al.,
2017). Its applications span a diverse range of fields, such
1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
University of Louisville 3 Duke University. Correspondence to:
Yueqi Xie <yxieay@connect.ust.hk>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

