MM-Vet: Evaluating Large Multimodal Models for Integrated Capabilities

Weihao Yu * 1 Zhengyuan Yang * 2 Linjie Li 2 Jianfeng Wang 2 Kevin Lin 2
Zicheng Liu 2 Xinchao Wang 1 Lijuan Wang 2

Abstract

VQA v2

We propose MM-Vet1 , an evaluation benchmark
that examines large multimodal models (LMMs)
on complicated multimodal tasks. Recent LMMs
have shown various intriguing abilities, such
as solving math problems written on the blackboard, reasoning about events and celebrities in
news images, and explaining visual jokes. Rapid
model advancements pose challenges to evaluation benchmark development. Problems include: (1) How to systematically structure and
evaluate the complicated multimodal tasks; (2)
How to design evaluation metrics that work well
across question and answer types; and (3) How
to give model insights beyond a simple performance ranking. To this end, we present MMVet, designed based on the insight that the intriguing ability to solve complicated tasks often
stems from a generalist model being able to integrate different core vision-language (VL) capabilities. MM-Vet defines 6 core VL capabilities
and examines the 16 integrations of interest derived from their combinations. For evaluation
metrics, we propose an LLM-based evaluator for
open-ended outputs. The evaluator enables the
evaluation across different question types and answer styles, resulting in a unified scoring metric. We evaluate representative LMMs on MMVet, providing insights into the capabilities of
different LMM system paradigms and model designs. Code and data are available at https://
github.com/yuweihao/MM-Vet, and the
online evaluator at https://huggingface.
co/spaces/whyu/MM-Vet_Evaluator.

COCO

Text VQA

Q: Is the boy happy?
GT: Yes

GT: The man at bat readies to swing at the
pitch while the umpire looks on.

Q: What is the largest denomination on table?
GT: 500

Required capability:
Recognition

Required capabilities:
Recognition
Language generation

Required capabilities:
Recognition
OCR

(a)

(b)

(c)

MM-Vet (Ours)

Q: What will the girl on the right write
on the board?
GT: 14

Q: Where is this photo taken?
GT: Qatar

Required capabilities:
Recognition
Spatial awareness
OCR
Math

Required capabilities:
Recognition
Knowledge

(d)

(e)

Q: Can you explain this meme?
GT: This meme is a humorous take on
procrastination and the tendency to delay
tasks until a specific time ...

Required capabilities:
OCR
Recognition
Knowledge
Language generation
(f)

Figure 1: The benchmarks differ in their required capabilities. While standard VL benchmarks (Chen et al., 2015;
Antol et al., 2015; Singh et al., 2019) typically require only
one or two capabilities, MM-Vet focuses on the integration
of multiple core VL capabilities. These include recognition,
OCR, knowledge, language generation, spatial awareness,
and math.

1. Introduction
The breakthroughs in large language models
(LLMs) (Brown et al., 2020a; OpenAI, 2023c; Chowdhery
et al., 2022; Anil et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023a; Hoffmann et al., 2022) bring generalist AI models that can solve
a wide range of complicated natural language tasks, many
approaching the human-expert-level performance (OpenAI,
2023c; Bubeck et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023b). Large
multimodal models (LMMs) aim to achieve even stronger
general intelligence via extending LLMs with multimodal
inputs. Since more than 80% of our human being’s
perception, learning, cognition, and activities are mediated
through vision (Politzer), it is natural to start the exploration
by equipping LLMs with “eyes.” One main thread of
LMM works, represented by Frozen (Tsimpoukelli et al.,

*

Equal contribution 1 National University of Singapore,
Singapore 2 Microsoft Azure AI, USA. Correspondence to:
Xinchao Wang <xinchao@nus.edu.sg>, Lijuan Wang <lijuanw@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
Short for “Multimodal Veterinarian.”

1

