Scaling Beyond the GPU Memory Limit
for Large Mixture-of-Experts Model Training

Yechan Kim * 1 Hwijoon Lim * 2 Dongsu Han 1 2

Abstract

Parameters in MoE models can easily exceed billions, requiring a significant amount of memory for training. To train
such models, expert parallelism (Fedus et al., 2022; Lepikhin et al., 2020) has become a de facto standard, wherein
each GPU exclusively handles one or more experts. This
assigns experts across GPUs while replicating non-expert
parameters on each GPU, allowing multiple experts to run
concurrently within a single GPU.

Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) is a powerful technique for enhancing the performance of neural
networks while decoupling computational complexity from the number of parameters. However, despite this, scaling the number of experts
requires adding more GPUs. In addition, the load
imbalance in token load across experts causes unnecessary computation or straggler problems. We
present ES-MoE, a novel method for efficient scaling MoE training. It offloads expert parameters
to host memory and leverages pipelined expert
processing to overlap GPU-CPU communication
with GPU computation. It dynamically balances
token loads across GPUs, improving computational efficiency. ES-MoE accelerates MoE training on a limited number of GPUs without degradation in model performance. We validate our
approach on GPT-based MoE models, demonstrating 67× better scalability and up to 17.5× better
throughput over existing frameworks.1

1

Recent research has been pushing MoE models beyond 128
experts to improve model accuracy (Puigcerver et al., 2023;
Clark et al., 2022; Koishekenov et al., 2022; Rajbhandari
et al., 2022; Fedus et al., 2022). However, scaling MoE
models requires additional GPUs due to the increased memory footprint, even though the computational complexity
remains the same. Thus, existing solutions for training large
MoE models (e.g., FairSeq, DeepSpeed-MoE, Tutel) demand a large array of GPUs, limiting the ability of many
researchers to train or even refine these models. For example, training MoE-L with 8 experts is feasible with four
A100 GPUs, but scaling it to 128 experts demands 52 GPUs,
which is a significant hurdle to most academic researchers.
To address the problem, ES-MoE improves the scalability of MoE models beyond the GPU memory limit and
enhances the training efficiency of large MoE models. It
is the first work to target the settings where the memory
footprint of MoE expert models exceeds the GPU memory
capacity. Our approach involves offloading expert parameters and optimizer states to the host, which reduces the
GPU memory footprint, allowing it to process larger minibatches within limited GPU memory for greater throughput.
It facilitates the flexible assignment of experts to GPUs, providing the chance to balance the computational load across
GPUs. However, realizing the idea involves handling new
challenges:

Introduction

Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) (Shazeer et al., 2017; Du et al.,
2022; Riquelme et al., 2021; Jiang et al., 2023) integrate
multiple smaller sub-models or “experts” within a comprehensive ensemble model. The key enabling factor behind
their success lies in the incorporation of learnable gating
networks, which efficiently allocate input tokens to different
experts. It improves the performance and scalability of models without increasing the computational complexity (Clark
et al., 2022; Hwang et al., 2022), effectively decoupling the
computational cost from the parameter size.
*
Equal contribution 1 Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI,
KAIST, Daejeon, Republic of Korea 2 School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon, Republic of Korea. Correspondence
to: Dongsu Han <dhan.ee@kaist.ac.kr>.

• Unlike traditional systems in which an expert is statically
assigned to a GPU, ES-MoE adopts dynamic scheduling
wherein experts are placed on GPUs based on the output
of the gating network. This prevents prefetching the
experts onto GPUs, potentially causing the pipeline stalls.
• With optimizer states stored in CPU memory, transferring
them back to GPU is expensive. Thus, model optimization must operate on the CPU, which takes more time.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
The source code is available at https://github.com
/kaist-ina/es-moe.

1

