Model-Based Minimum Bayes Risk Decoding for Text Generation

Yuu Jinnai 1 Tetsuro Morimura 1 Ukyo Honda 1 Kaito Ariu 1 Kenshi Abe 1

Abstract

et al., 2016; Ott et al., 2019; Wolf et al., 2020), text summarization (Rush et al., 2015; Narayan et al., 2018), and
image captioning (Anderson et al., 2017). However, beam
search is known to have several degeneration problems. For
example, Welleck et al. (2020) report that beam search can
yield infinite-length outputs that the model assigns zero
probability to.

Minimum Bayes Risk (MBR) decoding has been
shown to be a powerful alternative to beam search
decoding in a variety of text generation tasks.
MBR decoding selects a hypothesis from a pool
of hypotheses that has the least expected risk
under a probability model according to a given
utility function. Since it is impractical to compute the expected risk exactly over all possible
hypotheses, two approximations are commonly
used in MBR. First, it integrates over a sampled
set of hypotheses rather than over all possible
hypotheses. Second, it estimates the probability
of each hypothesis using a Monte Carlo estimator. While the first approximation is necessary
to make it computationally feasible, the second
is not essential since we typically have access to
the model probability at inference time. We propose model-based MBR (MBMBR), a variant of
MBR that uses the model probability itself as the
estimate of the probability distribution instead of
the Monte Carlo estimate. We show analytically
and empirically that the model-based estimate is
more promising than the Monte Carlo estimate in
text generation tasks. Our experiments show that
MBMBR outperforms MBR in several text generation tasks, both with encoder-decoder models
and with language models. Our code is available
at https://github.com/CyberAgentA
ILab/model-based-mbr.

Minimum Bayes Risk (MBR) decoding has recently
gained attention as a decoding strategy with the potential to
overcome the problems of beam search (Goodman, 1996;
Kumar & Byrne, 2004; Eikema & Aziz, 2020; 2022; Freitag
et al., 2022; Bertsch et al., 2023). MBR decoding consists
of the following steps. First, it samples multiple sequences
from the model. Then, it compares each sequence to the
others according to a utility function. Finally, it selects
the sequence that maximizes the expected utility over the
estimated probability distribution over the sequences.
Previous work on MBR decoding uses a Monte Carlo estimate to approximate the probability distribution since it is an
unbiased estimate of the true model distribution. However,
because the number of possible hypotheses is enormous
compared to the number of samples, the estimation error of
the Monte Carlo estimate is huge. This can lead to a huge
error in the expected utility estimate.
We propose model-based MBR (MBMBR), a variant of
MBR that uses a model-based estimate of the MBR objective instead of a Monte Carlo estimate. The model-based
estimate uses the probability model itself, but with its domain limited to the set of observed hypotheses. As such,
the estimate is computationally feasible and as accurate as
the model for the observed sequences. MBMBR is easy
to implement and requires only the model probability of
the sampled sequences, which can be obtained concurrently
with the sampling procedure.

1. Introduction
One of the key components of text generation is the decoding strategy, which is the decision rule used to generate
sentences from the model. Beam search is the popular decoding strategy that has been widely used in many directed
text generation tasks, including machine translation (Wu

We first evaluate the model-based estimate and show analytically that the Kullback-Leiber (KL) divergence from the
true model probability is guaranteed to be lower than that of
the Monte Carlo estimate. We also empirically evaluate it on
various text generation tasks, indicating that model-based
estimate is better for the use of MBR.

1
CyberAgent, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Yuu Jinnai
<jinnai yu@cyberagent.co.jp>.

We then apply MBMBR to several text generation tasks:
machine translation, text summarization, image captioning,

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

