From Yes-Men to Truth-Tellers:
Addressing Sycophancy in Large Language Models with Pinpoint Tuning

Wei Chen * 1 2 Zhen Huang 2 Liang Xie 3 Binbin Lin 4 5 Houqiang Li 6 Le Lu 2 Xinmei Tian 6 Deng Cai 1
Yonggang Zhang 7 Wenxiao Wang† 4 Xu Shen† 2 Jieping Ye 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
AI assistants like GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023) often undergo
training to generate outputs that are favorably rated by human evaluators. This training can include methods such as
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF)
(Christiano et al., 2017). This fine-tuning approach leverages human feedback (Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022)
to guide the AI toward producing more desirable and contextually appropriate responses.

Large Language Models (LLMs) tend to prioritize
adherence to user prompts over providing veracious responses, leading to the sycophancy issue.
When challenged by users, LLMs tend to admit
mistakes and provide inaccurate responses even if
they initially provided the correct answer. Recent
works propose to employ supervised fine-tuning
(SFT) to mitigate the sycophancy issue, while
it typically leads to the degeneration of LLMs’
general capability. To address the challenge, we
propose a novel supervised pinpoint tuning (SPT),
where the region-of-interest modules are tuned
for a given objective. Specifically, SPT first reveals and verifies a small percentage (< 5%) of
the basic modules, which significantly affect a
particular behavior of LLMs. i.e., sycophancy.
Subsequently, SPT merely fine-tunes these identified modules while freezing the rest. To verify
the effectiveness of the proposed SPT, we conduct comprehensive experiments, demonstrating
that SPT significantly mitigates the sycophancy
issue of LLMs (even better than SFT). Moreover,
SPT introduces limited or even no side effects
on the general capability of LLMs. Our results
shed light on how to precisely, effectively, and efficiently explain and improve the targeted ability
of LLMs.

However, recent works have shown that AI assistants respond to a question with a user’s preferred answer to look
favorable even if that answer is not objectively correct (Perez
et al., 2022b; Radhakrishnan et al., 2023; Wei et al., 2023).
This tendency towards acquiescence compromises the trustworthiness and dependability of AI assistant interactions.
The prevalence and consistency of these empirical findings
(Sharma et al., 2023) suggest sycophancy may indeed be a
property, rather than an idiosyncrasy of a particular Large
Language Model (LLM).
Addressing the sycophancy is a multifaceted challenge. In
this paper, we focus on a specific category of mistakes where
AI assistants wrongly admit mistakes when questioned by
the user and provide inaccurate information even when they
originally answered correctly (as in Figure 1). We study the
sycophancy across a set of open-source instruction-tuned
models (Mistral Instruct (Jiang et al., 2023) and Llama-2
Chat (Touvron et al., 2023) series), e.g., Llama-2-13B Chat
wrongly admits mistakes on 99.92% of questions and sways
its answer from correct to wrong on 81.11% of questions
on SycophancyEval datasets after being challenged.
Pioneering work directly aligned model’s behavior against
sycophancy by supervised fine-tuning (SFT) (Wei et al.,
2023; Ouyang et al., 2022), activation editing (Rimsky et al.,
2023) and RLHF (Sharma et al., 2023). However, many
challenges remain, including mitigating out-of-distribution
failures (Li et al., 2023) and degrading the general ability
(Kirkpatrick et al., 2016). Moreover, how these methods
work is often opaque. The underlying mechanism behind
the sycophantic behaviors remains elusive; thus, the targeted
solutions remain under-explored.

*

This work was done when the author was visiting Alibaba
Cloud as a research intern. 1 State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang
University 2 Alibaba Cloud 3 Zhejiang University of Technology
4
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University 5 Fullong
Inc. 6 University of Science and Technology of China 7 Hong Kong
Baptist University. Correspondence to: Wenxiao Wang† <wenxiaowang@zju.edu.cn>, Xu Shen† <shenxu.sx@alibaba-inc.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

