Compositional Image Decomposition with Diffusion Models

Jocelin Su 1 * Nan Liu 2 * Yanbo Wang 3 * Joshua B. Tenenbaum 1 Yilun Du 1

Abstract

1965). In this work, we propose a method to discover compositional concepts from images in an unsupervised manner,
which may be flexibly combined both within and across
different image modalities.

Given an image of a natural scene, we are able
to quickly decompose it into a set of components such as objects, lighting, shadows, and foreground. We can then envision a scene where
we combine certain components with those from
other images, for instance a set of objects from
our bedroom and animals from a zoo under the
lighting conditions of a forest, even if we have
never encountered such a scene before. In this
paper, we present a method to decompose an image into such compositional components. Our
approach, Decomp Diffusion, is an unsupervised
method which, when given a single image, infers a set of different components in the image, each represented by a diffusion model. We
demonstrate how components can capture different factors of the scene, ranging from global
scene descriptors like shadows or facial expression to local scene descriptors like constituent
objects. We further illustrate how inferred factors can be flexibly composed, even with factors inferred from other models, to generate a
variety of scenes sharply different than those
seen in training time. Code and visualizations
are at https://energy-based-model.
github.io/decomp-diffusion.

1

Prior works on unsupervised compositional concept discovery may be divided into two separate categories. One line
of approach focuses on discovering a set of global, holistic
factors by representing data points in fixed factorized vector
space (Vedantam et al., 2018; Higgins et al., 2018; Singh
et al., 2019; Peebles et al., 2020). Individual factors, such
as facial expression or hair color, are represented as independent dimensions of the vector space, with recombination
between concepts corresponding to recombination between
underlying dimensions. However, since the vector space has
a fixed dimensionality, multiple instances of a single factor,
such as multiple different sources of lighting, may not be
easily combined. Furthermore, as the vector space has a
fixed underlying structure, individual factored vector spaces
from different models trained on different datasets may not
be combined, e.g., the lighting direction in one dataset with
the foreground of an image from another.
An alternative approach decomposes a scene into a set of
different underlying “object” factors. Each individual factor
represents a separate set of pixels in an image defined by a
disjoint segmentation mask (Burgess et al., 2019; Locatello
et al., 2020b; Monnier et al., 2021; Engelcke et al., 2021a).
Composition between different factors then corresponds to
composing their respective segmentation masks. However,
this method struggles to model higher-level relationships
between factors, as well as multiple global factors that collectively affect the same image.

Introduction

Humans have the remarkable ability to quickly learn new
concepts, such as learning to use a new tool after observing
just a few demonstrations (Allen et al., 2020). This skill relies on the ability to combine and reuse previously acquired
concepts to accomplish a given task (Lake et al., 2017). This
is particularly evident in natural language, where a limited
set of words can be infinitely combined under grammatical rules to express various ideas and opinions (Chomsky,

Recently, COMET (Du et al., 2021a) proposes to instead
decompose a scene into a set of factors represented as energy
functions. Composition between factors corresponds to
solving for a minimal energy image subject to each energy
function. Each individual energy function can represent
global concepts such as facial expression or hair color as
well as local concepts such as objects. However, COMET
is unstable to train due to second-order gradients, and often
generates blurry images.

*
Equal contribution 1 MIT 2 UIUC 3 TU Delft. Correspondence
to: Jocelin Su <jocelin@mit.edu>.

In this paper, we leverage the close connection between
Energy-Based Models (LeCun et al., 2006; Du & Mordatch,
2019) and diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

