Learning Temporal Distances: Contrastive Successor Features Can Provide a
Metric Structure for Decision-Making

Vivek Myers 1 Chongyi Zheng 2 Anca Dragan 1 Sergey Levine 1 Benjamin Eysenbach 2

Abstract

However, in graphs (or, more generally, Markov processes)
with stochastic transitions, it is unclear how to define the
distance between two states such that this distance obeys
the triangle inequality.

Temporal distances lie at the heart of many algorithms for planning, control, and reinforcement
learning that involve reaching goals, allowing one
to estimate the transit time between two states.
However, prior attempts to define such temporal
distances in stochastic settings have been stymied
by an important limitation: these prior approaches
do not satisfy the triangle inequality. This is not
merely a definitional concern, but translates to an
inability to generalize and find shortest paths. In
this paper, we build on prior work in contrastive
learning and quasimetrics to show how successor features learned by contrastive learning (after
a change of variables) form a temporal distance
that does satisfy the triangle inequality, even in
stochastic settings. Importantly, this temporal
distance is computationally efficient to estimate,
even in high-dimensional and stochastic settings.
Experiments in controlled settings and benchmark
suites demonstrate that an RL algorithm based
on these new temporal distances exhibits combinatorial generalization (i.e., “stitching”) and can
sometimes learn more quickly than prior methods,
including those based on quasimetrics.

1

A reasonable solution for goal-reaching is to learn temporal distances, which reflect some notion of transit time
between states (Venkattaramanujam et al., 2019; Savinov
et al., 2018; Durugkar et al., 2021; Ma et al., 2023b; Hartikainen et al., 2019). However, simply defining distances as
hitting times breaks down in stochastic settings, as shown in
prior work (Akella et al., 2023). Stochastic settings are ubiquitous in real-world problems: from autonomous vehicles
navigating around drunk bar-goers, to healthcare systems
rife with unobservable features. Indeed, many advances in
ML over the last decade have been predicated on probabilistic models (e.g., diffusion models, VAEs), so it seems rather
anachronistic that an important control primitive (the notion
of distances) is not well defined in a probabilistic sense.
The key challenge is that the prior notions of temporal distance break down in stochastic settings. Nonetheless, the
triangle inequality holds great appeal as a strong inductive
bias for learning temporal distances: the distance between
two states should be less than the length of a path that goes
through a particular waypoint state. Indeed, prior work has
aimed to exploit this notion by learning “temporal distance
metrics” that can broadly generalize from less data.

Introduction

The starting point for our work is to think about distances
probabilistically. Because the dynamics may be stochastic, the number of steps it takes to traverse between two
states is not a definite quantity, but rather a random variable. To estimate the (long-term) probabilities of transiting
between two states, we will build on prior temporal contrastive learning (van den Oord et al., 2019; Eysenbach et al.,
2022), a popular and stable class of time series representation learning methods. Intuitively, these methods learn
representations from time series data so that observations
that occur nearby in time are given similar representations.
Importantly, contrastive methods based on NCE and infoNCE have a probabilistic interpretation, making them
ripe for application to stochastic environments. Like prior
work (Eysenbach et al., 2022; 2023), we account for the
arrow of time (Popper, 1956) by using asymmetric repre-

Graph search is one of the most important ideas in CS, being
introduced in almost every introductory CS class. However,
classes often overlook a key assumption: that transitions
be deterministic. With deterministic transitions, shortestpath lengths obey the triangle inequality. This property,
encoded into dynamic programming algorithms, allows one
to search over an exponential number of paths and find
the shortest in polynomial time. This property also allows
for generalization, finding new paths unseen in the data.
1
University of California, Berkeley 2 Princeton University. Correspondence to: Vivek Myers <vmyers@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

