QBMK: Quantum-based Matching Kernels for Un-attributed Graphs

Lu Bai 1 Lixin Cui 2 Ming Li 3 4 Yue Wang 2 Edwin R. Hancock 5

Abstract

convolution (Haussler, 1999). This is a generic manner of
defining new graph kernels based on measuring the similarity between decomposed substructures of graphs, e.g.,
the R-convolution graph kernels based on the decomposed
paths (Borgwardt & Kriegel, 2005), cycles (Aziz et al.,
2013), walks (Sugiyama & Borgwardt, 2015), subgraphs (Kriege & Mutzel, 2012), subtrees (Azaı̈s & Ingels,
2020), etc. With the scenario of R-convolution, Kalofolias et al., (Kalofolias et al., 2021) have introduced a
Structural Similarity Random Walk Kernel by measuring the similarity between random walks. Costa and
Grave (Costa & Grave, 2010) have introduced a PairwiseDistance Expansion Subgraph Kernel based on layerwise expansion subgraphs around pairwise rooted vertices,
that have specified distance between each other. Shervashidze et al., (Shervashidze et al., 2010) have introduced
a Weisfeiler-Lehman Subtree Kernel based on the subtree
invariants, that are extracted by the classical WeisfeilerLehman Isomorphism Test Method (Weisfeiler & Lehman,
1968). Other classical R-convolution graph kernels also include: the Wasserstein Weisfeiler-Lehman Subtree
Kernel (Togninalli et al., 2019), the Pyramid-Quantized
Shortest-Path Kernel (Gkirtzou & Blaschko, 2016), the Isolation Graph Kernel (Xu et al., 2021a), the Graph Filtration
Kernel (Schulz et al., 2022), etc.

In this work, we develop a new Quantum-based
Matching Kernel (QBMK) for un-attributed
graphs, by computing the kernel-based similarity between the quantum Shannon entropies of
aligned vertices through the Continuous-time
Quantum Walk (CTQW). The theoretical analysis reveals that the proposed QBMK kernel
not only addresses the shortcoming of neglecting the structural correspondence information between graphs arising in existing R-convolution
graph kernels, but also overcomes the problem
of neglecting the structural differences between
pairs of aligned vertices arising in existing vertexbased matching kernels. Moreover, the proposed
QBMK kernel can simultaneously capture both
global and local structural characteristics through
the quantum Shannon entropies. Experimental
evaluations on standard graph datasets demonstrate that the proposed QBMK kernel is able
to outperform state-of-the-art graph kernels and
graph deep learning approaches.

1. Introduction

Unfortunately, most of the above R-convolution graph kernels suffer from some common drawbacks, influencing
the effectiveness. First, to guarantee the computational efficiency, the R-convolution graph kernels tend to utilize the
local substructures of small sizes. Thus, the R-convolution
graph kernels fail to capture characteristics of the global
graph structures. Second, the R-convolution graph kernels only focus on whether a pair of substructures are isomorphic, ignoring the structural correspondence information between the substructures. For example, Fig. 1 exhibits two Delaunay graphs, that are both extracted from
the same house object through different viewpoints. Since
the two triangle-based substructures are isomorphic, the Rconvolution graph kernels will directly add one unit kernel
value, no matter whether the substructures are structurally aligned to each other in terms of the vision background.
As a result, the R-convolution graph kernels can not reflect
precise similarity measures between graphs.

There are increasing interests in employing graph kernels associated with specified kernel machines (e.g., the CSupport Vector Machine (C-SVM), etc) for graph classification (Gärtner et al., 2003; Jebara et al., 2004).
Generally speaking, graph kernels are defined as the similarity measure between graph structures. Most state-ofthe-art graph kernels essentially fall into the concept of R1

School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Normal University, Beijing 100875, China. 2 School of Information, Central
University of Finance and Economics, Beijing 100081, China.
3
Zhejiang Institute of Optoelectronics, Jinhua 321004, China.
4
Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Intelligent Education Technology
and Application, Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua 321004,
China. 5 Department of Computer Science, University of York,
YO10 5GH York, UK.. Correspondence to: Lixin Cui <cuilixin@cufe.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

To address the drawback of ignoring global structure in1

