Position: Opportunities Exist for Machine Learning in Magnetic Fusion Energy

Lucas Spangher * 1 Allen Wang * 1 Andrew Maris * 1 Myles Stabelberg 1 Viraj Mehta 2 Alex Sparstein 1
Stephen Lane-Walsh 1 Akshata Kishore Moharir 3 Alessandro Pau 4 Cristina Rea 1

Abstract

the looming consequences of climate change, and energy
insecurity continues to catalyze conflicts around the globe.
Humanity must urgently tackle the challenge of scaling
cheap, clean, and carbon-free energy.

Magnetic confinement fusion may one day provide reliable, carbon-free energy, but the field
currently faces technical hurdles. In this position
paper, we highlight six key research challenges in
the field of fusion energy that we believe should
be research priorities for the Machine Learning
(ML) community because they are especially ripe
for ML applications: (1) disruption prediction, (2)
simulation and dynamics modeling (3) resolving
partially observed data, (4) improving controls,
(5) guiding experiments with optimal design, and
(6) enhancing materials discovery. For each problem, we give background, review past ML work,
suggest features of future models, and list challenges and idiosyncrasies facing ML development.
We also discuss ongoing efforts to update the fusion data ecosystem and identify opportunities
further down the line that will be enabled as fusion and its data infrastructure advance. It is our
position that fusion energy offers especially exciting opportunities for ML practitioners to impact
decarbonization and the future of energy.

Fusion energy, the nuclear process that powers the stars, has
long been sought as a practical energy source (Harms et al.,
2000). Fusion uses abundant fuel, emits no carbon, and
uses minimal land1 . For these reasons, fusion is an alluring
possibility as a component of future energy grids.
We focus in this paper on the most technically mature
magnetic fusion device: the “tokamak.” A tokamak is
a doughnut-shaped machine that confines a steady-state
plasma at fusion-relevant temperatures by applying external
magnetic fields and inducing a current in the plasma that
circulates around the torus, creating a helical magnetic field
that confines the plasma (Wesson & Campbell, 2011; Taylor,
1997).
Fusion entered a new era in the 2020s because of three
factors: technical innovation, a growing awareness of the
climate crisis, and big bets by venture capital. The development of high temperature superconductors, for example,
put previously infeasible fusion concepts within the grasp
of commercial-scale labs. At the same time, the cost of
climate change and rapid decarbonization is coming into
view. These factors brought in billions from established venture capital firms to the nascent fusion start-up landscape
(Fusion Industry Association, 2023; Parisi & Ball, 2019).

1. Introduction: Magnetic Confinement Fusion
Eras of human history are defined by their energy sources,
from the charcoal that forged the iron age to the fossil fuels that shape our modern world. Today, our planet faces

However, several “showstopping” challenges remain; it
is our position that Machine Learning (ML, see common
acronyms in Appendix A) may be key to addressing several
critical issues for tokamak fusion. Tokamaks can generate
massive amounts of data and require fairly sophisticated
control schemes. Furthermore, the field has been generating
data across an array of modalities for decades. It is our
observation that there are low-hanging fruit abound for ML
practitioners in fusion, and we strongly believe that collaboration between the two fields will be important and mutually
beneficial.

*
Equal contribution 1 Plasma Science and Fusion Center, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA 2 Department of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes
Avenue Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA 3 Robert H. Smith School of
Business, University of Maryland, College Park, 7901 Regents
Drive College Park, MD 20742-5025, USA 4 Swiss Plasma Center, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Chemin du Barrage
16, 1015 Ecublens, Lausanne, Switzerland.. Correspondence
to: Lucas Spangher <spangher@psfc.mit.edu>, Allen Wang
<awang@psfc.mit.edu>, Andrew Maris <maris@psfc.mit.edu>,
Cristina Rea <crea@psfc.mit.edu>.

1
Nuclear fusion should not be confused with nuclear fission,
which is a fundamentally different process. No fusion power plants
exist today, but fission reactions are responsible for nuclear power
plants (Kulcinski et al., 1979).

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

