Wukong: Towards a Scaling Law for Large-Scale Recommendation

Buyun Zhang * 1 Liang Luo * 1 Yuxin Chen * 1
Jade Nie 1 Xi Liu 1 Shen Li 1 Yanli Zhao 1
Yuchen Hao 1 Yantao Yao 1 Ellie Dingqiao Wen 1 Jongsoo Park 1
Maxim Naumov 1 Wenlin Chen 1
Relative LogLoss (%)
0.4

Abstract
Scaling laws play an instrumental role in the sustainable improvement in model quality. Unfortunately, recommendation models to date do not
exhibit such laws similar to those observed in the
domain of large language models, due to the inefficiencies of their upscaling mechanisms. This
limitation poses significant challenges in adapting these models to increasingly more complex
real-world datasets. In this paper, we propose
an effective network architecture based purely on
stacked factorization machines, and a synergistic
upscaling strategy, collectively dubbed Wukong,
to establish a scaling law in the domain of recommendation. Wukong’s unique design makes
it possible to capture diverse, any-order of interactions simply through taller and wider layers.
We conducted extensive evaluations on six public
datasets, and our results demonstrate that Wukong
consistently outperforms state-of-the-art models
quality-wise. Further, we assessed Wukong’s scalability on an internal, large-scale dataset. The
results show that Wukong retains its superiority in
quality over state-of-the-art models, while holding the scaling law across two orders of magnitude in model complexity, extending beyond 100
GFLOP/example, where prior arts fall short.

0.2
0.0

AutoInt+
AFN+

DLRM

−0.2

MaskNet

FinalMLP

DCNv2

−0.4
−0.6
−0.8

Wukong
10

0

101

102
GFLOP/example

Figure 1: Wukong outperforms existing state-of-the-art models while demonstrating a scaling law in the recommendation
domain across two orders of magnitude in model complexity,
extending beyond 100 GFLOP/example.

Modern DLRS are designed to process a blend of continuous dense features, such as date, and categorical sparse
features, like user clicked posts history. Each sparse feature is transformed into a dense embedding representation
through a trainable embedding lookup table. These dense
embeddings are then fed into an interaction component, designed to capture the intricate interactions between features.
While existing models demonstrate promising accuracy on
smaller datasets, their capability to adapt to the scale and
intricacy of substantially larger datasets, and to sustain continuous quality improvement as these models scale up, remains less certain. This scalability is increasingly crucial,
as modern datasets have seen exponential growth. For example, production datasets today might contain hundreds
of billions of training examples (Wang et al., 2021a). Furthermore, foundational models (Bommasani et al., 2021)
need to operate at scale to handle larger and multiple complex input sources at the same time. Thus, the need for
a DLRS that can both upscale and downscale effectively,
adjusting to varying dataset sizes and computational constraints, is paramount. This scalability is encompassed in

1. Introduction
Deep learning-based recommendation systems (DLRS)
power a wide range of online services today (Naumov et al.,
2019; Wang et al., 2021a; Lian et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2022;
Covington et al., 2016).
*

Equal contribution 1 Meta AI. Correspondence to: Buyun
Zhang <buyunz@meta.com>, Liang Luo <liangluo@meta.com>,
Yuxin Chen <yuxinc@meta.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

