Optimal Batched Linear Bandits

Xuanfei Ren 1 Tianyuan Jin 2 Pan Xu 3

Abstract

in modeling decision processes where an agent actively
interacts with an uncertain environment to achieve a longterm goal. In particular, we study the linear contextual
bandit problems (Langford & Zhang, 2007; Li et al., 2010;
Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011; Chu et al., 2011; Agrawal &
Goyal, 2013; Kirschner et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2022), where
the agent can choose from K arms to play at each step, and
each arm is associated with a feature vector in the Rd space.
Each arm when played emits a noisy reward with its mean
assumed to be a linear function of the feature vector with
the unknown weight parameter shared across different arms.
These bandit problems are prevalent in numerous real-world
applications, from online advertising (Abe et al., 2003) to
recommendation systems (Agarwal et al., 2008; Li et al.,
2010), where abundant side information is available and thus
provides powerful feature representation of each arm. The
most critical dilemma in designing algorithms for learning
bandit problems is the trade-off between exploitation and
exploration, where the agent must decide whether to exploit
the currently known best option or to explore unknown
possibly suboptimal options for maximizing the long-run
gains.

4

We introduce the E algorithm for the batched
linear bandit problem, incorporating an ExploreEstimate-Eliminate-Exploit framework. With a
proper choice of exploration rate, we prove E4
achieves the finite-time minimax optimal regret
with only O(log log T ) batches, and the asymptotically optimal regret with only 3 batches as
T → ∞, where T is the time horizon. We further
prove a lower bound on the batch complexity of
linear contextual bandits showing that any asymptotically optimal algorithm must require at least
3 batches in expectation as T → ∞, which indicates E4 achieves the asymptotic optimality in
regret and batch complexity simultaneously. To
the best of our knowledge, E4 is the first algorithm
for linear bandits that simultaneously achieves the
minimax and asymptotic optimality in regret with
the corresponding optimal batch complexities. In
addition, we show that with another choice of exploration rate E4 achieves an instance-dependent
regret bound requiring at most O(log T ) batches,
and maintains the minimax optimality and asymptotic optimality. We conduct thorough experiments to evaluate our algorithm on randomly generated instances and the challenging End of Optimism instances (Lattimore & Szepesvari, 2017)
which were shown to be hard to learn for optimism based algorithms. Empirical results show
that E4 consistently outperforms baseline algorithms with respect to regret minimization, batch
complexity, and computational efficiency.

In conventional bandit setting, the agent adjusts its strategy or policy step-by-step, by first choosing an arm to play,
observing a reward for this arm, and adjusting its strategy
accordingly in the immediate next step. This ideal setting
is also referred to as the fully-sequential setting, where
immediate outcome can be obtained and switch polices is
cost-efficient. In real-world problems, fully sequential learning strategies are usually expensive or infeasible in critical
applications where the interaction with the environment
takes months to observe the rewards like in clinical trials or
medical treatment (Robbins, 1952), or switching between
different policies is expensive in e-commerce (Bertsimas &
Mersereau, 2007). Therefore, the batched bandit setting is
more realistic and feasible, where an agent selects a batch
of actions rather than a single action at one decision point
to play, which significantly minimizes the number of policy
switching and expedites the learning process by enabling
parallel experiments (Perchet et al., 2015; Gao et al., 2019;
Esfandiari et al., 2021; Han et al., 2020; Jin et al., 2021b;a;
Ruan et al., 2021; Jin et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
Sequential decision-making problems including bandits and
reinforcement learning (Bubeck et al., 2012; Slivkins et al.,
2019; Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2020) have become pivotal
1

University of Science and Technology of China 2 National
University of Singapore 3 Duke University. Correspondence to:
Pan Xu <pan.xu@duke.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

To evaluate the effectiveness of bandit algorithms, a crucial metric is the regret, which represents the gap between
1

