Decoupling Feature Extraction and Classification Layers for
Calibrated Neural Networks
Mikkel Jordahn 1 Pablo M. Olmos 2

Abstract

prediction. With calibrated models, it is possible to refer to
a doctor when model prediction uncertainty is high, which
is not the case for poorly calibrated models.

Deep Neural Networks (DNN) have shown great
promise in many classification applications, yet
are widely known to have poorly calibrated predictions when they are over-parametrized. Improving
DNN calibration without comprising on model accuracy is of extreme importance and interest in
safety critical applications such as in the healthcare sector. In this work, we show that decoupling
the training of feature extraction layers and classification layers in over-parametrized DNN architectures such as Wide Residual Networks (WRN)
and Vision Transformers (ViT) significantly improves model calibration whilst retaining accuracy, and at a low training cost. In addition, we
show that placing a Gaussian prior on the last
hidden layer outputs of a DNN, and training the
model variationally in the classification training
stage, even further improves calibration. We illustrate these methods improve calibration across
ViT and WRN architectures for several image
classification benchmark datasets.

Throughout this work, we refer to calibration in terms of
the probabilities assigned to a prediction, i.e., if a perfectly
calibrated model assigns probability p of class C in A events,
we would expect p of those A events to be class C. In the
case of deep neural networks (DNN) for classification, it
is well known that over-parameterized models under crossentropy training tend to be overconfident (Guo et al., 2017).
Some argue that modern neural network architectures do
not exhibit this behaviour (Minderer et al., 2021), but we
find that they are still poorly calibrated when trained from
scratch.
Several methods have been proposed to create wellcalibrated DNNs. Some of these methods are particular
model specifications such as Bayesian Neural Networks
(BNNs) (MacKay, 1992; Gal & Ghahramani, 2016; Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017; Blei et al., 2018; Izmailov et al.,
2018). Other methods have been proposed to re-calibrate
models post-hoc, i.e., after the model has been regularly
trained, promising to retain model accuracy (Guo et al.,
2017; Ji et al., 2019). A class of methods also uses data
augmentation to regularize, thus creating calibrated models
directly during training (Müller et al., 2019; Thulasidasan
et al., 2019).

1. Introduction
Classification using machine learning is widely applied in
many industries, ranging from application in medical diagnostics (Shen et al., 2019; Ahsan et al., 2022) to being
a crucial part of self-driving car systems (Chen & Huang,
2017; Gupta et al., 2021). In applications with a safety or
ethical aspect, it is not only the accuracy of the applied
model that matters but also the calibration of the model. To
give an example, if a machine learning model is applied
in medical diagnostics, we simply do not just want to rely
on the model’s prediction, but rather the probability of this

In this work, we show empirical evidence that the common
practice of jointly training the feature extraction layers (convolution or attention layers) and the classification layers
(fully connected layers) can lead to uncalibrated models.
We then demonstrate that two-stage training procedures
that decouple the training of the feature extraction and classification layers remarkably improve calibration. Consequently, two training strategies are presented and analyzed:
Two-Stage Training (TST) and Variational Two-Stage
Training (V-TST). We provide the code for reproducing
our main results at https://github.com/MJordahn/
Decoupled-Layers-for-Calibrated-NNs.

1
Cognitive Systems, Technical University of Denmark, Kongens Lyngby, Denmark 2 Signal Processing Group (GTS), Universidad Carlos III de Madrid, Madrid, Spain. Correspondence to:
Mikkel Jordahn <mikkjo@dtu.dk>.

In TST, we first train a neural network end-to-end with crossentropy loss (CE) until convergence. In the second training
stage, we freeze the feature extraction layers (convolution
layers or attention layers) of the network, reinitialize the

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

