STELLA : Continual Audio-Video Pre-training with
Spatio-Temporal Localized Alignment

Jaewoo Lee 1 * Jaehong Yoon 2 * Wonjae Kim 3 Yunji Kim 3 Sung Ju Hwang 1 4

Abstract

Model

Past

Continuously learning a variety of audio-video
semantics over time is crucial for audio-related
reasoning tasks in our ever-evolving world. However, this is a nontrivial problem and poses two
critical challenges: sparse spatio-temporal correlation between audio-video pairs and multimodal
correlation overwriting that forgets audio-video
relations. To tackle this problem, we propose a
new continual audio-video pre-training method
with two novel ideas: (1) Localized Patch Importance Scoring: we introduce a multimodal
encoder to determine the importance score for
each patch, emphasizing semantically intertwined
audio-video patches. (2) Replay-guided Correlation Assessment: to reduce the corruption of
previously learned audiovisual knowledge due to
drift, we propose to assess the correlation of the
current patches on the past steps to identify the
patches exhibiting high correlations with the past
steps. Based on the results from the two ideas, we
perform probabilistic patch selection for effective
continual audio-video pre-training. Experimental validation on multiple benchmarks shows that
our method achieves a 3.69%p of relative performance gain in zero-shot retrieval tasks compared
to strong continual learning baselines, while reducing memory consumption by ∼45%. Our code
is available at https://cl-stella.github.io/.

0

1

2

3

Loud motor sound.

𝑻𝑻
𝒕𝒕

Present new semantics (e.g. electric car)

0

1

2

Silent motor sound.

3

𝑻𝑻
𝒕𝒕

Model
(outdated)

Failed A ↔ V
alignment

Figure 1: Outdated pre-trained audio-video models struggle
with understanding emerging new audio-video semantics.
multimodal, such as text-image (Liao et al., 2022; Lee et al.,
2023), text-video (Villegas et al., 2022; Hu et al., 2022b),
and audio-video (Korbar et al., 2018; Xiao et al., 2020) pairs.
While most vision-language learning (Li et al., 2020; Yan
et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023) assumes the availability of curated multimodal data with human-annotated descriptions,
audiovisual domain (Zhou et al., 2019; Gong et al., 2023)
holds a unique and practical advantage, as most videos inherently come with accompanying audios without human annotations. Thanks to this property, audiovisual multimodal
learning models can leverage web-scale raw videos (e.g.,
YouTube, TikTok, etc.) for training with minimal human
efforts in data preprocessing, and thus have achieved impressive success in audio-video compositional reasoning (Tang
et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2023).
However, most existing approaches (Tang et al., 2022;
Huang et al., 2023; Gong et al., 2023) struggle when deployed to real-world scenarios, where the distribution
of training data continuously changes over time with
new audio-video semantics. For example, the audiovisual
model pre-trained before electric vehicles became popular, would not be able to associate cars with their unique
acoustic cues (e.g., motor sound) (See Fig. 1). One straightforward solution to this problem is to periodically train the
model from scratch using audio-video data collected from
the past to the present, but this approach comes with prohibitive computation and memory costs.

1. Introduction
Multimodal learning is an important problem for various
real-world applications, as many real-world data types are
*

Equal contribution 1 KAIST 2 UNC Chapel Hill 3 NAVER
AI Lab 4 DeepAuto.
Correspondence to: Jaewoo Lee
<jwlee8877@kaist.ac.kr>, Jaehong Yoon <jhyoon@cs.unc.edu>,
Sung Ju Hwang <sjhwang82@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

