Scalable Multiple Kernel Clustering:
Learning Clustering Structure from Expectation

Weixuan Liang 1 En Zhu 1 Shengju Yu 1 Huiying Xu 2 Xinzhong Zhu 2 Xinwang Liu 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

A fundamental principle of learned models is to study the
parameters of the true distribution of sample space from
a set of training samples. In the learning task, we should
explore more general information about the distribution of
samples with its empirical distribution. In kernel clustering (Dhillon et al., 2004), the empirical kernel matrix is
essential to improve clustering performance. It is necessary
to know how the empirical kernel matrix deviates from its
expectation. In this paper, for a multi-view training set,
we assume that samples of each view are generated from
an unknown isotropic Gaussian distribution. If we use the
Gaussian kernel function to compute the kernel matrix, then
we can derive an upper bound of the difference between the
empirical kernel matrix and its expectation. Assuming that
the dimension of√
the samples is d, the above upper bound
e
is basically O(1/
d)1 . When the means of the clusters are
well separated, the expectation of the kernel matrix can be
close to a rank-k matrix.

In this paper, we derive an upper bound of the
difference between a kernel matrix and its expectation under a mild assumption. Specifically, we
assume that the true distribution of the training
data is an unknown isotropic Gaussian distribution. When the kernel function is a Gaussian
kernel, and the mean of each cluster is sufficiently
separated, we find that the expectation of a kernel
matrix can be close to a rank-k matrix, where k
is the cluster number. Moreover, we prove that
the normalized kernel matrix of the training set
deviates (w.r.t. Frobenius norm)
√ from its expecO(1/ d), where d is the
tation in the order of e
dimension of samples. Based on the above theoretical results, we propose a novel multiple kernel
clustering framework which attempts to learn the
information of the expectation kernel matrices.
First, we aim to minimize the distance between
each base kernel and a rank-k matrix, which is a
proxy of the expectation kernel. Then, we fuse
these rank-k matrices into a consensus rank-k
matrix to find the clustering structure. Using an
anchor-based method, the proposed framework
is flexible with the sizes of input kernel matrices
and able to handle large-scale datasets. We also
provide the approximation guarantee by deriving
two non-asymptotic bounds for the consensus kernel and clustering indicator matrices. Finally, we
conduct extensive experiments to verify the clustering performance of the proposed method and
the correctness of the proposed theoretical results.

Based on the above observations, we attempt to devise a
novel multiple kernel clustering (MKC) algorithm. MKC
(Zhao et al., 2009) is proposed to improve the clustering
performance of the single kernel clustering (Dhillon et al.,
2004). It constructs several base kernel matrices {Kv }Vv=1
with different kernel functions and fuses Kv ’s into a consensus one. Then, the standard kernel k-means (Dhillon et al.,
2004) is performed on the consensus kernel matrix for the
final clustering result. MKC has been extensively studied in
recent years (Liang et al., 2023; 2022; Liu, 2023; 2022; Ren
& Sun, 2020; Liu et al., 2017; 2016; Li et al., 2016). Among
them, Liu (2022) proposes a new fusion style by a min-max
optimization objective and improves clustering performance
without any hyper-parameter tuning. Liu (2023) further
improves the work of (Liu, 2022). Subsequently, Liang
et al. (2022) study the stability and generalization of MKC
and derive the excess risk bound of MKC for the first time.
Liang et al. (2023) establish the strong consistency of MKC
by proving the empirical kernel weights can converge to the
corresponding expected version.

1

College of Computer, National University of Defense
Technology, Changsha, China 2 School of Computer Science
and Technology, Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua, China.
Correspondence to: Huiying Xu, Xinzhong Zhu, Xinwang Liu
<xhy@zjnu.edu.cn,zxz@zjnu.edu.cn,xinwangliu@nudt.edu.cn>.

Although the research mentioned enriches the fields of

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1 e

O(·) hides logarithmic terms.

1

