Q-Star Meets Scalable Posterior Sampling:
Bridging Theory and Practice via HyperAgent

Yingru Li 1 2 * Jiawei Xu 1 * Lei Han 3 Zhi-Quan Luo 1 2

Abstract

in sequential decision-making demands that the agent learns
the optimal policy with as few interaction steps as possible,
a fundamental challenge given the need to balance exploration of the environment to gather more information and exploitation of existing information (Thompson, 1933; Lai &
Robbins, 1985; Thrun, 1992). Scalability and efficiency are
both critical for the practical deployment of RL algorithms
in real-world applications with limited resources. There
appears to be a divergence between the development of practical RL algorithms, which mainly focus on scalability and
computational efficiency, and RL theory, which prioritizes
data efficiency, to our knowledge. This divergence raises an
important question:

We propose HyperAgent, a reinforcement learning (RL) algorithm based on the hypermodel
framework for exploration in RL. HyperAgent
allows for the efficient incremental approximation of posteriors associated with an optimal
action-value function (Q⋆ ) without the need for
conjugacy and follows the greedy policies w.r.t.
these approximate posterior samples. We demonstrate that HyperAgent offers robust performance
in large-scale deep RL benchmarks. It can
solve Deep Sea hard exploration problems with
episodes that optimally scale with problem size
and exhibits significant efficiency gains in the
Atari suite. Implementing HyperAgent requires
minimal code addition to well-established deep
RL frameworks like DQN. We theoretically prove
that, under tabular assumptions, HyperAgent
achieves logarithmic per-step computational complexity while attaining sublinear regret, matching
the best known randomized tabular RL algorithm.

Can we design a practically efficient RL agent with
provable guarantees on efficiency and scalability?
1.1. Key Contributions
This work affirmatively answers the posed question
by proposing a novel reinforcement learning algorithm,
HyperAgent, based on the hypermodel framework (Li
et al., 2022; Dwaracherla et al., 2020; Osband et al., 2023b).
We highlight the advantages of HyperAgent below:

1. Introduction
• Algorithmic Simplicity. HyperAgent’s implementation1 requires only the addition of a single module, the
last-layer linear hypermodel, to the conventional DDQN
framework and a minor modification for action selection.
The added module facilitates efficient incremental approximation and sampling for the posteriors associated with
the Q⋆ function. Practically, HyperAgent can be a replacement for the ε-greedy method in most of its usecases.
This simplicity contrasts with state-of-the-art methods
for the Atari benchmarks, which often rely on multiple
complex algorithmic components and extensive tuning.

Practical reinforcement learning (RL) in complex environments faces challenges such as large state spaces and an
increasingly large volume of data. The per-step computational complexity, defined as the computational cost for the
agent to make a decision at each interaction step, is crucial.
Under resource constraints, any reasonable design of an
RL agent must ensure bounded per-step computation, a key
requirement for scalability. If per-step computation scales
polynomially with the volume of accumulated interaction
data, computational requirements will soon become unsustainable, which is untenable for scalability. Data efficiency

• Practical Efficiency. The HyperAgent algorithm
demonstrates exceptional scalability and efficiency in
challenging environments. Notably, in the Deep Sea exploration scenario (Osband et al., 2020), it efficiently
solves problems up to 120 × 120 in size with optimal

*

Equal contribution 1 The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Shenzhen 2 Shenzhen Research Institue of Big Data 3 Tencent
AI and Robotics X. Correspondence to: Yingru Li <szrlee@
gmail.com or yingruli@link.cuhk.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1
We provide the open-source code at https://github.
com/szrlee/HyperAgent.

1

