Learning Surrogates for Offline Black-Box Optimization via Gradient Matching

Minh Hoang 1 Azza Fadhel 2 Aryan Deshwal 2 Janardhan Rao Doppa 2 Trong Nghia Hoang 2

Abstract

over large design spaces. Some examples include design
optimization over candidate molecules, proteins (Nguyen &
Daugherty, 2005), drugs, biological sequences, and superconducting materials (Si et al., 2016). To evaluate candidate
designs, we need to perform physical lab experiments or
computational simulations which are labor-intensive and
impractical to do in an online manner. Offline optimization
(Trabucco et al., 2022; 2021) is a more practical setting
where we assume the access to a dataset of input and objective function evaluation pairs, and the overall goal is to use
this offline training data to uncover optimal designs.

Offline design optimization problem arises in numerous science and engineering applications including material and chemical design, where expensive online experimentation necessitates the
use of in silico surrogate functions to predict and
maximize the target objective over candidate designs. Although these surrogates can be learned
from offline data, their predictions are often inaccurate outside the offline data regime. This
challenge raises a fundamental question about the
impact of imperfect surrogate model on the performance gap between its optima and the true optima,
and to what extent the performance loss can be
mitigated. Although prior work developed methods to improve the robustness of surrogate models and their associated optimization processes,
a provably quantifiable relationship between an
imperfect surrogate and the corresponding performance gap, as well as whether prior methods directly address it, remain elusive. To shed light on
this important question, we present a theoretical
framework to understand offline black-box optimization, by explicitly bounding the optimization
quality based on how well the surrogate matches
the latent gradient field that underlines the offline
data. Inspired by our theoretical analysis, we
propose a principled black-box gradient matching algorithm to create effective surrogate models
for offline optimization, improving over prior approaches on various real-world benchmarks.

The prototypical approach (Hutter et al., 2011; Brookes
et al., 2019) to solve offline optimization problems is to
learn a surrogate model from the given training data which
can predict the objective function value for unknown inputs
and find optimal input (i.e., maximizer) for this surrogate
using gradient-based methods. The key implicit assumption behind this approach is that we can learn an accurate
surrogate model over the entire input space using supervised learning. However, this is rarely achievable in practice
due to the size and sparsity of the offline training data. In
most cases, the surrogate model is only reliable within a
constrained neighborhood of the offline data (Fannjiang &
Listgarten, 2020) and can be highly erroneous outside this
neighborhood. Consequently, there will be a discrepancy
between the gradient fields of the target objective function
and the surrogate model which will misguide the gradient
search towards sub-optimal solutions.
This raises two related questions. First, how does the discrepancy in gradient estimation affect the performance gap
between the optima of the surrogate model and the target
objective function? Second, how do we learn surrogate models that closely approximate the gradient field of the target
function? Both questions are challenging, given that the
target function’s gradient field is non-observable even at the
offline training data points, and have not been studied by
prior work. In fact, we note that while there is an existing
literature on random gradient estimation methods (Fu, 2015;
Wang et al., 2018), those methods require the ability to actively sample data from the black-box target function which
is not possible in the context of offline optimization.

1. Introduction
Many science and engineering applications involve optimizing an expensive-to-evaluate black-box objective function
1
Lewis-Sigler Institute of Integrative Genomics, Princeton
University, New Jersey, USA 2 School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Washington State University, Pullman, Washington, USA. Correspondence to: Trong Nghia
Hoang <trongnghia.hoang@wsu.edu>, Janardhan Rao Doppa
<jana.doppa@wsu.edu>.

Contributions. The main contributions of this paper include
(1) theoretically-sound answers to the above two questions;

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

