PAC-Bayesian Error Bound, via Rényi Divergence, for a Class of Linear
Time-Invariant State-Space Models

Deividas Eringis 1 John Leth 1 Zheng-Hua Tan 1 Rafal Wisniewski 1 Mihály Petreczky 2

Abstract

However, for various learning problems involving sequential, online or time-series data dynamical systems in statespace form represent a more general and more expressive
hypothesis class, see Section 2 for a more detailed discussion. In a nutshell, the hidden states in state-space models
encode a growing window of past observations, allowing for
potentially more accurate predictions. These favorable properties of state-space models are well-known in econometrics
(Durbin and Koopman, 2012) and control theory (Ljung,
1999). Recently, they were also explored in machine learning, in the form of structured state-space models (SSMs),
due to their relatively low inference complexity and often
high performance (Gu et al., 2021; 2023; Gu and Dao, 2023;
Li et al., 2021; Wang and Xue, 2023). Note that recurrent
neural networks (RNNs) and their various versions (LSTM,
etc.) are all dynamical systems in state-space form. PACBayesian bounds for state-space representations have the
potential for providing theoretical guarantees for existing
learning algorithms and potentially deriving new ones, see
Remark 2.5.

In this paper we derive a PAC-Bayesian error
bound for a class of stochastic dynamical systems with inputs, namely, for linear time-invariant
stochastic state-space models (stochastic LTI systems for short). This class of systems is widely
used in control engineering and econometrics, in
particular, they represent a special case of recurrent neural networks. In this paper we 1) formalize the learning problem for stochastic LTI
systems with inputs, 2) derive a PAC-Bayesian error bound for such systems, and 3) discuss various
consequences of this error bound.

1. Introduction
The Probably Approximately Correct (PAC)-Bayesian learning theory is an important tool for analysing theoretical
properties of machine learning algorithm, see (Guedj, 2019;
Alquier, 2021; Zhang, 2006; Grünwald, 2012; Alquier et al.,
2016; Germain et al., 2016; Sheth and Khardon, 2017). In
this paper we will present PAC-Bayesian error bounds for
time-series supervised learning, with quadratic loss. More
precisely, we consider time-series realised by stochastic linear time-invariant (LTI) systems in state-space form with
(stochastic) inputs and unbounded (sub-Gaussian) noise.
The proposed bound is based on Rényi divergence and converge to zero as the number of data points N goes to infinity
with the rate O( √1N ), for a fixed posterior.

Motivation for LTI systems: The motivation for working
with PAC-Bayesian bounds for LTI systems is as follows.
First, LTI systems are among the simplest class of dynamical systems in state-space form with partially observed state.
In turn, state-space representations with partially observed
states 1) are widely used for modeling physical systems,
2) they contain various standard models such as recurrent
neural networks (RNN), or structured state-space models
(SSMs), 3) are more general than autoregressive models,
in particular, in contrast to autoregressive models, statespace models allow integrating a growing number of past
observations for generating predictions. In particular,, PACBayesian bounds for LTI models could help to derive such
bounds for more general classes of systems. For example, LTI systems are special cases of RNNs and they are a
building blocks of SSMs.

Motivation for studying PAC-Bayesian bounds for dynamical systems in state-space form: While there is a
wealth of literature on PAC-Bayesian bounds for static models (Alquier, 2021; Guedj, 2019), much less is known for
dynamical systems. Moreover, existing results on dynamical systems often concentrate on autoregressive models.
1
Department of Electronic Systems, Aalborg University, Denmark 2 Univ. Lille, CNRS, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189 CRIStAL,
F-59000 Lille, France. Correspondence to: Mihaly Petreczky
<mihaly.petreczky@centralelille.fr>.

Moreover, despite their simplicity, LTI systems are widely
used in econometrics and control theory, due to their ability
to model various physical processes, see (Ljung, 1999; Pillonetto et al., 2022). In particular, learning of LTI systems
is an active research topic, both on its own and as a intermediate step in LQG reinforcement learning (Lale et al., 2020;

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

