Online Isolation Forest
Filippo Leveni 1 (

)

Guilherme Weigert Cassales 2
Bernhard Pfahringer 2
Giacomo Boracchi 1

Abstract

Albert Bifet 2

the most popular offline anomaly detection solution, which
is at the same time simple, easy to scale and shows strong
performance on a variety of benchmarks.

The anomaly detection literature is abundant with
offline methods, which require repeated access
to data in memory, and impose impractical assumptions when applied to a streaming context.
Existing online anomaly detection methods also
generally fail to address these constraints, resorting to periodic retraining to adapt to the online
context. We propose O NLINE-I F OREST, a novel
method explicitly designed for streaming conditions that seamlessly tracks the data generating
process as it evolves over time. Experimental
validation on real-world datasets demonstrated
that O NLINE-I F OREST is on par with online alternatives and closely rivals state-of-the-art offline
anomaly detection techniques that undergo periodic retraining. Notably, O NLINE-I F OREST consistently outperforms all competitors in terms of
efficiency, making it a promising solution in applications where fast identification of anomalies
is of primary importance such as cybersecurity,
fraud and fault detection.

The popularity of IFOR can be acknowledged by the
large number of subsequent works that build on top of
it. The majority of these methods aim to improve the performance of IFOR by addressing the limitation of axisparallel splits (Liu et al., 2010; Hariri et al., 2021; Lesouple et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2023), while others extend
IFOR beyond the concept of point-anomaly, to identify
functional-anomalies (Staerman et al., 2019) and structuredanomalies (Leveni et al., 2021; 2023). Despite their performance, IFOR and its variants are offline anomaly detection
methods, and they are unable to operate in a streaming scenario where data comes in endless streams possibly following a dynamic nature. In the online context, offline anomaly
detection solutions fail because the models would quickly
become outdated and lose performance. The dynamic nature
of online environments demands continuous adaptability,
making offline approaches unsuitable for effective anomaly
detection in the long run.
Online anomaly detection is far less explored compared
to online classification (Gomes et al., 2017; 2019), and
most of the solutions present in the literature are just online
adaptations of offline anomaly detection methods carried
out by periodic retraining. Although the retraining approach
represents an improvement over the static counterpart, it
leads to a substantial processing overhead. Furthermore,
online anomaly detection algorithms have to cope with a
potentially endless stream of data, strict memory limitations
and the single-pass requirement, where it is not possible to
store all data for later analysis. Thus, it is essential to have
a fast and truly online anomaly detection approach.

1. Introduction
Anomaly detection deals with the problem of identifying
data that do not conform to an expected behavior (Chandola
et al., 2009). This task finds numerous applications ranging
from the financial fraud (Ahmed et al., 2016; Dal Pozzolo
et al., 2018) and intrusion (Bronte et al., 2016) detection,
to health (Banaee et al., 2013) and quality monitoring (Stojanovic et al., 2016), to name a few examples. Usually,
anomaly detection methods are trained offline with a static
dataset and then used to classify new arriving instances. Isolation Forest (Liu et al., 2008; 2012) (IFOR) is perhaps

We propose O NLINE-I F OREST, an anomaly detection
method tailored for the streaming scenario, which can effectively handle the incremental nature of data streams. O N LINE- I F OREST models the data distribution via an ensemble
of multi-resolution histograms endowed with a dynamic
mechanism to learn new points and forget old ones. Each
histogram collects the points count within its bins and, upon
reaching a maximum height, a bin undergoes a split to increase the resolution of the histogram in the most populated
regions of the space. Conversely, bins in sparsely populated

1
Dipartimento di Elettronica, Informazione e Bioingegneria,
Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy 2 Artificial Intelligence Institute,
University of Waikato, Hamilton, New Zealand. Correspondence
to: Filippo Leveni <filippo.leveni@polimi.it>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

