Intersecting-Boundary-Sensitive Fingerprinting for Tampering Detection of
DNN Models
Xiaofan Bai * 1 2 3 4 5 Chaoxiang He * 1 2 3 4 5 Xiaojing Ma 1 2 3 4 5 Bin Benjamin Zhu 6 Hai Jin 7 2 3 8
Potential tampering attack

Abstract

Model compression

Cloud-based AI services offer numerous benefits but also introduce vulnerabilities, allowing for tampering with deployed DNN models, ranging from injecting malicious behaviors
to reducing computing resources. Fingerprint
samples are generated to query models to detect such tampering. In this paper, we present
Intersecting-Boundary-Sensitive Fingerprinting
(IBSF), a novel method for black-box integrity
verification of DNN models using only top-1 labels. Recognizing that tampering with a model alters its decision boundary, IBSF crafts fingerprint
samples from normal samples by maximizing the
partial Shannon entropy of a selected subset of
categories to position the fingerprint samples near
decision boundaries where the categories in the
subset intersect. These fingerprint samples are almost indistinguishable from their source samples.
We theoretically establish and confirm experimentally that these fingerprint samples’ expected sensitivity to tampering increases with the cardinality
of the subset. Extensive evaluation demonstrates
that IBSF surpasses existing state-of-the-art fingerprinting methods, particularly with larger subset cardinality, establishing its state-of-the-art performance in black-box tampering detection using
only top-1 labels. The IBSF code is available
at: https://github.com/CGCL-codes/
IBSF.

BadNets attack

…

Service provider

Bit-flipping attack
Trojan attack

Upload
Model !

Model !

=？

Model !!

Deployment

Tampering detection

Model !!

Model owner
Open access API

Figure 1. Potential adversarial tampering attacks on deployed models and the use of tampering detection to thwart them.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have made significant strides
across various domains, such as in computer vision (He
et al., 2016; Redmon et al., 2016; Long et al., 2015). To
broaden the utilization of DNN models, cloud providers
offer AI platforms like Microsoft Azure ML (Microsoft
Azure, 2023), Google AutoML (Google Cloud, 2023), and
Amazon SageMaker (Amazon Web Services, 2023). These
platforms enable users to deploy their DNN models in the
cloud, enhancing accessibility and scalability.
However, deploying DNN models in the cloud introduces
several security risks, as depicted in Fig. 1. Notably, adversaries may exploit deployed DNN models through Trojan (Liu et al., 2018) or backdoor attacks (Gu et al., 2019),
introducing malicious behavior. Furthermore, Unethical
model providers might maliciously alter a competitor’s
model to undermine its performance and gain a competitive
advantage. Additionally, dishonest cloud service providers
could surreptitiously replace a deployed model with a simpler, compressed version to cut operational costs. These
actions jeopardize the integrity and reliability of clouddeployed DNN models.

*

Equal contribution 1 School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology 2 National
Engineering Research Center for Big Data Technology and System 3 Services Computing Technology and System Lab 4 Hubei
Engineering Research Center on Big Data Security 5 Hubei Key
Laboratory of Distributed System Security 6 Microsoft 7 School
of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of
Science and Technology 8 Cluster and Grid Computing Lab. Correspondence to: Xiaojing Ma <lindahust@hust.edu.cn>.

To address these threats, various fingerprinting techniques
have been proposed for tampering detection in deployed
DNN models (He et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2023). These
techniques verify deployed models by querying them with
fingerprint samples, akin to normal queries. Given that deployed models often return only the top-1 category labels in

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

