Generalization Error of Graph Neural Networks in the Mean-field Regime

Gholamali Aminian * 1 Yixuan He * 2 Gesine Reinert 1 2 Łukasz Szpruch 1 3 Samuel N. Cohen 1 4

Abstract

of GNN learning theory.

This work provides a theoretical framework for
assessing the generalization error of graph neural
networks in the over-parameterized regime, where
the number of parameters surpasses the quantity
of data points. We explore two widely utilized
types of graph neural networks: graph convolutional neural networks and message passing graph
neural networks. Prior to this study, existing
bounds on the generalization error in the overparametrized regime were uninformative, limiting
our understanding of over-parameterized network
performance. Our novel approach involves deriving upper bounds within the mean-field regime for
evaluating the generalization error of these graph
neural networks. We establish upper bounds with
a convergence rate of O(1/n), where n is the
number of graph samples. These upper bounds
offer a theoretical assurance of the networks’ performance on unseen data in the challenging overparameterized regime and overall contribute to
our understanding of their performance.

A central concern in GNN learning theory is to understand
the efficacy of a GNN learning algorithm when applied
to data that it has not been previously exposed to. This
evaluation is typically carried out by investigating the generalization error, which quantifies the disparity between the
algorithm’s performance, as assessed through a risk function,
on the training data set and its performance on previously
unseen data drawn from the same underlying distribution.
This paper focuses on the generalization error for GNNs
in scenarios with an overabundance of model parameters,
potentially surpassing the number of available training data
points, with a particular focus on tasks related to classifying graphs. In this regard, our research endeavors to shed
light on the generalization performance exhibited by overparameterized GNN models in the mean-field regime (Mei
et al., 2018) for graph classification tasks.
We draw inspiration from the recent advancements in the
mean-field perspective regarding the training of neural networks, as proposed in a body of literature (Mei et al., 2018;
Chizat & Bach, 2018; Mei et al., 2019; Hu et al., 2019;
Tzen & Raginsky, 2020). These works propose to frame
the process of attaining optimal weights in one-hidden-layer
neural networks as a sampling challenge. Within the meanfield regime, the learning algorithm endeavors to discern
the optimal distribution within the parameter space, rather
than solely concentrating on achieving optimal parameter
values. A central question driving our research is how the
mean-field perspective can provide further insights into the
generalization behavior of over-parameterized GNN models.
Our contributions here can be summarized as follows:

1. Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have received increasing
attention due to their exceptional ability to extract meaningful representations from data structured in the form of
graphs (Kipf & Welling, 2016; Veličković et al., 2017; Gori
et al., 2005; Bronstein et al., 2017; Battaglia et al., 2018).
Consequently, GNNs have achieved state-of-the-art performance across various domains, including but not limited to
social networks (Hamilton et al., 2017; Fan et al., 2019),
recommendation systems (Ying et al., 2018a; Wang et al.,
2018) and computer vision (Monti et al., 2017). Despite the
success of GNN models, explaining their empirical generalization performance remains a challenge within the domain

• We provide upper bounds on the generalization error
for graph classification tasks in GNN models, including
graph convolutional networks and message passing
graph neural networks in the mean-field regime, via
two different approaches: functional derivatives and
Rademacher complexity based on symmetrized KL
divergence.

*
Equal contribution 1 The Alan Turing Institute, London, United
Kingdom 2 Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom 3 School of Mathematics, University of
Edinburgh 4 Mathematical Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Gholamali Aminian
<gaminian@turing.ac.uk>.

• Using the approach based on functional derivatives,
we derive an upper bound with convergence rate of
O(1/n), where n is the number of graph samples.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

• The effects of different readout functions and aggregation functions on the generalization error of GNN
1

