The Emergence of Reproducibility and Consistency in Diffusion Models

Huijie Zhang * 1 Jinfan Zhou * 1 Yifu Lu 1 Minzhe Guo 1 Peng Wang 1 Liyue Shen 1 Qing Qu 1

Abstract
In this work, we investigate an intriguing and
prevalent phenomenon of diffusion models which
we term as “consistent model reproducibility”:
given the same starting noise input and a deterministic sampler, different diffusion models often yield remarkably similar outputs. We confirm this phenomenon through comprehensive experiments, implying that different diffusion models consistently reach the same data distribution
and score function regardless of diffusion model
frameworks, model architectures, or training procedures. More strikingly, our further investigation
implies that diffusion models are learning distinct
distributions influenced by the training data size.
This is evident in two distinct training regimes:
(i) “memorization regime,” where the diffusion
model overfits to the training data distribution,
and (ii) “generalization regime,” where the model
learns the underlying data distribution. Our study
also finds that this valuable property generalizes
to many variants of diffusion models, including
those for conditional generation and solving inverse problems. Lastly, we discuss how our findings connect to existing research and highlight the
practical implications of our discoveries.

Figure 1. Visualization of generation samples from different
diffusion models. We utilized denoising diffusion probabilistic
models (DDPM) (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020a), consistency
model (CT) (Song et al., 2023b), U-ViT (Bao et al., 2023) trained
on CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009) dataset. Samples in the
corresponding row and column are generated from the same initial
noise with a deterministic ODE sampler.

et al., 2022; Chung et al., 2022a; Song et al., 2023a; Li et al.,
2024). These models learn an unknown data distribution
generated from the Gaussian noise distribution through a
process that imitates the non-equilibrium thermodynamic
diffusion process (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020b). In
the forward diffusion process, the noise is continuously injected into training samples; while in the reverse diffusion
process, a model is learned to remove the noise from noisy
samples parametrized by a noise-predictor neural network.
Then guided by the trained model, new samples (e.g., images) from the target data distribution can be generated by
transforming random noise instances through step-by-step
denoising following the reverse diffusion process. Despite
the remarkable data generation capabilities, the fundamental
mechanisms driving their performance are largely underexplored.

1. Introduction
Recently, diffusion models have emerged as a powerful new
family of deep generative models with remarkable performance in many applications, including image generation
(Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020b; Rombach et al., 2022a)
, image-to-image translation (Su et al., 2022; Saharia et al.,
2022a; Zhao et al., 2022), text-to-image synthesis (Rombach et al., 2022a; Ramesh et al., 2021; Nichol et al., 2021),
and solving inverse problem (Chung et al., 2022b; Song

In this work, we study an intriguing while prevalent phenomenon that sets diffusion models apart from most other
generative models. We refer to this phenomenon as “consistent model reproducibility”. More precisely, as illustrated
in Figure 1, when different diffusion models are trained on
the same dataset, and sampled from the same noises when
using a deterministic ODE sampler.1

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Location, Ann
Arbor, MI 48109-2122, USA. Correspondence to: Huijie Zhang
<huijiezh@umich.edu>, Qing Qu <qingqu@umich.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

We employ a deterministic sampler to ensure model reproducibility, but stochastic samplers can also achieve reproducibility
when they generate consistent noise across different models.

1

