In-Context Principle Learning from Mistakes

Tianjun Zhang * 1 Aman Madaan * 2 Luyu Gao * 2 Steven Zheng 3 Swaroop Mishra 3
Yiming Yang 2 Niket Tandon 4 Uri Alon 3

Abstract

Learned Principle

In-context learning (ICL, also known as fewshot prompting) has been the standard method
of adapting LLMs to downstream tasks, by learning from a few input-output examples. Nonetheless, all ICL-based approaches only learn from
correct input-output pairs. In this paper, we
revisit this paradigm, by learning more from
the few given input-output examples. We introduce Learning Principles (LEAP): First, we intentionally induce the model to make mistakes
on these few examples; then the model itself reflects on these mistakes, and learn explicit taskspecific “principles” from them without any human supervision, which help solve similar problems and avoid common mistakes; finally, we
prompt the model to answer unseen test questions using the original few-shot examples and
these learned general principles. We evaluate
LEAP on a wide range of benchmarks, including
multi-hop question answering (Hotpot QA), textual QA (DROP), Big-Bench Hard reasoning, and
math problems (GSM8K and MATH); in all these
benchmarks, LEAP improves the strongest available LLMs such as GPT-3.5-turbo, GPT-4,
GPT-4-turbo and Claude-2.1. For example, LEAP improves over the standard few-shot
prompting using GPT-4 by 7.5% in DROP, and
by 3.3% in HotpotQA. Importantly, LEAP does
not require any more input or examples than the
standard few-shot prompting settings.

Benchmark

When solving a problem involving multiple
sources of income and expenses, it is crucial
to keep track of each component separately
and calculate the total accurately.

GSM8K

When simplifying complex numbers raised
to powers, it is important to remember the
following rules: (1) i2 = −1 (2) i3 = −i (3)
i4 = 1 (4) i−1 = 1i = −i

MATH

Perform calculations using the full precision
available and only round as a final step, if
necessary.

DROP

When answering questions about commonalities between two entities, it is important to
consider all relevant aspects and not just the
most obvious or prominent one.

HotpotQA

Double negation, as in ‘not not’, cancels out
and returns the original value.

Boolean Expressions (BBH)

Sarcasm often involves saying the opposite
of what is meant ... Paying attention to the
incongruity between the literal meaning of
the words and the intended meaning can help
in accurately identifying sarcasm.

Snarks
(BBH)

Figure 1: Examples for learned principles using LEAP, with
key idea of each principle highlighted.

too costly to finetune for downstream tasks has led to the
growing popularity of in-context learning (ICL), also known
as few-shot prompting (Brown et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2023;
Wei et al., 2023). In in-context learning, the LLM is provided with a few (e.g., three) input-output task-specific examples in its prompt, along with an unseen test input. Using
this emergent ability (Wei et al., 2022b), the LLM is then
expected to generate output for the test input. The LLM
generates this output by implicitly learning the task from
the few given examples, at inference time.

1. Introduction
The rise of large language models (LLMs; Radford et al.,
2019; Chowdhery et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022; Li et al.,
2022; Anil et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023a;b) that are
*
1
Equal contribution
UC Berkeley 2 Carnegie Mellon
University 3 Google DeepMind 4 AI2.
Correspondence to:
Tianjun Zhang <tianjunz@berkeley.edu>, Aman Madaan
<amadaan@cs.cmu.edu>, Uri Alon <urialon@google.com>.

ICL was shown to be extremely effective and data-efficient
across a variety of tasks and domains (Min et al., 2022a;
Alayrac et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2021; Lu et al., 2023), mainly
because it allows for downstream task-adaptation without
training. Further, ICL enables generalization using only a
few annotated examples. Nonetheless, all ICL-based ap-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

