Bias of Stochastic Gradient Descent or the Architecture: Disentangling the
Effects of Overparameterization of Neural Networks

Amit Peleg 1 2 Matthias Hein 1 2

Abstract

based optimization is more challenging due to its integral
role in today’s well-performing networks. The implicit bias
of Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) is thus often thought
to be the main reason behind generalization (Arora et al.,
2019; Shah et al., 2020). A recent thought-provoking study
by Chiang et al. (2023) suggests the idea of the volume hypothesis for generalization: well-generalizing basins of the
loss occupy a significantly larger volume in the weight space
of neural networks than basins that do not generalize well.
They argue that the generalization performance of neural
networks is primarily a bias of the architecture and that the
implicit bias of SGD is only a secondary effect. To this end,
they randomly sample networks that achieve zero training
error (which they term Guess and Check (G&C)) and argue
that the generalization performance of these networks is
qualitatively similar to networks found by SGD.

Neural networks typically generalize well when
fitting the data perfectly, even though they are
heavily overparameterized. Many factors have
been pointed out as the reason for this phenomenon, including an implicit bias of stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) and a possible simplicity
bias arising from the neural network architecture.
The goal of this paper is to disentangle the factors
that influence generalization stemming from optimization and architectural choices by studying
random and SGD-optimized networks that achieve
zero training error. We experimentally show, in
the low sample regime, that overparameterization
in terms of increasing width is beneficial for generalization, and this benefit is due to the bias of
SGD and not due to an architectural bias. In contrast, for increasing depth, overparameterization
is detrimental for generalization, but random and
SGD-optimized networks behave similarly, so this
can be attributed to an architectural bias.

In this work, we revisit the approach of Chiang et al. (2023)
and study it in detail to disentangle the effects of implicit
bias of SGD from a potential bias of the choice of architecture. As we have to compare to randomly sampled neural
networks, our analysis is restricted to binary classification
tasks in the low sample regime. Specifically, we analyze
the behavior of the LeNet (LeCun et al., 1998), Multi-Layer
Perceptron (MLP), and ResNet (He et al., 2016) architectures.

1. Introduction
The generalization of neural networks challenges common
wisdom in classical statistical learning theory (Vapnik &
Chervonenkis, 1971): the number of parameters in today’s
neural networks is much larger than necessary to fit the
data (Zhang et al., 2017), and further increasing network
size, i.e., more overparameterization, yields better generalization (Hestness et al., 2017; Allen-Zhu et al., 2019). The
underlying mechanisms of generalization despite overparameterization remain, to a large extent, an open question.

In summary, we make the following contributions:
• We show that some findings of Chiang et al. (2023)
are based on a sub-optimal initialization of SGD, which
makes SGD artificially worse. Moreover, we argue that
their normalized loss cannot be used to compare networks
of different architectures. We suggest an alternative normalization and analysis scheme that allows us to study
the effects of increasing overparameterization (in terms
of width and depth).

While the contribution of certain aspects has been examined
in the past (e.g., batch size (Keskar et al., 2017a) and learning rate (Li et al., 2019)), isolating the effect of gradient-

• We show that increasing overparameterization in terms
of width improves the generalization of SGD, while for
randomly sampled networks, it remains mostly unaffected.
This indicates a clear implicit bias of SGD.

1

University of Tübingen, Germany 2 Tübingen AI Center,
Germany. Correspondence to: Amit Peleg <amit.peleg@unituebingen.de>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

• On the contrary, increasing overparameterization in terms
of depth is detrimental to generalization both for SGD
1

