Differentially Private Worst-group Risk Minimization

Xinyu Zhou 1 Raef Bassily 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Multi-distribution learning has gained increasing attention
due to its close connection to robustness and fairness in
machine learning. Consider p groups (or, sub-populations),
where each group is associated with some unknown data
distribution. In the multi-distribution learning paradigm, the
learner tries to find a model that minimizes the maximal
population risk across all groups. Let Di denote distribution
of group i ∈ [p] and ℓ : W × Z be a loss function over the
parameter space W and data domain Z, our objective of
minimizing the worst-group population risk can be formulated as a minimax stochastic optimization problem written
as
min max {LDi (w) := Ez∼Di ℓ(w, z)}
(1)

We initiate a systematic study of worst-group
risk minimization under (ϵ, δ)-differential privacy
(DP). The goal is to privately find a model that
approximately minimizes the maximal risk across
p sub-populations (groups) with different distributions, where each group distribution is accessed
via a sample oracle. We first present a new algorithm that achieves
excess worst-group population
√
pp
p d
risk of Õ( Kϵ + K ), where K is the total number of samples drawn from all groups and d is the
problem dimension. Our rate is nearly optimal
when each distribution is observed via a fixedsize dataset of size K/p. Our result is based on a
new stability-based analysis for the generalization
error. In particular, we show that ∆-uniform argument stability implies Õ(∆ + √1n ) generalization
error w.r.t. the worst-group risk, where n is the
number of samples drawn from each sample oracle. Next, we propose an algorithmic framework
for worst-group population risk minimization using any DP online convex optimization algorithm
as a subroutine.Hence, we give another excess

q
p p
pp
d1/2
risk bound of Õ
+
+
ϵK
Kϵ2
K . As-

w∈W i∈[p]

When each group distribution Di is observed by a dataset Si ,
we also define the worst-group empirical risk minimization
problem as
(
)
1 X
min max LSi (w) :=
ℓ(w, z)
(2)
w∈W i∈[p]
|Si |
z∼Si

The worst-group risk minimization problems (1) and (2)
have wide applications in a variety of learning scenarios.
In the regime of robust learning, the objective represents a
class of problems named as group distributionally robust
optimization (Group DRO) (Soma et al., 2022; Zhang et al.,
2023; Sagawa et al., 2019). This formulation also captures
the mismatch between distributions from different domains
(or, sub-populations). In this type of scenarios, instead of
assuming a fixed target distribution, this formulation can
be used to find a model that can work well for any possible
target distribution formed as a mixture of the distributions
from different domains/sub-populations. From the perspective of learning with fairness, each group may represent a
protected class or a demographic group. Minimizing the
worst-group risk leads to the notions of good-intent fairness
(Mohri et al., 2019) or min-max group fairness (Abernethy
et al., 2022; Diana et al., 2021; Papadaki et al., 2022). By
making sure the worst-off group performs as good as possible, the objective prevents the learner from overfitting to
certain groups at the cost of others. Moreover, the objectives
are also connected to other learning applications such as
collaborative learning (Blum et al., 2017) and agnostic fed-

suming the typical setting of ϵ = Θ(1), this bound
is more favorable than our first bound in a certain
range of p as a function of K and d. Finally, we
study differentially private worst-group empirical risk minimization in the offline setting, where
each group distribution is observed by a fixed-size
dataset. We present a new √
algorithm with nearly
optimal excess risk of Õ( pKϵd ).

1

Department of Computer Science & Engineering, The Ohio
State University 2 Department of Computer Science & Engineering and the Translational Data Analytics Institute (TDAI),
The Ohio State University. Correspondence to: Xinyu Zhou
<zhou.3542@buckeyemail.osu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

