Adaptive Conformal Inference by Betting

Aleksandr Podkopaev 1 Darren Xu 1 Kuang-chih Lee 1

Abstract

struction of uncertainty quantification wrappers that can be
seamlessly placed on top of arbitrary prediction models.

Conformal prediction is a valuable tool for quantifying predictive uncertainty of machine learning models. However, its applicability relies on
the assumption of data exchangeability, a condition which is often not met in real-world scenarios. In this paper, we consider the problem of
adaptive conformal inference without any assumptions about the data generating process. Existing
approaches for adaptive conformal inference are
based on optimizing the pinball loss using variants of online gradient descent. A notable shortcoming of such approaches is in their explicit
dependence on and sensitivity to the choice of the
learning rates. In this paper, we propose a different approach for adaptive conformal inference
that leverages parameter-free online convex optimization techniques. We prove that our method
controls long-term miscoverage frequency at a
nominal level and demonstrate its convincing empirical performance without any need of performing cumbersome parameter tuning.

Suppose that a model fˆ : Rd → R has been trained to
generate real-valued predictions. One option is to resort to
conformal predictors that output sets of the following form:
Ĉ(x; s) := [fˆ(x) − s, fˆ(x) + s]. Here, candidate prediction
sets are parameterized by a single univariate parameter, denoted by s. The goal is to calibrate this parameter, i.e, determine a suitable ŝ that ensures coverage. In this context, we
remind the reader of a well-known technique of split conformal prediction, which relies on a holdout set not used during
n
training: {(Xi , Yi )}i=1 . Estimating errors via the absolute
residuals, or the nonconformity scores: Ri = |fˆ(Xi ) − Yi |,
and selecting ŝ as the ⌈(1 − α)(n + 1)⌉-smallest value
amongst {R1 , . . . , Rn , +∞} results in a conformal predictor that satisfies:


P Ytest ∈ Ĉ(Xtest ; ŝ) ≥ 1 − α,
as long as (X1 , Y1 ), . . . , (Xn , Yn ), (Xtest , Ytest ) are exchangeable. We note that conformal inference is not specific to the above setting and has been extended in various
directions. First, it offers much higher flexibility beyond the
standard point forecasting model described above, e.g., it
can be applied to recalibrate the prediction intervals associated with conditional quantile regression models (Romano
et al., 2019). Moreover, procedures that extend the split
conformal framework beyond a single sample split, and
hence allow better utilization of available data, have been
developed, including procedures like Jackknife+ (Barber
et al., 2021). For a detailed overview of recent advancements and trends in the field of conformal inference, we
refer the reader to Angelopoulos & Bates (2023).

1. Introduction
Accurate uncertainty estimation plays a crucial role in the
practical deployment of machine learning models, particularly in contexts where model outputs impact downstream
decision-making. A popular approach for quantifying predictive uncertainty is by using prediction sets: intervals in
regression tasks or collection of labels in classification problems. The primary objective of such sets is to achieve valid
coverage, meaning that they should cover the true labels
with high probability (e.g., 90%). In addition to coverage,
the sharpness, or size of such prediction sets is extremely
important in real-world applications. Conformal prediction (Vovk et al., 2005) stands out as a versatile framework
which is well-suited for this task: it allows for the con-

While conformal inference relies on the assumption of data
exchangeability, it often fails to be met in practice. Examples include cases where data arrive sequentially over time,
possibly exhibiting shifts in distribution, or where one is
dealing with time series data. Despite the imposed practical
challenges, there remains a huge demand for supplementing
point predictions with valid measures of uncertainty. In this
work, we consider the problem of online conformal inference — without imposing any distributional or dependency
assumptions on the data generating process — and focus on
approaches that are applicable to arbitrary data streams.

1
Walmart Global Tech. Correspondence to: Aleksandr Podkopaev <sasha.podkopaev@walmart.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

