Revisiting the Role of Language Priors in Vision-Language Models

Zhiqiu Lin * 1 Xinyue Chen * 1 Deepak Pathak 1 Pengchuan Zhang 2 Deva Ramanan 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Vision-language models (VLMs) trained on web-scale
datasets will likely serve as the foundation for nextgeneration visual understanding systems. One reason for
their widespread adoption is their ability to be used in
an “off-the-shelf” (OTS) or zero-shot manner without finetuning for specific target applications. In this study, we
explore their OTS use on the task of image-text retrieval
(e.g., given an image, predict the correct caption out of K
options) across a suite of nine popular benchmarks.

Vision-language models (VLMs) are impactful
in part because they can be applied to a variety
of visual understanding tasks in a zero-shot fashion, without any fine-tuning. We study generative VLMs that are trained for next-word generation given an image. We explore their zeroshot performance on the illustrative task of imagetext retrieval across nine popular vision-language
benchmarks. Our first observation is that they
can be repurposed for discriminative tasks (such
as image-text retrieval) by simply computing the
match score of generating a particular text string
given an image. We call this probabilistic score
the Visual Generative Pre-Training Score (VisualGPTScore). While the VisualGPTScore produces
near-perfect accuracy on some retrieval benchmarks, it yields poor accuracy on others. We
analyze this behavior through a probabilistic lens,
pointing out that some benchmarks inadvertently
capture unnatural language distributions by creating adversarial but unlikely text captions. In
fact, we demonstrate that even a “blind” language
model that ignores any image evidence can sometimes outperform all prior art, reminiscent of similar challenges faced by the visual-question answering (VQA) community many years ago. We
derive a probabilistic post-processing scheme that
controls for the amount of linguistic bias in generative VLMs at test time without having to retrain
or fine-tune the model. We show that the VisualGPTScore, when appropriately debiased, is a
strong zero-shot baseline for vision-language understanding, oftentimes producing state-of-the-art
accuracy.

Challenges. While the performance of foundational VLMs
is impressive, many open challenges remain. Recent analyses (Kamath et al., 2023; Yuksekgonul et al., 2022) point
out that leading VLMs such as CLIP (Radford et al., 2021)
may often degrade to “bag-of-words” that confuse captions
such as “the horse is eating the grass” and
“the grass is eating the horse”. This makes
it difficult to use VLMs to capture compositions of objects,
attributes, and their relations. But somewhat interestingly,
large-scale language models (LLMs) trained for autoregressive next-token prediction (Brown et al., 2020) seem to be
able to discern such distinctions, which we investigate below. A related but under-appreciated difficulty is that of
benchmarking the performance of visio-linguistic reasoning.
Perhaps the most well-known example in the community is
that of the influential VQA benchmarks (Antol et al., 2015),
which could be largely solved by exploiting linguistic biases
in the dataset – concretely, questions about images could
often be answered by “blind” language-only models that did
not look at the image (Goyal et al., 2017). Notably, we find
that such blind algorithms still excel on many contemporary
image-text retrieval benchmarks where VLMs may struggle.
Generative models for discriminative tasks. We tackle the
above challenges by revisiting the role of language priors
through a probabilistic lens. To allow for a probabilistic
treatment, we focus on generative VLMs that take an image
as input and stochastically generate text via next-token prediction (Li et al., 2022; 2023). We first demonstrate that such
models can be easily repurposed for discriminative tasks
(such as retrieval) by setting the match score for an imagetext pair to be the probability that the VLM would generate
that text from the given image, or P (text|image). We call
this probability score the Visual Generative Pre-Training

*
Equal contribution 1 CMU 2 Meta. Correspondence to: Zhiqiu
Lin <zhiqiul@andrew.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

