Counterfactual Reasoning for Multi-Label Image Classification
via Patching-Based Training

Ming-Kun Xie * 1 Jia-Hao Xiao * 1 Pei Peng 1 Gang Niu 2 Masashi Sugiyama 2 3 Sheng-Jun Huang 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

In single-label supervised learning, each instance is assigned
with a single label to describe its semantics, while many
realistic scenarios exhibit a multi-labeled nature, where
each instance is associated with multiple labels (Zhang &
Zhou, 2013; Liu et al., 2021b). For example, an image
captured on the beach may simultaneously contain objects
such as sea, person, and palm tree. The goal of MLC is
to develop a classification model based on examples with
multiple semantics, enabling it to predict all relevant labels
for unseen instances.

The key to multi-label image classification (MLC)
is to improve model performance by leveraging label correlations. Unfortunately, it has been shown
that overemphasizing co-occurrence relationships
can cause the overfitting issue of the model, ultimately leading to performance degradation. In
this paper, we provide a causal inference framework to show that the correlative features caused
by the target object and its co-occurring objects
can be regarded as a mediator, which has both positive and negative impacts on model predictions.
On the positive side, the mediator enhances the
recognition performance of the model by capturing co-occurrence relationships; on the negative
side, it has the harmful causal effect that causes
the model to make an incorrect prediction for the
target object, even when only co-occurring objects are present in an image. To address this
problem, we propose a counterfactual reasoning
method to measure the total direct effect, achieved
by enhancing the direct effect caused only by
the target object. Due to the unknown location
of the target object, we propose patching-based
training and inference to accomplish this goal,
which divides an image into multiple patches and
identifies the pivot patch that contains the target
object. Experimental results on multiple benchmark datasets with diverse configurations validate that the proposed method can achieve stateof-the-art performance. The implementation is
available at https://github.com/xiemk/
MLC-PAT.

In comparison to single-label learning, tackling the MLC
tasks proves significantly more challenging, mainly due
to the exponentially expanded output space. Given the
prevalent co-occurrence of objects in the real world, many
methods have emerged to address the MLC problems by
exploiting label correlations. In the context of deep learning,
the pioneering work (Wang et al., 2016) employed recurrent neural networks (RNNs) to capture high-order label
correlations. Subsequent methods focused on integrating cooccurrence relationships into training, achieved through the
design of specialized architectures, e.g., graph convolutional
networks (GCNs) (Chen et al., 2019b), or the development
of innovative training schemes, e.g., label mask training
(Lanchantin et al., 2021).
While these methods have improved the practical performance of MLC, an excessive emphasis on co-occurrence has
been shown to misguide model training, leading to a degradation in overall performance (Xu et al., 2022). To address
this problem, the recent work (Xu et al., 2022) decomposed
the original task into co-occurrence and dis-occurrence subtasks. This enabled the former to capture joint patterns,
while the latter to focus on class-specific features. Another
study (Liu et al., 2023) proposed to treat co-occurring objects as confounders, recognizing the potential for incorrect
causalities between objects and predictions. To mitigate
this issue, it performed an attention-based intervention to
eliminate the harmful confounding effect.

*

Equal contribution 1 Nanjing University of Aeronautics
and Astronautics, Nanjing, China 2 RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, Tokyo, Japan 3 The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Sheng-Jun Huang
<huangsj@nuaa.edu.cn>.

In this paper, we conduct a systematic study to investigate
the impact of label co-occurrence in MLC. We first reveal
that when using the common binary cross entropy (BCE) or

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

