Jacobian Regularizer-based Neural Granger Causality

Wanqi Zhou 1 2 Shuanghao Bai 1 Shujian Yu 3 Qibin Zhao 2 Badong Chen 1

Abstract

1969), transfer entropy (TE) (Schreiber, 2000), and other
approaches like constraint-based methods (e.g., PCMCI),
noise-based methods (e.g., VarLiNGAM), and more, as
discussed in the literature (Assaad et al., 2022). Traditionally, methodologies like conditional TE (Sun et al., 2015;
Zhou et al., 2022) and constraint-based algorithms such as
PCMCI, tsFCI (Runge et al., 2019; Entner & Hoyer, 2010)
have been employed for uncovering nonlinear causal relationships. These methods have become popular due to their
capacity to sidestep the necessity for parametric modeling.
However, they grapple with a significant challenge when it
comes to scaling up to large causal graphs because of their
iterative nature and dependence on the estimation of probability densities, which motivates the need for more efficient
and effective techniques in causal relationship identification
within time series datasets.

With the advancement of neural networks, diverse methods for neural Granger causality have
emerged, which demonstrate proficiency in handling complex data, and nonlinear relationships.
However, the existing framework of neural
Granger causality has several limitations. It requires the construction of separate predictive models for each target variable, and the relationship depends on the sparsity on the weights of
the first layer, resulting in challenges in effectively modeling complex relationships between
variables as well as unsatisfied estimation accuracy of Granger causality. Moreover, most
of them cannot grasp full-time Granger causality. To address these drawbacks, we propose
a Jacobian Regularizer-based Neural Granger
Causality (JRNGC) approach, a straightforward
yet highly effective method for learning multivariate summary Granger causality and full-time
Granger causality by constructing a single model
for all target variables. Specifically, our method
eliminates the sparsity constraints of weights by
leveraging an input-output Jacobian matrix regularizer, which can be subsequently represented
as the weighted causal matrix in the post-hoc
analysis. Extensive experiments show that our
proposed approach achieves competitive performance with the state-of-the-art methods for learning summary Granger causality and full-time
Granger causality while maintaining lower model
complexity and high scalability.

Recent advancements in deep learning have shown promising progress in learning Granger causality. Several studies
have explored the application of neural networks, such as
multi-layer perceptron (MLP), recurrent neural networks
(RNNs), and dynamic variational autoencoders, for learning Granger causality from time series data (Tank et al.,
2021; Suryadi et al., 2023; Bussmann et al., 2021; Li et al.,
2023). These methods integrate Granger causality as a null
hypothesis into time series forecasting or generative models,
allowing causal relationships between variables to be more
accurately captured through causal constraint modeling. Despite these advancements, current neural Granger causality
methods have two major drawbacks. Firstly, as illustrated
in the left panel of Figure 1, they require building separate
neural networks for each target variable during the training
phase to learn Granger causality. This can result in computational inefficiencies and scalability challenges when dealing
with larger and more complex datasets, especially when we
need to grasp long full-time Granger causality. Secondly,
they rely on sparse constraints on the first layer weights,
which leads to the necessity of separate models for target
variables, and also limits the ability to capture Granger
causal relationships for complex data, because the dependencies between variables over time will be overlooked.
Moreover, in cases where the number of variables is high,
the search space for causal variance becomes broad. Thus
solely constraining the first layer is insufficient and may result in local optima. In other words, the relationship between

1. Introduction
On time-series data, causal relations can be learned by various methodologies, such as Granger causality (Granger,
1
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China. 2 RIKEN AIP, Japan. 3 Vrije Universiteit
Amsterdam, Netherlands. Correspondence to: Badong Chen
<chenbd@mail.xjtu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

