Referee Can Play: An Alternative Approach to Conditional Generation via
Model Inversion
Xuantong Liu 1 Tianyang Hu 2 Wenjia Wang 1 3 Kenji Kawaguchi 4 Yuan Yao 1

Abstract

text-to-image generation. The performance of state-of-theart (SOTA) DPMs, e.g., Stable Diffusion (SD) (Rombach
et al., 2022; Podell et al., 2023), PixArt-α (Chen et al.,
2023a), in generating various images with high-fidelity is
no longer a major concern. What is left to be desired is
controllability, i.e., the compatibility between the generated
image and the input text. For instance, a simple composite
prompt like “a red backpack and a blue book” is challenging
for Stable Diffusion (Huang et al., 2023).

As a dominant force in text-to-image generation
tasks, Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DPMs)
face a critical challenge in controllability, struggling to adhere strictly to complex, multi-faceted
instructions. In this work, we aim to address this
alignment challenge for conditional generation
tasks. First, we provide an alternative view of
state-of-the-art DPMs as a way of inverting advanced Vision-Language Models (VLMs). With
this formulation, we naturally propose a trainingfree approach that bypasses the conventional sampling process associated with DPMs. By directly
optimizing images with the supervision of discriminative VLMs, the proposed method can potentially achieve a better text-image alignment.
As proof of concept, we demonstrate the pipeline
with the pre-trained BLIP-2 model and identify
several key designs for improved image generation. To further enhance the image fidelity, a
Score Distillation Sampling module of Stable Diffusion is incorporated. By carefully balancing the
two components during optimization, our method
can produce high-quality images with near stateof-the-art performance on T2I-Compbench. The
code is available at https://github.com/Pepperlll/VLMinv.

To better understand the condition injection mechanism of
modern text-to-image generation models, let us first consider the relationship between text (i.e., condition) and image. In practice, the actual condition the model takes usually contains an extended version of the input prompt paraphrased by language models. As the text description gets
richer, more information is dictated for the target image with
less nuisance to fill. In other words, the stochasticity of the
generation task gradually decreases with extra conditions,
where we may even expect almost one-to-one matching
between the text and image. This transition calls for new
thinking about the conditional generation task.
On the one hand, when training such strong-condition models, high-quality paired data (x, y) are needed where x
satisfies the condition y. For most of the generative models,
the generation process can be described as mapping (y, ϵ) to
x where ϵ is a random vector providing diversity. In practice,
the controllability of the generative model is critically dependent on the label quality, i.e., y|x should be as detailed
as possible. Beyond human labeling, SOTA DPMs such as
DALLE-3 (Betker et al., 2023) utilize powerful vision language models (VLMs) to regenerate image captions during
training. Then, given a new prompt y at the inference phase,
the ideal image x|y should be deemed fit by the VLM. From
this perspective, the text-to-image generation case can be
seen as a model inversion task on the VLM, with explicit
mappings parametrized by the score network in DPMs. On
the other hand, the discriminative module also plays a more
central role in aligning with the condition. As supporting
evidence, consider the importance of guidance in current
text-to-image DPMs (Ho & Salimans, 2022; Bansal et al.,
2023; Ma et al., 2023). Although designed to work directly,
a relatively large classifier-free guidance (CFG) coefficient
is indispensable (7.5 by default in SD). When faced with the

1. Introduction
With exceptional sample quality and scalability, DPMs
(Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020; Song et al.,
2020) have significantly contributed to the success of Artificial Intelligence Generated Content (AIGC), especially in
1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 3 Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology (Guangzhou) 4 National University of Singapore. Correspondence to: Tianyang Hu <hutianyang.up@outlook.com>,
Yuan Yao <yuany@ust.hk>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

