Bifurcated Attention for Single-Context Large-Batch Sampling

Ben Athiwaratkun * 1 Sujan Kumar Gonugondla * 2 Sanjay Krishna Gouda 2 Haifeng Qian 2 Hantian Ding 2
Qing Sun 2 Jun Wang 2 Jiacheng Guo 2 Liangfu Chen 2 Parminder Bhatia 3 Ramesh Nallapati 4
Sudipta Sengupta 2 Bing Xiang 5

Abstract

impressive capabilities, the deployment of these large-scale
models in practical applications poses significant challenges,
particularly in terms of inference latency and efficiency.
Enhancing these aspects is critical, as they directly influence
the computational resources required to generate predictions
and enable the practical implementation of these advanced
models across various industries.

In our study, we present bifurcated attention, a
method developed for language model inference
in single-context batch sampling contexts. This
approach aims to reduce redundant memory IO
costs, a significant factor in latency for high batch
sizes and long context lengths. Bifurcated attention achieves this by dividing the attention
mechanism during incremental decoding into two
distinct GEMM operations, focusing on the KV
cache from prefill and the decoding process. This
method ensures precise computation and maintains the usual computational load (FLOPs) of
standard attention mechanisms, but with reduced
memory IO. Bifurcated attention is also compatible with multi-query attention mechanism known
for reduced memory IO for KV cache, further
enabling higher batch size and context length.
The resulting efficiency leads to lower latency,
improving suitability for real-time applications,
e.g., enabling massively-parallel answer generation without substantially increasing latency, enhancing performance when integrated with postprocessing techniques such as reranking.

A particularly demanding inference scenario is singlecontext batch sampling, where the goal is to generate multiple completions from a single context. This task is commonly encountered in numerous applications such as codeediting IDE tools that provide multiple recommendations, or
in cases where ranking among many generations is needed
for optimal performance (via ranking metrics like mean log
probability, majority voting, etc). The incremental decoding
of such sampling scenario is memory IO intensive, which
becomes a latency bottleneck for high batches and context
lengths.
In this study, we investigate two compatible strategies to
address the memory IO challenges in tranformers inference:
(1) an investigation of multi-query and its trade-offs, and (2)
a novel technique called context-aware bifurcated attention.
Our investigation begins with an analysis of the generalized multi-query attention (Ainslie et al., 2023), which
includes multi-query (Shazeer, 2019), as well as the established multi-head attention mechanism (Vaswani et al.,
2017) for performance and latency trade-off. Our findings
show smooth performance scaling with increasing model
size for a fixed value of the number of groups g for generalized multi-query1 . Lowering g results in an upward shift of
the validation loss vs model size scaling curves. The consistent relationship between the cache compression, model
size and validation loss allows us to trade-off inference efficiency with model size, i.e., enables us to select higher
compression for use cases requiring high efficiency, while
still matching the performance of multi-head attention by

1. Introduction
The advent of large language models (LLMs) has ushered
in a new era of machine learning, exhibiting remarkable
performance on a wide array of tasks (Brown et al., 2020;
OpenAI, 2023; Chowdhery et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023;
Chen et al., 2021; Hoffmann et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022;
Microsoft; Amazon; Nijkamp et al., 2023). Despite their
*
Equal contribution 1 Together.ai (work conducted at AWS)
AWS NGDE Science 3 GE HealthCare (work conducted at AWS)
4
Amazon AGI (work conducted at AWS) 5 Goldman Sachs (work
conducted at AWS). Correspondence to: Ben Athiwaratkun
<ben.athiwaratkun@gmail.com>, Sujan Kumar Gonugondla <gsujan@amazon.com>.
2

1
Lower values of attention groups g lead to higher compression
of the key-value tensors, as in the multi-query case where g = 1,
hence improving inference efficiency and latency due to reduced
KV cache compared to the multi-head case where g = h, the
number of query attention heads.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

