Universal Gradient Methods for Stochastic Convex Optimization

Anton Rodomanov 1 Ali Kavis 2 Yongtao Wu 3 Kimon Antonakopoulos 3 Volkan Cevher 3

Abstract

where f is the main (difficult) part of the problem, and ψ is
a simple convex function (e.g., indicator of a set). Furthermore, we assume that f can be queried only via an unbiased
stochastic gradient oracle with (unknown) variance σ 2 .

We develop universal gradient methods for
Stochastic Convex Optimization (SCO). Our algorithms automatically adapt not only to the oracle’s noise but also to the Hölder smoothness of
the objective function without a priori knowledge
of the particular setting. The key ingredient is a
novel strategy for adjusting step-size coefficients
in the Stochastic Gradient Method (SGD). Unlike AdaGrad, which accumulates gradient norms,
our Universal Gradient Method accumulates appropriate combinations of gradient- and iterate
differences. The resulting algorithm has state-ofthe-art worst-case convergence rate guarantees
for the entire Hölder class including, in particular,
both nonsmooth functions and those with Lipschitz continuous gradient. We also present the
Universal Fast Gradient Method for SCO enjoying optimal efficiency estimates.

Optimization algorithms are typically designed for a particular problem class and tailored to its properties. Two
standard classes are nonsmooth (f is Lipschitz continuous)
and smooth (f has Lipschitz gradient). It is common for
the problem class to dictate the selection of algorithm’s
parameters to ensure the optimal convergence.
However, in practice, every specific problem typically belongs to multiple problem classes at the same time, and it is
usually very difficult (if not impossible) to say in advance
which particular class better fits our problem. To address
this issue, we need universal methods that can automatically adjust to the “correct” problem class when applied to
a concrete problem instance given to them.
The important example of such algorithms is given by
Universal Gradient Methods (UGMs) of (Nesterov, 2015).
These methods are capable of solving the more general class
of Hölder-smooth problems:

1. Introduction
Motivation. The complexity of modern machine learning
problems makes it difficult to estimate their mathematical
properties, let alone characterize them accurately. The problems thus demand sophisticated solutions which are robust
to possible variations in the parameters. One therefore needs
algorithms that can work simultaneously under multiple assumptions while implicitly adapting to the parameters of the
problem. The sheer scale of modern problems also raises
efficiency concerns, which paves the way for the stochastic
methods leveraging randomized computations.

∥∇f (x) − ∇f (y)∥ ≤ Lν ∥x − y∥ν ,

∀x, y ∈ dom ψ,

which continuously connects nonsmooth problems (ν = 0)
with the smooth ones (ν = 1). To achieve universality,
UGMs use a special line-search procedure which automatically selects an appropriate step size for any possible Hölder
exponent and the corresponding Hölder constant, without
knowing these parameters. As a result, the methods automatically adjust to the best possible problem class. However,
UGMs require exact computations of gradients (σ = 0).

In this paper, we study the convex optimization problem


min F (x) := f (x) + ψ(x) ,
(1)

The extension of UGMs to stochastic optimization has been
a challenging open problem. The desired algorithms should
automatically adjust not only to the Hölder smoothness of
the objective function, but also to the oracle’s noise.

x∈dom ψ

1
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security,
Saarbrücken, Germany 2 Institute for Foundations of Machine
Learning (IFML), UT Austin, Texas, USA 3 Laboratory for Information and Inference Systems (LIONS), EPFL, Lausanne,
Switzerland. Correspondence to: Anton Rodomanov <anton.rodomanov@cispa.de>.

In this paper, we address this open problem and provide
a solution to it. We design line-search-free variants of
UGMs which automatically adapt to: (i) Hölder exponent ν,
(ii) Hölder constant Lν , (iii) variance of the stochastic oracle σ, without having the prior knowledge of neither the
problem class nor the nature of the gradient information.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

