DisCo-Diff: Enhancing Continuous Diffusion Models with Discrete Latents

Yilun Xu * 1 2 Gabriele Corso 2 Tommi Jaakkola 2 Arash Vahdat 1 Karsten Kreis 1

Abstract

molecular structures (Corso et al., 2023; Yim et al., 2023;
Ingraham et al., 2023; Watson et al., 2023). DMs leverage a
forward diffusion process that effectively encodes the training data in a simple, unimodal Gaussian prior distribution.
Generation can be formulated either as a stochastic or, more
conveniently, as a deterministic process that takes as input
random noise from the Gaussian prior and transforms it
into data through a generative ordinary differential equation
(ODE) (Song et al., 2021). The Gaussian prior corresponds
to the DM’s continuous latent variables, where the data is
uniquely encoded through the ODE-defined mapping.

Diffusion models (DMs) have revolutionized generative learning. They utilize a diffusion process
to encode data into a simple Gaussian distribution. However, encoding a complex, potentially
multimodal data distribution into a single continuous Gaussian distribution arguably represents
an unnecessarily challenging learning problem.
We propose Discrete-Continuous Latent Variable
Diffusion Models (DisCo-Diff) to simplify this
task by introducing complementary discrete latent variables. We augment DMs with learnable
discrete latents, inferred with an encoder, and
train DM and encoder end-to-end. DisCo-Diff
does not rely on pre-trained networks, making the
framework universally applicable. The discrete
latents significantly simplify learning the DM’s
complex noise-to-data mapping by reducing the
curvature of the DM’s generative ODE. An additional autoregressive transformer models the distribution of the discrete latents, a simple step because DisCo-Diff requires only few discrete variables with small codebooks. We validate DisCoDiff on toy data, several image synthesis tasks as
well as molecular docking, and find that introducing discrete latents consistently improves model
performance. For example, DisCo-Diff achieves
state-of-the-art FID scores on class-conditioned
ImageNet-64/128 datasets with ODE sampler.

However, realistic data distributions are typically highdimensional, complex and often multimodal. Directly encoding such data into a single unimodal Gaussian distribution and learning a corresponding reverse noise-to-data
mapping is challenging. The mapping, or generative ODE,
necessarily needs to be highly complex, with strong curvature, and one may consider it unnatural to map an entire
data distribution to a single Gaussian distribution. In practice, conditioning information, such as class labels or text
prompts, often helps to simplify the complex mapping by
offering the DM’s denoiser additional cues for more accurate denoising. However, such conditioning information
is typically of a semantic nature and, even given a class
or text prompt, the mapping remains highly complex. For
instance, in the case of images, even within a class we find
images with vastly different styles and color patterns, which
corresponds to large distances in pixel space.
Here, we propose Discrete-Continuous Latent Variable
Diffusion Models (DisCo-Diff), DMs augmented with additional discrete latent variables that encode additional highlevel information about the data and can be used by the main
DM to simplify its denoising task (Fig. 1). These discrete
latents are inferred through an encoder network and learnt
end-to-end together with the DM. Thereby, the discrete latents directly learn to encode information that is beneficial
for reducing the DM’s score matching objective and making
the DM’s hard task of mapping simple noise to complex data
easier. Indeed, in practice, we find that they significantly reduce the curvature of the DM’s generative ODE and reduce
the DM training loss in particular for large diffusion times,
where denoising is most ambiguous and challenging. In contrast to previous work (Bao et al., 2022; Hu et al., 2023; Harvey & Wood, 2023), we do not rely on domain-specific pretrained encoder networks, making our framework general

1. Introduction
Diffusion models (DMs) (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho
et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021) have recently led to breakthroughs for generative modeling in diverse domains. For
instance, they can synthesize expressive high-resolution imagery (Saharia et al., 2022; Ramesh et al., 2022; Rombach
et al., 2022; Balaji et al., 2022) or they can generate accurate
*

Work done during an internship at NVIDIA. 1 NVIDIA 2 MIT.
Correspondence to: Yilun Xu <yilunx@nvidia.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

