Benchmarking and Building Long-Context Retrieval Models with LoCo and
M2-BERT
Jon Saad-Falcon 1 Daniel Y. Fu 1 Simran Arora 1 Neel Guha 1 Christopher Ré 1

Abstract

Dinan et al., 2019; Petroni et al., 2021). Most retrieval systems rely on pretrained text models that are only capable of
processing short input sequences (e.g., approximately 512 to
8192 tokens) (Reimers & Gurevych, 2019; Lassance & Clinchant, 2022; Karpukhin et al., 2020; Santhanam et al., 2022).
Yet from our analysis of domain-specific datasets, such as
those in law and medicine (Section 5.1), the documents or
queries may be tens of thousands of tokens long, and identifying the relevant document requires synthesizing information
across a long text sequence (Li et al., 2023). Examples include legal contracts, company financial documents, patient
notes, screenplays, and other documents with specific contextual details and cross-document references (Bai et al., 2023;
Shaham et al., 2022; Dasigi et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2023). Our
work explores how to benchmark and build high quality and
efficient retrieval systems for long-context corpora.

Retrieval pipelines are an integral component of
many machine learning systems. However, they
perform poorly in domains where documents are
long (e.g., 10K tokens or more) and where identifying the relevant document requires synthesizing
information across the entire text. Developing
long-context retrieval encoders suitable for these
domains raises three challenges: (1) how to evaluate long-context retrieval performance, (2) how to
pretrain a base language model to represent both
short contexts (corresponding to queries) and long
contexts (corresponding to documents), and (3)
how to finetune this model for retrieval under the
batch size limitations imposed by GPU memory
constraints. To address these challenges, we first
introduce LoCoV1, a 12 task benchmark constructed to measure long-context retrieval where
chunking is not possible or not effective. We next
present the M2-BERT retrieval encoder, an 80M
parameter state-space encoder model built from
the Monarch Mixer architecture, capable of scaling
to documents up to 32K tokens long. We describe a
pretraining data mixture which allows this encoder
to process both short and long context sequences,
and a finetuning approach that adapts this base
model to retrieval with only single-sample batches.
Finally, we validate the M2-BERT retrieval encoder on LoCoV1, finding that it outperforms competitive Transformer-based models by at least 22.2
points, despite containing 90× fewer parameters.

1

Popular retrieval models are built using the Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2023), which scales quadratically
in sequence length, making it expensive to extend existing
retrieval recipes to the long-context setting. Recent work
on state-space architectures, such as S4 (Gu et al., 2022),
Mamba (Gu & Dao, 2023), Monarch Mixer (Fu et al., 2023a),
and more (Wang et al., 2022; Smith et al., 2023; Hasani et al.,
2022; Fu et al., 2023b; Poli et al., 2023), suggests that the
subquadratic scaling properties enjoyed by these models
make them amenable for long contexts. However, adapting
state-space models for retrieval raises three challenges:
• Evaluation: Existing benchmarks for retrieval contain
query-document pairs where the relevant information is
contained either within the first 512 tokens of the document,
or within a small sequence of text (Thakur et al., 2021;
Muennighoff et al., 2022). As a result, naive truncationbased and chunking baselines perform nearly optimally,
regardless of the document length. Validating long-context
retrievers thus requires benchmarks on which identifying
the relevant document requires reasoning across longer
spans of text (e.g. medical, financial, or legal documents
with many repeated textual phrases amongst in-class documents but key contextual details throughout the document).
• Pretraining: Retrieval encoders must be pretrained to
process both short sequences (corresponding to queries)
and long sequences (corresponding to documents). Prior
work on state-space model pretraining, in contrast, has

Introduction

Retrieval is an essential component of machine learning
pipelines for tasks like search, question-answering, dialogue,
and fact verification (Chen et al., 2017; Lewis et al., 2021;
1
Stanford University, Computer Science, Stanford, CA. Correspondence to: Jon Saad-Falcon <jonsaadfalcon@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

