Learning Useful Representations of
Recurrent Neural Network Weight Matrices

Vincent Herrmann 1 Francesco Faccio 1 2 Jürgen Schmidhuber 1 2

Abstract

text, audio and video with deep neural networks (NNs). This
expertise has significantly advanced the field by enabling
models to convert data into formats useful for solving problems. In particular, recurrent NNs (RNNs) have been widely
adopted due to their computational universality (Siegelmann
& Sontag, 1991). Low-dimensional representations of the
programs of RNNs (their weight matrices) are of great interest as they can speed up the search for solutions to given
problems. For instance, compressed representations of RNN
weight matrices have been used to evolve RNN parameters (Koutnı́k et al., 2010) for controlling a car from raw
video input (Koutnı́k et al., 2013), using Fourier-type transforms, e.g., the coefficient of the Discrete Cosine Transform
(DCT) (Srivastava et al., 2012), without using the capabilities of NNs to learn such representations. Recent work has
seen a rise of representation learning techniques for NN
weights using NNs as encoders (Eilertsen et al., 2020; Unterthiner et al., 2020; Schürholt et al., 2021; Dupont et al.,
2022; Faccio et al., 2022b). However, there is a lack of
methods for learning representations of RNNs.

Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) are generalpurpose parallel-sequential computers. The program of an RNN is its weight matrix. How to
learn useful representations of RNN weights that
facilitate RNN analysis as well as downstream
tasks? While the mechanistic approach directly
looks at some RNN’s weights to predict its behavior, the functionalist approach analyzes its overall
functionality—specifically, its input-output mapping. We consider several mechanistic approaches
for RNN weights and adapt the permutation equivariant Deep Weight Space layer for RNNs. Our
two novel functionalist approaches extract information from RNN weights by ‘interrogating’ the
RNN through probing inputs. We develop a theoretical framework that demonstrates conditions
under which the functionalist approach can generate rich representations that help determine RNN
behavior. We release the first two ‘model zoo’
datasets for RNN weight representation learning.
One consists of generative models of a class of
formal languages, and the other one of classifiers
of sequentially processed MNIST digits. With
the help of an emulation-based self-supervised
learning technique we compare and evaluate the
different RNN weight encoding techniques on
multiple downstream applications. On the most
challenging one, namely predicting which exact
task the RNN was trained on, functionalist approaches show clear superiority.

This paper introduces novel techniques for learning RNN
representations using powerful NNs, which may be RNNs
themselves. Just like representation learning in other fields,
such as computer vision, facilitates solutions of specific
tasks, such techniques can facilitate learning, searching, and
planning with RNNs. We show that by employing general RNN weight encoder architectures and self-supervised
learning methods, it is possible to learn representations that
capture diverse functionalities of RNNs. We differentiate
between encoders that treat the weights as input data (mechanistic) and those that engage only with the function defined
by the weights (functionalist). Within the functionalist approach, the non-interactive probing method uses learnable
but fixed probing sequences as input to the RNN and observes the corresponding outputs. In contrast, interactive
probing adapts the probing sequences dynamically based on
the input RNN in order to extract the most relevant information. We provide empirical and theoretical evidence of the
effectiveness of interactive probing for complex tasks, despite occasional training stability issues. For simpler tasks or
when interactive properties are not required, non-interactive
probing or mechanistic encoders might be more suitable.

1. Introduction
For decades, researchers have developed techniques for
learning representations of complex objects such as images,
1

The Swiss AI Lab IDSIA, USI & SUPSI 2 AI Initiative, KAUST. Correspondence to: Vincent Herrmann <vincent.herrmann@idsia.ch>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

