Transferring Knowledge from
Large Foundation Models to Small Downstream Models

Shikai Qiu 1 2 3 Boran Han 1 Danielle C. Maddix 1 Shuai Zhang 1 Yuyang Wang 1 Andrew Gordon Wilson 1 2

Abstract

stream data. This procedure only transfers generic and
limited information and the computational burden of finetuning and deploying pre-trained models is quickly becoming prohibitive with increases in model size (Bommasani
et al., 2021; Brown et al., 2020; Dosovitskiy et al., 2020;
Zhai et al., 2022). Furthermore, this approach precludes
transferring from multiple pre-trained models that learn
complementary information due to different pre-training
strategies, when a variety of distinctly pre-trained models
have become available, especially in domains like computer
vision (Oquab et al., 2023; Radford et al., 2021; Kolesnikov
et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020b).

How do we transfer the relevant knowledge from
ever larger foundation models into small, taskspecific downstream models that can run at much
lower costs? Standard transfer learning using
pre-trained weights as the initialization transfers
limited information and commits us to often massive pre-trained architectures. This procedure also
precludes combining multiple pre-trained models
that learn complementary information. To address these shortcomings, we introduce Adaptive
Feature Transfer (AFT). Instead of transferring
weights, AFT operates purely on features, thereby
decoupling the choice of the pre-trained model
from the smaller downstream model. Rather than
indiscriminately compressing all pre-trained features, AFT adaptively transfers pre-trained features that are most useful for performing the
downstream task, using a simple regularization
that adds minimal overhead. Across multiple vision, language, and multi-modal datasets, AFT
achieves significantly better downstream performance compared to alternatives with a similar
computational cost. Furthermore, AFT reliably
translates improvement in pre-trained models into
improvement in downstream performance, even if
the downstream model is over 50× smaller, and
can effectively transfer complementary information learned by multiple pre-trained models.

In principle, however, this transfer from large foundation
models to small downstream models should not only be
possible but also natural, since the downstream models need
not indiscriminately compress all knowledge learned by pretraining, but only inherit the task-revelant knowledge. Leveraging this insight, we propose Adaptive Feature Transfer
(AFT), illustrated in Figure 1a, a simple, general, and efficient method to adaptively transfer task-relevant knowledge
from a set of pre-trained models into a small downstream
model, with negligible cost compared to standard training.
Viewing pre-trained features as a compressed representation of the input containing highly relevant information for
downstream predictions, AFT steers the downstream model
to prioritize learning the task-relevant subset of pre-trained
features over entirely new features representing information about the raw input but not preserved by pre-training.
Crucially, recognizing not all pre-trained features are relevant for a specific downstream task, AFT discourages the
downstream model from learning irrelevant features.

1. Introduction

Across multiple vision, language, and multi-modal datasets,
we show AFT delivers a substantial performance improvement when transferring from some of the strongest opensource vision and language foundation models, compared
to alternatives with a similar computational cost: direct
fine-tuning of the downstream model with standard transfer learning, B-Tuning (You et al., 2022), an efficient
method multi-source and cross-architecture transfer learning, and knowledge distillation from the pre-trained to the
downstream model (Hinton et al., 2015; Romero et al.,
2014; Park et al., 2019; Kim et al., 2018). Moreover,

Despite the growing importance of transfer learning, it
remains standard practice to simply start with some pretrained weights as an initialization for fine-tuning on down1

AWS AI Labs, Santa Clara, CA, USA 2 Department of Computer Science, New York University, NYC, USA 3 Work done
during an internship at AWS. Correspondence to: Shikai Qiu
<sq2129@nyu.edu>, Boran Han <boranhan@amazon.com>,
Andrew Gordon Wilson <andrewgw@cims.nyu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

