Slow and Steady Wins the Race
Maintaining Plasticity with Hare and Tortoise Networks

Hojoon Lee 1 Hyeonseo Cho 2 Hyunseung Kim 1 Donghu Kim 1 Dugki Min 2 Jaegul Choo 1 Clare Lyle 3

ℒ(𝑓"! 𝑥 , 𝑦)

Abstract

grad

This study investigates the loss of generalization ability in neural networks, revisiting warmstarting experiments from Ash & Adams (2020).
Our empirical analysis reveals that common methods designed to enhance plasticity by maintaining
trainability provide limited benefits to generalization. While reinitializing the network can be effective, it also risks losing valuable prior knowledge.
To this end, we introduce the Hare & Tortoise, inspired by the brain’s complementary learning system. Hare & Tortoise consists of two components:
the Hare network, which rapidly adapts to new
information analogously to the hippocampus, and
the Tortoise network, which gradually integrates
knowledge akin to the neocortex. By periodically
reinitializing the Hare network to the Tortoise’s
weights, our method preserves plasticity while retaining general knowledge. Hare & Tortoise can
effectively maintain the network’s ability to generalize, which improves advanced reinforcement
learning algorithms on the Atari-100k benchmark.
The code is available at https://github.
com/dojeon-ai/hare-tortoise.

Hare
network
𝜃!

copy
ema

Tortoise
network
𝜃#

𝑥
Figure 1. Hare & Tortoise architecture. The Hare Network
rapidly updates its weights for new data, while the Tortoise Network slowly integrates knowledge through an exponential moving
average (ema) of the Hare’s weights. Periodic reinitialization of the
Hare Network to the Tortoise Network’s weights ensures a balance
between fast, fleeting adaptation and slow, steady generalization.

et al., 2023). In experiments where the dataset labels were
periodically randomized, some networks gradually lost their
ability to minimize their training loss. This phenomenon
has been linked to several factors such as the increasing
distance from initial weights, emergence of gradient starvation, and accumulating dormant neurons (Lyle et al., 2023;
Dohare et al., 2023; Lewandowski et al., 2023). To mitigate this problem, various methods have been developed
(Lyle et al., 2022; Kumar et al., 2023b; Abbas et al., 2023;
Sokar et al., 2023), proving their efficacy in maintaining
trainability throughout repetitive learning tasks.

1. Introduction
In neural networks, plasticity refers to the ability to learn
and adapt to new data. Maintaining plasticity is crucial
in continual learning and reinforcement learning, where
networks must consistently adapt to incoming data. With
the emergence of large-scale models like GPT-4 (Achiam
et al., 2023) and Gemini (Google et al., 2023), understanding
plasticity is becoming crucial, considering the substantial
resources required to retrain these models from scratch.

Ultimately, the goal of maintaining plasticity is not just to
memorize the new training data but to enable the network to
generalize to unseen data. However, it is not well understood
whether, and if so how, improved trainability translates to
better generalization. The first contribution of this paper is
to conduct a rigorous empirical study into the relationship
between these dual faces of plasticity. To do so, we expand
the warm-starting experiments from Ash & Adams (2020)
by first training some networks on noisy dataset subsets and
then retraining them on complete, noise-free datasets. Here,
we observed a consistent decline in generalization when
models were initially trained on smaller and noisier subsets.

Recent studies have shown that neural networks tend to lose
plasticity as training progresses (Lyle et al., 2023; Dohare
1
KAIST 2 Konkuk University 3 Deepmind. Correspondence to:
Hojoon Lee <joonleesky@kaist.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

