Double Variance Reduction: A Smoothing Trick for Composite Optimization
Problems without First-Order Gradient
Hao Di 1 2 Haishan Ye 1 3 Yueling Zhang 4 Xiangyu Chang 1 Guang Dai 3 Ivor W. Tsang 5 6

Abstract

1. Introduction
This paper considers the following composite finite-sum
optimization problem,

Variance reduction techniques are designed to
decrease the sampling variance, thereby accelerating convergence rates of first-order (FO) and
zeroth-order (ZO) optimization methods. However, in composite optimization problems, ZO
methods encounter an additional variance called
the coordinate-wise variance, which stems from
the random gradient estimation. To reduce this
variance, prior works require estimating all partial
derivatives, essentially approximating FO information. This approach demands O(d) function
evaluations (d is the dimension size), which incurs substantial computational costs and is prohibitive in high-dimensional scenarios. This paper
proposes the Zeroth-order Proximal Double Variance Reduction (ZPDVR) method, which utilizes
the averaging trick to reduce both sampling and
coordinate-wise variances. Compared to prior
methods, ZPDVR relies solely on random gradient estimates, calls the stochastic zeroth-order
oracle (SZO) in expectation O(1) times per iteration, and achieves the optimal O(d(n+κ) log( 1ϵ ))
SZO query complexity in the strongly convex and
smooth setting, where κ represents the condition
number and ϵ is the desired accuracy. Empirical
results validate ZPDVR’s linear convergence and
demonstrate its superior performance over other
related methods.

min

x∈Rd

F (x) = f (x) + ψ(x),
n

with f (x) =

1X
fi (x),
n i=1

(1)

where fi (x) : Rd → R is a µ-strongly convex and L-smooth
function , and ψ(x) : Rd → R is a convex and non-smooth
function, such as the ℓ1 regularization. This formulation
is prevalent in several critical applications, such as signal
compression (Jenatton et al., 2011), image recovery (Chen
et al., 2021), sparse model training (Beck & Teboulle, 2009;
Yun et al., 2021). In this study, we assume that only the
zeroth-order (ZO) oracle (i.e., the value of function f (x)) is
available. Under this condition, we explore the ZO variance
reduction method to achieve the linear convergence rate for
the above composite optimization problem (1) with only
random gradient estimates.
ZO optimization methods approximate the directional
derivative information by utilizing either the function value
or the difference in function values, and employ this estimate to minimize the objective function (Liu et al., 2020).
Due to their exclusive reliance on function evaluations, ZO
optimization methods simplify algorithm implementation
(Nesterov & Spokoiny, 2017; Liu et al., 2020) and are increasingly employed in scenarios where gradient information is either inaccessible or impractical, such as in neural
network black-box attacks and robotic stiffness control (Tu
et al., 2019; Li et al., 2023). Recently, Malladi et al. (2023)
have capitalized on the benefits of ZO optimization methods
for fine-tuning large language models, achieving a comparable performance to first-order (FO) methods while significantly reducing memory usage. Furthermore, Chen et al.
(2023a) employ ZO methods to train the ResNet-20 model
from scratch, illustrating the practicality of these methods
in large-scale machine learning applications.

1

Center for Intelligent Decision-Making and Machine Learning,
School of Management, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China. 2 This
work was completed during the internship at SGIT AI Lab, State
Grid Corporation of China. 3 SGIT AI Lab, State Grid Corporation
of China. 4 International Business School, Beijing Foreign Studies
University, Beijing, China. 5 CFAR and IHPC, Agency for Science,
Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore 6 College of Computing and Data Science, NTU, Singapore.. Correspondence to:
Haishan Ye <yehaishan@xjtu.edu.cn>.

To decrease the variance resulting from the random sampling and accelerate the convergence rate of ZO optimization methods
Pn for finite-sum optimization problems (i.e.,
minx∈Rd i=1 fi (x)), researchers have introduced various

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

