Feasibility Consistent Representation Learning for Safe Reinforcement Learning

Zhepeng Cen 1 Yihang Yao 1 Zuxin Liu 1 Ding Zhao 1

Abstract

& Fernández, 2015). Safe RL aims to learn a constraint
satisfaction policy either by interacting with the environment or from static offline datasets to reduce the risk of
policy deployment in safety-critical scenarios (Brunke et al.,
2021).

In the field of safe reinforcement learning (RL),
finding a balance between satisfying safety
constraints and optimizing reward performance
presents a significant challenge. A key obstacle
in this endeavor is the estimation of safety constraints, which is typically more difficult than estimating a reward metric due to the sparse nature of
the constraint signals. To address this issue, we introduce a novel framework named Feasibility Consistent Safe Reinforcement Learning (FCSRL).
This framework combines representation learning with feasibility-oriented objectives to identify
and extract safety-related information from the
raw state for safe RL. Leveraging self-supervised
learning techniques and a more learnable safety
metric, our approach enhances the policy learning
and constraint estimation. Empirical evaluations
across a range of vector-state and image-based
tasks demonstrate that our method is capable of
learning a better safety-aware embedding and
achieving superior performance than previous representation learning baselines. The project website is available at https://sites.google.
com/view/FCSRL.

While many strategies have been explored for safe RL problem, from model-based approaches that predict and mitigate
potential risks (Kaiser et al., 2019; As et al., 2022), to constrained optimization-based methods (Zhang et al., 2020;
Chow et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2020) that ensure policy
updates within the feasible set, there still remain several
significant hurdles. Among them, one main challenge is
cost estimation (Achiam et al., 2017; Tessler et al., 2018),
which stems from two main sources: (1) the complexity
of the raw state often complicates the prediction of singlestep costs; and (2) the sparsity of cost signal intensifies the
non-smoothness of ground-truth value function and causes
larger noise in value estimation, which is similar to the cases
in sparse-reward and goal-conditioned RL (Andrychowicz
et al., 2017; Riedmiller et al., 2018; Hare, 2019; Liu et al.,
2022a; Eysenbach et al., 2022; Cen et al., 2024). The former
influences the evaluation of immediate state safety while the
second impacts the estimation of long-term safety. These issues cause a significant over-estimation or under-estimation
of agent on costs. Therefore, the safe RL agent struggles
to balance the objectives of reward maximization and constraint satisfaction, thus obtaining a suboptimal policy performance.

1. Introduction

We propose Feasibility Consistent Safe Reinforcement
Learning (FCSRL) to employ representation learning (Bengio et al., 2013) to tackle above challenge. Inspired by the
enhancement of dynamics-based representation learning on
RL (Yang & Nachum, 2021; Fujimoto et al., 2023), we also
leverage transition dynamics of environment to learn the
underlying structure of the transition dynamics by applying
self-supervised learning (Chen & He, 2021; He et al., 2020)
loss on adjacent states in the sample trajectory. Additionally,
due to the sparsity of cost, the representation loss based
on traditional metrics (e.g., value function) does not boost
the safety-aware embedding learning, although they exhibit
notable improvement in standard RL setting (Ye et al., 2021;
Hessel et al., 2021; Farquhar et al., 2021). To address this,
we introduce a novel learning objective, feasibility score,
with smoother nature compared to other cost metrics and

Reinforcement Learning (RL) has achieved remarkable success in various domains, leveraging its capability to learn
optimal policies by interacting with the environment. This
success has spanned from mastering complex games (Mnih
et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2016; Hessel et al., 2018) to enabling autonomous systems (Kiran et al., 2021; Li et al.,
2022; Ding et al., 2023). However, as RL applications venture into more critical areas such as healthcare, finance, and
self-driving vehicles, ensuring safety alongside task performance becomes equally or even more imperative (Garcıa
1
Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence to: Zhepeng
Cen <zcen@andrew.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

