Ameliorate Spurious Correlations in Dataset Condensation

Justin Cui 1 Ruochen Wang 1 Yuanhao Xiong 1 Cho-Jui Hsieh 1

Abstract

machine learning models and design new methods, such
as architectures, hyperparameters, and loss functions. As a
result, dataset condensation (also known as dataset distillation (Wang et al., 2018)) emerges as a promising direction
for solving this issue. Dataset Condensation aims at compressing the original large-scale dataset into a small subset
of information-rich examples, enabling models trained on
them to achieve competitive performance compared with
training on the whole dataset. The distilled dataset with a
significantly reduced size can therefore be used to accelerate
model training and reduce data storage. Dataset condensation has been shown to benefit a wide range of machine
learning tasks, such as Neural Architecture Search (Wang
et al., 2021), Federated Learning (Xiong et al., 2023), Continual Learning (Yang et al., 2023; Gu et al., 2023), Graph
Compression (Jin et al., 2021; Feng et al., 2023a), and Multimodality (Wu et al., 2023).

Dataset Condensation has emerged as a technique for compressing large datasets into smaller
synthetic counterparts, facilitating downstream
training tasks. In this paper, we study the impact of bias inside the original dataset on the
performance of dataset condensation. With a
comprehensive empirical evaluation on canonical
datasets with color, corruption and background
biases, we found that color and background biases in the original dataset will be amplified
through the condensation process, resulting in
a notable decline in the performance of models
trained on the condensed dataset, while corruption bias is suppressed through the condensation
process. To reduce bias amplification in dataset
condensation, we introduce a simple yet highly
effective approach based on a sample reweighting scheme utilizing kernel density estimation.
Empirical results on multiple real-world and synthetic datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of
the proposed method. Notably, on CMNIST with
5% bias-conflict ratio and IPC 50, our method
achieves 91.5% test accuracy compared to 23.8%
from vanilla DM, boosting the performance by
67.7%, whereas applying state-of-the-art debiasing method on the same dataset only achieves
53.7% accuracy. Our findings highlight the importance of addressing biases in dataset condensation
and provide a promising avenue to address bias
amplification in the process.

Recent dataset condensation methods mainly focus on performance enhancements on standard datasets (Loo et al.,
2023; Zhao et al., 2023; Du et al., 2023; Cui et al., 2023).
However, this emphasis often overlooks dataset bias, a critical issue in machine learning. Dataset bias (Tommasi et al.,
2017) occurs when collected data unintentionally reflects
existing biases, leading to skewed predictions and potential ethical concerns. Despite extensive research on bias
detection and mitigation strategies in recent years (Sagawa
et al., 2019; Li & Vasconcelos, 2019; Nam et al., 2020; Lee
et al., 2021; Hwang et al., 2022), the impact of dataset bias
on data condensation remains unexplored. Given that a biased synthetic set can lead to inaccurate or unfair decisions,
understanding the role of bias in dataset condensation and
developing effective mitigation strategies is crucial.

1. Introduction

This paper provides the first study of how biases in the original training set affect dataset distillation process. Specifically, we are interested in the following questions: 1). How
does bias propagate from the original dataset to the distilled dataset? 2). How do we mitigate biases present in the
distilled dataset?

Dataset plays a central role in machine learning model
performances. The rapidly growing size of contemporary
datasets not only poses challenges to data storage and preprocessing, but also makes it increasingly expensive to train
1

Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles. Correspondence to: Justin Cui <justincui@ucla.edu>, Cho-Jui Hsieh <chohsieh@cs.ucla.edu>.

To answer the first question, we assess existing dataset condensation algorithms across several benchmark datasets.
Our findings reveal that the condensation process is significantly influenced by the type of bias, with color and background biases being amplified and noise bias suppressed.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

