Viewing Transformers Through the Lens of Long Convolutions Layers

Itamar Zimerman 1 Lior Wolf 1

Abstract

Therefore, our work focuses on the effectiveness part, which
is a critical bottleneck that has been identified by (Mehta
et al., 2022) who observe that transformers struggle to exploit long context, and (Xiong et al., 2021), which show
that full-length transformers often perform comparably to
local-attention-based transformers on long range tasks.

Despite their dominance in modern DL and, especially, NLP domains, transformer architectures
exhibit sub-optimal performance on long-range
tasks compared to recent layers that are specifically designed for this purpose. In this work,
drawing inspiration from key attributes of longrange layers, such as state-space layers, linear
RNN layers, and global convolution layers, we
demonstrate that minimal modifications to the
transformer architecture can significantly enhance
performance on the Long Range Arena (LRA)
benchmark, thus narrowing the gap with these
specialized layers. We identify that two key principles for long-range tasks are (i) incorporating
an inductive bias towards smoothness, and (ii) locality. As we show, integrating these ideas into
the attention mechanism improves results with a
negligible amount of additional computation and
without any additional trainable parameters. Our
theory and experiments also shed light on the reasons for the inferior performance of transformers
on long-range tasks and identify critical properties that are essential for successfully capturing
long-range dependencies.

The lack of effectiveness of transformers in this setting
was also exposed by the Long Range Arena (LRA) benchmark (Tay et al., 2020). This benchmark highlights that standard sequence models, such as transformers, perform poorly
even on seemingly simple long-range tasks. As modern
deep learning heavily relies on transformers, understanding
why transformers do not perform well on these tasks, or
how to improve those abilities is an essential research topic.
Motivated by recent advances in deep long sequence modeling, we delve into the question of why long-range layers
such as state-space layers (Gu et al., 2021b;a; Gupta et al.,
2022a) and long convolutions (Li et al., 2022; Fu et al., 2023)
perform well on the LRA benchmark and other long-range
tasks. We discern two simple yet significant conditions
(i) an exponential decaying positional structure, and (ii) a
regularized smooth global operator. Building upon these
two principles, we introduce Local and Smooth Attention
(LaS-Attention), a variant of attention that adheres to this
pair of principles. Empirical analysis shows that this layer
can boost Transformer performance on long-range tasks and
narrow the gap with state-space layers and long convolutions, with negligible additional complexity compared to
vanilla transformers.

1. Introduction
Enhancing the long-range capabilities of deep learning models is a central challenge for the field. This aspect is crucial
for real-world time-series analysis, and can significantly
boost performance in processing long-form data modalities,
such as text, speech, or videos. The problem of capturing
long-range dependencies encapsulates two aspects: effectiveness and efficiency. Researchers have proposed several
transformer variants with sub-quadratic complexity to solve
the efficiency problem. However, such mechanisms may
not be beneficial without solving the effectiveness problem.

Our main contributions encompass the following main
aspects: (i) We furnish theoretical and empirical insights
about long-range sequence modeling and identify the desired properties for achieving success in long-range tasks,
(ii) We demonstrate that a smoothness-promoting inductive
bias and positional locality are vital principles for capturing
long-range dependencies. Moreover, we empirically identify that these concepts present a crucial bottleneck affecting
the long-range capabilities of current transformers. (iii) We
present a novel variant of attention that is empirically proven
to be effective in capturing long-range dependencies, and
furthermore (iv) present an LaS-chunk variation that satisfies both the effectiveness and efficiency criteria, by having
a linear complexity while maintaining high accuracy com-

1

The Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv
University. Correspondence to: Itamar Zimerman <zimerman1@mail.tau.ac.il>, Lior Wolf <wolf@cs.tau.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

