Scalable AI Safety via Doubly-Efficient Debate

Jonah Brown-Cohen 1 Geoffrey Irving 1 Georgios Piliouras 1

Abstract

invoked with context given by some set of previous model
outputs (Lu et al., 2023). As the complexity of such tasks
scales, the ability to provide direct human feedback for
training on long complex traces involving reasoning, planning, and taking actions is limited. This limitation leads to
the need for new approaches for scalable oversight (Leike
et al., 2018; Christiano et al., 2018)–where carefully designed protocols involving the interaction of both humans
and AI models are used to provide high-quality feedback
for training and oversight of complex AI systems.

The emergence of pre-trained AI systems with
powerful capabilities across a diverse and everincreasing set of complex domains has raised a
critical challenge for AI safety as tasks can become too complicated for humans to judge directly. Irving et al. (2018) proposed a debate
method in this direction with the goal of pitting
the power of such AI models against each other
until the problem of identifying (mis)-alignment
is broken down into a manageable subtask. While
the promise of this approach is clear, the original
framework was based on the assumption that the
honest strategy is able to simulate deterministic
AI systems for an exponential number of steps,
limiting its applicability. In this paper, we show
how to address these challenges by designing a
new set of debate protocols where the honest strategy can always succeed using a simulation of a
polynomial number of steps, whilst being able
to verify the alignment of stochastic AI systems,
even when the dishonest strategy is allowed to use
exponentially many simulation steps.

As a motivating example, consider the case of using a language model to draft a law or a legal contract. Laws and
contracts are written in natural language, refer to concepts in
the real world, and require human judgement (in the worst
case a judge in an actual court) to interpret their meaning.
Furthermore, individual passages or even single characters
in laws or contracts can have significant real-world consequences, as demonstrated by multimillion-dollar losses
suffered by companies and governments due to misplaced
commas (Kurtzleben, 2014; BBC, 2017). In order to train
a language model to write such high-stakes natural language, it is necessary to be certain that every passage of an
extremely long document is correct, where correctness is
defined by human judgement. However, requiring human
experts to carefully read an entire law or contract produced
by a language model to provide the training label for one
example is clearly prohibitively expensive. Thus, in this
setting it is necessary to design methods for training and
oversight that are extremely efficient in their use of human
judgements.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated emergent capabilities, including the ability to follow naturallanguage instructions, use various tools, and perform some
types of general-purpose abstract reasoning and planning
(Saunders et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2023; Menick et al., 2022;
Zhou et al., 2023). Thus far, human feedback on LLM outputs has been used to improve the alignment between the
behavior of these models and their designer’s intent (Ouyang
et al., 2022). However, these models are increasingly being
used to perform complex tasks that can be viewed as the
writing and execution of general-purpose computations described in natural language, where at each step the model is

A prominent approach to the oversight and safe training
of AI systems builds upon the fact that there is a natural
high-level correspondence between training techniques in
machine learning and interactive proofs in complexity theory, as exemplified by the proposal for AI safety via debate
(Irving et al., 2018). The overall goal of this approach is
to enable the design of methods that allow the training of
extremely computationally powerful learned models that
nonetheless behave as desired, despite only being supervised by much more limited verifiers. For example, while
no human Go player can instruct the AlphaZero model (Silver et al., 2017) on what move to make next, the model
nonetheless was trained to a super-human level via self-play.
This was possible precisely because it is computationally

1
Google DeepMind, London, UK. Correspondence to: Jonah
Brown-Cohen <jonahbc@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

