High-Order Contrastive Learning with Fine-grained Comparative
Levels for Sparse Ordinal Tensor Completion

Yu Dai∗1 Junchen Shen∗1 Zijie Zhai∗1 Danlin Liu∗1 Jingyang Chen∗2 Yu Sun 3 Ping Li 4 Jie Zhang 2
Kai Zhang 1

Abstract

pervised representation learning with remarkable success
in computer vision (He et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020a),
speech recognition (Kharitonov et al., 2021) and natural
language processing (Gao et al., 2021; Chuang et al., 2022).
The main idea is to push similar instances together in the
feature space while pushing apart those dissimilar or irrelevant ones. In many domains, such positive/negative sample
relation can be specified conveniently through simple rules,
which allows representation learning to be performed in an
unsupervised manner for large datasets.

Contrastive learning is a powerful paradigm for
representation learning with wide applications
in vision and NLP, but how to extend its success to high-dimensional tensors remains a challenge. This is because tensor data often exhibit
high-order mode-interactions that are hard to profile and with negative samples growing combinatorially fast; besides, many real-world tensors
have ordinal entries that necessitate more delicate comparative levels. We propose High-Order
Contrastive Tensor Completion (HOCTC) to extend contrastive learning to sparse ordinal tensor
regression. HOCTC employs a novel attentionbased strategy with query-expansion to capture
high-order mode interactions even in case of very
limited tokens, which transcends beyond secondorder learning scenarios. Besides, it extends twolevel comparisons (positive-vs-negative) to finegrained contrast-levels using ordinal tensor entries
as a natural guidance. Efficient sampling scheme
is proposed to enforce such delicate comparative structures, generating comprehensive selfsupervised signals for high-order representation
learning. Experiments show that HOCTC has
promising results in sparse tensor completion in
traffic/recommender applications.

There are a number of notable methods for contrastive learning. InstDisc (Wu et al., 2018) pioneers the use of instancebased discrimination as a pretext task. CMC (Tian et al.,
2020) further uses multiple views of an image as positive
samples, and those from distinct images as the negative
samples, which enhances the discrimination. MoCo (He
et al., 2020) increases negative samples through momentum
contrast and a query encoder. PIRL and SimCLR (Misra
& Maaten, 2020; Chen et al., 2020a) use more sophisticated strategies for selecting positive/negative samples, like
jigsaw augmentation or random data augmentation (cropping, resizing, and re-coloring). In BYOL (Grill et al.,
2020), a dual-network is used to alleviate the reliance on
negative pairs. Besides, contrastive learning has also been
applied successfully in natural language processing (Gao
et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021a), recommendation systems
(Zhou et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021; Xie et al., 2022; Chen
et al., 2022), and graph learning (Veličković et al., 2019;
Zhu et al., 2020; 2021; Hassani & Khasahmadi, 2020).

1. Introduction

Current contrastive learning methods mainly exploit secondorder relation, i.e., the proximity between a pair of entities
like image patches (Chen et al., 2020a), time series (Van den
Oord et al., 2018), or two variations of a sentence (Gao et al.,
2021). In many applications, we have high-order (multiway) interacting relations encoded by tensors. For example,
in traffic monitoring, a three-mode sensor-road-time tensor
describes the traffic flow across various sensors on different
roads over time. In recommendation, a user-item-tag tensor
describes the tag that a user assigns to an item. Modelling
such high-order interactions among the modes of a tensor
for tensor decomposition or tensor completion is useful in

Self-supervised learning techniques, in particular contrastive
learning, have emerged as a powerful paradigm for unsu*

Equal contribution 1 School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China. 2 Institute
of Science and Technology for Brain Inspired Intelligence, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. 3 Indeed Inc., Sunnyvale, United
States. 4 Southwest Petroleum University, Chengdu, China.. Correspondence to: Jie Zhang <jzhang080@gmail.com>, Kai Zhang
<kzhang@cs.ecnu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

