An Analysis of Linear Time Series Forecasting Models

William Toner 1 2 Luke Darlow 2

Abstract

many fields, most notably in computer vision and language
processing, superseding simpler classical models. Following these successes, deep learning has seen increasing usage
in time series forecasting. In particular transformer models
have been adapted for broader time series forecasting applications (Nie et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2021;
Wu et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2023; Darlow et al., 2024).

Despite their simplicity, linear models perform
well at time series forecasting, even when pitted against deeper and more expensive models. A
number of variations to the linear model have been
proposed, often including some form of feature
normalisation that improves model generalisation.
In this paper we analyse the sets of functions expressible using these linear model architectures.
In so doing we show that several popular variants of linear models for time series forecasting
are equivalent and functionally indistinguishable
from standard, unconstrained linear regression.
We characterise the model classes for each linear
variant. We demonstrate that each model can be
reinterpreted as unconstrained linear regression
over a suitably augmented feature set, and therefore admit closed-form solutions when using a
mean-squared loss function. We provide experimental evidence that the models under inspection
learn nearly identical solutions, and finally demonstrate that the simpler closed form solutions are
superior forecasters across 72% of test settings. 3

Linear models for forecasting Despite the advantages
offered by deep learning, its application to time series forecasting has encountered unique challenges. Recent studies
have shown that the performance benefits of deep models for
forecasting are often marginal when compared to simpler linear models (Zeng et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023). Linear models
are also appealing due to their simplicity, explainability, and
efficiency. This is particularly relevant in industries where
forecasting models are queried frequently and/or involve
high-resolution data, such as in cloud resource allocation
(Joosen et al., 2023; Darlow et al., 2023). This has spurred
a growing interest in refining linear models: several variants
of linear time series forecasting models have emerged, each
purporting superiority owing to some architectural difference (summary in Section 2). We show in this research that
many of these popular, and often high-performing, linear
models are essentially equivalent. By this we mean that the
parametric families of functions which they describe, are
equal (up to choice of data normalisation). The convexity of
least-squares linear regression makes this a significant finding since it implies that all these models should converge to
the same optima, given a suitable optimiser.

1. Introduction
Time series forecasting is a crucial challenge across a wide
array of domains, where accurate predictions of the future
are essential. Key areas such as finance, meteorology, healthcare, cloud infrastructure, and traffic flow management rely
heavily on forecasting for decision-making and strategic
planning (Wu et al., 2021; Lai et al., 2018; Sloss et al., 2019;
Taylor & Letham, 2018; Darlow et al., 2023; Joosen et al.,
2023). This has led to significant research efforts to develop
effective forecasting models. Deep learning has transformed

Outline and Contributions In this paper, we delve into
the mathematics of several well-known linear time series
forecasting models. We fully characterise the set of functions which are expressible using each architecture. We
show, somewhat remarkably, that they are all essentially
equivalent: corresponding either to unconstrained or weakly
constrained (via feature augmentation) linear regression.
The convexity of least-squares linear regression suggests
that the behaviour of these models should therefore be virtually indistinguishable. We provide experimental evidence
which supports this hypothesis, showing that, in practice, all
models tend to the same optima. Furthermore, we show that
the closed form solution to least-squares linear regression
performs either comparably or better than those trained by

1
ANC, Department of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh 2 Systems Infrastructure Research,
Huawei Research Centre, Edinburgh. Correspondence to:
William Toner <w.j.toner@sms.ed.ac.uk>, Luke Darlow
<luke.darlow1@huawei.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
3
github.com/sir-lab/linear-forecasting

1

