Faster Adaptive Decentralized Learning Algorithms

Feihu Huang 1 2 Jianyu Zhao 1

Abstract

centralized machine has become inefficient and unscalable.
Due to addressing the efficiency and scalability challenges,
recently distributed machine learning optimization is widely
studied. In particular, decentralized optimization (Lian et al.,
2017) has received increasing attention in recent years in
machine learning due to liberating the centralized agent with
large communication load and privacy risk. In the paper,
we study decentralized learning algorithms to solve the distributed stochastic problem over a communication network
G = (V, E), defined as

Decentralized learning recently has received increasing attention in machine learning due to its
advantages in implementation simplicity and system robustness, data privacy. Meanwhile, the
adaptive gradient methods show superior performances in many machine learning tasks such as
training neural networks. Although some works
focus on studying decentralized optimization algorithms with adaptive learning rates, these adaptive decentralized algorithms still suffer from high
sample complexity. To fill these gaps, we propose a class of faster adaptive decentralized algorithms (i.e., AdaMDOS and AdaMDOF) for
distributed nonconvex stochastic and finite-sum
optimization, respectively. Moreover, we provide
a solid convergence analysis framework for our
methods. In particular, we prove that our AdaMDOS obtains a near-optimal sample complexity of
Õ(ϵ−3 ) for finding an ϵ-stationary solution of nonconvex stochastic optimization. Meanwhile, our
AdaMDOF obtains
a near-optimal sample com√
plexity of O( nϵ−2 ) for finding an ϵ-stationary
solution of for nonconvex finite-sum optimization,
where n denotes the sample size. To the best of
our knowledge, our AdaMDOF algorithm is the
first adaptive decentralized algorithm for nonconvex finite-sum optimization. Some experimental
results demonstrate efficiency of our algorithms.

min F (x) ≡

x∈Rd

m


1 X i
(1)
f (x), f i (x) = Eξi f i x; ξ i
m i=1

where for any i ∈ [m], f i (x) denotes the objective function
in i-th client, which is a differentiable and possibly nonconvex function. Here ξ i for any i ∈ [m] is an independent
random variable following an unknown distribution Di , and
for any i, j ∈ [m] possibly Di ̸= Dj . G = (V, E) is a communication network including m computing agents, where
any agents i, j ∈ V can communicate only if (i, j) ∈ E.
Meanwhile, we also consider decentralized learning algorithms for solving the distributed finite-sum problem over a
communication network G = (V, E), defined as
m

min F (x) ≡

x∈Rd

n

1 X i
1X i
f (x), f i (x) =
fk (x)
m i=1
n

(2)

k=1

where fki (x) = f i (x; ξki ) for k = 1, 2 · · · , n. Here
{ξki }nk=1 can be seen as n samples drawn from distribution Di for i = 1, 2, · · · , m. In fact, Problems (1) and
(2) frequently appear many machine learning applications
such as training Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) (Lian et al.,
2017) and reinforcement learning (Chen et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
With the rapidly increasing dataset sizes and the high dimensionality of the machine learning problems, training
large-scale machine learning models has been increasingly
concerned. Clearly, training large-scale models by a single

Many decentralized stochastic gradient-based algorithms
recently have been developed to solve the above stochastic
Problem (1). For example, (Lian et al., 2017) proposed
an efficient decentralized stochastic gradient descent (DPSGD) algorithm, which integrates average consensus with
local-SGD steps and outperforms the standard centralized
SGD methods. Due to the presence of inconsistency under
non-i.i.d. setting, some variants of D-PSGD (Tang et al.,
2018; Xin et al., 2021b) are studied to handle the data heterogeneity issue, e.g., D2 method (Tang et al., 2018) by storing
previous status, and GT-DSGD method (Xin et al., 2021a)

1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing
University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China
2
MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, Nanjing, China. Correspondence to: Feihu Huang
<huangfeihu2018@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

