C-RAG: Certified Generation Risks for Retrieval-Augmented Language Models

Mintong Kang 1 Nezihe Merve Gürel 2 Ning Yu 3 Dawn Song 4 Bo Li 1 5

Abstract

different NLP tasks, such as text summarization, question
answering, and machine translation. However, existing
works (Wang et al., 2023a; Liang et al., 2022; Liu et al.,
2023) show that the generations of LLMs can be unreliable,
untrustworthy, and risky in many cases. Therefore, certifiably controlling the generation risks of LLMs becomes
particularly important before the deployment of LLMs, especially in safety-critical domains.

Despite the impressive capabilities of large language models (LLMs) across diverse applications,
they still suffer from trustworthiness issues, such
as hallucinations and misalignments. Retrievalaugmented language models (RAG) have been
proposed to enhance the credibility of generations
by grounding external knowledge, but the theoretical understandings of their generation risks
remains unexplored. In this paper, we answer: 1)
whether RAG can indeed lead to low generation
risks, 2) how to provide provable guarantees on
the generation risks of RAG and vanilla LLMs,
and 3) what sufficient conditions enable RAG
models to reduce generation risks. We propose
C-RAG, a novel framework to certify generation
risks for RAG models. Specifically, we provide
conformal risk analysis for RAG models and certify an upper confidence bound of generation risks,
which we refer to as conformal generation risk.
We also provide theoretical guarantees on conformal generation risks for general bounded risk
functions under test distribution shifts. We prove
that RAG achieves a lower conformal generation
risk than that of a single LLM when the quality of
the retrieval model and transformer is non-trivial.
Our intensive empirical results demonstrate the
soundness and tightness of our conformal generation risk guarantees across four widely-used NLP
datasets on four state-of-the-art retrieval models.

Retrieval-augmented language models (RAG) (Lewis et al.,
2020; Karpukhin et al., 2020; Xiong et al., 2020) have been
proposed to enhance the credibility of LLMs by retrieving
relevant documents from an external knowledge base and
generating contents conditioned on the retrieved knowledge.
RAG models are shown effective in mitigating generation
risks via in-context learning from the retrieved documents
(Brown et al., 2020). However, theoretical understandings
of their generation risks still remain unexplored. In this
work, we focus on this problem and ask:
Can RAG indeed lead to low generation risks? How can we
provide provable guarantees on the generation risks of RAG
and vanilla LLMs? What are the sufficient conditions that
enable RAG models to reduce generation risks? Can we
provably control the generation risks below a desired level?
To theoretically analyze the generation risks of RAG and
answer the above questions, we propose C-RAG, a novel
framework of certified generation risks for RAG models.
We first propose a constrained generation protocol for RAG
models to produce a controlled set of generations. The protocol operates based on specific parameter configurations,
including the number of retrieved examples, the size of the
generation set, and a similarity threshold for generation diversity. We then provide conformal analysis (Bates et al.,
2021; Angelopoulos et al., 2021; 2022) for RAG models
under the constrained generation protocol, aiming to provably control the generation risks based on test statistics from
in-distribution calibration samples. To achieve this goal, we
derive a high-probability upper bound of generation risks
during inference time, which we call conformal generation
risk. We show that (a) the conformal generation risk serves
as a sound upper bound to the empirical generation risks
given a RAG configuration in Prop. 1; (b) the generation
risk can be certifiably controlled below a desired level by
computing a valid set of RAG configurations via C-RAG

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) (Touvron et al., 2023; OpenAI et al., 2023) recently exhibit emergent abilities across
1

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA 2 Delft
University of Technology, Netherlands 3 Netflix Eyeline Studios, USA 4 University of California, Berkeley, USA 5 University
of Chicago, USA. Correspondence to: Mintong Kang
<mintong2@illinois.edu>, Bo Li <lbo@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

