Balanced Resonate-and-Fire Neurons
Saya Higuchi 1 Sebastian Kairat 1 Sander M. Bohté 2 Sebastian Otte 1

Abstract

real-world applications—particularly in the realm of edge
computing— due to the deep non-linear continuous estimators to represent features of the data (Pfeiffer & Pfeil,
2018).

The resonate-and-fire (RF) neuron, introduced
over two decades ago, is a simple, efficient, yet biologically plausible spiking neuron model, which
can extract frequency patterns within the time domain due to its resonating membrane dynamics.
However, previous RF formulations suffer from
intrinsic shortcomings that limit effective learning
and prevent exploiting the principled advantage
of RF neurons. Here, we introduce the balanced
RF (BRF) neuron, which alleviates some of the
intrinsic limitations of vanilla RF neurons and
demonstrates its effectiveness within recurrent
spiking neural networks (RSNNs) on various sequence learning tasks. We show that networks
of BRF neurons achieve overall higher task performance, produce only a fraction of the spikes,
and require significantly fewer parameters as compared to modern RSNNs. Moreover, BRF-RSNN
consistently provide much faster and more stable
training convergence, even when bridging many
hundreds of time steps during backpropagation
through time (BPTT). These results underscore
that our BRF-RSNN is a strong candidate for future large-scale RSNN architectures, further lines
of research in SNN methodology, and more efficient hardware implementations.

Spiking neural networks (SNNs) circumvent this drawback
by processing information through the precise timing of
action potentials, or spikes. SNNs can potentially be more
efficient compared to ANNs due to their event-driven property, for which computation is only required when spikes are
propagated in the system (Paugam-Moisy & Bohté, 2012).
Furthermore, SNNs are self-recurrent, as the neurons have a
dynamic internal state that modulates their activity over time,
and are more biologically realistic than conventional ANNs.
Some examples of spiking neurons with ascending biological plausibility include the leaky integrate-and-fire (LIF)
neuron, the adaptive leaky integrate-and-fire (ALIF) neuron (Bellec et al., 2018), the Izhikevich neuron (Izhikevich,
2003), and the Hodgkin-Huxley (HH) neuron (Hodgkin &
Huxley, 1952). While the HH model is too computationally expensive for practical application, it exhibits rich and
complex membrane dynamics that simpler models lack.
One mode of dynamics gaining interest in ML applications
in particular is the resonating behavior seen in oscillatory
neurons. Subthreshold oscillations of the membrane potential have been observed in various mammalian nervous
systems, including the neurons in the frontal cortex (Llinas
et al., 1991), in the thalamus (Pedroarena & Llinás, 1997),
and in layer II of the medial entorhinal cortex (Alonso &
Llinás, 1989), which is crucial in spatial information processing (Doeller et al., 2010). The resonate-and-fire (RF)
neuron proposed by Izhikevich (2001) models such damped
or sustained subthreshold oscillations of biological neurons:
the RF neuron fires when the frequency of the incoming
spikes matches that of the neuron’s damped oscillation. Incoming signals with higher frequency leads to more firing
for a LIF neuron but less firing for an RF neuron with slow
oscillation. As the RF neuron is similarly computationally
efficient as the LIF neuron, it is a spiking neuron model
potentially suitable for large-scale SNNs (Izhikevich, 2001).

1. Introduction
Artificial neural networks (ANNs) have become the main
method for solving machine learning problems in recent
years (Goodfellow et al., 2016; Wu & Feng, 2018; Abiodun et al., 2019). However, they require massive computation and energy, making them inefficient for large-scale
1
Adaptive AI Lab, Institute of Robotics and Cognitive Systems
University of Lübeck, Germany 2 Machine Learning Group, Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica (CWI)
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Correspondence to: Saya
Higuchi <saya.higuchi@student.uni-luebeck.de>, Sebastian Otte
<sebastian.otte@uni-luebeck.de>.

Previous works showed RF neurons implemented in the Intel Loihi 2 (Davies et al., 2018), a neuromorphic processor,
can be used to compute the short-time Fourier transform
(STFT) of signals (Frady et al., 2022; Shrestha et al., 2023).
Moreover, the RF neurons successfully converted raw data

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

