LEVI: Generalizable Fine-tuning via Layer-wise Ensemble of Different Views

Yuji Roh 1 Qingyun Liu 2 Huan Gui 2 Zhe Yuan 1 Yujin Tang 2
Steven E. Whang 3 Liang Liu 1 Shuchao Bi 1 Lichan Hong 2 Ed H. Chi 2 Zhe Zhao 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Recent breakthroughs in foundation models make various
high-quality pre-trained models available to the public (Devlin et al., 2019; Radford et al., 2021), and the fine-tuning
paradigm has become a prevalent approach for leveraging
pre-trained models’ power in new downstream tasks. By
tailoring the pre-trained features to align with the characteristics of the new tasks, fine-tuning shows promising performances in various scenarios, including natural language and
computer vision (Kornblith et al., 2019; Guu et al., 2020).

Fine-tuning is becoming widely used for leveraging the power of pre-trained foundation models
in new downstream tasks. While there are many
successes of fine-tuning on various tasks, recent
studies have observed challenges in the generalization of fine-tuned models to unseen distributions (i.e., out-of-distribution; OOD). To improve
OOD generalization, some previous studies identify the limitations of fine-tuning data and regulate
fine-tuning to preserve the general representation
learned from pre-training data. However, potential limitations in the pre-training data and models
are often ignored. In this paper, we contend that
overly relying on the pre-trained representation
may hinder fine-tuning from learning essential
representations for downstream tasks and thus
hurt its OOD generalization. It can be especially
catastrophic when new tasks are from different
(sub)domains compared to pre-training data. To
address the issues in both pre-training and finetuning data, we propose a novel generalizable
fine-tuning method LEVI (Layer-wise Ensemble
of different VIews), where the pre-trained model
is adaptively ensembled layer-wise with a small
task-specific model, while preserving its efficiencies. By combining two complementing models,
LEVI effectively suppresses problematic features
in both the fine-tuning data and pre-trained model
and preserves useful features for new tasks. Broad
experiments with large language and vision models show that LEVI greatly improves fine-tuning
generalization via emphasizing different views
from fine-tuning data and pre-trained features.

Despite many success stories of fine-tuning, recent studies have observed that fine-tuned models often fail to ensure consistent generalization across new distributions (i.e.,
out-of-distribution; OOD) at deployment time (Bommasani
et al., 2021; Kumar et al., 2022b), where OOD samples come
from a different distribution than the data the model was
fine-tuned on. Unlike traditional OOD generalization studies, fine-tuning pre-trained models faces unique challenges
in improving OOD generalization, including computational
costs of handling large models and the lack of access to
pre-training data, which may already have inherent issues.
Although several algorithms have been recently proposed to
enhance fine-tuning generalization (Kumar et al., 2022a;b;
Wortsman et al., 2022b; Tian et al., 2023), most of them do
not consider the inherent limitations in the pre-trained models. Specifically, many previous works implicitly assume
that 1) the pre-trained models already have good enough
features for the new tasks and that 2) any problems with
generalization stem from the downstream (fine-tuning) data.
As a result, these algorithms mainly focus on preserving
the original pre-trained features and avoiding overfitting to
the fine-tuning data’s problems, such as spurious features –
informative during training, but not useful (transferable) in
general. However, such assumptions in prior works may not
be true in practice, and pre-trained features can also have
inherent issues. For example, even if there is no spurious
feature in the fine-tuning data, some of the features in the
pre-trained model can be improperly used in the downstream
tasks (Xue et al., 2023), e.g., pre-trained demographic features in language models can be wrongly used in new ranking systems. Moreover, pre-trained features may not have
all the important representations for the new tasks (Kang

1

Google Inc, Mountain View, CA, USA 2 Google DeepMind, Mountain View, CA, USA 3 School of Electrical Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
(KAIST), Daejeon, Korea. Correspondence to: Yuji Roh <yujiroh@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

