Split-Ensemble: Efficient OOD-aware Ensemble via Task and Model Splitting

Anthony Chen * 1 Huanrui Yang * 2 Yulu Gan * 1 Denis A Gudovskiy 3 Zhen Dong 2 Haofan Wang 4
Tomoyuki Okuno 3 Yohei Nakata 3 Kurt Keutzer 2 Shanghang Zhang 1

Abstract

deployed in the real world can also face corrupted, perturbed,
or out-of-distribution inputs (Hendrycks & Dietterich, 2019).
Then, model predictions may not be reliable. Therefore,
estimation of the epistemic uncertainty with OOD detection
is crucial for trustworthy models (Gal & Ghahramani, 2016).

Uncertainty estimation is crucial for deep learning models to detect out-of-distribution (OOD)
inputs. However, the naive deep learning classifiers produce uncalibrated uncertainty for OOD
data. Improving the uncertainty estimation typically requires external data for OOD-aware training or considerable costs to build an ensemble. In
this work, we improve on uncertainty estimation
without extra OOD data or additional inference
costs using an alternative Split-Ensemble method.
Specifically, we propose a novel subtask-splitting
ensemble training objective where a task is split
into several complementary subtasks based on
feature similarity. Each subtask considers part
of the data as in-distribution while all the rest as
OOD data. Diverse submodels can therefore be
trained on each subtask with OOD-aware objectives, learning generalizable uncertainty estimation. To avoid overheads, we enable low-level
feature sharing among submodels, building a treelike Split-Ensemble architecture via iterative splitting and pruning. Empirical study shows SplitEnsemble, without additional computational cost,
improves accuracy over a single model by 0.8%,
1.8%, and 25.5% on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and
Tiny-ImageNet, respectively. OOD detection for
the same backbone and in-distribution datasets
surpasses a single model baseline by 2.2%, 8.1%,
and 29.6% in mean AUROC, respectively.

In general, uncertainty estimation is not a trivial task. Practitioners often consider various statistics derived from the
uncalibrated outputs of softmax classifiers as confidence
scores (Hendrycks et al., 2022). On the other hand, deep ensembling is another popular approach (Lakshminarayanan
et al., 2017), where uncertainty can be derived from predictions of independently trained deep networks. However,
deep ensembles come with large memory and computational
costs, which grow linearly with the ensemble size. Recent
research investigates strategies to share and reuse parameters and processing across ensemble submodels (Gal &
Ghahramani, 2016; Wen et al., 2020; Turkoglu et al., 2022).
Though these techniques reduce memory overheads, they
suffer from the reduced submodel diversity and, thus, uncertainty calibration. Moreover, their computational costs
remain similar to the naive deep ensemble since the inference through each individual submodel is still required.
More advanced methods for uncertainty estimation using a
single model include temperature scaling, adversarial perturbation of inputs (Liang et al., 2017), and classifiers with the
explicit OOD class trained by OOD-aware outlier exposure
training (Hendrycks et al., 2018). However, as outlier exposure methods typically outperform other approaches that
do not utilize external OOD-like data, OOD data distribution can be unknown or unavailable to implement effective
outlier exposure training in practical applications.

1. Introduction

This work aims to propose novel training objectives and
architectures to build a classifier with a single-model
cost, without external OOD proxy data, while achieving
ensemble-level performance and uncertainty estimation. To
avoid the redundancy of having multiple ensemble submodels learn the same task, we, instead, split an original multiclass classification task into multiple complementary subtasks. As illustrated in Figure 1, each subtask is defined by
considering a subset of classes in the original training data
as ID classes. Then, the rest of the training set is a proxy for
OOD distribution for the subtask. Feature similarity is used

Deep learning models achieve high accuracy metrics when
applied to in-distribution (ID) data. However, such models
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Computer Science, Peking
University 2 University of California, Berkeley 3 Panasonic Holdings Corporation 4 Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence
to: Shanghang Zhang <shanghang@pku.edu.cn>, Huanrui Yang
<huanrui@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

