Pedestrian Attribute Recognition as Label-balanced Multi-label Learning

Yibo Zhou 1 2 Hai-Miao Hu 1 2 3 Yirong Xiang 4 Xiaokang Zhang 1 2 Haotian Wu 1 2

Rooting in the scarcity of most attributes, realistic pedestrian attribute datasets exhibit unduly
skewed data distribution, from which two types of
model failures are delivered: (1) label imbalance:
model predictions lean greatly towards the side of
majority labels; (2) semantics imbalance: model
is easily overfitted on the under-represented attributes due to their insufficient semantic diversity.
To render perfect label balancing, we propose
a novel framework that successfully decouples
label-balanced data re-sampling from the curse of
attributes co-occurrence, i.e., we equalize the sampling prior of an attribute while not biasing that of
the co-occurred others. To diversify the attributes
semantics and mitigate the feature noise, we propose a Bayesian feature augmentation method to
introduce true in-distribution novelty. Handling
both imbalances jointly, our work achieves best
accuracy on various popular benchmarks, and importantly, with minimal computational budget.

30
0.9
25
0.8
20
PETA
15
RAP 0.7
10
0.6
66% of PETA, 57% of RAP
5
0
0.5
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0

Accuracy (baseline)

Histogram counts

Abstract

Frequency of attributes (label mean)

Figure 1. The dominance of negative labels in PAR datasets, and
mean accuracy as a function of the label mean. In PETA (Deng
et al., 2014), 66% attributes occur with a frequency under 0.1,
while that for RAP (Li et al., 2016) is 57%. Also, label imbalance
is the main performance bottleneck of contemporary PAR model,
as it is significantly brittle to attributes with label mean ≤ 0.1.

should infer on minimal area as relevant as possible for a
discriminative recognition (Jia et al., 2022). While for the
attribute of whole-body semantics like action or ages, any
explicit mechanism to discard spatial information may result
in insufficiency of information exchange, revealing that in
this case, PAR is more akin to regular visual classification.

1. Introduction

As a result, the broadness of ‘attribute’ implies it a loose
umbrella term, and motivates us not to approach PAR from
the perspective of over-specialized architectures (Lu et al.,
2023; Jia et al., 2021a). Thus, we question that, is there
a more pervasive problem existing in realistic pedestrian
attribute tasks, by solving which the predictions on overall
attributes are expected to be evenly boosted? Equipped with
this aspiration, we concisely distill PAR into a problem of
multi-label classification under significant data imbalance.

In visual tasks, human attribute is generally not a precisely
defined concept, and can encompass a spectrum of disparate
soft-biometrics that range from locatable body parts to comprehensive human descriptors (Wang et al., 2022; Liu et al.,
2017). Thus, for the pedestrian attribute recognition (PAR),
it is inviable to craft a universal framework that efficiently
yields level performance among myriad attributes of distinct
characteristics. Specifically, for accessary attribute like hat
or boot, the task of PAR essentially mirrors weakly supervised object detection (Zhang et al., 2021b), as the model

This simplification makes sense as: (1) the ambiguity and
variety within attributes require a much general PAR definition; (2) since most attributes occur with small empirical
frequencies, PAR datasets are profoundly label-imbalanced.
Worse, attribute label priors exhibit great unpredictability
across various sceneries (Zhou et al., 2023), making it an
immense data selection bias that hardly generalizes; (3)
previous work only partly alleviates label imbalance by experimentally setting different penalizing weights for labels
(Wang et al., 2022), or just abstains the overly infrequent
attributes from benchmarks to display decent overall results

1

Beijing Key Laboratory of Digital Media, School of Computer
Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191,
China 2 State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and
Systems, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China 3 Hangzhou
Innovation Institute of Beihang University, Hangzhou 310051,
China 4 The University of Manchester, UK. Correspondence to:
Hai-Miao Hu <hu@buaa.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

