Emergent Equivariance in Deep Ensembles

Jan E. Gerken * 1 Pan Kessel * 2

Abstract

emergent: while the prediction of the ensemble is equivariant, the predictions of its members are not. In particular, the
ensemble members are not required to have an equivariant
architecture.

We show that deep ensembles become equivariant
for all inputs and at all training times by simply
using full data augmentation. Crucially, equivariance holds off-manifold and for any architecture
in the infinite width limit. The equivariance is
emergent in the sense that predictions of individual ensemble members are not equivariant but
their collective prediction is. Neural tangent kernel theory is used to derive this result and we
verify our theoretical insights using detailed numerical experiments.

We rigorously derive this surprising emergent equivariance
by using the duality between neural networks and kernel machines in the large width limit (Neal, 1996; Lee et al., 2018;
Yang, 2020). The neural tangent kernel (NTK) describes
the evolution of deep neural networks during training (Jacot
et al., 2018). In the limit of infinite width, the neural tangent kernel is frozen, i.e., it does not evolve during training
and the training dynamics can be solved analytically. As a
random variable over initializations, the output of the neural
network after arbitrary training time follows a Gaussian distribution whose mean and covariance are available as closed
form expressions (Lee et al., 2019). In this context, deep
ensembles can be interpreted as a Monte-Carlo estimate of
the corresponding expected network output. This insight
allows us to theoretically analyze the effect of data augmentation throughout training and show that the deep ensemble
is fully equivariant.

1. Introduction
Deep ensembles are a standard workhorse of deep learning practitioners (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017). They
operate by averaging the prediction of several networks and
therefore offer a straightforward way of estimating the uncertainty of the prediction. For example, deep ensembles
are widely used in the medical domain such as in cancer cell
detection in pathology or in protein folding in drug design as
quantifying the confidence of the output is critical in these
fields (Saib et al., 2020; Ruffolo et al., 2023).

In practice, this emergent equivariance of deep ensemble
cannot be expected to hold perfectly and exact equivariance
will be broken, since neural networks are not infinitely wide
and the expectation value over initalizations is estimated
by Monte-Carlo. Furthermore, in the case of a continuous
symmetry group, data augmentation cannot cover the entire
group orbit and is thus approximate. We analyze the resulting breaking of equivariance and demonstrate empirically
that deep ensembles nevertheless show a competetively high
degree of equivariance even with a low number of ensemble
members.

The main message of this paper is that deep ensembles offer
a novel and straightforward way to enforce equivariance
with respect to symmetries of the data. Specifically, we
show that upon full data augmentation, deep ensembles become equivariant at all training steps and for any input in
the large width limit. While this statement would be trivial
for a fully trained model and on the data manifold, our results are significantly more powerful in that they also hold
off-manifold and even at initialization. A deep ensemble is
thus indistinguishable from a fully equivariant network. It
is important to emphasize that this manifest equivariance is

The main contributions of our work are:
• We prove in our main theorem 5.3 that infinitely wide
deep ensembles are equivariant at all stages of training
and any input if trained with full data augmentation
using the theory of neural tangent kernels.

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Mathematical Sciences,
Chalmers University of Technology and the University of Gothenburg, SE-412 96 Gothenburg, Sweden 2 Prescient Design, Genentech Roche, Basel, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Jan Gerken
<gerken@chalmers.se>, Pan Kessel <pan.kessel@roche.com>.

• We derive bounds for deviations from equivariance
due to finite size as well as data augmentation for a
continuous group.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

• We empirically demonstrate the emergent equivariance
1

