Autonomous Sparse Mean-CVaR Portfolio Optimization

Yizun Lin 1 Yangyu Zhang 2 Zhao-Rong Lai 1 Cheng Li 1

Abstract

Moreover, CVaR is more tractable than VaR from the perspective of optimization. It can serve as the risk metric in
Markowitz’s mean-risk criterion (Markowitz, 1952) which
balances the expected return and the risk of a portfolio. The
original mean-CVaR model with linear constraints can be
efficiently solved by linear programming (Rockafellar &
Uryasev, 2000).

The `0 -constrained mean-CVaR model poses a
significant challenge due to its NP-hard nature,
typically tackled through combinatorial methods
characterized by high computational demands.
From a markedly different perspective, we propose an innovative autonomous sparse meanCVaR portfolio model, capable of approximating the original `0 -constrained mean-CVaR model
with arbitrary accuracy. The core idea is to convert the `0 constraint into an indicator function
and subsequently handle it through a tailed approximation. We then propose a proximal alternating linearized minimization algorithm, coupled with a nested fixed-point proximity algorithm (both convergent), to iteratively solve the
model. Autonomy in sparsity refers to retaining
a significant portion of assets within the selected
asset pool during adjustments in pool size. Consequently, our framework offers a theoretically
guaranteed approximation of the `0 -constrained
mean-CVaR model, improving computational efficiency while providing a robust asset selection
scheme.

In practical portfolio optimization (PO), it is desirable to
constrain the scale of selected assets while keeping an appropriate investing performance, in order to reduce transaction cost and managerial burden. This can be done via the
managerial approach, such as the endowment model (Dimmock et al., 2023), market crashes (Liu & Loewenstein,
2013), and the revenue-driven resource allocation (Chao
et al., 2009). However, these methods still demand professional knowledge in management and finance. Recently,
the arising development in machine learning methods for
management science provides an alternative way for PO.
For example, (Ban et al., 2018) propose the performancebased regularization with a data-driven strategy to improve
the out-of-sample performance in PO. (Brodie et al., 2009)
adopt the `1 regularization to construct a sparse and stable
Markowitz portfolio (SSMP). (Lai et al., 2018) and (Luo
et al., 2020) propose short-term sparse portfolio optimization models with `1 and `0 regularizations, respectively. (Lai
et al., 2020) propose a sparse structure for the covariance
estimation based on the spectral decomposition.

1. Introduction

Among all the sparsity approaches, the `0 constraint can
exactly control the number of selected assets. However,
the `0 constraint generally leads to an NP-hard problem
that has a very high computational complexity. A general approach to exactly solve the `0 -constrained problems
is the combinatorial approach, such as the mixed-integer
optimization (Günlük & Linderoth, 2010) and the branchand-bound procedure (Kobayashi et al., 2021). For example, (Bertsimas & Cory-Wright, 2022) propose a cuttingplane approach with some heuristics to exactly solve an
`0 -constrained mean-variance model, which saves some
computational time according to the experimental results.
(Kobayashi et al., 2021) further adopt this approach to exactly solve an `0 -constrained mean-CVaR model. It is essentially a branch-and-bound algorithm: for each visit of a
node (a combinatorial case), it conducts one ordinary meanCVaR optimization. Since its experimental results show

Value-at-risk (VaR, Jorion 1997) is a widely-used downsiderisk metric in finance that assesses the extreme percentage
loss in a disadvantageous situation. Since it fails to satisfy the subadditivity property (Artzner et al., 1999), it is
improved to its tail statistic named conditional value-atrisk (CVaR, Rockafellar & Uryasev 2000). CVaR not only
has the good theoretical property of coherence (Artzner
et al., 1999; Gotoh & Takeda, 2011), but also accords with
dual stochastic dominance (Ogryczak & Ruszczyński, 2002).
1

Department of Mathematics, College of Information Science and Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China 2 Jinan
University-University of Birmingham Joint Institute, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Zhao-Rong Lai
<laizhr@jnu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

