Robust Inverse Constrained Reinforcement Learning under Model
Misspecification

Sheng Xu 1 Guiliang Liu 1 *

Abstract

autonomous driving), the underlying constraints are often
time-dependent, context-sensitive, and relevant to human
experience. How to accurately specify these constraints and
facilitate safe control remains a critical challenge.

To solve safety-critical decision-making problems, Inverse Constrained Reinforcement Learning (ICRL) infers constraints from expert demonstrations and seeks to imitate expert preference
by utilizing these constraints. While prior ICRL
research commonly overlooks the discrepancy between the training and deploying environments,
we demonstrate that such a discrepancy can significantly compromise the reliability of the inferred constraints and thus induce unsafe movements. Motivated by this finding, we propose
the Robust Constraint Inference (RCI) problem
and an Adaptively Robust ICRL (AR-ICRL) algorithm to solve RCI efficiently. Specifically,
we model the impact of misspecified dynamics
with an opponent policy and learn a robust policy to facilitate safe control in a Markov Game.
Subsequently, we adjust our constraint model to
align the learned policies to expert demonstrations, accommodating both soft and hard optimality in our behavioral models. Empirical results demonstrate the significance of robust constraints and the effectiveness of the proposed
AR-ICRL algorithm under continuous and discrete domains. The code is available at https:
//github.com/Jasonxu1225/AR-ICRL.

To address this challenge, Inverse Constrained Reinforcement Learning (ICRL) (Scobee & Sastry, 2020; Malik et al.,
2021) aims to recover the constraints respected by expert
agents from their demonstrations and learn the corresponding policies. Compared to directly imitating the expert
behaviors, modeling constraints offer better interpretability
of experts’ preferences, and these constraints can potentially
support downstream applications within similar domains.
To study the validity of a learned constraint, a common approach is to examine whether an RL policy can replicate
expert demonstrations under this constraint. Existing ICRL
methods (Liu & Zhu, 2022; 2023; 2024; Liu et al., 2023;
Gaurav et al., 2023; Qiao et al., 2023) typically train and
test their constraints within an identical environment. This
configuration, nevertheless, contradicts the real-world settings, where a discrepancy often arises between the training
dynamics and those encountered during deployment. Our
study illustrates such a discrepancy is not trivial in safe control. As the discrepancy scales, the efficacy of a learned
constraint is substantially undermined during deployment,
thereby causing the agent to perform dangerous movements.
In this work, we investigate how the mismatched environmental dynamics influence the efficacy of constraints in
terms of ensuring safe control. Motivated by our findings,
we introduce the problem of Robust Constraint Inference
(RCI). This problem requires the constraints learned in the
training environment to generalize reliably to the testing
environments under an uncertainty set.

1. Introduction
When deploying a Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithm
to practical applications, an important requirement is that
the agent’s behaviors should adhere to the constraints of
given tasks (Garcı́a & Fernández, 2015; Liu et al., 2021;
Brunke et al., 2022). However, due to the complexity of realworld environments (e.g., auto-diagnosis, robot control, and

To effectively enable RCI, we propose the Adaptively Robust Inverse Constrained Reinforcement Learning (ARICRL) algorithm. AR-ICRL alternatively solves:

*
Corresponding Author 1 School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, Guangdong, 518172,
P.R. China . Correspondence to: Guiliang Liu <liuguiliang@cuhk.edu.cn>.

1) Safety-Robust Policy Optimization that learns a control
policy that consistently executes safe actions while maintaining robustness against the uncertainty of environmental
dynamics. By leveraging the game-theoretic framework,
we model the influence of uncertainty with adversarial attacks from an opponent policy, and the robust policy can be

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

