Near-Optimal Reinforcement Learning with Self-Play
under Adaptivity Constraints

Dan Qiao 1 Yu-Xiang Wang 2

Abstract

ing (Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2016), household power management (Chung et al., 2020), and computer networking
(Bhattacharyya et al., 2019).

We study the problem of multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) with adaptivity constraints — a new problem motivated by realworld applications where deployments of new
policies are costly and the number of policy updates must be minimized. For two-player zerosum Markov Games, we design a (policy) elimination
√ based algorithm that achieves a regret of
e H 3 S 2 ABK), while the batch complexity is
O(
only O(H + log log K). In the above, S denotes
the number of states, A, B are the number of actions for the two players respectively, H is the
horizon and K is the number of episodes. Furthermore, we prove a batch complexity lower bound
Ω( logH K + log log K) for all algorithms with
√A
e K) regret bound, which matches our upper
O(
bound up to logarithmic factors. As a byproduct,
our techniques naturally extend to learning bandit
games and reward-free MARL within near optimal batch complexity. To the best of our knowledge, these are the first line of results towards
understanding MARL with low adaptivity.

The sheer amount of computation needed for self-play-based
learning in these applications often demands the algorithm
to run in a distributed fashion where the communication
cost becomes a bottleneck. In such circumstances, instead
of syncing up after each single trajectory, a more practical alternative is to assign a larger batch of work for each
machine to perform independently and sync up only sporadically. The need for infrequent communication could be
hard constraints in applications such as autonomous driving
(Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2016). Deploying new policies to
vehicle firmware takes weeks, while new data are being
collected in millions of cars every second. These constraints
render standard multi-agent RL algorithms that require altering the policy after each new data point impractical.
In the scenarios discussed above, the agent needs to minimize the number of policy deployments while learning a
good policy using (nearly) the same number of samples as
its fully-adaptive counterparts. Previous works brought up
different notions to measure the adaptivity of an online RL
algorithm, including switching cost (Bai et al., 2019; Zhang
et al., 2020c; Qiao et al., 2022; Gao et al., 2021; Wang et al.,
2021; He et al., 2023; Qiao et al., 2023; Kong et al., 2021;
Velegkas et al., 2022; Zhao et al., 2023; Xiong et al., 2023),
batch complexity (Perchet et al., 2016; Gao et al., 2019;
Qiao et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2021;
Johnson et al., 2023; Xiong et al., 2023) and deployment
efficiency (Matsushima et al., 2020; Huang et al., 2022b;
Qiao and Wang, 2023; Modi et al., 2021). Although algorithms with low adaptivity have been designed for various
Markov decision process (MDP) settings, all of the previous
works focused on the single-agent setting while the solution to multi-agent RL with low adaptivity is still unknown.
Therefore it is natural to question:

1. Introduction
This paper considers the problem of multi-agent reinforcement learning (multi-agent RL), where multiple agents aim
to make decisions simultaneously in an unfamiliar environment to maximize their individual cumulative rewards.
Multi-agent RL is used not only in large-scale strategy
games like Go (Silver et al., 2017), Poker (Brown and Sandholm, 2019) and MOBA games (Ye et al., 2020), but also
in various real-world applications such as autonomous driv1

Department of Computer Science, University of California,
Santa Barbara (UCSB), USA 2 Halıcıoğlu Data Science Institute,
University of California, San Diego (UCSD), USA. Correspondence to: Dan Qiao <danqiao@ucsb.edu>, Yu-Xiang Wang <yuxiangw@ucsd.edu>.

Question 1.1. Is it possible to design a self-play algorithm
to solve Markov games while achieving near optimal adaptivity and sample complexity simultaneously?

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Our contributions. In this paper, we answer the above
question affirmatively by proposing a new low-adaptive
1

