Efficient PAC Learnability of Dynamical Systems Over Multilayer Networks

Zirou Qiu 1 2 Abhijin Adiga 2 Madhav V. Marathe 1 2 S. S. Ravi 2 3
Daniel J. Rosenkrantz 2 3 Richard E. Stearns 2 3 Anil Vullikanti 1 2

Abstract

state evolves over time. Overall, the system dynamics proceeds in discrete time, with vertices updating their states
using interaction functions.

Networked dynamical systems are widely used as
formal models of real-world cascading phenomena, such as the spread of diseases and information. Prior research has addressed the problem of
learning the behavior of an unknown dynamical
system when the underlying network has a single layer. In this work, we study the learnability
of dynamical systems over multilayer networks,
which are more realistic and challenging. First,
we present an efficient PAC learning algorithm
with provable guarantees to show that the learner
only requires a small number of training examples
to infer an unknown system. We further provide a
tight analysis of the Natarajan dimension which
measures the model complexity. Asymptotically,
our bound on the Nararajan dimension is tight
for almost all multilayer graphs. The techniques
and insights from our work provide the theoretical
foundations for future investigations of learning
problems for multilayer dynamical systems.

Inferring the unknown components of networked systems is
an active research area (Chen & Poor, 2022; Dawkins et al.,
2021; Conitzer et al., 2020; Adiga et al., 2019; Lokhov,
2016; Narasimhan et al., 2015). One ongoing line of work
focuses on learning the unknown interaction functions of
vertices. Interaction functions are crucial to the system dynamics; they specify the decision-making rules that entities
employ to update their states. An illustrative example is
the class of threshold interaction functions (Granovetter,
1978), which are widely used to model the spread of social contagions (Li et al., 2020; Watts, 2002). Under this
framework, each entity in the network has a decision threshold that represents the tipping point for a behavioral (i.e.,
state) shift. For instance, in rumor propagation, a person’s
belief changes when the number of neighbors believing in
the rumor reaches a threshold (Trpevski et al., 2010). Overall, the interaction functions define the mechanism of the
cascade process, which also describes the system’s global
behavior (Del Vicario et al., 2016).
Existing methods for learning interaction functions only apply to the case when the underlying graph has a single-layer.
Nevertheless, such single-layer frameworks often are oversimplifications of reality, as real-world networks encompass
diverse types of connections that are not adequately captured by single-layer graphs (Kivelä et al., 2014). To our
knowledge, the learning problem for the more complex and
realistic multilayer setting (corresponding to multi-relational
networks) has not received attention in the literature. In this
work, we fill this gap through a formal study of the learnability of dynamical systems over multilayer networks.

1. Introduction
Networked dynamical systems are mathematical frameworks for numerous cascade processes, including the spread
of social behaviors, information, diseases, and biological
phenomena (Battiston et al., 2020; Ji et al., 2017; Lum et al.,
2014; Sneddon et al., 2011; Schelling, 2006; Laubenbacher
& Stigler, 2004; Kauffman et al., 2003). In general, such
a system consists of an underlying graph where vertices
are entities (e.g., individuals, genes), and edges represent
relationships between the entities. In modeling contagion
propagation, each vertex maintains a state, and has a set
of interaction functions (i.e., behavior) specifying how the

The multilayer setting. The graph in our target system
consists of multiple layers, with generally a different set
of edges in each layer. This is a classic setting for multilayer networks, and the capacity of such networks to
model complex real-world phenomena has been widely recognized (e.g., (Hammoud & Kramer, 2020; Kivelä et al.,
2014; Newman, 2018)). Notably, multilayer networks allow heterogeneous ties between vertices, with edges in
each layer capturing a particular type of interaction (e.g.,

1

University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA
Biocomplexity Institute and Initiative, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA 3 Department of Computer
Science, University at Albany – SUNY, Albany, NY, USA.
Correspondence to: Zirou Qiu <zq5au@virginia.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

