Empowering Graph Invariance Learning with Deep Spurious Infomax

Tianjun Yao * 1 Yongqiang Chen * 1 2 Zhenhao Chen 1 Kai Hu 3 Zhiqiang Shen 1 Kun Zhang 1 3

Abstract

be guaranteed in many real-world applications (Hu et al.,
2021; Koh et al., 2021; Huang et al., 2021). Therefore, it
has drawn great attention from the community to overcome
the Out-of-Distribution (OOD) generalization challenge that
enables GNNs to generalize to new environments outside
the training distributions. Recent studies incorporate the
invariance principle from causality (Peters et al., 2015) into
GNNs (Wu et al., 2022a; Chen et al., 2022), in which the
rationale is to learn the invariant graph features or identify
invariant subgraphs that only focus on the direct causes of
the target label and discards the other features whose correlations with the target labels may change across different
environments (e.g., graph sizes). Due to the non-Euclidean
and abstraction nature of graph data, the environment labels
for distinguishing distribution shifts are usually expensive
or unavailable, as collecting these labels typically requires
expert knowledge (Wu et al., 2022a; Chen et al., 2022).
Therefore, existing approaches generally rely on intermediate partitions of invariant and spurious graph features either
from input space (Fan et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022; Wu
et al., 2022b) or latent space (Li et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022;
Zhuang et al., 2023) and adopts additional assumptions in
order to learn the desired graph invariant features.

Recently, there has been a surge of interest in developing graph neural networks that utilize the
invariance principle on graphs to generalize the
out-of-distribution (OOD) data. Due to the limited knowledge about OOD data, existing approaches often pose assumptions about the correlation strengths of the underlying spurious features and the target labels. However, this prior is
often unavailable and will change arbitrarily in
the real-world scenarios, which may lead to severe failures of the existing graph invariance learning methods. To bridge this gap, we introduce a
novel graph invariance learning paradigm, which
induces a robust and general inductive bias. The
paradigm is built upon the observation that the infomax principle encourages learning spurious features regardless of spurious correlation strengths.
We further propose the EQuAD framework that
realizes this learning paradigm and employs tailored learning objectives that provably elicit invariant features by disentangling them from the
spurious features learned through infomax. Notably, EQuAD shows stable and enhanced performance across different degrees of bias in synthetic
datasets and challenging real-world datasets up to
31.76%.

A significant challenge arises in the application of these
graph invariance learning algorithms, as the assumptions
typically pose a strong prior about the joint distribution
of spurious features S and class label Y , i.e., P(S, Y ), in
an implicit or explicit way. In real-world scenarios, however, P(S, Y ) can vary arbitrarily, leading to varying correlation degrees between S and Y . Consequently, this variability may conflict with the assumptions underlying these
algorithms, resulting in potential failures. For example,
DisC (Fan et al., 2022) presumes a strong correlation between S and Y and uses the presumption to identify a biased
graph. Then DisC contrasts against the separated biased subgraph to learn the unbiased graph features. On the other
hand, environment inference (Yang et al., 2022; Li et al.,
2022) and augmentation (Wu et al., 2022b; Liu et al., 2022)
algorithms typically presume a weaker correlation between
S and Y to accurately infer or augment the environments.
However, the premise can be easily broken when spurious
correlation strengths shift, and lead to the failure of graph
invariance learning (Chen et al., 2023). The brittleness of
relying on presumed correlations as inductive bias, raises a

1. Introduction
Despite the enormous success of Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) (Kipf & Welling, 2016; Xu et al., 2018; Veličković
et al., 2018a), they generally assume that the testing and
training graphs are independently sampled from an identical distribution, i.e., the I.I.D. assumption, which can not
*

1
Equal contribution
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE 2 The
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
3
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA. Correspondence to: Tianjun Yao <tianjun.yao@mbzuai.ac.ae>,
Zhiqiang Shen <zhiqiang.shen@mbzuai.ac.ae>, Kun Zhang
<kun.zhang@mbzuai.ac.ae>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

