Optimal Differentially Private Model Training with Public Data

Andrew Lowy 1 Zeman Li 2 Tianjian Huang 2 Meisam Razaviyayn 2

Abstract

a rigorous guarantee that no attacker can learn too much
about any individual’s data (Dwork et al., 2006). DP has
been successfully deployed by various companies (Apple,
2016; Thakurta et al., 2017; Úlfar Erlingsson et al., 2014;
Ding et al., 2017), and by government agencies (U.S. Census Bureau, 2020). However, a major hindrance to more
widespread adoption of DP is that DP-trained models are
less accurate than their non-private counterparts.

Differential privacy (DP) ensures that training a
machine learning model does not leak private data.
In practice, we may have access to auxiliary public data that is free of privacy concerns. In this
work, we assume access to a given amount of public data and settle the following fundamental open
questions: 1. What is the optimal (worst-case) error of a DP model trained over a private data set
while having access to side public data? 2. How
can we harness public data to improve DP model
training in practice? We consider these questions
in both the local and central models of pure and
approximate DP. To answer the first question, we
prove tight (up to log factors) lower and upper
bounds that characterize the optimal error rates
of three fundamental problems: mean estimation,
empirical risk minimization, and stochastic convex optimization. We show that the optimal error
rates can be attained (up to log factors) by either discarding private data and training a public
model, or treating public data like it is private and
using an optimal DP algorithm. To address the
second question, we develop novel algorithms that
are “even more optimal” (i.e. better constants)
than the asymptotically optimal approaches described above. For local DP mean estimation,
our algorithm is optimal including constants. Empirically, our algorithms show benefits over the
state-of-the-art.

Leveraging public data—that is free of privacy concerns—
appears to be a promising and practically important avenue
for closing the accuracy gap between DP and non-private
models (Papernot et al., 2017; Avent et al., 2017; Feldman
et al., 2018; Amid et al., 2022). For example, large language
models (LLMs) are often pre-trained on public data and
fine-tuned on private data (Kerrigan et al., 2020b; Li et al.,
2021b; Yu et al., 2021a). Public data may be provided by
people who volunteer (e.g. product developers or early
testers) (Church, 2005; Feldman et al., 2018) or sell their
data. Data that is generated synthetically (Torkzadehmahani
et al., 2019; Vietri et al., 2020; Boedihardjo et al., 2022; He
et al., 2023) or released through a legal process (Klimt &
Yang, 2004) may serve as additional sources of public data.
The power and limitations of public data vary depending on
the particular learning problem and loss function/hypothesis
class. To calibrate the effectiveness of a public-data-assisted
DP algorithm, we can compare it against two naı̈ve baselines: 1) “throw away” the private data and run an optimal
non-private algorithm on the public data; 2) use an optimal
DP algorithm on the full data set, treating the public data
like it is private data. Some works have identified problems
where significant improvements over the naı̈ve approaches
are possible. For example, (Alon et al., 2019) show that for
agnostic PAC learning with a hypothesis class of finite VCdimension, it is possible to achieve asymptotically smaller
sample complexity than the naı̈ve baselines. (Bassily et al.,
2020) show a similar result for private query release with
finite VC-dimension. On the other hand, for certain problems it is impossible to do better than the naı̈ve approaches:
e.g., releasing binary decision stumps (Bassily et al., 2020).
Understanding what improvements, if any, over the naı̈ve approaches are possible for other problems (e.g. optimization)
and function classes is interesting.

1. Introduction
Training machine learning models on people’s data can leak
sensitive information, violating their privacy (Fredrikson
et al., 2015; Shokri et al., 2017; Carlini et al., 2021). Differential Privacy (DP) prevents such leaks by providing
1
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Wisconsin Institute of Discovery, Madison, WI, USA 2 Department of Industrial & Systems
Engineering, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA,
USA. Correspondence to: Andrew Lowy <alowy@wisc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

This work considers DP model training with side access to

1

