RoboCodeX: Multimodal Code Generation for Robotic Behavior Synthesis

Yao Mu 1 2 Junting Chen 2 3 Qinglong Zhang 2 Shoufa Chen 1 Qiaojun Yu 4 Chongjian GE 1 Runjian Chen 1 2
Zhixuan Liang 1 Mengkang Hu 1 2 Chaofan Tao 1 Peize Sun 1 Haibao Yu 1 Chao Yang 2 Wenqi Shao 2
Wenhai Wang 2 5 Jifeng Dai 2 6 Yu Qiao 2 Mingyu Ding 7 Ping Luo 1 2

Abstract

Observations

Human command
“Place the apple
into the drawer”

RoboCodeX

Robotic behavior synthesis, the problem of understanding multimodal inputs and generating
precise physical control for robots, is an important part of Embodied AI. Despite successes in
applying multimodal large language models for
high-level understanding, it remains challenging
to translate these conceptual understandings into
detailed robotic actions while achieving generalization across various scenarios. In this paper, we
propose a tree-structured multimodal code generation framework for generalized robotic behavior synthesis, termed RoboCodeX. RoboCodeX
decomposes high-level human instructions into
multiple object-centric manipulation units consisting of physical preferences such as affordance
and safety constraints, and applies code generation to introduce generalization ability across
various robotics platforms. To further enhance
the capability to map conceptual and perceptual
understanding into control commands, a specialized multimodal reasoning dataset is collected for
pre-training and an iterative refining methodology
is introduced for supervised fine-tuning. Extensive experiments demonstrate that RoboCodeX
achieves state-of-the-art performance in both simulators and real robots on four different kinds of
manipulation tasks and one embodied navigation
task. More demos and information can be found
in our homepage.

Chain of Code with Multi-modal Input
Scene Understanding

Object (apple)

Physical
Constrains
Keep the center
of mass within
the gripper

Object (drawer)

Preference
Grasp
Proposals

Grab at central
to prevent
sphere rolling

Part
(handle)

Physical
Constrains
Operations must
occur along a
fixed axis

Grasp
Proposals

Code for Motion Planning

Preference
Move
horizontally
along the x-axis

Code for Motion Planning
Physical Constrains

Grasp Proposals

Preference

Figure 1. An illustration of our RoboCodeX, a large vision language model with tree-of-thought reasoning capabilities for robotic
code generation. It decomposes high-level human instructions into
multiple object-focused manipulation subtasks, further expanding them by predicting physical constraints, preferential rankings,
and target position proposals. RoboCodeX acts as an interface to
translate high-level semantic understanding of the observed environment and instructions into tailored robotic behaviors.

1. Introduction
Embodied AI equips intelligent agents, such as robots,
with the capacity for perception, reasoning, and interaction within the 3D physical world and with humans. Yet,
a central challenge lies in the generalizability of robotic
manipulation frameworks. On one hand, robot policies may
struggle to generalize to objects with diverse properties and
mechanisms, e.g., objects with different physical constraints
and grasping preferences in Figure. 1. On the other hand,
adapting a robot learning framework to different robotic
platforms encounters difficulties. These challenges stem
from the gap between the high-level scene understanding
and the low-level manipulation and control policies. How to
create a general framework with reasoning capabilities that

1
Department of Computer Science, The University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong 2 OpenGVLab, Shanghai AI Laboratory 3 ETH
Zurich 4 Shanghai Jiao Tong University 5 The Chinese University
of Hong Kong 6 Tsinghua University 7 UC Berkely. Correspondence to: Ping Luo <pluo@cs.hku.hk>, Mingyu Ding <myding@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

