Reducing Item Discrepancy via Differentially Private Robust Embedding
Alignment for Privacy-Preserving Cross Domain Recommendation

Weiming Liu 1 Xiaolin Zheng* 1 Chaochao Chen 1 Jiahe Xu 1 Xinting Liao 1 Fan Wang 1 Yanchao Tan 2
Yew-Soon Ong 3 4

Abstract
Cross-Domain Recommendation (CDR) have become increasingly appealing by leveraging useful
information to tackle the data sparsity problem
across domains. Most of latest CDR models assume that domain-shareable user-item information (e.g., rating and review on overlapped users
or items) are accessible across domains. However, these assumptions become impractical due
to the strict data privacy protection policy. In this
paper, we propose Reducing Item Discrepancy
(RidCDR) model on solving Privacy-Preserving
Cross-Domain Recommendation (PPCDR) problem. Specifically, we aim to enhance the model
performance on both source and target domains
without overlapped users and items while protecting the data privacy. We innovatively propose private-robust embedding alignment module in RidCDR for knowledge sharing across domains while avoiding negative transfer privately.
Our empirical study on Amazon and Douban
datasets demonstrates that RidCDR significantly
outperforms the state-of-the-art models under the
PPCDR without overlapped users and items.

Domain1
User

Domain1 Item

Domain2 Item

1

?
0

?
1

?
0

?

1

?

?

?

1

?

1

?

1

?

Movie
Scene

Action
Performance

Story Theme
Main Topic

Domain2
User

Rhetorical
Expressions

Writing
Style

Figure 1. The illustration of privacy-preserving cross-domain recommendation problem without overlapped users and items.

information (e.g., user-item ratings and reviews). However,
these assumptions could be rather impractical with the increasing law on privacy protection (Pramod, 2023; Li et al.,
2024c;b). In this scenario, user/item identities may undergo
anonymous process and thus it could be hard to determine
overlapped users or items (Zhang et al., 2021a). How to
leverage cross-domain information while considering the
aforementioned constraints remains a challenge for inclusive public service.
In this paper, we focus on Privacy-Preserving Cross-Domain
Recommendation (PPCDR) problem as shown in Fig.1.
That is, we aim to resolve data sparsity problem and enhance
the model performance on both source and target domains
simultaneously. In each domain, user-item rating and review information is available, while other domains do not
have access to these intra-domain contents. Moreover, we
assume that both users and items are non-overlapped across
domains which makes the problem even more challenging,
especially under the settings of data privacy protection.

1. Introduction
Recommender systems have become increasingly appealing
in addressing the issue of information overload for users
(Chen et al., 2023b; Zhu et al., 2021a; 2023; Zang et al.,
2022; Li et al., 2024a; Liu et al., 2023b; Li et al., 2024c).
Meanwhile, most of current Cross-Domain Recommendation (CDR) models assume the presence of prior-known
overlapped users/items and the accessibility of intra-domain

Previous CDR methods cannot better solve PPCDR well.
On the one hand, conventional CDR and PPCDR models
should utilize domain-shareable contents (e.g., overlapped
users/items) as the bridges for knowledge sharing (Man
et al., 2017; Cao et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 2022). These model
performance could be severely degraded without the aid of
overlapped users/items which ultimately limits their potentials in the real practice. On the other hand, items on different domains are inherently diverse and heterogeneous which
leads to biases and discrepancies (Li et al., 2021). As the
illustration in Fig.1., movie items inherit scene and action
information while book items contain writing style. Meanwhile we should explore domain-invariant patterns (e.g.,

1
Zhejiang University, China. 2 Fuzhou University, China.
Nanyang Technology University, Singapore. 4 Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore. Correspondence to:
Xiaolin Zheng <xlzheng@zju.edu.cn>.
3

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

