Mechanistic Design and Scaling of Hybrid Architectures

Michael Poli * 1 2 Armin W Thomas * 2 Eric Nguyen * 2
Pragaash Ponnusamy 1 Björn Deiseroth 3 Kristian Kersting 3 Taiji Suzuki 4 5
Brian Hie 6 2 Stefano Ermon 2 7 Christopher Ré 2 Ce Zhang 1 Stefano Massaroli 4 8

1. Introduction

Abstract
The development of deep learning architectures
is a resource-demanding process, due to a vast design space, long prototyping times, and high compute costs associated with at-scale model training
and evaluation. We set out to simplify this process by grounding it in an end-to-end mechanistic
architecture design (MAD) pipeline, encompassing small-scale capability unit tests predictive of
scaling laws. Through a suite of synthetic token manipulation tasks such as compression and
recall, designed to probe capabilities, we identify and test new hybrid architectures constructed
from a variety of computational primitives. We
experimentally validate the resulting architectures
via an extensive compute-optimal and a new stateoptimal scaling law analysis, training over 500
language models between 70M to 7B parameters.
Surprisingly, we find MAD synthetics to correlate
with compute-optimal perplexity, enabling accurate evaluation of new architectures via isolated
proxy tasks. The new architectures found via
MAD, based on simple ideas such as hybridization
and sparsity, outperform state-of-the-art Transformer, convolutional, and recurrent architectures
(Transformer++, Hyena, Mamba) in scaling, both
at compute-optimal budgets and in overtrained
regimes. Overall, these results provide evidence
that performance on curated synthetic tasks can
be predictive of scaling laws, and that an optimal
architecture should leverage specialized layers via
a hybrid topology.

*

1

Alongside data quality, the effectiveness of large-scale training is determined by the quality of a model architecture
[17, 14], which is defined by the set and arrangement of the
computational primitives used to form layers and functional
blocks, as well as their parametrization.
Due to the combinatorial explosion of possible architecture
designs and a lack of reliable prototyping pipelines – despite progress on automated neural architecture search methods [40] – architectural improvements are obtained through
an opaque development process guided by heuristics and
individual experience, rather than systematic procedures.
Further adding to this issue are the large costs and long
iteration times associated with training and testing new architectures, underscoring the need for principled and nimble
design pipelines.
In spite of the wealth of possible architecture designs, the
majority of models rely on variations of the same uniform Transformer recipe, based on a regular interleaving
of memory-based mixers (self-attention layers) with memoryless mixers (shallow FFNs) [37, 16]. This particular
combination of computational primitives – originating from
the first Transformer design [38] – is known to improve
quality, with empirical arguments supporting the notion that
these primitives specialize in different sequence modeling
sub-tasks e.g., in-context versus factual recall [10]. Beyond
the Transformer architecture are a class of emerging computational primitives inspired by signal processing, based on
gated convolutions and recurrences [18, 27, 28, 25, 11, 41],
promising improved quality, cheaper scaling to long sequence length, and efficient inference. These new primitives
expand the architecture design space, offering new opportunities to extend capabilities and specializations of models.
In this work, we set out to explore key questions arising
from these observations:

2

Equal contribution
Together AI Stanford University
Hessian AI 4 RIKEN 5 The University of Tokyo 6 Arc Institute 7 CZ Biohub 8 Liquid AI. Correspondence to: Michael Poli
<polimic03gmail.com>.
3

1. Can the architecture design process be streamlined
through a set of simple pretext token manipulation
tasks, providing quick and cheap performance estimates predictive of scaling laws?

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

