From Coarse to Fine: Enable Comprehensive Graph Self-supervised Learning
with Multi-granular Semantic Ensemble

Qianlong Wen 1 Mingxuan Ju 1 2 Zhongyu Ouyang 1 Chuxu Zhang 3 Yanfang Ye 1

Abstract

ever, obtaining a sufficient number of annotated graphs can
be prohibitively expensive. As a result, self-supervised
learning (SSL) on graphs has emerged as a popular research
direction, offering the ability to learn task-agnostic representations without relying on costly label annotations (Zhu
et al., 2020; You et al., 2020; Thakoor et al., 2022). The SSL
paradigm has proven particularly valuable in various realworld applications, such as drug discovery (Gilmer et al.,
2017; Wu et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2021b), protein analysis (Jiang et al., 2017), and social network analysis (Fan
et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019a; Ying et al., 2018), where
the scarcity of labeled data poses a significant challenge.
Meanwhile, SSL frameworks are usually time-consuming
and computationally expensive, because they require either
contrasting the positive samples with a large number of negatives (Chen et al., 2020a) or learning the same object from
different views by multiple trials (Chen & He, 2021), which
undermines the feasibility to train a model from scratch
on each application. To overcome the computational barrier, transfer learning frameworks have been extensively
explored to quickly migrate models trained for general purposes to task-specific domains. For example, models can be
adapted to new downstream tasks by appending only one or
few MLP layers (Chen et al., 2020a; Kenton & Toutanova,
2019) with little fine-tuning to achieve good performance.

Self-supervised learning (SSL) has gained increasing attention in the graph learning community, owing to its capability of enabling powerful models
pre-trained on large unlabeled graphs for general
purposes, facilitating quick adaptation to specific
domains. Though promising, existing graph SSL
frameworks often struggle to capture both highlevel abstract features and fine-grained features
simultaneously, leading to sub-optimal generalization abilities across different downstream tasks.
To bridge this gap, we present Multi-granularity
Graph Semantic Ensemble via Knowledge Distillation, namely MGSE, a plug-and-play graph
knowledge distillation framework that can be applied to any existing graph SSL framework to
enhance its performance by incorporating the concept of multi-granularity. Specifically, MGSE
captures multi-granular knowledge by employing
multiple student models to learn from a single
teacher model, conditioned by probability distributions with different granularities. We apply
it to six state-of-the-art graph SSL frameworks
and evaluate their performances over multiple
graph datasets across different domains, the experimental results show that MGSE can consistently
boost the performance of these existing graph SSL
frameworks with up to 9.2% improvement.

Unfortunately, the knowledge from models trained for general purposes may not always suffice for various downstream tasks requiring semantics (underlying patterns) with
different granularities. For instance, in the computer vision field, object detection requires fine-grained knowledge
to recognize minute objects; whereas image segmentation
needs a high-level overview of the contours (Sun et al.,
2019). Similarly, in the natural language processing field,
named entity recognition requires fine-grained token-level
representations but document classification needs high-level
understanding over the whole input text (Liu et al., 2022).
Consider the illustration in Figure 1, where amino acids
share common amino and carboxyl groups, which make up
the majority of amino acids. However, their hydrophobic
properties are determined by the side chains, with glycine
and alanine being hydrophobic and serine and threonine
being non-hydrophobic. The defining sub-structures for
amino acids operate at a coarse granularity, while those for

1. Introdution
Graph neural networks (GNNs) garnered increasing attention due to its exceptional performance in learning powerful
representations over graphs (Kipf & Welling, 2017). How*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, USA
2
Snap Inc., Bellevue, WA, USA 3 School of Computer Science,
Brandeis University, Waltham, MA, USA. Correspondence to:
Qianlong Wen <qwen@nd.edu>, Yanfang Ye <yye7@nd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

