Q-value Regularized Transformer for Offline Reinforcement Learning

Shengchao Hu 1 2 Ziqing Fan 1 2 Chaoqin Huang 1 2 Li Shen 3 4 Ya Zhang 1 2 Yanfeng Wang 1 2 Dacheng Tao 5

Abstract

Recent advancements in offline RL have taken a new perspective on the problem, departing from conventional methods for offline RL that concentrate on policy regularization
(Kumar et al., 2019a; Fujimoto et al., 2019b) or conservatism for value function approximation (Kostrikov et al.,
2021a; Kumar et al., 2020). Instead, the problem is viewed
as a generic Conditional Sequence Modeling (CSM) task
(Chen et al., 2021; Janner et al., 2021), where past experiences consisting of state-action-reward triplets are input to
Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017a). The model generates
a sequence of action predictions using a goal-conditioned
policy, effectively converting offline RL to a supervised
learning problem. This approach relaxes the MDP assumption by considering multiple historical steps to predict an
action, allowing the model to be capable of handling long
sequences and avoid stability issues associated with bootstrapping (Srivastava et al., 2019; Kumar et al., 2019b).

Recent advancements in offline reinforcement
learning (RL) have underscored the capabilities
of Conditional Sequence Modeling (CSM), a
paradigm that learns the action distribution based
on history trajectory and target returns for each
state. However, these methods often struggle with
stitching together optimal trajectories from suboptimal ones due to the inconsistency between
the sampled returns within individual trajectories
and the optimal returns across multiple trajectories. Fortunately, Dynamic Programming (DP)
methods offer a solution by leveraging a value
function to approximate optimal future returns for
each state, while these techniques are prone to
unstable learning behaviors, particularly in longhorizon and sparse-reward scenarios. Building
upon these insights, we propose the Q-value regularized Transformer (QT), which combines the
trajectory modeling ability of the Transformer
with the predictability of optimal future returns
from DP methods. QT learns an action-value
function and integrates a term maximizing actionvalues into the training loss of CSM, which aims
to seek optimal actions that align closely with the
behavior policy. Empirical evaluations on D4RL
benchmark datasets demonstrate the superiority
of QT over traditional DP and CSM methods,
highlighting the potential of QT to enhance the
state-of-the-art in offline RL.

However, the CSM approach fails to achieve the stitching
property desired in offline RL, which involves synthesizing optimal trajectories from sub-optimal ones (Fu et al.,
2020). The primary challenge lies in the inconsistency between sampled target returns and the optimal returns from
actions, as high-return trajectories might not reflect superior actions but rather fortunate circumstances (Wang et al.,
2023). CSM associates the return-to-go (RTG) token value
with individual trajectories, overlooking the stochastic nature of state transitions and optimal future returns that span
across different trajectories (Paster et al., 2022). Additionally, the intrinsic uncertainty and approximation errors in
behavior policies further exacerbate the inconsistency, leading to inferior performance in stitching tasks, particularly
when dealing with sub-optimal data (Wang et al., 2023).

1. Introduction

Fortunately, conventional Dynamic Programming methods
(Q-learning1 ) provide a robust solution to handle this inconsistency. By treating each timestep individually and
backpropagating optimal future returns for each state, these
methods enable agents to select actions that maximize longterm returns. However, these techniques are prone to unstable learning behaviors, particularly in long-horizon and
sparse-reward scenarios (Yamagata et al., 2023). While the

Offline reinforcement learning (RL) aims at learning effective policies entirely from previously collected data without
interacting with the environment (Fujimoto et al., 2019b).
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory,
China 3 Sun Yat-sen University, China 4 JD Explore Academy,
China 5 Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. Correspondence to: Li Shen <mathshenli@gmail.com>.

1

In this paper, the terms Q-learning and Dynamic Programming
(DP) will be used interchangeably to refer to any RL algorithm
that relies on the Bellman-backup operation.

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

