Reason for Future, Act for Now: A Principled Architecture
for Autonomous LLM Agents

Zhihan Liu * 1 Hao Hu * 2 Shenao Zhang * 1 Hongyi Guo 1 Shuqi Ke 3 Boyi Liu 1 Zhaoran Wang 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Large language models (LLMs) exhibit remarkable reasoning abilities, which open a new avenue for agents to interact with the real world autonomously. However, turning
reasoning into actions remains challenging. Specifically,
although LLMs are equipped with the prior knowledge obtained through pretraining, it is stateless in nature and ungrounded in the real world, which makes the resulting action suboptimal. To bridge the reasoning-acting gap, we
aim to design an internal mechanism of reasoning on top of
LLMs, which optimizes actions iteratively by incorporating
feedback from the external environment. In particular, we
focus on the sample efficiency of autonomous LLM agents
in interactive decision-making tasks, which plays a key role
in their practical adoption, especially when interactions are
costly and risky. Our primary goal is to enable agents to
complete a given task in a guaranteed manner through reasoning within a minimum number of interactions with the
external environment.

Large language models (LLMs) demonstrate impressive reasoning abilities, but translating reasoning into actions in the real world remains
challenging. In particular, it is unclear how to
complete a given task provably within a minimum number of interactions with the external
environment, e.g., through an internal mechanism of reasoning. To this end, we propose the
first framework with provable regret guarantees
to orchestrate reasoning and acting, which we
call “reason for future, act for now” (RAFA).
Specifically, we design a prompt template for
reasoning that learns from the memory buffer
and plans a future trajectory over a long horizon (“reason for future”). At each step, the
LLM agent takes the initial action of the planned
trajectory (“act for now”), stores the collected
feedback in the memory buffer, and reinvokes
the reasoning routine to replan the future trajectory from the new state. The key idea is to
cast reasoning in LLMs as learning and planning
in Bayesian adaptive Markov decision processes
(MDPs). Correspondingly, we prompt LLMs
with the memory buffer to estimate the unknown
environment (learning) and generate an optimal
trajectory for multiple future steps that maximize
a value function (planning). The learning and
planning subroutines are performed in an “incontext” manner to emulate the actor-critic update for √
MDPs. Our theoretical analysis establishes a T regret, while our experimental validation demonstrates superior empirical performance. Here, T denotes the number of online
interactions.

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a well-studied paradigm
for improving actions by collecting feedback. However, to
tailor existing RL techniques for autonomous LLM agents,
we lack a rigorous mapping between RL and LLMs, which
leads to various conceptual discrepancies. For example, RL
operates in a numerical system, where rewards and transitions are defined by scalars and probabilities. In comparison, the inputs and outputs of LLMs are described by tokens in a linguistic system. As another example, LLMs
are trained on a general-purpose corpus and remain fixed
throughout the interactive process. In contrast, RL trains
actors and critics via parameter updates on the collected
feedback iteratively. Thus, it appears inappropriate to treat
LLMs as actors or critics under the RL framework, although all of them are parameterized by deep neural networks. Moreover, it remains unclear what reasoning with
LLMs means under the RL framework, e.g., what are the
inputs and outputs of a reasoning routine and how reasoning should be coordinated with acting. Such conceptual discrepancies prevent us from establishing a principled
framework beyond borrowing the “trial and error” concept
from RL straightforwardly and make it difficult to establish
the theoretical guarantee.

*

Equal contribution 1 Northwestern University, USA 2 Institute
for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University,
China 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong, China. Correspondence to: Zhihan Liu <ZhihanLiu2027@u.northwestern.edu>,
Zhaoran Wang <zhaoranwang@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

