Learning the Target Network in Function Space

Kavosh Asadi * 1 Yao Liu * 1 Shoham Sabach * 1 2 Ming Yin * 3 Rasool Fakoor 1

Abstract

state spaces we leverage function approximation to learn
the value function. More specifically, in this approximate
setting we select a certain hypothesis class (such as neural
networks) to represent an approximate value function vθ
parameterized by θ (Sutton & Barto, 2018). The valuefunction approximation problem is then formulated as the
problem of finding a parameter θ whose corresponding value
function vθ solves the Bellman equation vθ = T vθ .

We focus on the task of learning the value function
in the reinforcement learning (RL) setting. This
task is often solved by updating a pair of online
and target networks while ensuring that the parameters of these two networks are equivalent. We
propose Lookahead-Replicate (LR), a new valuefunction approximation algorithm that is agnostic
to this parameter-space equivalence. Instead, the
LR algorithm is designed to maintain an equivalence between the two networks in the function
space. This value-based equivalence is obtained
by employing a new target-network update. We
show that LR leads to a convergent behavior in
learning the value function. We also present empirical results demonstrating that LR-based targetnetwork updates significantly improve deep RL
on the Atari benchmark.

When solving this equation it is typical to maintain two
different parameters, denoted by (θ, w), akin to the use of
target and online networks in DQN and its successors (Mnih
et al., 2015). A deeper examination reveals that these algorithms are designed to find a pair (θ, w) that jointly satisfy
two constraints. First, there is a function-space constraint,
namely that the value function solves the Bellman equation
vw = T vθ . Additionally there is a second constraint, this
time in the parameter space, that the value functions on
two sides of the Bellman equation are parameterized using
exactly the same parameters θ = w. By satisfying this
constraint, we guarantee that we ultimately learn a single
value function. But, is there a more direct formulation to
ensure that we solve the Bellman equation and we also learn
a single value function?

1. Introduction
Learning an accurate value function is a core competency
of reinforcement learning (RL) agents. The value function
is the main ingredient in numerous RL approaches such as
TD (Sutton, 1988), Q-learning (Watkins & Dayan, 1992),
and DQN (Mnih et al., 2015). It is also a key ingredient in
some of the policy-based approaches to RL, such as actorcritic (Barto et al., 1983), and even in some model-based
RL approaches, for example the Dyna Architecture (Sutton, 1991). Therefore, obtaining a deeper understanding
of the value-function approximation setting allows us to
design better learning algorithms, and ultimately improve
the effectiveness of RL agents in practice.

We answer this question affirmatively by reformulating the
value function approximation problem. Specifically, we
substitute the parameter-space constraint in the original formulation with a function-space constraint. In addition to
solving the Bellman equation, vw = T vθ , we impose a second function-space constraint vθ = vw . As a consequence
of this reformulation, the value function could be parameterized using a pair of parameters (θ, w) where θ is not
necessarily equal to w. Suppose that we have found two
parameters θ ̸= w whose corresponding value functions
are equivalent vθ = vw . Finding such a pair of parameters is doable especially in the overparameterized setting.
Moreover, suppose that this unique value function is the
fixed-point of the Bellman Operator vw = T vθ . We argue
that (θ, w) together constitute a perfectly valid solution to
the original problem, but this pair is excluded by existing
algorithms only because θ ̸= w.

A key property of the value function v is that it corresponds
to the fixed point of the Bellman operator T (defined in
Section 2), meaning that v = T v. In RL problems with large
*
Equal contribution. The order of the first authors was fully
decided by dice roll. 1 Amazon 2 Technion 3 Princeton University.
Correspondence to: Kavosh Asadi <kavosh@alumni.brown.edu>,
Ming Yin <my0049@princeton.edu>.

Moving into our algorithmic contribution, we develop a
novel and practical RL algorithm that solves the reformulated problem. The new algorithm, referred to as Lookahead-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

