Curated LLM: Synergy of LLMs and Data Curation
for tabular augmentation in low-data regimes

Nabeel Seedat * 1 Nicolas Huynh * 1 Boris van Breugel 1 Mihaela van der Schaar 1

Abstract

data scarce: (i) in healthcare and finance, collecting annotations can be expensive or practically impossible; (ii) in developing and low-to-middle income countries (LMICs), digital
infrastructure (such as electronic healthcare records (EHRs))
can be limited or nonexistent (Ade-Ibijola & Okonkwo,
2023; Asiedu et al., 2023; Owoyemi et al., 2020; Mollura
et al., 2020; Alami et al., 2020; Ciecierski-Holmes et al.,
2022) and (iii) within large datasets, there can be (ethnic)
minorities that are underrepresented. This lack of data has
serious consequences: to sideline these settings to the peripheries of ML advancements and prevent the development
of accurate models. How can we build a reliable ML model
in this low-data regime, with so few samples? Solving
this problem is a major opportunity that would unlock the
potential of ML across society, domains, and regions.

Machine Learning (ML) in low-data settings remains an underappreciated yet crucial problem.
Hence, data augmentation methods to increase
the sample size of datasets needed for ML are
key to unlocking the transformative potential of
ML in data-deprived regions and domains. Unfortunately, the limited training set constrains traditional tabular synthetic data generators in their
ability to generate a large and diverse augmented
dataset needed for ML tasks. To address this
challenge, we introduce CLLM, which leverages
the prior knowledge of Large Language Models
(LLMs) for data augmentation in the low-data
regime. However, not all the data generated by
LLMs will improve downstream utility, as for any
generative model. Consequently, we introduce a
principled curation mechanism, leveraging learning dynamics, coupled with confidence and uncertainty metrics, to obtain a high-quality dataset.
Empirically, on multiple real-world datasets, we
demonstrate the superior performance of CLLM in
the low-data regime compared to conventional
generators. Additionally, we provide insights
into the LLM generation and curation mechanism,
shedding light on the features that enable them to
output high-quality augmented datasets.

Aim. To address this important yet undervalued low-data
problem, we aim to augment the small labeled dataset (n <
100) with synthetic samples. We focus on tabular data, as
defining augmentations is non-trivial and can easily result in
nonsensical or invalid samples. Moreover, tabular domains
like healthcare are often where data scarcity is acute.
Related work. Data augmentation is a widely used and
different approach to address data scarcity in tabular data
contexts. Methods are either based on generative models
(Ghosheh et al., 2023; Biswas et al., 2023; Wang & Pai,
2023; Machado et al., 2022; Tanaka & Aranha, 2019) such
as GANs (Xu et al., 2019), VAEs (Xu et al., 2019), Normalizing Flows (Papamakarios et al., 2021), Score-based
models (Kotelnikov et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2022), or alternatively traditional methods such as SMOTE (Chawla
et al., 2002; Wang & Pai, 2023; Machado et al., 2022). However, in low-data regimes (n < 100), the training data may
not describe the full data distribution well, despite it being
i.i.d. draws. Consequently, this harms conventional methods
since the augmented data may not be sufficiently diverse and
accurate, restricting the generalizability of predictive models
trained on such data. Recent work has shown the potential
of fine-tuning Large Language Models (LLMs) for tabular
data generation (Borisov et al., 2023). While LLMs offer
some degree of prior knowledge, there are two challenges
in our setting. First, it is computationally expensive to finetune LLMs, while needing specialized hardware —luxuries

1. Introduction
No data, No Machine Learning. Machine learning (ML)
has transformed numerous industries, but its wider adoption is hindered by a pervasive roadblock: insufficient data.
Specifically, the use of ML algorithms presumes the availability and access to large datasets for training, be it labeled
or unlabeled. Unfortunately, real-world domains are often
*

Equal contribution 1 University of Cambridge. Correspondence to: Nabeel Seedat <ns741@cam.ac.uk>, Nicolas Huynh
<nvth2@cam.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

