Exact Conversion of In-Context Learning to Model Weights in
Linearized-Attention Transformers
Brian K Chen 1 2 Tianyang Hu 3 Hui Jin 3 Hwee Kuan Lee 1 2 4 5 6 7 Kenji Kawaguchi 1

Abstract

Learning (ICL), which involves learning to generalize and
make predictions on new tasks based on demonstration
examples provided in the prompt. Numerous studies have
shown LLMs solving increasingly complex tasks with ICL as
compared to fine-tuning using labeled data (Wei et al., 2022).

In-Context Learning (ICL) has been a powerful
emergent property of large language models that
has attracted increasing attention in recent years.
In contrast to regular gradient-based learning,
ICL is highly interpretable and does not require
parameter updates. In this paper, we show that, for
linearized transformer networks, ICL can be made
explicit and permanent through the inclusion of
bias terms. We mathematically demonstrate the
equivalence between a model with ICL demonstration prompts and the same model with the additional bias terms. Our algorithm (ICLCA) allows
for exact conversion in an inexpensive manner. Existing methods are not exact and require expensive
parameter updates. We demonstrate the efficacy
of our approach through experiments that show
the exact incorporation of ICL tokens into a linear
transformer. We further suggest how our method
can be adapted to achieve cheap approximate conversion of ICL tokens, even in regular transformer
networks that are not linearized. Our experiments
on GPT-2 show that, even though the conversion
is only approximate, the model still gains valuable
context from the included bias terms.

In-context learning is an attractive proposition compared to
traditional parameter-based model update methods such as
fine-tuning (Wei et al., 2021; Ouyang et al., 2022) or knowledge editing (Dai et al., 2021; Meng et al., 2022a;b). Demonstration examples can be directly included in the prompt.
There is no need to edit the parameters of the model which can
be costly when considering models with billions of parameters such as OpenAI’s GPT-4 and Google’s Bard. In terms
of performance, ICL prompting methods (Wei et al., 2022;
Zhou et al., 2022) also demonstrate stronger generalization
and more precise control of the model behavior (Zheng et al.,
2023). Such an advantage is expected to be more prominent as LLMs get larger and more powerful. In addition,
ICL presents a degree of interpretability when incorporating
demonstration examples into the model. The examples often
take the form of natural language prompts or other readily understandable inputs that can be understood by humans. This
is often not the case when working with machine learning.
Despite its promising qualities, there are clear shortcomings to the ICL paradigm compared to the traditional
gradient-based fine-tuning approaches. While not requiring
costly parameter updates like other methods, ICL does
not permanently modify the model weights. All included
contextual information is only temporary. Demonstration
examples are only incorporated on a case-by-case basis
and will not be applied to future input prompts. Studies on
permanently including ICL information in the model weights
are still limited. There are some attempts aiming to distill
the context information from ICL prompts into the model
parameters (Askell et al., 2021; Choi et al., 2022; Snell et al.,
2022). However, these so-called context distillation methods
are largely empirical and lack theoretical guarantees.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have displayed incredible
performance and capabilities with the introduction of models
such as BERT (Devlin et al., 2018) and GPT (Radford et al.,
2018; Brown et al., 2020). One such ability is In-Context
1
National University of Singapore 2 Bioinformatics Institute, Agency for Science, Technology and Research
(A*STAR) 3 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 4 Nanyang Technological University 5 Singapore Eye Research Institute 6 Singapore
International Research Laboratory on Artificial Intelligence
7
Singapore Institute for Clinical Sciences. Correspondence to:
Tianyang Hu <hutianyang.up@outlook.com>, Kenji Kawaguchi
<kenji@comp.nus.edu.sg>.

In this study, we attempt to incorporate ICL demonstration
prompts into the parameters of an LLM through the addition
of a bias term to the attention module. We do so for a
specific class of transformers with linearized attention
modules which have already shown promise in real-world

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

