No Double Descent in Principal Component Regression:
A High-Dimensional Analysis

Daniel Gedon 1 Antônio H. Ribeiro 1 Thomas B. Schön 1
studied before (Bartlett & Mendelson, 2002; Dziugaite &
Roy, 2017; Belkin et al., 2018; Advani et al., 2020).

Abstract
Understanding the generalization properties of
large-scale models necessitates incorporating realistic data assumptions into the analysis. Therefore, we consider Principal Component Regression (PCR)—combining principal component
analysis and linear regression—on data from a
low-dimensional manifold. We present an analysis of PCR when the data is sampled from a
spiked covariance model, obtaining fundamental
asymptotic guarantees for the generalization risk
of this model. Our analysis is based on random
matrix theory and allows us to provide guarantees for high-dimensional data. We additionally
present an analysis of the distribution shift between training and test data. The results allow
us to disentangle the effects of (1) the number
of parameters, (2) the data-generating model and,
(3) model misspecification on the generalization
risk. The use of PCR effectively regularizes the
model and prevents the interpolation peak of the
double descent. Our theoretical findings are empirically validated in simulation, demonstrating
their practical relevance.

Principal Component Regression (PCR) is a widely
adopted model where the input data is projected onto the
principal components of the data and then a linear model is
fitted to the projected data (Pearson, 1901; Jolliffe, 2002).
It is a simple but effective model that is used in many
real-world applications for its interpretable regularization
effect. Examples include exploratory statistical research
(Massy, 1965), econometrics (Geweke, 1996), genetics
(Wang & Abbott, 2008), robotics (Vijayakumar & Schaal,
2000) and many more. These real-world datasets are often
high-dimensional but lie on a low-dimensional manifold
(Tenenbaum et al., 2000). In this work, we therefore consider the case where PCR is applied to data that is sampled
from a spiked covariance model (Johnstone, 2001) which
is a widely adopted model for high-dimensional data (Baik
et al., 2005; Baik & Silverstein, 2006). The spiked covariance model assumes that the data is sampled from a lowdimensional subspace. Thus, the feature covariance matrix
is given by a base covariance C0 representing noise and
some spikes for the d-dimensional data subspace, yielding
Pd
C = C0 + i=1 vi λi vi⊤ .
While the double descent is well studied for linear regression models (Bartlett et al., 2020; Hastie et al., 2022; Mei
& Montanari, 2022), the effect of the double descent for
PCR is not well understood. To visualize PCR under highdimensional inputs for a real-world data example, we use
the Diverse MAGIC wheat data set (Scott et al., 2021).
Here, we subsample the genotypes uniformly for a varying number of features p while keeping the number of samples n fixed. Figure 1 shows the risk of PCR and full linear
regression on this data set. While in this example there is no
reason to assume that the data is sampled from a spiked covariance model which is a linear data generator, we can observe that (1) linear regression has a double descent curve
and (2) PCR effectively regularizes the model and for sufficiently many principal components, the risk approaches
the linear regression risk for small and large number of features p. Therefore, even though our analysis focuses on the
linear case, it can describe the qualitative behaviour of PCR
on real-world data.

1. Introduction
The study of overparameterized models with more features than training data points offers a natural route to gain
theoretical understanding when it comes to the successes
of large-scale models with good generalization properties
(Neyshabur et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2017). The observation that the generalization error often decreases in the
overparameterized regime and the framing as ‘double descent’ (Belkin et al., 2019) boosted research in this direction even if generalization of large models was already
1

Department of Information Technology, Uppsala University, Sweden.
Correspondence to:
Daniel Gedon
<daniel.gedon@it.uu.se>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

