Lyapunov-stable Neural Control for State and Output Feedback:
A Novel Formulation
Lujie Yang∗ 1 Hongkai Dai∗ 2 Zhouxing Shi 3 Cho-Jui Hsieh 3 Russ Tedrake 1 2 Huan Zhang 4

Abstract

Learning-based neural network (NN) control policies have shown impressive empirical performance in a wide range of tasks in robotics and
control. However, formal (Lyapunov) stability
guarantees over the region-of-attraction (ROA) for
NN controllers with nonlinear dynamical systems
are challenging to obtain, and most existing approaches rely on expensive solvers such as sumsof-squares (SOS), mixed-integer programming
(MIP), or satisfiability modulo theories (SMT). In
this paper, we demonstrate a new framework for
learning NN controllers together with Lyapunov
certificates using fast empirical falsification and
strategic regularizations. We propose a novel formulation that defines a larger verifiable regionof-attraction (ROA) than shown in the literature,
and refines the conventional restrictive constraints
on Lyapunov derivatives to focus only on certifiable ROAs. The Lyapunov condition is rigorously
verified post-hoc using branch-and-bound with
scalable linear bound propagation-based NN verification techniques. The approach is efficient
and flexible, and the full training and verification procedure is accelerated on GPUs without
relying on expensive solvers for SOS, MIP, nor
SMT. The flexibility and efficiency of our framework allow us to demonstrate Lyapunov-stable
output feedback control with synthesized NNbased controllers and NN-based observers with
formal stability guarantees, for the first time in
literature. Source code at github.com/VerifiedIntelligence/Lyapunov Stable NN Controllers

Figure 1: Phase portrait (colorful trajectories) of simulating
the angle-observed pendulum with the synthesized neuralnetwork controller and observer in different 2-dimensional
slice. The torque limit |u| ≤ mgl
3 is challenging for both
synthesis and verification. The certified ROA is outlined by
the black contour. To the best of our knowledge, our method
provides the first formal neural certificate for the pendulum
with output feedback control.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has significantly advanced the development
of neural-network-based controllers for robotic systems, especially those leveraging output feedback from images and
sensor data (Kalashnikov et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2016).
Despite their impressive performance, many of these controllers lack the critical stability guarantees that are essential
for safety-critical applications. Addressing this issue, Lyapunov stability (Lyapunov, 1892) in control theory offers
a robust framework to ensure the closed-loop stability of
nonlinear dynamical systems. Central to this theory, a Lyapunov function is a scalar function whose value decreases
along the system’s closed-loop trajectories, guiding the system towards a stable equilibrium from any states within
the region-of-attraction (ROA). While existing research has
successfully synthesized simple (linear or polynomial) controllers (Tedrake et al., 2010; Majumdar et al., 2013; Yang
et al., 2023; Dai & Permenter, 2023) with rigorous stability guarantees, certified by Lyapunov functions and their
sublevel sets as region-of-attraction (Slotine et al., 1991)
using linear quadratic regulator (LQR) or sum-of-squares
(SOS) (Parrilo, 2000) based method, a gap persists in extending these guarantees to more complex neural-network
controllers. To bridge this gap, we aim to synthesize neuralnetwork controllers with Lyapunov functions, in order to

*

Equal contribution 1 MIT 2 Toyota Research Institute 3 UCLA
UIUC. Correspondence to: Lujie Yang <lujie@mit.edu>, Huan
Zhang <huan@huan-zhang.com>.

4

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

