Expressivity and Generalization: Fragment-Biases for Molecular GNNs

Tom Wollschläger * 1 2 Niklas Kemper * 1 Leon Hetzel 1 3 Johanna Sommer 1 2 Stephan Günnemann 1 2

Abstract

as they can be powerful predictors of the functional properties of molecules (Merlot et al., 2003). The beneficial
effect of fragments becomes even more apparent in larger
systems, such as proteins, where individual components
often resemble whole residues (Singh & Saha, 2003).

Although recent advances in higher-order Graph
Neural Networks (GNNs) improve the theoretical expressiveness and molecular property predictive performance, they often fall short of the
empirical performance of models that explicitly
use fragment information as inductive bias. However, for these approaches, there exists no theoretic expressivity study. In this work, we propose the Fragment-WL test, an extension to the
well-known Weisfeiler & Leman (WL) test, which
enables the theoretic analysis of these fragmentbiased GNNs. Building on the insights gained
from the Fragment-WL test, we develop a new
GNN architecture and a fragmentation with infinite vocabulary that significantly boosts expressiveness. We show the effectiveness of our model
on synthetic and real-world data where we outperform all GNNs on Peptides and have 12% lower
error than all GNNs on ZINC and 34% lower
error than other fragment-biased models. Furthermore, we show that our model exhibits superior
generalization capabilities compared to the latest transformer-based architectures, positioning
it as a robust solution for a range of molecular
modeling tasks.

To give GNNs the predictive power of substructures, recent work has introduced more powerful methods that relate
expressive power to the ability to distinguish isomorphic
graphs. For these higher-order GNNs, the Weisfeiler &
Leman (WL) test serves as a measure of expressivity. Empirical evaluations analyze the ability of these models to
count substructures and predict molecular properties (Zhang
et al., 2023; Morris et al., 2021). However, many of these
works focus primarily on theoretical expressiveness analysis,
often neglecting practical implications.
Recently, Campi et al. (2023) showed that these models
suffer from poor generalization to data that do not perfectly
fit the training distribution. This often results in sub-par performance on real-world data (Maron et al., 2019; Gasteiger
et al., 2020). At the same time, models that explicitly incorporate fragment information as inductive biases perform
better overall (Fey et al., 2020), but are often limited to a
single substructure and lack a theoretical analysis of their
expressiveness, leading to a mismatch between theory and
practical performance (Zhu et al., 2022; Fey et al., 2020;
Zang et al., 2023).
In this work, we address the gap between theory and practical performance by introducing the Fragment-WL test, an
extension of the standard WL test that enables a unified analysis of existing (fragment-biased) models. In addition, we introduce a new powerful model that directly leverages graph
fragments within its message-passing framework. Thereby,
our model becomes more robust to varying graph structures
and can generalize better to out-of-distribution data. Lastly,
our model enables a new fragmentation to represent molecular graphs with an infinite vocabulary consisting only of basic building blocks. We show the usefulness of our approach
across a range of molecular datasets and tasks. We analyze
both short- and long-range interactions, where we achieve
state-of-the-art performance compared to graph-based models and even outperform transformer-based architectures in
some scenarios.1

1. Introduction
A common issue with Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) is
their lack of expressiveness, including their inability to recognize substructures, which could limit their empirical performance (Morris et al., 2021). In chemistry and machine
learning for chemistry, frequently occurring substructures,
or fragments, are commonly used to improve expressivity,
*
Equal contribution 1 School of Computation, Information
& Technology, Technical University of Munich. 2 Munich
Data Science Institute, Germany. 3 Helmholtz Center for Computational Health, Munich, Germany. Correspondence to:
Tom Wollschläger <t.wollschlaeger@tum.de>, Niklas Kemper
<niklas.kemper@tum.de>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

1

Find our code at cs.cit.tum.de/daml/fragment-biased-gnns/

