Unsupervised Evaluation of Code LLMs with Round-Trip Correctness

Miltiadis Allamanis * 1 Sheena Panthaplackel * 1 Pengcheng Yin * 1

Abstract

benchmarks focus on narrow domains of code: HumanEval
and MBPP evaluate introductory-level, standalone programming tasks; ARCADE and DS-1000 focus on simple data
science tasks using few popular open-source libraries (e.g.,
numpy, pandas). These benchmarks are “necessary” but
not “sufficient” for good performance for Code LLM users
that work on different development environments which
feature a much broader spectrum of domains, programming
libraries and frameworks. However, manually creating new
benchmarks with expanded scope is costly and impractical
given the general-purpose nature of code and fast-paced
software evolution.

To evaluate large language models of code, research has relied on a few small manually curated benchmarks, such as HumanEval and MBPP,
which represent a narrow part of the real-world
software domains. In this work, we introduce
round-trip correctness (RTC) as an alternative
evaluation method. RTC allows Code LLM evaluation on a broader spectrum of real-world software domains without the need for costly human
curation. RTC rests on the idea that we can ask a
model to make a prediction (e.g., describe some
code using natural language), feed that prediction
back (e.g., synthesize code from the predicted description), and check if this round-trip leads to
code that is semantically equivalent to the original input. We show how to employ RTC to evaluate code synthesis and editing. We find that RTC
strongly correlates with model performance on existing narrow-domain code synthesis benchmarks
while allowing us to expand to a much broader set
of domains and tasks which was not previously
possible without costly human annotations.

Towards ameliorating these limitations, we use the concept of round-trip correctness (RTC) which allows us to
perform unsupervised evaluation over certain LLM capabilities, complementing existing human-annotated evaluations.
RTC relies on the idea that we can use an LLM to perform
both an action (e.g., “Describe these lines of code”) and
its inverse (“Implement the code given this description”).
See Fig. 1 for an example. We can then judge whether the
round-trip has retained the semantics of the input. This
can be achieved via computing various discrete (e.g., exact match) or continuous metrics (e.g., BLEU) or involve
execution-based oracles (e.g., unit tests) which commonly
already exist and require no additional human involvement.
Our contributions are:

1. Introduction

• We propose an unsupervised method for evaluating LLMs
via round-trip correctness (RTC) (Sec. 2) and instantiate
it for code synthesis and editing (Sec. 3).
• We show that RTC strongly correlates with existing metrics on narrow-domain benchmarks (HumanEval and ARCADE) measuring the same LLM capability within that
narrow domain (Sec. 4.1).
• We show that RTC allows us to measure an LLM’s performance over a wide-range of real-life software domains
— without human-provided annotations — and complements existing narrow-domain benchmarks (Sec. 4.2).
• We demonstrate that RTC is a general metric that can be
used for other tasks, like code editing, for which there are
no well-established benchmarks (Sec. 3.2).

While large language models (LLMs) have shown exceptional abilities in a wide range of tasks, their evaluation remains costly, commonly requiring laborious human-curated
datasets. This is particularly true for code capabilities of
LLMs that commonly require highly-skilled programmers to
create evaluation benchmarks. Existing benchmarks, such
as HumanEval (Chen et al., 2021), MBPP (Austin et al.,
2021), ARCADE (Yin et al., 2022), and DS-1000 (Lai et al.,
2023) have been developed by asking human annotators to
provide natural language, code, tests, and sometimes the
target problems themselves.
At the same time, established human-annotated evaluation
*
Equal contribution 1 Google DeepMind. Correspondence to:
Miltiadis Allamanis <mallamanis@google.com>.

Our code can be found at https://github.com/
google-deepmind/icml2024-roundtrip-correctness.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

