How Free is Parameter-Free Stochastic Optimization?

Amit Attia 1 Tomer Koren 1 2

Abstract

Addressing the challenge, a variety of methods emerged
over the years, with the goal of minimizing knowledge
about problem parameters required for tuning, while maintaining performance competitive with carefully tuned algorithms. These include the so-called adaptive methods, such
as AdaGrad and Adam (e.g., Duchi et al., 2011; Kingma &
Ba, 2015) and their recent theoretical advancements (Reddi
et al., 2018; Tran et al., 2019; Kavis et al., 2019; Alacaoglu
et al., 2020; Faw et al., 2022; Kavis et al., 2022; Attia &
Koren, 2023; Liu et al., 2023), that self-tune learning rates
based on gradient statistics; parameter-free methods (e.g.,
Chaudhuri et al., 2009; Streeter & McMahan, 2012; Luo
& Schapire, 2015; Orabona & Pál, 2021; Carmon & Hinder, 2022) that focus primarily on automatically adapting
to the complexity of (i.e., distance to) an optimal solution;
and advanced techniques from the literature on online learning (Orabona & Pál, 2016; Cutkosky & Orabona, 2018)
that can be used in a stochastic optimization setting via an
online-to-batch reduction. More recently, several works
have achieved advancements in improving practical performance, narrowing the gap to finely-tuned methods (Orabona
& Tommasi, 2017; Chen et al., 2020; Ivgi et al., 2023; Defazio & Mishchenko, 2023; Mishchenko & Defazio, 2023).

We study the problem of parameter-free stochastic
optimization, inquiring whether, and under what
conditions, do fully parameter-free methods exist: these are methods that achieve convergence
rates competitive with optimally tuned methods,
without requiring significant knowledge of the
true problem parameters. Existing parameterfree methods can only be considered “partially”
parameter-free, as they require some non-trivial
knowledge of the true problem parameters, such
as a bound on the stochastic gradient norms, a
bound on the distance to a minimizer, etc. In the
non-convex setting, we demonstrate that a simple
hyperparameter search technique results in a fully
parameter-free method that outperforms more sophisticated state-of-the-art algorithms. We also
provide a similar result in the convex setting with
access to noisy function values under mild noise
assumptions. Finally, assuming only access to
stochastic gradients, we establish a lower bound
that renders fully parameter-free stochastic convex optimization infeasible, and provide a method
which is (partially) parameter-free up to the limit
indicated by our lower bound.

While adaptive and parameter-free methods enjoy strong theoretical guarantees, each of the aforementioned approaches
still demands some level of non-trivial knowledge regarding problem parameters. This includes knowledge about
the smoothness parameter and the initial suboptimality for
non-convex adaptive and self-tuning methods, or a bound
on either the stochastic gradient norms or on the distance
to an optimal solution for parameter-free convex (including
online) optimization algorithms. To the best of our knowledge, in the absence of such non-trivial assumptions, no
method in the literature is fully parameter-free, in either the
non-convex or convex, smooth or non-smooth cases.

1. Introduction
Stochastic first-order optimization is a cornerstone of
modern machine learning, with stochastic gradient descent (SGD, Robbins & Monro, 1951) as the go-to method
for addressing statistical learning problems. The tuning of
algorithmic parameters, particularly those associated with
SGD such as the step-size, proves to be a challenging task,
both theoretically and in practice (e.g., Bottou, 2012; Schaul
et al., 2013), especially when the problem parameters are
unknown. The present paper focuses on theoretical aspects
of this challenge.

This paper explores the following question: in what stochastic optimization scenarios, and under what conditions, do
fully parameter-free optimization algorithms exist? In this
context, we note that direct hyperparameter tuning, which
parameter-free self-tuning methods aim to eschew, could
be considered a valid approach for designing parameterfree algorithms. Consequently, we also examine the question: can self-tuning optimization algorithms actually outperform direct tuning methods based on simple hyperparam-

1 Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University
2 Google Research Tel Aviv. Correspondence to: Amit Attia <ami-

tattia@mail.tau.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 41𝑠𝑡 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

