Prompt Sketching for Large Language Models

Luca Beurer-Kellner 1 Mark Niklas Mueller 1 Marc Fischer 1 Martin Vechev 1

Abstract

phrases to elicit the desired responses (Kojima et al., 2022),
more recent work considers conversational (Ouyang et al.,
2022), multi-part, and template-guided LLM interactions,
where a model is queried several times in a constrained way,
based on a template or grammar. This offers control over
LLM reasoning by filling in a template of pre-defined steps
(Beurer-Kellner et al., 2023; Lundberg and Ribeiro), allows
interfacing with automated software systems, and enables
syntactically reliable code generation (Poesia et al., 2022).

Many recent prompting strategies for large language models (LLMs) query the model multiple
times sequentially – first to produce intermediate
results and then the final answer. However, using
these methods, both decoder and model are unaware of potential follow-up prompts, leading to
disconnected and undesirably wordy intermediate
responses. In this work, we address this issue
by proposing prompt sketching, a new prompting paradigm in which an LLM does not only
respond by completing a prompt, but by predicting values for multiple variables in a template.
This way, sketching grants users more control
over the generation process, e.g., by providing
a reasoning framework via intermediate instructions, leading to better overall results. The key
idea enabling sketching with existing, autoregressive models is to adapt the decoding procedure
to also score follow-up instructions during text
generation, thus optimizing overall template likelihood in inference. Our experiments show that in
a zero-shot setting, prompt sketching outperforms
existing, sequential prompting schemes such as
direct asking or chain-of-thought on 7 out of 8
LLM benchmarking tasks, including state tracking, arithmetic reasoning, and general question
answering. To facilitate future use, we release a
number of generic, yet effective sketches applicable to many tasks, and an open source library
called dclib, powering our sketch-aware decoders
as part of https://github.com/eth-sri/lmql.

Key Challenge: Decoding with (Hard) Constraints We
consider a simple application, illustrated in Figure 1. The
goal is to generate a list of items, satisfying two hard requirements: (1) the result should be a dashed list of exactly four
items and (2) the second item should be Frisbee. To guarantee that these requirements are satisfied, prompting and
fine-tuning alone are insufficient, as unconstrained LLMs
remain inherently stochastic, even with good instructions,
demonstrations, or training Arora et al. (2023); Zhao et al.
(2021). To address this issue, template-guided inference
constructs a template from the (hard) constraints, leaving
multiple holes for the LLM to fill during the generation
(top right, Figure 1). Unfortunately, the naive strategy of
calling an unconstrained model (Figure 1, left) for each
placeholder fails frequently, as the model runs on, beyond
the template, generating many items per placeholder. A practical alternative is stop-and-go inference (middle): By feeding the template incrementally, item-by-item, and enforcing
stopping-conditions for each call, we can force the overall
output to adhere to the template. While this method is effective for output formatting (Beurer-Kellner et al., 2023;
Lundberg and Ribeiro), the model remains unaware of the
overall template when decoding each placeholder, leading to
sub-optimal reasoning strategies. For instance, in Figure 1,
stop-and-go generates Frisbee as the first item, leading to a
repetition of the word, which would otherwise be unlikely
under the model’s distribution. This example raises three
important questions: (1) How does stop-and-go inference
compare to unconstrained inference – Beurer-Kellner et al.
(2023); Lundberg and Ribeiro do not evaluate this – in terms
of overall model performance on reasoning tasks? (2) Can
we improve on naive stop-and-go inference by anticipating
the overall template during generation? And, (3) what are
the general effects of these inference methods, i.e., do they
impair or improve the model’s reasoning capabilities?

1. Introduction
While early prompting strategies for large language models (LLMs) (Brown et al., 2020; Anil et al., 2023; Jiang
et al., 2024; Touvron et al., 2023) focused on simple trigger
1

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Luca Beurer-Kellner <luca.beurerkellner@inf.ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

