DRED: Zero-Shot Transfer in Reinforcement Learning via
Data-Regularised Environment Design

Samuel Garcin 1 James Doran 2 Shangmin Guo 1 Christopher G. Lucas 1 Stefano V. Albrecht 1

Abstract
Autonomous agents trained using deep reinforcement learning (RL) often lack the ability to successfully generalise to new environments, even
when these environments share characteristics
with the ones they have encountered during training. In this work, we investigate how the sampling
of individual environment instances, or levels, affects the zero-shot generalisation (ZSG) ability of
RL agents. We discover that, for deep actor-critic
architectures sharing their base layers, prioritising levels according to their value loss minimises
the mutual information between the agent’s internal representation and the set of training levels
in the generated training data. This provides a
novel theoretical justification for the regularisation achieved by certain adaptive sampling strategies. We then turn our attention to unsupervised
environment design (UED) methods, which assume control over level generation. We find that
existing UED methods can significantly shift the
training distribution, which translates to low ZSG
performance. To prevent both overfitting and distributional shift, we introduce data-regularised
environment design (DRED). DRED generates
levels using a generative model trained to approximate the ground truth distribution of an initial
set of level parameters. Through its grounding,
DRED achieves significant improvements in ZSG
over adaptive level sampling strategies and UED
methods.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: The agent (yellow) must navigate to the goal
(green) but cannot pass through walls (grey) and only observes tiles directly adjacent to itself (highlighted yellow).
An agent trained over levels (a)-(c) will transfer zero-shot
to level (d) if it has learnt a behavior adapted to the task
semantics of following blue tiles to the goal location.

Prior applications of RL algorithms (Agostinelli et al., 2019;
Lee et al., 2020; Rudin et al., 2022) indicate that strong
zero-shot generalisation (ZSG) can be achieved through an
adaptive sampling strategy over the set of environment instances available during training, which we refer to as the
set of training levels. However, the relationship between
ZSG and the level sampling process remains poorly understood. In this work, we draw novel connections between
this process and the minimisation of an upper bound on
the generalisation error. This bound depends on the mutual
information (MI) between the learned policy π and the set
of training levels L,
I(π; L) = H(i) +

XZ
i∈L

P (π=π̄, i=i) log P (i=i|π=π̄),

π̄∈∆A

(1)
where i refers to an individual training level, H(i) the entropy of the level distribution and ∆A the output space of the
policy. A model with high I(π; L) outputs action distributions that are highly correlated to the level identity. In other
words, the model internally predicts the level it is currently
in and learns an ensemble of level-specific policies. In general, such an agent will not transfer to new levels zero-shot,
as illustrated in the minimal example in Figure 1. In this
scenario, it is possible to identify a training level from its
initial observation. An agent with high I(π; L) would use
this information to infer the goal location without having to
observe it first. In doing so, it can ignore the task semantics
shared across levels, while still maximising its returns on the

1. Introduction
A central challenge facing modern reinforcement learning
(RL) is learning policies capable of zero-shot transfer of
learned behaviours to a wide range of environment settings.
1
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh 2 Huawei. Correspondence to: Samuel Garcin <s.garcin@ed.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

