Learning Linear Block Error Correction Codes

Yoni Choukroun 1 Lior Wolf 1

Abstract

Gruber et al., 2017; Bennatan et al., 2018; Choukroun &
Wolf, 2022) have been applied as successful heuristics to the
NP-hard maximum likelihood (ML) problem of decoding.
However, creating high-performance codes in conjunction
with their decoders remains a challenge, particularly in the
contemporary realm of finite-length codes.

Error correction codes are a crucial part of the
physical communication layer, ensuring the reliable transfer of data over noisy channels. The
design of optimal linear block codes capable of
being efficiently decoded is of major concern, especially for short block lengths. While neural
decoders have recently demonstrated their advantage over classical decoding techniques, the neural design of the codes remains a challenge. In
this work, we propose for the first time a unified
encoder-decoder training of binary linear block
codes. To this end, we adapt the coding setting to
support efficient and differentiable training of the
code for end-to-end optimization over the order
two Galois field. We also propose a novel Transformer model in which the self-attention masking
is performed in a differentiable fashion for the
efficient backpropagation of the code gradient.
Our results show that (i) the proposed decoder
outperforms existing neural decoding on conventional codes, (ii) the suggested framework generates codes that outperform the analogous conventional codes, and (iii) the codes we developed
not only excel with our decoder but also show
enhanced performance with traditional decoding
techniques.

Linear block codes are generally designed upon asymptotical analysis based on mathematical principles or upon
pseudorandom generation. The Shannon channel capacity
theorem (Shannon, 1948) demonstrated first the existence
of a coding technique that allows an arbitrarily small error
probability under maximum likelihood decoding when the
transmission rate remains closely below the channel capacity. Then, the capacity can be asymptotically achieved using
random linear block codes, encoded in polynomial time.
Polar codes (Arikan, 2008) are a family of codes proven to
be capacity-achieving under successive cancellation (SC)
decoding with an explicit construction method based on
recursive channel combination. Low-Density Parity-Check
(LDPC) codes (Gallager, 1962) are provably close to the
capacity generally obtained from random sparse bipartite
graphs with appropriate degree distribution. LDPC codes
are effectively decoded via the efficient Belief Propagation
algorithm (Pearl, 1988).
While neural methods have been applied successfully to
train decoders of existing codes, attempts to use machine
learning for code design are far fewer. There have been
attempts to learn non-linear continuous codes along with
their neural decoders (O’Shea & Hoydis, 2017; Jiang et al.,
2019b), but the very high degree of non-differentiability of
the ubiquitous binary linear block codes makes their design
a major challenge.

1. Introduction
In the modern era of information technology, maintaining
strong and reliable communication despite interference in
transmission channels is a significant priority. It necessitates
the development of codes designed for resilient transmission
over noisy channels. Among the existing family of codes,
linear block codes represent a widely used class of error
correction codes (ECC), which benefits from decades of research and design. Neural methods (Nachmani et al., 2016;

Our contributions include (i) showing for the first time that
it is possible to directly optimize binary linear block codes
along with a neural decoder, in a unified and differentiable
fashion.
We optimize the denoising capabilities of a learned code
with respect to a neural decoder that is trained jointly. A
central question then becomes whether the learned code
is tailored for a given neural decoder only, or whether the
framework provides a universally good code in some sense.
(ii) We present compelling evidence supporting that the
optimized code exhibits improved performance compared

1

The Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel
Aviv University.
Correspondence to: Yoni Choukroun
<choukroun.yoni@gmail.com>, Lior Wolf <wolf@cs.tau.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

