Parameter Estimation in DAGs from Incomplete Data via Optimal Transport

Vy Vo 1 2 Trung Le 1 Tung-Long Vuong 1 3 He Zhao 2 Edwin V. Bonilla 2 Dinh Phung 1 3

Abstract

thereby converging slowly on large datasets (Liang & Klein,
2009). Subsequently, researchers have explored combining
EM with approximate inference along with other strategies
to improve efficiency (Wei & Tanner, 1990; Neal & Hinton, 1998; Delyon et al., 1999; Beal & Ghahramani, 2006;
Cappé & Moulines, 2009; Liang & Klein, 2009; Neath et al.,
2013). A large family of approximation algorithms based
on variational inference (VI, Jordan et al., 1999; Hoffman
et al., 2013) have demonstrated tremendous potential, where
the evidence lower bound (ELBO) is not only used for posterior approximation but also for point estimation of the
model parameters. Such an approach has proved effective
and robust to overfitting, especially when having a small
number of parameters. VI has recently taken a leap forward
by embracing amortized inference (Amos, 2022), which
performs black-box optimization in a considerably more
efficient way.

Estimating the parameters of a probabilistic directed graphical model from incomplete data is a
long-standing challenge. This is because, in the
presence of latent variables, both the likelihood
function and posterior distribution are intractable
without assumptions about structural dependencies or model classes. While existing learning
methods are fundamentally based on likelihood
maximization, here we offer a new view of the parameter learning problem through the lens of optimal transport. This perspective licenses a general
framework that operates on any directed graphs
without making unrealistic assumptions on the
posterior over the latent variables or resorting to
variational approximations. We develop a theoretical framework and support it with extensive
empirical evidence demonstrating the versatility
and robustness of our approach. Across experiments, we show that not only can our method
effectively recover the ground-truth parameters
but it also performs comparably or better than
competing baselines on downstream applications.

Prior to parameter estimation, both EM and VI consist of
an inference step which ultimately requires carrying out
expectations of the commonly intractable posterior over the
latent variables. In order to address this challenge, a large
spectrum of methods have been proposed in the literature
and we refer the reader to Ambrogioni et al. (2021) for an
excellent discussion of these approaches. Here we characterize them between two extremes. At one extreme, restrictive assumptions about the structure (e.g., as in mean-field
approximations) or the model class (e.g., using conjugate
exponential families) must be made to simplify the task. At
the other extreme, when no assumptions are made, most
existing black-box methods exploit very little information
about the structure of the known probabilistic model, e.g., in
black-box and stochastic VI (Ranganath et al., 2014; Hoffman et al., 2013), hierarchical approaches (Ranganath et al.,
2016) or normalizing flows (Papamakarios et al., 2021). Section 2 summarizes the progression of VI research towards
this extreme. Since the ultimate goal of VI is posterior inference, parameter estimation has been treated as a by-product
of the optimization process where the model parameters
are cast as global latent variables. As the complexity of
the graph increases, parameter estimation in VI becomes
computationally challenging.

1. Introduction
Learning probabilistic directed graphical models (DGMs,
also known as Bayesian networks) with latent variables is an
ongoing challenge in machine learning and statistics. This
paper focuses on parameter learning, i.e., estimating the
parameters of a DGM with its structure known. Learning
DGMs has a long history, dating back to classical indirect
likelihood-maximization approaches such as expectation
maximization (EM, Dempster et al., 1977). Despite all its
success stories, EM is known to suffer from local optima issues. More importantly, EM becomes inapplicable when the
posterior distribution is intractable, which arises fairly often
in practice. Furthermore, EM is originally a batch algorithm,
1

Monash University, Australia 2 CSIRO’s Data61, Australia 3 VinAI Research, Vietnam. Correspondence to: Vy Vo
<v.vo@monash.edu>.

A natural question arises as to whether one can learn the parameters of any DGMs with hidden nodes without explicitly
solving inference nor assuming any structural independen-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

