Hybrid2 Neural ODE Causal Modeling and an Application to Glycemic Response

Bob Junyi Zou 1 Matthew E. Levine 2 Dessi P. Zaharieva 3 Ramesh Johari 4 Emily B. Fox 5 6

Abstract

betes (T1D) management, where continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) and smart insulin pumps are revolutionizing
care by offering near-real-time insights into physiological
states (Tauschmann et al., 2022). To provide data-driven
management strategies, there is a pressing need for interpretable models that not only make accurate predictions,
but also grasp the causal mechanisms behind physiological responses (e.g., for counterfactual reasoning over various
potential interventions). The target of causally-grounded,
performant models is critical in many scientific disciplines
ranging from astronomy to cell biology to neuroscience; in
many of these settings, we are faced with only partial or
indirect observations of a complex physiological or physical
process we aim to reason about.

Hybrid models composing mechanistic ODEbased dynamics with flexible and expressive neural network components have grown rapidly in
popularity, especially in scientific domains where
such ODE-based modeling offers important interpretability and validated causal grounding (e.g.,
for counterfactual reasoning). The incorporation
of mechanistic models also provides inductive
bias in standard blackbox modeling approaches,
critical when learning from small datasets or partially observed, complex systems. Unfortunately,
as the hybrid models become more flexible, the
causal grounding provided by the mechanistic
model can quickly be lost. We address this problem by leveraging another common source of domain knowledge: ranking of treatment effects for
a set of interventions, even if the precise treatment
effect is unknown. We encode this information in
a causal loss that we combine with the standard
predictive loss to arrive at a hybrid loss that biases
our learning towards causally valid hybrid models.
We demonstrate our ability to achieve a win-win,
state-of-the-art predictive performance and causal
validity, in the challenging task of modeling glucose dynamics post-exercise in individuals with
type 1 diabetes.

Blackbox sequence models have demonstrated extraordinary
performance in numerous fields, ranging from natural language processing to forecasting. Popular methods include
recurrent neural networks (RNNs), such as long short-term
memory networks (LSTMs) (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber,
1997) and gated recurrent units (GRUs) (Chung et al., 2014);
(temporal) convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (Lea et al.,
2016; Bai et al., 2018; Shi et al., 2023); Transformer models,
including Informer (Zhou et al., 2021) and Autoformer (Wu
et al., 2021); and state space sequence models, such as
S4 (Gu et al., 2022b). Despite their transformative role in
many fields, the application of these models to various scientific domains has encountered challenges. An obvious
hurdle is the limited size of some scientific datasets. But
even in the presence of lots of data, these methods are still
crippled by the incomplete nature of what can be measured.
This problem is exacerbated by the fact that most data is
observational: blackbox models are adept at identifying
associations leading to good predictions, but may not learn
causally coherent models. For example, in our T1D setting,
insulin delivery frequently coincides with a planned meal or
snack, which initially causes glucose to rise; the model may
incorrectly infer that insulin causes glucose to rise, when
the reality is the opposite.

1. Introduction
In many scientific and clinical domains, an influx of high resolution sensing data has brought the promise of more refined
and informed scientific discovery and decision-making. The
motivating example we consider in this paper is type 1 dia1

Institute for Computational and Mathematical Engineering, Stanford University 2 Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard
3
Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University 4 Department
of Management Science and Engineering, Stanford University
5
Department of Statistics and Department of Computer Science,
Stanford University 6 Chan Zuckerberg Biohub – San Francisco.
Correspondence to: Emily B. Fox <ebfox@stanford.edu>.

Sophisticated mechanistic models—specified via a set of
ordinary differential equations (ODEs)—remain a preferred
method in many scientific domains, as they capture labvalidated or otherwise known physical or physiological
causal properties of the system. Examples include cardiac
and renal modeling (Hilgemann & Noble, 1987; ten Tuss-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

