Probabilistic Generating Circuits—Demystified∗

Sanyam Agarwal 1 Markus Bläser 1

Abstract

1. Introduction

Zhang et al. (ICML 2021, PLMR 139, pp.
12447–12457) introduced probabilistic generating circuits (PGCs) as a probabilistic model to
unify probabilistic circuits (PCs) and determinantal point processes (DPPs). At a first glance,
PGCs store a distribution in a very different way,
they compute the probability generating polynomial instead of the probability mass function and
it seems that this is the main reason why PGCs
are more powerful than PCs or DPPs. However,
PGCs also allow for negative weights, whereas
classical PCs assume that all weights are nonnegative. One main insight of this work is that the
negative weights are the cause for the power of
PGCs and not the different representation. PGCs
are PCs in disguise: we show how to transform
any PGC on binary variables into a PC with negative weights with only polynomial blowup. PGCs
were defined by Zhang et al. only for binary random variables. As our second main result, we
show that there is a good reason for this: we prove
that PGCs for categorical variables with larger image size do not support tractable marginalization
unless NP = P. On the other hand, we show that
we can model categorical variables with larger
image size as PC with negative weights computing set-multilinear polynomials. These allow for
tractable marginalization. In this sense, PCs with
negative weights strictly subsume PGCs.

Probabilistic modeling is a central task in machine learning.
When the underlying models become large and complicated,
however, probabilistic inference easily becomes intractable,
see (Roth, 1996) for an explanation. Therefore, it is important to develop probabilistic models that are tractable (TPMs
for short), that is, they allow for efficient probabilistic inference. On the other hand, the probabilistic models should be
as expressive efficient as possible (in the sense of Martens
& Medabalimi (2014)), which means that they are able to
represent as many different distributions as possible. The
more classes we can represent, the broader the spectrum of
applications of the model. There is typically a tradeoff between expressiveness and tractability. The more expressive
the model, the harder will be probabilistic inference.
Examples of tractable models are for instance bounded
treewidth graphical models (Meila & Jordan, 2000; Koller
& Friedman, 2009), the well-known determinantal point processes (Borodin & Rains, 2005; Kulesza & Taskar, 2012),
or probabilistic circuits like for instance sum-product networks (Darwiche, 2009; Kisa et al., 2014; Poon & Domingos, 2012). These models represent probability distributions
by computing probability mass functions: the input is an
assignment to the random variables and the output is the
corresponding probability of the event.
Probabilistic circuits (PCs), see also Section 2, compute (unnormalized) probability distributions for syntactic1 reasons:
the weights on the edges are required to be nonnegative. Socalled decomposable PCs are tractable again for syntactic
reasons: The scopes of each product gate are disjoint and
therefore marginalization and multiplication commute.

* Broadrick et al. (2024) independently obtain some of the
results presented in this paper. In particular, they prove that probabilistic circuits and probabilistic generating circuits for binary
variables are equivalent (our Theorem 8.1) as well as the hardness
of marginalization for probabilistic generating circuits with at least
four categories (our Theorem 7.1). These results were obtained
independently of ours and were submitted to a conference around
the same time as ours.

Another popular tractable model are determinantal point
processes (DPPs). Zhang et al. (2020) show that PCs in
general do not subsume DPPs. Shortly after, Zhang et al.
(2021) propose a new model called probabilistic generating
circuits (PGCs) that represent a distribution by a generating polynomial. PGCs allow for efficient marginalization
and subsume both PCs and DPPs. It seems that the power
of PGCs comes from the fact that they use a different rep-

1
Saarland University, Saarland Informatics Campus,
Saarbrücken, Germany.
Correspondence to:
Sanyam
Agarwal <agarwal@cs.uni-saarland.de>, Markus Bläser
<mblaeser@cs.uni-saarland.de>.

1
By a syntactic property, we mean a property that can be
checked by inspecting the structure of the circuit, but we do not
need to take the input-output behaviour of the circuit into account,
in contrast to semantic properties.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

