Acquisition Conditioned Oracle for Nongreedy Active Feature Acquisition

Michael Valancius 1 Max Lennon 2 Junier B. Oliva 2

Abstract

many real-world situations allow for the dynamic collection
of information on an instance at inference time. That is, often one may query (at a cost) the environment for additional
information (features) that are currently missing for an instance. This shall be especially relevant in an automated
future, where autonomous agents can routinely interact with
an environment to obtain more information. In this work we
develop novel methodology for active feature acquisition
(AFA) (Saar-Tsechansky et al., 2009), the study of how to
sequentially acquire a dynamic (on a per instance basis)
subset of features that minimizes acquisition costs whilst
yielding accurate inferences.

We develop novel methodology for active feature
acquisition (AFA), the study of sequentially acquiring a dynamic subset of features that minimizes acquisition costs whilst still yielding accurate inference. The AFA framework can be useful
in a myriad of domains, including health care applications where the cost of acquiring additional
features for a patient (in terms of time, money,
risk, etc.) can be weighed against the expected
improvement to diagnostic performance. Previous
approaches for AFA have employed either: deep
learning RL techniques, which have difficulty
training policies due to a complicated state and
action space; deep learning surrogate generative
models, which require modeling complicated multidimensional conditional distributions; or greedy
policies, which cannot account for jointly informative feature acquisitions. We show that we can
bypass many of these challenges with a novel,
nonparametric oracle based approach, which we
coin the acquisition conditioned oracle (ACO).
Extensive experiments show the superiority of the
ACO to state-of-the-art AFA methods when acquiring features for both predictions and general
decision-making.

Consider the following illustrative application where
AFA is useful: an automated survey system to perform
psychological assessments. A traditional ML approach
would require collecting responses on an exhaustive list of
survey questions, and only after all responses (features)
are collected would one make a prediction of the correct
assessment. However, administering a long survey is slow,
may lead to user fatigue (Early et al., 2016a), or may even
decrease the accuracy of responses (Early et al., 2016b).
Instead, an AFA approach would sequentially decide what
next question (if any) to prompt the user with to help it
make its assessment, ultimately leading to a prediction with
a succinct, personalized subset of features per instance.
Note that in contrast to traditional feature selection, which
would always select the same subset of questions, an AFA
approach will determine a custom subset of questions (of
potentially varying cardinality) to ask on a per case basis.
This is because, in AFA, the next feature (answer to a
question) to acquire can depend on the values of previous
acquisitions. Similar applications include educational
assessments, automated trouble shooting systems, and
cyberphysical systems.

1. Introduction
An overwhelming bulk of efforts in machine learning assume access to a fully observed feature vector, x ∈ Rd .
However, this paradigm largely ignores that the collection
of features comes at a cost, limiting applicability in realworld scenarios that involve making judgements with some
features or information missing. Unlike in conventional imputation and partially observed methodology, we note that

In this work, we first present an alternative perspective from
the two predominant approaches to active feature acquisition: reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms that are theoretically optimal but practically challenging to train, and
greedy approaches that are computationally simpler but may
lead to sub-optimal sets of acquired features. In contrast
to both, we contribute the following: (1) ACO, a simple,
nonparametric policy approach that is non-greedy while
circumventing the need for training a general RL policy;

1

Department of Biostatistics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA 2 Department of Computer Science, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill,
North Carolina, USA. Correspondence to: Michael Valancius
<mval@email.unc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

