Provable Risk-Sensitive Distributional Reinforcement Learning
with General Function Approximation

Yu Chen * 1 Xiangcheng Zhang * 1 Siwei Wang 2 Longbo Huang 1

Abstract

et al., 2020), they often fall short in real-world scenarios
demanding strict risk control, such as financial investment
(Bielecki et al., 2000) , medical treatment (Ernst et al., 2006),
and automous driving (Candela et al., 2023).

In the realm of reinforcement learning (RL), accounting for risk is crucial for making decisions
under uncertainty, particularly in applications
where safety and reliability are paramount. In
this paper, we introduce a general framework
on Risk-Sensitive Distributional Reinforcement
Learning (RS-DisRL), with static Lipschitz Risk
Measures (LRM) and general function approximation. Our framework covers a broad class of
risk-sensitive RL, and facilitates analysis of the
impact of estimation functions on the effectiveness of RSRL strategies and evaluation of their
sample complexity. We design two innovative
meta-algorithms: RS-DisRL-M, a model-based
strategy for model-based function approximation,
and RS-DisRL-V, a model-free approach for
general value function approximation. With our
novel estimation techniques via Least Squares
Regression (LSR) and Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) in distributional RL with augmented Markov √
Decision Process (MDP), we dee K) dependency of the regret
rive the first O(
upper bound for RSRL with static LRM, marking a pioneering contribution towards statistically
efficient algorithms in this domain.

The significance of comprehending risk management in RL
has led to the emergence of Risk-Sensitive RL (RSRL). Unlike risk-neutral RL, which primarily focuses on maximizing
expected returns, RSRL seeks to optimize risk metrics, such
as entropy risk measures (ERM) (Fei et al., 2020; 2021) or
conditional value-at-risk (CVaR) (Wang et al., 2023a), of
the possible cumulative reward which emphasizes its distributional characteristics. However, traditional RL framework
based on Q-learning which typically considers the mean of
reward-to-go and corresponding Bellman equation, cannot
efficiently capture the characteristics of the cumulative reward’s distribution. Therefore, there has been an upsurge
of interest in Distributional RL (DisRL) due to its capacity
to understand the intrinsic distributional attributes of cumulative rewards, which has already achieved significant
empirical success in risk-sensitive tasks (Bellemare et al.,
2017; Dabney et al., 2018; Keramati et al., 2020; Urpı́ et al.,
2020; Lim & Malik, 2022).
However, there remains a dearth of comprehensive theoretical insights into the sample complexity of Risk-Sensitive
Distributional RL (RS-DisRL), particularly in scenarios encompassing general risk measures and function approximation. Previous theory works of RS-DisRL have primarily
been constrained to tabular MDPs (Bastani et al., 2022;
Liang & Luo, 2022) which fail in extending to infinite-state
settings, or have been confined to specific risk measures
such as CVaR or ERM (Stanko & Macek, 2019).

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 2018) has
emerged as a powerful framework for sequential decisionmaking in dynamic and uncertain environments. While
traditional RL methods, predominantly focused on maximizing the expected return, have seen significant advancements
through approaches such as Q-learning (Mnih et al., 2015;
Jin et al., 2018) and policy gradients (Kakade, 2001; Cai

In this paper, we delve into the RS-DisRL with static Lipschitz risk measures (LRM), a general risk measure class that
includes various well-known risk measures such as coherent risk, convex risk, CVaR, and ERM. In order to address
the challenges posed by extremely large or infinite state
spaces, we consider two distinct general function approximation scenarios: model-based function approximation and
value function approximation. The model-based function
approximation, as extensively used in prior works such as
Sun et al. (2019); Liu et al. (2022; 2023), typically assumes
that the agent has access to a model class that contains

*

Equal contribution 1 Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Microsoft Research Asia. Correspondence to: Longbo Huang
<longbohuang@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

