Graph Automorphism Group Equivariant Neural Networks

Edward Pearce–Crump 1 William J. Knottenbelt 1

Abstract

some form of equivariance to the symmetric group, which
has since been characterised fully by a number of authors
(Maron et al., 2019; Ravanbakhsh, 2020; Pearce-Crump,
2022). However, using neural networks that are equivariant
to the symmetric group does not take into account the relations that exist between the vertices in a graph. Given that
the actual group of symmetries of a graph is its automorphism group, we would like to construct neural networks
that satisfy the stronger condition of being equivariant to
this group instead.

Permutation equivariant neural networks are typically used to learn from data that lives on a graph.
However, for any graph G that has n vertices, using the symmetric group Sn as its group of symmetries does not take into account the relations
that exist between the vertices. Given that the
actual group of symmetries is the automorphism
group Aut(G), we show how to construct neural networks that are equivariant to Aut(G) by
obtaining a full characterisation of the learnable,
linear, Aut(G)-equivariant functions between layers that are some tensor power of Rn . In particular, we find a spanning set of matrices for these
layer functions in the standard basis of Rn . This
result has important consequences for learning
from data whose group of symmetries is a finite
group because a theorem by Frucht (1938) showed
that any finite group is isomorphic to the automorphism group of a graph.

In this paper, writing the automorphism group of a graph G
having some n vertices as Aut(G), we give a full characterisation of all of the possible Aut(G)-equivariant neural
networks whose layers are some tensor power of Rn by
finding a spanning set of matrices for the learnable, linear,
Aut(G)-equivariant layer functions between such tensor
power spaces in the standard basis of Rn . Our approach is
similar to the one seen in Pearce-Crump (2022; 2023a;b),
where they used the combinatorics of set partitions to characterise the learnable, linear, group equivariant layer functions
between any two tensor power spaces of Rn for a number
of important groups. However, instead of calculating the
spanning set by studying set partitions, we obtain it by relating each spanning set element with the isomorphism class
of a so-called bilabelled graph. In short, a (k, l)–bilabelled
graph is a graph that comes with two tuples, one of length
k and the other of length l, whose entries are taken from
the vertex set of the graph (with repetitions amongst entries
allowed). Consequently, by looking at the combinatorics
of bilabelled graphs, we can determine the learnable, linear,
Aut(G)-equivariant layer functions between any two tensor
power spaces of Rn .

1. Introduction
In many cases, the relationships that exist between certain
entities can be structured in the form of a graph. These
include the interactions between people in a social network
(Leskovec et al., 2010), the bonds that connect atoms in
a molecule (Gilmer et al., 2017), and the relationships between users and items in a recommendation system (Konstas
et al., 2009). As a result, there is a high level of motivation
to design neural network architectures that can offer new
insights into data with this structure. A number of methods
for learning from graphs exist in the machine learning literature. These include Graph Attention Networks (GATs)
(Velicković et al., 2018), Graph Convolutional Networks
(GCNs) (Kipf & Welling, 2017), and Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Gori et al., 2005; Scarselli et al., 2009),
among others. In particular, many of these approaches use

We leverage the work of Mančinska & Roberson (2020),
who studied the problem of determining under what circumstances two graphs are quantum isomorphic. They built
upon the work of Chassaniol (2019), who showed that a
vertex-transitive graph has no quantum symmetries. We
show how their results and methods can be applied instead
for the purpose of learning from data that has an underlying
symmetry to the automorphism group of a graph.

1

Department of Computing, Imperial College London,
United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Edward Pearce–Crump
<ep1011@ic.ac.uk>.

There are important consequences for performing such a
characterisation. A famous theorem in algebraic graph theory known as Frucht’s Theorem (Frucht, 1938) states that

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

