CW Complex Hypothesis for Image Data

Yi Wang * 1 Zhiren Wang * 2

Abstract

riety of image datasets. A comprehensive work on empirical
verification of manifold hypothesis for many commonlyused image datasets was carried out in (Pope et al., 2021).
See also (Fefferman et al., 2016) for principled algorithms
for verifying the manifold hypothesis. Many works related
manifold hypothesis to deep generative models (DGMs),
e.g.(Rezende et al., 2020), (Brehmer & Cranmer, 2020),
(Mathieu & Nickel, 2020), (Arbel et al., 2021), (Kothari
et al., 2021), (Caterini et al., 2021). The literature relevant
to this area extends beyond the references above.

We examine both the manifold hypothesis (Bengio et al., 2013) and the union of manifold hypothesis (Brown et al., 2023), and argue that, in
contrast to these hypotheses, the local intrinsic
dimension varies from point to point even in the
same connected component. We propose an alternative CW complex hypothesis that image data
is distributed in “manifolds with skeletons”. We
support the hypothesis by visualizing distributions
of 2D families of synthetic image data, as well
as by introducing a novel indicator function and
testing it on natural image datasets. One motivation of our work is to explain why diffusion
models have difficulty generating accurate higher
dimensional details such as human hands. Under the CW complex hypothesis and with both
theoretical and empirical evidences, we provide
an interpretation that the mixture of higher and
lower dimensional components in data obstructs
diffusion models from efficient learning.

The union of manifold hypothesis (Brown et al., 2023) challenged the manifold hypothesis and suggested that the data
is distributed on a disjoint union of submanifolds, which
may have different dimensions. This new hypothesis is supported by the experiments in that paper, which show that
there is indeed variation in intrinsic dimensions across different sample classes in the same dataset. An alternative
way of stating the hypothesis from (Brown et al., 2023) is
that each connected component of datasets is a manifold
equipped with a measure with continuous density.
The current paper examines to what extent the hypothesis
that connected components are manifolds is valid. Based on
empirical evidences and simple modeling, we find the need
of an even less restrictive hypothesis than that of (Brown
et al., 2023), so that intrinsic dimension is allowed to vary
within each connected component. In the generic setting,
we expect a dataset to be supported on a disjoint union of
“manifolds with skeletons”, a.k.a. CW complexes, where
each connected component is a CW complex consisting of
finitely many bounded submanifolds glued together along
their boundaries. In particular, the distribution of data may
show concentration on lower dimensional skeletons.

1. Introduction
The manifold hypothesis was proposed in (Bengio et al.,
2013) and has been a common assumption on distributions
of natural datasets in many researches in various areas of machine learning, especially for image datasets. It states that
the distribution of data in a large data set, up to small errors,
often lies in a lower-dimensional submanifold of the ambient
Euclidean space. The dimension of this lower dimensionalmanifold is commonly referred to as the intrinsic dimension.
Previous research, such as (Schölkopf et al., 1998), (Tenenbaum et al., 2000), (Roweis & Saul., 2000), (Brand, 2002),
(Fodor, 2002), (Ozakin & Gray, 2009), (Narayanan & Mitter, 2010), (Besold & Spokoiny, 2019), (Ansuini et al., 2019)
among many others, supported this hypothesis for a wide va-

The contributions of this paper can be summarized as:
1. In Section 2.1 and Appendix A.1, we create synthetic
image data of a 2D family of randomly positioned shapes
and visualized the distribution by projecting to a 2D plane.
The visualizations show concentration along 1D skeletons.

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Mathematics, Johns Hopkins University 2 Department of Mathematics, Pennsylvania State
University. Correspondence to: Yi Wang <ywang261@jhu.edu>,
Zhiren Wang <zhirenw@psu.edu>.

2. In Proposition 2.2, we introduce a new indicator function Ik measuring the variance of local intrinsic dimension
across data points, and prove Ik ≈ 1 under the manifold
hypothesis. Experiments show that Ik is indeed around 1
for true manifold data, but much larger for label classes

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

