Triadic-OCD: Asynchronous Online Change Detection with Provable
Robustness, Optimality, and Convergence

Yancheng Huang 1 Kai Yang 1 Zelin Zhu 1 Leian Chen 2 3

Abstract

2014; Kurt et al., 2018b). In contrast to general detection
problems, OCD problem in dynamic systems are particularly challenging because changes in the distribution of
observed data can be caused by the dynamics of the system
itself, even without external changes. Although extensive
research has been conducted on this problem, existing studies still face critical issues. The primary challenge is that
the parameters associated with systems are assumed to be
perfectly estimated. In practice, however, this is often not
the case due to factors such as estimation errors, system
updates, etc. For instance, the investigated OCD problem
within dynamic systems subsumes the false data injection
attacks (FDIA) detection problem in smart grids and the
blockage detection in MIMO systems —both critical issues
that have received extensive attention (Huang et al., 2011;
Nishimori et al., 2011). In smart grids, fluctuations in the environment can lead to changes in line admittances, causing
inaccuracies in system matrix (Li et al., 2014). Similarly,
in MIMO systems, factors such as estimation error, aging,
and quantization often prevent the perfect estimation of the
channel matrix (Weber et al., 2006). Furthermore, current
research focuses on centralized setting, which may incur
privacy breaches (Subramanya & Riggio, 2021) and high
communication costs. Additionally, the synchronous distributed approach often encounters straggler issues (Jiao
et al., 2022) which can cause significant delays in the detection process. Therefore, in this paper, we aim to address
these issues, and our contributions are summarized as follows:

The primary goal of online change detection
(OCD) is to promptly identify changes in the data
stream. OCD problem find a wide variety of applications in diverse areas, e.g., security detection
in smart grids and intrusion detection in communication networks. Prior research usually assumes
precise knowledge of the system parameters. Nevertheless, this presumption often proves unattainable in practical scenarios due to factors such as
estimation errors, system updates, etc. This paper
aims to take the first attempt to develop a triadicOCD framework with certifiable robustness, provable optimality, and guaranteed convergence. In
addition, the proposed triadic-OCD algorithm can
be realized in a fully asynchronous distributed
manner, easing the necessity of transmitting the
data to a single server. This asynchronous mechanism could also mitigate the straggler issue that
faced by traditional synchronous algorithm. Moreover, the non-asymptotic convergence property of
Triadic-OCD is theoretically analyzed, and its iteration complexity to achieve an ϵ-optimal point
is derived. Extensive experiments have been conducted to elucidate the effectiveness of the proposed method.

1. Introduction

• Certified Robustness: As opposed to existing works
in the literature, Triadic-OCD provides a high degree of
confidence across a broad spectrum of system parameter uncertainties. This certifiable robustness assures
the reliability of change point detection in real-world
applications.

Detecting distribution changes as quickly as possible while
controlling the false alarm rate is the fundamental objective
of OCD. And this problem is frequently encountered in a
diverse range of fields such as econometrics, climate modeling, and system security (Andersson et al., 2006; Barnett
et al., 2001; Tartakovsky et al., 2006; Yang et al., 2016; Dou
et al., 2019; Huang et al., 2011; Li et al., 2014; Huang et al.,

• Asynchronous Updating: In order to address concerns related to potential privacy breaches, elevated
communication costs, and straggler issues, we propose
a novel asynchronous distributed algorithm to effectively address the detection problem in the presence
of parameter uncertainties. In addition, the proposed
approach goes beyond empirical performance by offer-

1

Tongji University 2 Columbia University 3 This work was done
prior to Leian Chen joining Amazon. Correspondence to: Kai
Yang <kaiyang@tongji.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

