Differentially Private Representation Learning via Image Captioning

Tom Sander * 1 2 Yaodong Yu * 1 3 Maziar Sanjabi 1 Alain Durmus 2 Yi Ma 3 Kamalika Chaudhuri 1 4 Chuan Guo 1

Abstract

rithms, DP-SGD (Song et al., 2013; Abadi et al., 2016) can
be readily applied to obtain models with rigorous DP guarantee. Regrettably, DP training has also been marred by
a sub-optimal privacy-utility trade-off, with model utility
severely lagging behind their non-private counterpart (Jayaraman & Evans, 2019; Tramer & Boneh, 2020; Kurakin
et al., 2022). At the core of this unfavorable trade-off is the
difficulty of DP representation learning. Tramer & Boneh
(2020) showed that when DP training from scratch under a
low-to-moderate privacy budget, most models do not learn
useful representations, with the quality of learned representations worse than even handcrafted features. These
observations naturally lead to the research question: “How
does one learn useful representations with DP training?”

Differentially private (DP) machine learning is
considered the gold-standard solution for training
a model from sensitive data while still preserving privacy. However, a major barrier to achieving this ideal is its sub-optimal privacy-accuracy
trade-off, which is particularly visible in DP representation learning. Specifically, it has been shown
that under modest privacy budgets, most models
learn representations that are not significantly better than hand-crafted features. In this work, we
show that effective DP representation learning
can be done via image captioning and scaling up
to internet-scale multimodal datasets. Through
a series of engineering tricks, we successfully
train a DP image captioner (DP-Cap) on a 233M
subset of LAION-2B from scratch using a reasonable amount of computation, and obtaining
unprecedented high-quality image features that
can be used in a variety of downstream vision
and vision-language tasks. For example, under a
privacy budget of ε = 8 for the LAION dataset, a
linear classifier trained on top of learned DP-Cap
features attains 65.8% accuracy on ImageNet-1K,
considerably improving the previous SOTA of
56.5%. Our work challenges the prevailing sentiment that high-utility DP representation learning cannot be achieved by training from scratch.
Code is available at https://github.com/
facebookresearch/dpcap.

One plausible reason for the failure of prior attempts at DP
representation learning is the lack of training data. Indeed,
DP limits the information content of each training sample via the privacy budget ε, inducing a privacy-accuracysample size tradeoff; thus a substantially larger training
dataset is required to extract the same amount of information
to train the model. As the vast majority of prior work only
utilize small to moderate scale classification datasets such
as CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009) and ImageNet (Deng
et al., 2009b), the amount of training data is simply insufficient for learning high-quality representations under
DP (Tramer & Boneh, 2020). Yu et al. (2023) made partial progress towards this through self-supervised learning
(SSL) on internet-scale data. By training a masked autoencoder (MAE; He et al. (2022)) using DP-SGD on a 233M
subset of the LAION-2B dataset (Schuhmann et al., 2022),
the model learned image representations that are on-par
with non-private AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) trained
on ImageNet—the first deep learning model to outperform
handcrafted features and a major cornerstone for representation learning. However, the MAE objective also promotes
the model to learn extraneous details in the image that may
not be helpful for obtaining generalizable representations,
severely limiting the potential of this approach for DP.

1. Introduction
Differentially private (DP; Dwork et al. (2006)) model training is an effective strategy for privacy-preserving ML on
sensitive data. For most optimization-based learning algo*
Equal contribution 1 Meta 2 CMAP, École polytechnique
UC Berkeley 4 UCSD. Correspondence to: Tom Sander <tomsander@meta.com>, Yaodong Yu <yyu@eecs.berkeley.edu>,
Chuan Guo <chuanguo@meta.com>.

We adopt a different approach of DP training via image captioning on internet-scale multimodal datasets. The reason
is twofold: 1. Text caption provides a concise summary
of the training image and serves as better supervision compared to image-only SSL (Tschannen et al., 2023). Under
the constraint on information content from DP, we hypothe-

3

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

