A Sparsity Principle for Partially Observable Causal Representation Learning

Danru Xu 1 Dingling Yao 2 3 Sébastien Lachapelle 4 5 Perouz Taslakian 6 Julius von Kügelgen 7
Francesco Locatello 2 Sara Magliacane 1

Abstract

tured, high-dimensional observations of a causal system.
Motivated by this shortcoming, causal representation learning (CRL; Schölkopf et al., 2021) aims to infer high-level
causal variables from low-level data such as images.

Causal representation learning aims at identifying
high-level causal variables from perceptual data.
Most methods assume that all latent causal variables are captured in the high-dimensional observations. We instead consider a partially observed
setting, in which each measurement only provides
information about a subset of the underlying
causal state. Prior work has studied this setting
with multiple domains or views, each depending
on a fixed subset of latents. Here we focus on
learning from unpaired observations from a
dataset with an instance-dependent partial observability pattern. Our main contribution is to establish two identifiability results for this setting: one
for linear mixing functions without parametric
assumptions on the underlying causal model, and
one for piecewise linear mixing functions with
Gaussian latent causal variables. Based on these
insights, we propose two methods for estimating
the underlying causal variables by enforcing sparsity in the inferred representation. Experiments
on different simulated datasets and established
benchmarks highlight the effectiveness of our
approach in recovering the ground-truth latents.

A popular approach to identify (i.e., provably recover)
high-level latent variables is (nonlinear) independent
component analysis (ICA) (Hyvarinen and Morioka, 2016;
2017; Hyvarinen et al., 2019; Khemakhem et al., 2020),
which aims to recover independent latent factors from
entangled measurements. Several works generalize this
setting to the case in which the latent variables can have
causal relations (Yao et al., 2022; Brehmer et al., 2022;
Lippe et al., 2022; 2023; Ahuja et al., 2023a;b; Lachapelle
et al., 2022; 2023; 2024; von Kügelgen et al., 2021; 2023;
Wendong et al., 2023; Squires et al., 2023; Buchholz
et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023), establishing various
identifiability results under different assumptions on the
available data and the generative process. However, most
existing works assume that all causal variables are captured
in the high-dimensional observations. Notable exceptions
include Sturma et al. (2023) and Yao et al. (2023) who
study partially observed settings with multiple domains
(datasets) or views (tuples of observations), respectively,
each depending on a fixed subset of the latent variables.
In this work, we also focus on learning causal representations in such a partially observed setting, where not necessarily all causal variables are captured in any given observation. Our setting differs from prior work in two key aspects:
(i) we consider learning from a dataset of unpaired partial
observations; and (ii) we allow for instance-dependent partial observability patterns, meaning that each measurement
depends on an unknown, varying (rather than fixed) subset
of the underlying causal state.

1. Introduction
Endowing machine learning models with causal reasoning
capabilities is a promising direction for improving their robustness, generalization, and interpretability (Spirtes et al.,
2000; Pearl, 2009; Peters et al., 2017). Traditional causal inference methods assume that the causal variables are given a
priori, but in many real-world settings, we only have unstruc-

This setting is motivated by real-world applications in which
we cannot at all times observe the complete state of the
environment, e.g., because some objects are moving in and
out of frame, or are occluded. As a motivating example,
consider a stationary camera that takes pictures of a parking
lot on different days as shown in Fig. 1a. On different days,
different cars are present in the parking lot, and the same
car can be parked in different spots. Our task is to recover
the position for each car that is present in a certain image.

1

University of Amsterdam 2 Institute of Science and Technology
Austria 3 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen,
Germany 4 Samsung - SAIT AI Lab, Montreal 5 Mila, Université
de Montréal 6 ServiceNow Research 7 Seminar for Statistics, ETH
Zürich. Correspondence to: Danru Xu <d.xu3@uva.nl>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

