On Mechanistic Knowledge Localization in Text-to-Image Generative Models

Samyadeep Basu * 1 Keivan Rezaei * 1 Priyatham Kattakinda 1 Vlad I Morariu 2 Nanxuan Zhao 2
Ryan A Rossi 2 Varun Manjunatha 2 Soheil Feizi 1

Abstract

et al., 2022), and DALLE (Ramesh et al., 2021). These
models have captured widespread attention owing to their
impressive image generation and editing capabilities, as evidenced by leading FID scores on prominent benchmarks
such as MS-COCO (Lin et al., 2014). Typically trained
on extensive billion-scale image-text pairs like LAION5B (Schuhmann et al., 2022), these models encapsulate
a diverse array of visual concepts, encompassing color, artistic styles, objects, and renowned personalities.

Identifying layers within text-to-image models
which control visual attributes can facilitate efficient model editing through closed-form updates. Recent work, leveraging causal tracing
show that early Stable-Diffusion variants confine knowledge primarily to the first layer of the
CLIP text-encoder, while it diffuses throughout
the UNet. Extending this framework, we observe that for recent models (e.g., SD-XL, DeepFloyd), causal tracing fails in pinpointing localized knowledge, highlighting challenges in model
editing. To address this issue, we introduce the
concept of mechanistic localization in text-toimage models, where knowledge about various
visual attributes (e.g., “style”, “objects”, “facts”)
can be mechanistically localized to a small fraction of layers in the UNet, thus facilitating efficient model editing. We localize knowledge using
our method L OCO G EN which measures the direct
effect of intermediate layers to output generation
by performing interventions in the cross-attention
layers of the UNet. We then employ L OCO E DIT,
a fast closed-form editing method across popular open-source text-to-image models (including
the latest SD-XL) and explore the possibilities
of neuron-level model editing. Using mechanistic localization, our work offers a better view of
successes and failures in localization-based textto-image model editing. Code will be available at
https://github.com/samyadeepbasu/LocoGen.

A recent work (Basu et al., 2023) designs an interpretability
framework using causal tracing (Pearl, 2001) to trace the
location of knowledge about various styles, objects or facts
in text-to-image generative models. Essentially, causal tracing finds the indirect effects of intermediate layers (Pearl,
2001), by finding layers which can restore a model with corrupted inputs to its original state. Using this framework, the
authors find that knowledge about various visual attributes
is distributed in the UNet, whereas, there exists a unique
causal state in the CLIP text-encoder where knowledge is
localized. This unique causal state in the text-encoder can
be leveraged to edit text-to-image models in order to remove
style, objects or update facts effectively. However, we note
that their framework is restricted to early Stable-Diffusion
variants such as Stable-Diffusion-v1-5.
In our paper, we first revisit knowledge localization for textto-image generative models, specifically examining the effectiveness of causal tracing beyond Stable-Diffusion-v1-5.
While causal tracing successfully identifies unique localized
states in the text-encoder for Stable-Diffusion variants, including v1-5 and v2-1, it fails to do so for recent models like
SD-XL (Podell et al., 2023) and DeepFloyd1 across different
visual attributes. In the UNet, causal states are distributed
across a majority of open-source text-to-image models (excluding DeepFloyd), aligning with findings in Basu et al.
(2023). Notably, for DeepFloyd, we observe a lack of strong
causal states corresponding to visual attributes in the UNet.

1. Introduction
In recent years, substantial strides in conditional image
generation have been made through diffusion-based text-toimage generative models, including notable examples like
Stable-Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2021), Imagen (Saharia

To address the universal knowledge localization framework
absence across different text-to-image models, we introduce
the concept of mechanistic localization that aims to identify
a small number of layers which control the generation of
distinct visual attributes, across a spectrum of text-to-image

*
Equal contribution 1 University of Maryland 2 Adobe Research.
Correspondence to: Samyadeep Basu <sbasu12@umd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

1

https://github.com/deep-floyd/IF

