Reward-Free Kernel-Based Reinforcement Learning

Sattar Vakili 1 Farhang Nabiei 1 Da-shan Shiu 1 Alberto Bernacchia 1

Abstract

pre-collected offline dataset, without any further interaction
with the environment. Therefore, the offline dataset should
adequately represent the trajectory produced by the optimal
policy. In real-world RL applications, the reward function
is often crafted by the learner based on domain knowledge.
The learner may have multiple reward functions to select
from or may employ an adaptive algorithm for reward design. In such situations, it is preferable to have an offline
dataset that encapsulates all potential optimal trajectories
associated with a variety of reward functions. With such a
comprehensive offline dataset, the RL agent can estimate
the corresponding policy for any arbitrary reward function.

Achieving sample efficiency in Reinforcement
Learning (RL) is primarily hinged on the efficient
exploration of the underlying environment, but
it is still unknown what are the best exploration
strategies in different settings. We consider the
reward-free RL problem, which operates in two
phases: an exploration phase, where the agent
gathers exploration trajectories over episodes irrespective of any predetermined reward function,
and a subsequent planning phase, where a reward
function is introduced. The agent then utilizes the
episodes from the exploration phase to calculate a
near-optimal policy. Existing algorithms and sample complexities for reward-free RL are limited
to tabular, linear or very smooth function approximations, leaving the problem largely open for
more general cases. We consider a broad range of
kernel-based function approximations, including
non-smooth kernels, and propose an algorithm
based on adaptive domain partitioning. We show
that our algorithm achieves order-optimal sample
complexity for a large class of common kernels,
which includes Matérn and Neural Tangent kernels.

To methodically study this problem, we concentrate on the
reward-free RL framework, which includes an exploration
phase and a planning phase (Figure 1). In the exploration
phase, the agent interacts with the environment without any
pre-determined rewards and gathers empirical trajectories
over episodes for the subsequent planning phase. During the
planning phase, the agent uses the offline data accumulated
in the exploration phase to compute the optimal policy for
a given extrinsic reward function r, without further interactions with the environment.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) policies using complex function approximations have been empirically effective in various fields including gaming (Silver et al., 2016; Lee et al.,
2018; Vinyals et al., 2019), autonomous driving (Kahn et al.,
2017), microchip design (Mirhoseini et al., 2021), robot
control (Kalashnikov et al., 2018), and algorithm search
(Fawzi et al., 2022). To achieve sample efficiency, these RL
policies must learn the transition model, either directly or indirectly, necessitating efficient exploration. In the context of
offline RL, the agent learns the optimal policy solely from a

Exploration

Planning

Collect N trajectories
without knowing
the reward.

Reward r is revealed;
Design a policy π
for reward r.

Figure 1. Reward-Free RL framework.

The reward-free RL framework has been progressively examined under increasingly complex models —tabular →
linear → kernel-based → deep learning based— in several
works including (Jin et al., 2020a; Wang et al., 2020; Qiu
et al., 2021). The existing literature adequately addresses
the tabular and linear settings. It however tends to falter,
providing only partial and incomplete results when dealing
with the more intricate kernel-based and deep learning based
settings. The contribution of this paper is to further the literature by providing order optimal results in the kernel-based
setting, applicable to a broad class of common kernels.

1
MediaTek Research. Correspondence to: Sattar Vakili <sattar.vakili@mtkresearch.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Our main objectives are: (i) Designing algorithms for both
1

