Provable Benefits of Local Steps in Heterogeneous Federated Learning for
Neural Networks: A Feature Learning Perspective

Yajie Bao 1 Michael Crawshaw 2 Mingrui Liu 2

1. Introduction

Abstract
Local steps are crucial for Federated Learning
(FL) algorithms and have witnessed great empirical success in reducing communication costs
and improving the generalization performance of
deep neural networks. However, there are limited
studies on the effect of local steps on heterogeneous FL. A few works investigate this problem
from the optimization perspective. Woodworth
et al. (2020a) showed that the iteration complexity of Local SGD, the most popular FL algorithm,
is dominated by the baseline mini-batch SGD,
which does not show the benefits of local steps.
In addition, Levy (2023) proposed a new local
update method that provably benefits over minibatch SGD. However, in the same setting, there is
still no work analyzing the effects of local steps
to generalization in a heterogeneous FL setting.
Motivated by our experimental findings where Local SGD learns more distinguishing features than
parallel SGD, this paper studies the generalization benefits of local steps from a feature learning
perspective. We propose a novel federated data
model that exhibits a new form of data heterogeneity, under which we show that a convolutional
neural network (CNN) trained by GD with global
updates will miss some pattern-related features,
while the network trained by GD with local updates can learn all features in polynomial time.
Consequently, local steps help CNN generalize
better in our data model. In a different parameter
setting, we also prove that Local GD with oneshot model averaging can learn all features and
generalize well in all clients. Our experimental
results also confirm the benefits of local steps in
improving test accuracy on real-world data.

Federated learning (FL) is an efficient distributed paradigm
in which local clients train a global model collaboratively by
performing multiround gradient-based updates using local
data (Konečnỳ et al., 2016). Local steps in FL algorithms
are initially designed to reduce the communication cost
between clients and the server, while they are mysteriously
useful to improve the generalization performance of deep
neural networks. For example, extensive experiments in
(Lin et al., 2018) showed that local steps could improve
the test accuracy of models compared with parallel SGD in
the homogeneous data setting. To theoretically explain this
phenomenon, Gu et al. (2023b;a) investigated the dynamic
of Local SGD based on the stochastic differential equation
(SDE) approximation and showed that it enjoys a reduction
of sharpness when choosing a large number of local steps
and thus generalizes better in the test data. However, these
works are restricted to the homogeneous data setting.
In the heterogeneous data setting, Woodworth et al. (2020b)
proved that a baseline method mini-batch SGD that only
takes global updates converges faster than Local SGD. To
show the benefits of local steps in optimization, Levy (2023)
proposed a new local update method and proved it requires
less communication round than mini-batch SGD under the
gradient dissimilarity assumption for heterogeneous data.
However, these works purely focus on the optimization
perspective. To the best of our knowledge, there is still no
work considering the generalization effect of local steps in
a heterogeneous FL regime.
Our work is motivated by an experimental finding of the
CIFAR-10 task in the heterogeneous FL environment, where
we can see that Local SGD learned more distinguishing features than parallel SGD in Figure 1 (e.g., one can compare
the pixels inside the bounding boxes). This finding inspires
us to analyze the benefits of local steps from a feature learning (Allen-Zhu & Li, 2022a;b) perspective: How does the
FL algorithm with local steps learn heterogeneous features
more efficiently than that without local steps?

1
School of Mathematical Sciences, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China 2 Department of Computer Science, George
Mason University, Fairfax, VA 22030, USA. Correspondence to:
Mingrui Liu <mingruil@gmu.edu>.

To characterize the benefits of local steps in generalization,
we build a new heterogeneous data model in the FL setting.
Different from the traditional definition of data heterogene-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

