Efficient Contextual Bandits with Uninformed Feedback Graphs

Mengxiao Zhang 1 Yuheng Zhang 2 Haipeng Luo 1 Paul Mineiro 3

Abstract

This problem reduces to the classic contextual bandits when
the feedback graph only contains self-loops, and generally
captures more real-world applications, such as personalized
web advertising (Mannor & Shamir, 2011):

Bandits with feedback graphs are powerful online
learning models that interpolate between the full
information and classic bandit problems, capturing many real-life applications. A recent work
by Zhang et al. (2023) studies the contextual version of this problem and proposes an efficient
and optimal algorithm via a reduction to online
regression. However, their algorithm crucially relies on seeing the feedback graph before making
each decision, while in many applications, the
feedback graph is uninformed, meaning that it is
either only revealed after the learner makes her
decision or even never fully revealed at all. This
work develops the first contextual algorithms for
such uninformed settings, via an efficient reduction to online regression over both the losses and
the graphs. Importantly, we show that it is critical to learn the graphs using log loss instead of
squared loss to obtain favorable regret guarantees.
We also demonstrate the empirical effectiveness
of our algorithm on a bidding application using
both synthetic and real-world data.

The non-contextual version of this problem has been studied
extensively in the literature (Mannor & Shamir, 2011; Alon
et al., 2015a; 2017). Alon et al. (2015a) provided a full characterization on the minimax regret rate with respect to different graph theoretic quantities according to different types of
the feedback graphs. However, the more practically useful
contextual version is much less explored. A recent work
by Zhang et al. (2023) first considered this problem with
adversarial context and general feedback graphs, and proposed an efficient algorithm achieving minimax regret rates.
However, their algorithm only works in the informed setting
where the feedback graph is revealed to the learner before
her decision. In many applications, such as online pricing (Cohen et al., 2016), the feedback graph is not available
to the learner when (or even after) she makes the decision.
Cohen et al. (2016) first considered this more challenging
uninformed setting without context and derived algorithms
achieving near-optimal regret guarantees. However, there
is no prior work offering a solution for contextual bandits
with uninformed feedback graphs. In this work, we take
the first step in this direction and propose the first efficient
algorithms achieving strong regret guarantees. Specifically,
our contributions are as follows.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we consider efficient algorithm design for
contextual bandits with directed feedback graphs, which
generalizes classic contextual bandits (Auer et al., 2002;
Langford & Zhang, 2007). The interaction between the
learner and the environment lasts for T rounds. At each
round, the learner first observes a context and then chooses
one of K actions, while simultaneously an adversary decides
the loss for each action and a directed feedback graph with
the K actions as nodes. After that, the learner suffers the
loss of the chosen action, and her observation is determined
based on this feedback graph. Specifically, she observes the
loss of every action to which the chosen action is connected.

Contributions. Our algorithm, SquareCB.UG, is based
on the SquareCB.G algorithm of Zhang et al. (2023). Assuming realizability on the loss function and an online
square loss regression oracle, Zhang et al. (2023) extended
the minimax framework for contextual bandits (Foster &
Rakhlin, 2020; Foster & Krishnamurthy, 2021) to contextual
bandits under informed feedback graphs. With uninformed
graphs, we further assume that they are realizable by another
function class G and propose to learn them simultaneously
so that in each round we can plug in the predicted graph
into SquareCB.G. While the idea is natural, our analysis is
highly non-trivial and, perhaps more importantly, reveals
that it is crucial to learn these graphs using log loss instead
of squared loss.

1

University of Southern California 2 University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign 3 Microsoft Research. Correspondence to:
Mengxiao Zhang <mengxiao.zhang@usc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

More specifically, within the uninformed setting, we analyze
two different types of feedback on the graph structure. In the
1

