Generalizing Knowledge Graph Embedding with
Universal Orthogonal Parameterization

Rui Li 1 Chaozhuo Li 2 Yanming Shen 3 Zeyu Zhang 1 Xu Chen 1

Abstract
Recent advances in knowledge graph embedding
(KGE) rely on Euclidean/hyperbolic orthogonal
relation transformations to model intrinsic logical
patterns and topological structures. However, existing approaches are confined to rigid relational
orthogonalization with restricted dimension and
homogeneous geometry, leading to deficient modeling capability. In this work, we move beyond
these approaches in terms of both dimension and
geometry by introducing a powerful framework
named GoldE, which features a universal orthogonal parameterization based on a generalized form
of Householder reflection. Such parameterization
can naturally achieve dimensional extension and
geometric unification with theoretical guarantees,
enabling our framework to simultaneously capture
crucial logical patterns and inherent topological
heterogeneity of knowledge graphs. Empirically,
GoldE achieves state-of-the-art performance on
three standard benchmarks. Codes are available
at https://github.com/xxrep/GoldE.

(a) Symmetry

(b) Antisymmetry

(c) Inversion

(d) Composition

(e) Hierarchy

(f) Cyclicity

Figure 1. Illustrations of logical patterns (a-d) (Sun et al., 2019)
and topological structures (e-f) (Chami et al., 2020).

Embedding (KGE), which learns expressive representations
of entities and relations for predicting the missing links.
The key to KGE lies in capturing crucial logical patterns
(e.g., symmetry, antisymmetry, inversion and composition)
(Sun et al., 2019) and inherent topological structures (e.g.,
cyclicity and hierarchy) (Chami et al., 2020) as illustrated
in Figure 1. Recent advances highlight the effectiveness of
orthogonal relation transformations for this principle. As a
pioneering work, RotatE (Sun et al., 2019) represents relations as 2-dimensional Euclidean rotations, i.e., isometries
on 1-spheres (Sommer, 2013), which is able to model the
four logical patterns and cyclical structures. The subsequent
works can be categorized into two branches: (1) “Dimension
Branch” (Zhang et al., 2019; Gao et al., 2020; Cao et al.,
2021; Li et al., 2022) extends the (Euclidean) orthogonal
relation transformations into higher-dimensional spaces for
better modeling capacity; (2) “Geometry Branch” (Balazevic et al., 2019; Chami et al., 2020) leverages hyperbolic
isometries to preserve the hierarchical structures.

1. Introduction
Knowledge graphs (KGs) structurally organize vast human
knowledge into the factual triples, where each triple (h, r, t)
signifies the existence of a relation r between head entity h
and tail entity t. Imbued with a wealth of factual knowledge,
KGs have facilitated a myriad of downstream applications
(Saxena et al., 2020; Yasunaga et al., 2022; Sun et al., 2023).
However, real-world KGs such as Freebase (Bollacker et al.,
2008) are plagued by incompleteness (Bordes et al., 2013).
This motivates substantial research on Knowledge Graph

However, it takes two to tango—none of existing approaches
can simultaneously break the restrictions of dimension and
geometry for orthogonal relation transformations. As shown
in Table 1, the dimensional extensions are entrenched in Euclidean geometry, while the hyperbolic relational orthogonalization remains constrained in low-dimensional spaces
due to the significant computational demand and complexity.
Moreover, all these approaches are specifically designed on
homogeneous geometry, which is inadequate to preserve the
topological heterogeneity of KGs—in some regions cyclical,
in others hierarchical (Gu et al., 2019; Skopek et al., 2020;
Wang et al., 2021). In light of such limitations, a challenging

1
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University
of China, Beijing, China 2 Key Laboratory of Trustworthy Distributed Computing and Service (MOE), Beijing University of
Posts and Telecommunications, China 3 School of Computer Science and Technology, Dalian University of Technology, China.
Correspondence to: Xu Chen <xu.chen@ruc.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

