Position: Open-Endedness is Essential for Artificial Superhuman Intelligence

Edward Hughes * 1 Michael Dennis * 1 Jack Parker-Holder 1 Feryal Behbahani 1 Aditi Mavalankar 1 Yuge Shi 1
Tom Schaul 1 Tim Rocktäschel 1

Abstract

explosion of emergent capabilities, behaviors, and artifacts.
This kind of open-ended invention is the mechanism by
which human individuals and society at large accumulates
new knowledge and technology. Therefore, open-endedness
must be a property of an artificial superhuman intelligence
(ASI, Morris et al., 2023) that can, by definition, accomplish
a wide range of tasks at a level which no human can match.
By the very nature of superhuman intelligence, open-ended
discovery of innovative solutions is essential to empower humanity to manage its risks, just as society evolves norms and
institutions to govern increasingly capable humans across
generations (Richerson et al., 2001).

In recent years there has been a tremendous surge
in the general capabilities of AI systems, mainly
fuelled by training foundation models on internetscale data. Nevertheless, the creation of openended, ever self-improving AI remains elusive.
In this position paper, we argue that the ingredients are now in place to achieve openendedness in AI systems with respect to a human observer. Furthermore, we claim that
such open-endedness is an essential property
of any artificial superhuman intelligence (ASI).
We begin by providing a concrete formal definition of open-endedness through the lens of novelty
and learnability. We then illustrate a path towards
ASI via open-ended systems built on top of foundation models, capable of making novel, humanrelevant discoveries. We conclude by examining
the safety implications of generally-capable openended AI. We expect that open-ended foundation
models will prove to be an increasingly fertile and
safety-critical area of research in the near future.

Foundation models such as large language models (LLMs)
have scaled learning to large, static datasets scraped from
the internet. Extrapolating, we may soon be running out
of high-quality textual and visual data for training such
models (Villalobos et al., 2022). Thus, open-endedness is
unlikely to arise for free by training on ever-larger datasets.
Rather, a system endowed with the open-endedness necessary for ASI will eventually have to create, refute and refine
its own explanatory knowledge, in interaction with a source
of evidence (Deutsch, 2011), as well as learning what data to
learn from (Jiang et al., 2022). Moreover, for ASI to be useful and safe, it is important that open-endedness be guided
towards knowledge that is understandable by and beneficial
for humanity. Foundation models and open-endedness are
orthogonal dimensions, whose combination is particularly
powerful (cf. Lehman et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2022; Chen
et al., 2023a; Meyerson et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023; Wu
et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a). Open-ended algorithms
endow foundation models with the ability to uncover new
knowledge, while foundation models guide the search space
for open-ended AI towards discovering human-relevant artifacts efficiently (Liu et al., 2023a; Ma et al., 2023; RomeraParedes et al., 2024). A formal definition of open-endedness
can catalyze progress in this direction, offering clarity and
focus to galvanize the research community.

1. Introduction
Recent years have seen impressive progress in AI, mainly
driven by foundation models (Bommasani et al., 2021).
These models are increasingly used as agents in various
applications (e.g., Wang et al., 2023a; Wu et al., 2023;
Lifshitz et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023c; Liu et al., 2023b;
Zheng et al., 2024; Ahn et al., 2022). This represents significant progress towards artificial general intelligence (AGI),
in the sense of reaching human-level performance on a wide
range of tasks (Legg and Hutter, 2007). However, we are
still missing a formal description of what it would take for
an autonomous system to self-improve towards increasingly
creative and diverse discoveries without end—a Cambrian

We provide a new and precise definition of open-endedness
in Section 2, inspired by the open-ended systems in nature
that have created life, the human brain, culture, and technology, as well as open-ended systems in silico that, for
instance, have achieved superhuman level at the game of
Go (Silver et al., 2016), generated human-level adaptation

*

Equal contribution 1 Google DeepMind, London, UK. Correspondence to: Edward Hughes <edwardhughes@google.com>,
Michael Dennis <dennismi@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

