Pausing Policy Learning in Non-stationary Reinforcement Learning

Hyunin Lee 1 Ming Jin 2 Javad Lavaei 1 Somayeh Sojoudi 1

Abstract

2019; Schrittwieser et al., 2020). One strategy for real-time
action is to employ a multi-threaded architecture, where
model learning and planning occur in background threads
while actions are returned in real-time (Hester & Stone,
2013; Imanberdiyev et al., 2016; Glavic et al., 2017).

Real-time inference is a challenge of real-world
reinforcement learning due to temporal differences in time-varying environments: the system
collects data from the past, updates the decision
model in the present, and deploys it in the future.
We tackle a common belief that continually updating the decision is optimal to minimize the
temporal gap. We propose forecasting an online
reinforcement learning framework and show that
strategically pausing decision updates yields better overall performance by effectively managing
aleatoric uncertainty. Theoretically, we compute
an optimal ratio between policy update and hold
duration, and show that a non-zero policy hold
duration provides a sharper upper bound on the
dynamic regret. Our experimental evaluations on
three different environments also reveal that a nonzero policy hold duration yields higher rewards
compared to continuous decision updates.

In this paper, we show that intentionally pausing policy
learning can lead to better overall performance than continuous policy updating. Our study is based on deriving an
analytical solution for the optimal ratio between the pausing and updating phases. Perhaps most importantly, this
paper offers the insight that the pausing phase is crucial
to handling an aleatoric uncertainty that stems from the
environment’s intrinsic uncertainty.
This paper begins with a fundamental observation of the realtime inference mechanism based on prediction: the agent
forecasts the future based on past data, and then continually
updates decisions in the present based on future predictions.
This highlights the significance of balancing conservatism
or pessimism in decision-making, based on the three types
of uncertainties: epistemic, aleatoric, and predictive uncertainties (Gal, 2016). We define conservatism as expecting
past trends to continue in the future, and pessimism as anticipating future differences. Although accumulating extensive
past data reduces aleatoric uncertainty, and a prediction
model with high capacity lessens predictive uncertainty, the
frequency of policy updates still remains a key factor due to
unknown aleatoric uncertainty in the present.

1. Introduction
Real-world reinforcement learning (RL) bridges the gap
between the current literature on RL and real-world problems. Real-time inference, a key challenge in real-world
RL, requires that inference occur in real-time at the control
frequency of the system (Dulac-Arnold et al., 2019). For RL
deployment in a production system, policy inference must
occur in real-time, matching the control frequency of the
system. This could range from milliseconds for tasks such
as recommendation systems (Covington et al., 2016; Steck
et al., 2021) or autonomous vehicle control (Hester & Stone,
2013), to minutes for building control systems (Evans &
Gao). This constraint prevents us from speeding up the task
beyond real-time to rapidly generate extensive data (Silver
et al., 2016; Espeholt et al., 2018) or slowing it down for
more computationally intensive approaches (Levine et al.,

𝝅𝒕

𝑹𝒕
𝒂𝟎

1
0

𝒂𝟏
𝑻

𝟎

(a)

𝝅𝒕

1

𝛽"
0

𝑻

𝟎

(b)

𝟎

𝑻

(c)

Figure 1. (a) Non-stationary bandit setting, (b) conservative policy,
(c) pessimistic policy

To elucidate the importance of the above problem, consider
a recommendation system tasked with optimally suggesting
item x0 or x1 to a user whose preference changes over time.
This can be framed as a Bernoulli non-stationary bandit
setting with a set of two actions A = {a0 , a1 }, and a timedependent policy πt : A → [0, 1], where πt (a0 ) = βt and
πt (a1 ) = 1 − βt , 0 ≤ βt ≤ 1. The rewards of each action,

1
University of California, Berkeley 2 Virginia Tech. Correspondence to: Hyunin Lee <hyunin@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

