Linear Alignment: A Closed-form Solution for Aligning Human Preferences
without Tuning and Feedback

Songyang Gao * 1 Qiming Ge * 2 Wei Shen 2 Shihan Dou 2 Junjie Ye 2 Xiao Wang 2 Rui Zheng 3
Yicheng Zou 1 † Zhi Chen 1 Hang Yan 1 Qi Zhang 2 Dahua Lin 1

Abstract

Current alignment works, exemplified by ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2022) and Llama2-Chat (Touvron et al., 2023), utilize
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF)
to harmonize model outputs with human preferences (Bai
et al., 2022a). The effectiveness of these assistants highlights RLHF’s potential to enhance the capability of LLMs.
However, the RLHF pipeline is considerably complex and
costly, incorporating the collection of preference annotations and training of multiple models. raising concerns
about its resource requirements and limited scalability (Gao
et al., 2022; Lambert & Calandra, 2023). With the growing
demand for personalized AI assistants, the scope of model
alignment has extended beyond traditional preferences like
helpfulness and harmlessness (Casper et al., 2023). Therefore, a more flexible alignment algorithm is required to
reduce the reliance on training and annotation in RLHF.

The success of AI assistants based on Language
Models (LLMs) hinges on Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) to comprehend and align with user intentions. However,
traditional alignment algorithms, such as PPO,
are hampered by complex annotation and training requirements. This reliance limits the applicability of RLHF and hinders the development
of professional assistants tailored to diverse human preferences. In this work, we introduce Linear Alignment, a novel algorithm that aligns language models with human preferences in one
single inference step, eliminating the reliance
on data annotation and model training. Linear alignment incorporates a new parameterization for policy optimization under divergence
constraints, which enables the extraction of optimal policy in a closed-form manner and facilitates the direct estimation of the aligned response. Extensive experiments on both general
and personalized preference datasets demonstrate
that linear alignment significantly enhances the
performance and efficiency of LLM alignment
across diverse scenarios. Our code and dataset
is published on https://github.com/
Wizardcoast/Linear_Alignment.git.

Recently, numerous efforts have been devoted to improving
the efficiency of RLHF implementations. From the perspective of avoiding model optimization, a popular and wellperforming method remains the best-of-n policy (Nakano
et al., 2021), which utilises a reward model to select the
highest-scoring response from nucleus sampling candidates.
Similar processing is subsequently applied on sentence (Li
et al., 2023b) or word level (Mudgal et al., 2023), aiming to
achieve finer control over the decoding process. However,
they still require extra supervision signals (e.g., a reward
model) to select better responses and struggle to achieve
competitive performance with policy optimization. The process of generating various responses and then filtering them
severely hampers generation efficiency, making it challenging to apply them in practical applications.

1. Introduction
As the evolution of large language models (LLMs) progresses, aligning their generative strategies with human intent is emerging as a crucial step (Ouyang et al., 2022).

At the preference modelling level, researchers attempt to
reduce the reliance on preference data by utilizing feedback from automated AI systems (Lee et al., 2023), including guiding models for self-assessment (Madaan et al.,
2023), introducing principle-based reward models (Sun
et al., 2023c;b), and constitutional AI frameworks (Bai et al.,
2022b; Kundu et al., 2023). These methods still rely on annotation and training cycles, adhering to the optimization
processes in RLHF. Consequently, they fall short of offering
convenient solutions to diverse and evolving spectrum of

*

Equal contribution 1 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 2 School of Computer Science, Fudan University
3
ByteDance Inc † Corresponding Author. Correspondence to:
Songyang Gao <gaosongyang@pjlab.org.cn>, Yicheng Zou
<zouyicheng@pjlab.org.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

