Statistically Optimal Generative Modeling with Maximum Deviation from the
Empirical Distribution

Elen Vardanyan 1 * Sona Hunanyan 1 * Tigran Galstyan 1 2 * Arshak Minasyan 3 Arnak Dalalyan 3

Abstract

(Wiese et al., 2020), energy (Fekri et al., 2019), physics
(Paganini et al., 2018), chemistry (Maziarka et al., 2020),
and biology (Repecka et al., 2021). The primary goal of
generative models is to simulate new examples by learning
from training data, while ensuring diversity and avoiding
the replication of examples from the training set.

This paper explores the problem of generative
modeling, aiming to simulate diverse examples
from an unknown distribution based on observed
examples. While recent studies have focused on
quantifying the statistical precision of popular
algorithms, there is a lack of mathematical evaluation regarding the non-replication of observed examples and the creativity of the generative model.
We present theoretical insights into this aspect,
demonstrating that the Wasserstein GAN, constrained to left-invertible push-forward maps, generates distributions that not only avoid replication but also significantly deviate from the empirical distribution. Importantly, we show that leftinvertibility achieves this without compromising
the statistical optimality of the resulting generator.
Our most important contribution provides a finitesample lower bound on the Wasserstein-1 distance
between the generative distribution and the empirical one. We also establish a finite-sample upper
bound on the distance between the generative distribution and the true data-generating one. Both
bounds are explicit and show the impact of key
parameters such as sample size, dimensions of
the ambient and latent spaces, noise level, and
smoothness measured by the Lipschitz constant.

Assessing the performance of a generative model can be
done qualitatively by evaluating the realism of the generated examples, which we refer to as accuracy. However,
accuracy should be balanced with another crucial property:
the diversity of generated examples and their difference
from the training examples. This property, referred to as
the generator’s creativity (Li et al., 2024), is essential to
avoid overfitting (producing examples that are slight modifications of those in the training set). Qualitative evaluation
of diversity is challenging due to the large size of training
sets, making it impossible to retain all the examples they
contain. Nonetheless, diversity is as important as accuracy,
particularly in applications where generative models aim to
enrich datasets in cases where data acquisition is expensive
or infeasible. Generating examples that closely resemble
the observed data diminishes the utility of such algorithms.
The success of deep neural nets in generative modeling has
attracted significant attention from the machine learning
community. The number of proposed methods in recent
years, following the influential work by (Goodfellow et al.,
2014), is extensive, making it impractical to cite all of them
here1 . While many of these methods have been empirically validated and justified using heuristics, a more comprehensive mathematical quantification of their strengths
and limitations is often lacking.

1. Introduction
Generative modeling is a widely-used machine learning
technique that has found applications in various scientific
and industrial domains, including health (Yan et al., 2018;
Nie et al., 2017), climate (Gagne et al., 2020), finance

The importance of diversity in generated examples is wellacknowledged but presents practical challenges. Numerous papers have empirically studied the issue of limited
diversity in learned distributions, proposing some solutions
(Dumoulin et al., 2017; Arora et al., 2017; 2018; Srivastava
et al., 2017). However, the majority of studies on diversity
have primarily targeted the mitigation of mode collapse.
This phenomenon occurs when certain examples in the train-

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Mathematics, Yerevan
State University (YSU), Armenia 2 YerevaNN, Armenia 3 CREST,
GENES, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France. Correspondence
to: Elen Vardanyan <evardanyan@aua.am>, Arnak Dalalyan <arnak.dalalyan@ensae.fr>.

1

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

For a comprehensive list, refer to https://github.com/
hindupuravinash/the-gan-zoo

1

