Private Heterogeneous Federated Learning Without a Trusted Server Revisited:
Error-Optimal and Communication-Efficient Algorithms for Convex Losses

Changyu Gao * 1 Andrew Lowy * 1 Xingyu Zhou * 2 Stephen J. Wright 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Federated learning (FL) is a distributed machine learning
paradigm in which multiple silos (a.k.a. clients), such as
hospitals or cell-phone users, collaborate to train a global
model. In FL, silos store their data locally and exchange focused updates (e.g. stochastic gradients), sometimes making
use of a central server (Kairouz et al., 2021). FL has been
applied in myriad domains, from consumer digital products
(e.g. Google’s mobile keyboard (Hard et al., 2018) and
Apple’s iOS (Apple, 2019)) to healthcare (Courtiol et al.,
2019), finance (FedAI, 2019), and large language models
(LLMs) (Hilmkil et al., 2021).

We revisit the problem of federated learning (FL)
with private data from people who do not trust
the server or other silos/clients. In this context,
every silo (e.g. hospital) has data from several
people (e.g. patients) and needs to protect the
privacy of each person’s data (e.g. health records),
even if the server and/or other silos try to uncover
this data. Inter-Silo Record-Level Differential
Privacy (ISRL-DP) prevents each silo’s data from
being leaked, by requiring that silo i’s communications satisfy item-level differential privacy. Prior
work (Lowy & Razaviyayn, 2023a) characterized
the optimal excess risk bounds for ISRL-DP algorithms with homogeneous (i.i.d.) silo data and
convex loss functions. However, two important
questions were left open: 1) Can the same excess
risk bounds be achieved with heterogeneous (noni.i.d.) silo data? 2) Can the optimal risk bounds be
achieved with fewer communication rounds? In
this paper, we give positive answers to both questions. We provide novel ISRL-DP FL algorithms
that achieve the optimal excess risk bounds in the
presence of heterogeneous silo data. Moreover,
our algorithms are more communication-efficient
than the prior state-of-the-art. For smooth loss
functions, our algorithm achieves the optimal excess risk bound and has communication complexity that matches the non-private lower bound. Additionally, our algorithms are more computationally efficient than the previous state-of-the-art.

One of the primary reasons for the introduction of FL was to
enhance protection of the privacy of people’s data (McMahan et al., 2017). Unfortunately, local storage is not sufficient to prevent data from being leaked, because the model
parameters and updates communicated between the silos
and the central server can reveal sensitive information (Zhu
& Han, 2020; Gupta et al., 2022). For example, Gupta et al.
(2022) attacked a FL model for training LLMs to uncover
private text data.
Differential privacy (DP) (Dwork et al., 2006) guarantees
that private data cannot be leaked. Different variations of
DP have been considered for FL. Central DP prevents the
final trained FL model from leaking data to an external
adversary (Jayaraman & Wang, 2018; Noble et al., 2022).
However, central DP has two major drawbacks: 1) it does
not provide a privacy guarantee for each individual silo; and
2) it does not ensure privacy when an attacker/eavesdropper
has access to the server or to another silo.
Another notion of DP for FL is user-level DP (McMahan
et al., 2018; Geyer et al., 2017; Levy et al., 2021). User-level
DP mitigates the drawback 1) of central DP, by providing
privacy for the complete local data set of each silo. Userlevel DP is practical in the cross-device FL setting, where
each silo is a single person (e.g. cell-phone user) with a large
number of records (e.g. text messages). However, user-level
DP still permits privacy breaches if an adversary has access
to the server or eavesdrops on the communications between
silos. Moreover, user-level DP is not well-suited for crosssilo federated learning, where silos represent organizations

*
Equal contribution 1 University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA 2 Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA. Correspondence to: Changyu Gao <changyu.gao@wisc.edu>, Andrew
Lowy <alowy@wisc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

