Thermometer: Towards Universal Calibration for Large Language Models

Maohao Shen 1 Subhro Das 2 Kristjan Greenewald 2 Prasanna Sattigeri 2 Gregory Wornell 1 Soumya Ghosh 2

Abstract
We consider the issue of calibration in large language models (LLM). Recent studies have found
that common interventions such as instruction
tuning often result in poorly calibrated LLMs. Although calibration is well-explored in traditional
applications, calibrating LLMs is uniquely challenging. These challenges stem as much from the
severe computational requirements of LLMs as
from their versatility, which allows them to be
applied to diverse tasks. Addressing these challenges, we propose THERMOMETER, a calibration approach tailored to LLMs. THERMOMETER
learns an auxiliary model, given data from multiple tasks, for calibrating a LLM. It is computationally efficient, preserves the accuracy of the LLM,
and produces better-calibrated responses for new
tasks. Extensive empirical evaluations across various benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of
the proposed method1 .

Figure 1. Calibration performance against inference runtime.
Different methods for calibrating LLaMA-2-Chat 7B compared on
the P ROFESSIONAL L AW task of MMLU on a A100, 40 GB GPU.
The task contains 1533 questions. Our method, THERMOMETER
is significantly faster than methods that require multiple forward
passes (Wei & Zou, 2019; Xiong et al., 2023; Jiang et al., 2023a)
at inference time and achieves lower calibration error compared to
methods with comparable runtime (Tian et al., 2023). Vanilla refers
to the no-calibration baseline, and TS-CV is a temperature scaling
variant (Section 5). Similar trends hold for other benchmarks.

1. Introduction

distributions over sequences of tokens and produce probabilistic forecasts over future tokens in a sequence2 . Their
ability to synthesize knowledge from large volumes of
data, represented as sequences of tokens, has led to remarkable performance on diverse tasks, including question
answering (Hendrycks et al., 2020), commonsense reasoning (Zhong et al., 2019), and machine translation (Zhu et al.,
2020) among others. However, much like other probabilistic forecasters, before deploying LLMs in critical applications, it is important that they are well-calibrated in addition to being accurate. Unfortunately, a growing body of
evidence suggests that while pre-trained LLMs are often
well-calibrated, alignment interventions such as instruction
tuning which make the pre-trained LLMs more usable, also
harm calibration (OpenAI, 2023; Zhu et al., 2023).

Well-calibrated forecasts are a desirable property of any
probabilistic forecaster. They ensure that probabilities produced by the forecaster can be interpreted as accurate confidence estimates of the forecasts. Informally, this implies
that the forecaster is more often wrong on predictions made
with low probabilities than those made with high probabilities. Such forecasts are useful for both enabling trust in the
forecaster’s predictions and incorporating the forecasts as
part of a larger autonomous or semi-autonomous system.
Large language models (LLMs) (Brown et al., 2020; Raffel et al., 2020; Touvron et al., 2023) define probability
1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, USA 2 MITIBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research.
Correspondence to: Maohao Shen <maohao@mit.edu>, Soumya
Ghosh <ghoshso@us.ibm.com>.

While calibration has long been studied (Brier, 1950; Dawid,
1982; Gneiting et al., 2007) and different approaches for
improving calibration properties of probabilistic forecasters exist (Platt et al., 1999; Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017;
Gal & Ghahramani, 2016; Guo et al., 2017), LLMs pose
unique challenges. Training a LLM is expensive, and even

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
The code is available at https://github.com/
maohaos2/Thermometer.

2

1

and corresponding semantic entities represented by the tokens.

