Position: Future Directions in the Theory of Graph Machine Learning

Christopher Morris 1 Fabrizio Frasca 2 Nadav Dym 2 Haggai Maron 2 3 İsmail İlkan Ceylan 4 Ron Levie 2
Derek Lim 5 Michael Bronstein 4 Martin Grohe 1 Stefanie Jegelka 5 6

Abstract

machine learning community, especially messsage-passing
graph neural networks (MPNNs) (Gilmer et al., 2017;
Scarselli et al., 2009).1 Nowadays, MPNNs, or, more generally, GNNs, are among the most prominent topics at toptier machine learning conferences,2 and have showcased
promising outcomes across diverse domains, including breakthroughs in discovering new antibiotics (Stokes et al., 2020;
Wong et al., 2023).

Machine learning on graphs, especially using
graph neural networks (GNNs), has seen a surge in
interest due to the wide availability of graph data
across a broad spectrum of disciplines, from life
to social and engineering sciences. Despite their
practical success, our theoretical understanding
of the properties of GNNs remains highly incomplete. Recent theoretical advancements primarily
focus on elucidating the coarse-grained expressive power of GNNs, predominantly employing
combinatorial techniques. However, these studies
do not perfectly align with practice, particularly
in understanding the generalization behavior of
GNNs when trained with stochastic first-order optimization techniques. In this position paper, we
argue that the graph machine learning community needs to shift its attention to developing a
balanced theory of graph machine learning, focusing on a more thorough understanding of the
interplay of expressive power, generalization, and
optimization.

While GNNs are successful in practice and are making realworld impact, their theoretical properties are understood to
a lesser extent. That is, only GNNs’ expressive power, i.e.,
their ability to separate graphs and express functions over
graphs is understood to some extent (Azizian & Lelarge,
2021; Geerts & Reutter, 2022; Morris et al., 2019; 2021;
Xu et al., 2019). However, most current analyses heavily
rely on combinatorial techniques, such as the 1-dimensional
Weisfeiler–Leman algorithm (1-WL), a well-studied heuristic
for the graph isomorphism problem (Grohe, 2017; Weisfeiler
& Leman, 1968; Weisfeiler, 1976). While the graph isomorphism perspective has helped the community understand
GNNs’ ultimate limitations in capturing graph structure, it
is inherently binary. For example, it does not give insights
into the degree of similarity between two given graphs, prohibiting a more fine-grained analysis. While some recent
works (Böker et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2022) aim at a more
fine-grained analysis, they still have strong limitations, such
as not considering continuous node and edge features. A second limitation of current GNN expressivity results is that they
are fairly specific. They are tailored to particular classes of
GNNs, overlooking practically relevant architectural choices.

1. Introduction
Graphs serve as powerful mathematical representations,
adept at capturing intricate interactions among entities across
a spectrum of disciplines, spanning from life (Wong et al.,
2023) to social sciences (Easley & Kleinberg, 2010) and
optimization (Cappart et al., 2021). This diversity underscores the critical demand for specialized machine-learning
methods that extract valuable patterns from complex graph
data.

While understanding MPNNs’ and related architectures, e.g.,
graph transformers (Müller et al., 2023), expressive power
is vital, understanding when such architectures generalize
to unseen graphs and how to find parameter assignments
that allow so is equally important. However, in MPNNs and
GNNs, the essential aspects of generalization and optimization are severely understudied. The few existing works that
study MPNNs’ generalization properties, e.g., Garg et al.

Hence, in recent years, neural networks capable of handling graph-structured data received a lot of attention in the
1
RWTH Aachen University 2 Technion - Israel Institute of Technology 3 NVIDIA Research 4 University of Oxford 5 MIT 6 TU Munich. Correspondence to: Christopher Morris <morris@cs.rwthaachen.de>.

1

We use the term MPNNs to refer to graph-machine learning
architectures that fit into the framework of Gilmer et al. (2017)
and use the term GNNs in a broader sense, i.e., all neural network
architectures capable of handling graph-structured inputs.
2
http://tinyurl.com/mpn89vju

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

