Learning Latent Structures in Network Games via
Data-Dependent Gated-Prior Graph Variational Autoencoders

Xue Yu 1 2 Muchen Li 3 Yan Leng 4 Renjie Liao 5 6 7

Abstract

can be encapsulated in what are known as network games.
In these games, an individual’s utility is shaped not only
by their actions but also by the actions of others in their
social circles. Two types of strategic relationships, known
as strategic complement and strategic substitute, encompass
a wide range of behaviors. In scenarios involving strategic
complements, an individual’s actions positively influence
others’ utility, hence typically leading to higher action levels.
This interdependence often results in individuals mimicking the actions of their neighbors. Conversely, in strategic
substitute relationships, neighbors’ action levels reduce individuals’ utility and hence reduce their action levels. In
both strategies, the network structure plays a fundamental
role in determining individuals’ utility and subsequently
their decisions. However, it is increasingly common that
despite having abundant data on individual decisions, the
intricate relationships (e.g., represented by an interaction
network) among them often remain concealed due to the
high costs of observation or privacy considerations (Leng
et al., 2020; Rossi et al., 2022; Leng et al., 2023a). As such,
revealing latent network structures and identifying the types
of interactions are crucial in network games.

In network games, individuals interact strategically within network environments to maximize their utilities. However, obtaining network
structures is challenging. In this work, we propose an unsupervised learning model, called datadependent gated-prior graph variational autoencoder (GPGVAE), that infers the underlying latent
interaction type (strategic complement vs. substitute) among individuals and the latent network
structure based on their observed actions. Specially, we propose a spectral graph neural network
(GNN) based encoder to predict the interaction
type and a data-dependent gated prior that models
network structures conditioned on the interaction
type. We further propose a Transformer based
mixture of Bernoulli encoder of network structures and a GNN based decoder of game actions.
We systematically study the Monte Carlo gradient estimation methods and effectively train our
model in a stage-wise fashion. Extensive experiments across various synthetic and real-world network games demonstrate that our model achieves
state-of-the-art performances in inferring network
structures and well captures interaction types.

Many studies rely on utility functions to analyze individuals’
Nash equilibrium behaviors and estimate the latent network
structures (Honorio & Ortiz, 2015; Barik & Honorio, 2019;
Leng et al., 2020). These works often assume specific forms
of utility functions. Meanwhile, supervised (Belilovsky
et al., 2016; Zhao et al., 2023) and semi-supervised approaches (Elinas et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2023; Wang et al.,
2023) have been proposed to predict network structures
given users’ actions and partial network connections (required in semi-supervised learning). In real-world applications, determining the exact form of utility functions or
acquiring graph structures is often challenging, which motivates us to explore unsupervised methods that can infer
network structures without knowing the utility function.

1. Introduction
Social influence and strategic dependencies are prevalent
in systems like social networks (Aral et al., 2009; Banerjee
et al., 2013; Leng et al., 2023b). These social dynamics
1

Center for Applied Statistics, School of Statistics, Renmin
University of China, Beijing, China 2 Beijing Advanced Innovation
Center for Future Blockchain and Privacy Computing 3 Department
of Computer Science, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
BC, Canada 4 McCombs School of Business, The University of
Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA 5 Vector Institute for AI 6 Canada
CIFAR AI Chair 7 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
Correspondence to: Xue Yu <xueyu 2019@ruc.edu.cn>.

In this paper, we propose an unsupervised learning model,
dubbed data-dependent Gated-Prior Graph Variational Autoencoder (GPGVAE), which directly infers latent network
structures from game actions. Specifically, in our efforts to
capture interaction types such as strategic complements and
substitutes, we initially investigate data-dependent priors,

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

