Turnstile ℓp leverage score sampling with applications

Alexander Munteanu 1 Simon Omlor 2 3

Abstract

even reach the limits of tractability. When dealing with data
streams, or distributed data, we face additional restrictions
regarding their accessibility or communication. In massively
unordered models, huge amounts of data are stored and need
to be processed in arbitrary order. To deal with such situations, it is necessary to preprocess the dataset and reduce its
size before classical data analysis algorithms can perform
on a compressed substitute data set. Two main techniques
can be identified in the literature, referred to as coresets
and sketching, that quickly compute some sort of smaller
data summary while data is presented under the various
restrictions mentioned above, and thereby provide mathematical guarantees on the approximation error obtained
from analyzing the proxy (Phillips, 2017; Munteanu, 2023).

The turnstile data stream model offers the most
flexible framework where data can be manipulated dynamically, i.e., rows, columns, and even
single entries of an input matrix can be added,
deleted, or updated multiple times in a data stream.
We develop a novel algorithm for sampling rows
ai of a matrix A ∈ Rn×d , proportional to their
ℓp norm, when A is presented in a turnstile data
stream. Our algorithm not only returns the set
of sampled row indexes, it also returns slightly
perturbed rows ãi ≈ ai , and approximates their
sampling probabilities up to ε relative error. When
combined with preconditioning techniques, our
algorithm extends to ℓp leverage score sampling
over turnstile data streams. With these properties in place, it allows us to simulate subsampling
constructions of coresets for important regression
problems to operate over turnstile data streams
with very little overhead compared to their respective off-line subsampling algorithms. For logistic
regression, our framework yields the first algorithm that achieves a (1 + ε) approximation and
works in a turnstile data stream using polynomial
sketch/subsample size, improving over O(1) approximations, or exp(1/ε) sketch size of previous
work. We compare experimentally to plain oblivious sketching and plain leverage score sampling
algorithms for ℓp and logistic regression.

Coreset constructions often work by importance subsampling or selection of original rows of a data matrix and
reweighting them reciprocally to their sampling probability
(Munteanu & Schwiegelshohn, 2018). This yields unbiased
and precise estimates using few rows of high importance
that are likely to be included, while many low contributions
are redundant and can be subsampled in a near uniform way
(Langberg & Schulman, 2010; Feldman et al., 2020).
Sketching is often seen as a descendant of random projections and aims at randomly isolating rows that have a very
high impact on the objective function (Woodruff, 2014).
The idea behind the type of sketches considered in this paper is that these high impact contributions can be separated
with high probability from each other by hashing them randomly into buckets, and collisions with less important data
add only little noise (Charikar et al., 2004; Woodruff, 2014;
Mahabadi et al., 2020).

1. Introduction

Coresets admit batch-wise processing of data points using
a black-box technique called Merge & Reduce (Bentley
& Saxe, 1980; Geppert et al., 2020; Feldman et al., 2020;
Cohen-Addad et al., 2023), and a lot of effort has been put
recently into developing on-line algorithms that simulate ℓp
norm subsampling in a data stream, when the input points
are presented row-by-row (Chhaya et al., 2020; Cohen et al.,
2020; Munteanu et al., 2022; Woodruff & Yasuda, 2023a).
Dynamic data structures, allowing to remove points after
their insertion (Frahling & Sohler, 2005; Frahling et al.,
2008; Braverman et al., 2017), are slightly less common in
the coreset literature.

When analyzing huge amounts of data, even linear time and
space algorithms may require large computing resources or
*

Equal contribution 1 Dortmund Data Science Center, Faculties of Statistics and Computer Science, TU Dortmund University, Dortmund, Germany 2 Faculty of Statistics, TU Dortmund
University, Dortmund, Germany 3 Lamarr-Institute for Machine
Learning and Artificial Intelligence, Dortmund, Germany. Correspondence to: Alexander Munteanu <alexander.munteanu@tudortmund.de>, Simon Omlor <simon.omlor@tu-dortmund.de>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

