Better Locally Private Sparse Estimation Given Multiple Samples Per User

Yuheng Ma 1 Ke Jia 1 Hanfang Yang 2 1

Abstract

Fortunately, in some scenarios, each user may possess multiple samples, which can serve as a way to overcome these difficulties. This is known as user-level LDP (ULDP) (Acharya
et al., 2023; Bassily & Sun, 2023). Research has demonstrated performance improvement in intentionally designed
models when each user has multiple samples, from both the
central DP perspective (Liu et al., 2020; Ghazi et al., 2021;
Levy et al., 2021; Narayanan et al., 2022; Ghazi et al., 2023)
and the LDP perspective (Girgis et al., 2022; Acharya et al.,
2023; Bassily & Sun, 2023). In most cases (for ULDP), the
improvement lies in the effective sample size: if there are n
users with m samples and privacy budget ε, the problem is
as tractable as having nm users with one sample and privacy
budget ε. See Table 1 for a summary.

Previous studies yielded discouraging results for
item-level locally differentially private linear regression with s∗ -sparsity assumption, where the
minimax rate for nm samples is O(s∗ d/nmε2 ).
This can be challenging for high-dimensional data,
where the dimension d is extremely large. In
this work, we investigate user-level locally differentially private sparse linear regression. We
show that with n users each contributing m samples, the linear dependency of dimension d can
be eliminated, yielding an error upper bound of
O(s∗2 /nmε2 ). We propose a framework that first
selects candidate variables and then conducts estimation in the narrowed low-dimensional space,
which is extendable to general sparse estimation
problems with tight error bounds. Experiments
on both synthetic and real datasets demonstrate
the superiority of the proposed methods. Both
the theoretical and empirical results suggest that,
with the same number of samples, locally private
sparse estimation is better conducted when multiple samples per user are available.

We proceed to ask the following question: Besides effective
sample size, does having multiple samples per user offer
benefits? If the answer to this question is affirmative, it holds
practical significance. For instance, when designing data
collection schemes, the primary focus should be on users
capable and willing to provide multiple samples. Moreover,
if a significant number of users lack trust in the data collector
but are willing to share information within small groups
(such as family or company), then better mechanisms can
be devised for conducting the learning process.

1. Introduction

In this work, we offer an affirmative response to the question
from the perspective of sparse estimation. Sparse estimation
stands as a crucial task in modern machine learning, especially when dealing with high-dimensional data where structured assumptions like sparsity can significantly enhance
performance. Particularly, we study sparse linear regression.
We first elucidate why the minimax lower bound fails to hold
when each user possesses multiple samples and provide a
lower bound for ULDP (Theorem 2.4). Subsequently, we introduce an algorithm structured as follows: half of the users
perform local variable selection and aggregate their findings
to identify the support of non-zero variables. Under mild
assumptions, we establish theoretical guarantees for both local selection (Proposition 3.2) and aggregation (Proposition
3.3). Then, to conduct estimation on the narrowed space,
we propose a sub-optimal multi-round protocol (Theorem
3.4) and a two-round protocol (Theorem 3.6). The latter
achieves an estimation error O(s∗2 /nmε2 ). Compared to
minimax error rate O(ds∗ /nmε2 ) under LDP, our rate improves by a factor of s∗ /d which can be significant for high

Local differential privacy (LDP) (Kairouz et al., 2014; Duchi
et al., 2018), a variant of differential privacy (DP) (Dwork
et al., 2006), has gained considerable attention in recent
years. LDP assumes that each sample is possessed by a data
holder, who privatizes their data before it is collected by
the curator. Offering a stronger sense of privacy protection
compared to central DP, learning under LDP often encounters challenges such as slow convergence, high demand for
local machine capacity, and limited accessibility to basic
techniques (Duchi et al., 2018; Tramèr et al., 2022; Ma et al.,
2024b), which obstruct the theoretical analysis and practical
implementation of LDP learning.
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Statistics, Renmin University of
China 2 Center for Applied Statistics, Renmin University of China.
Correspondence to: Hanfang Yang <hyang@ruc.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

