A Sober Look at LLMs for Material Discovery:
Are They Actually Good for Bayesian Optimization Over Molecules?

Agustinus Kristiadi 1 Felix Strieth-Kalthoff 2 Marta Skreta 2 1 Pascal Poupart 3 1 Alán Aspuru-Guzik 2 1
Geoff Pleiss 4 1
https://github.com/wiseodd/lapeft-bayesopt

Abstract

Prompt: What is the molecular mass of OS(=O)(=O)O?

Automation is one of the cornerstones of contemporary material discovery. Bayesian optimization
(BO) is an essential part of such workflows, enabling scientists to leverage prior domain knowledge into efficient exploration of a large molecular space. While such prior knowledge can take
many forms, there has been significant fanfare
around the ancillary scientific knowledge encapsulated in large language models (LLMs). However, existing work thus far has only explored
LLMs for heuristic materials searches. Indeed,
recent work obtains the uncertainty estimate—an
integral part of BO—from point-estimated, nonBayesian LLMs. In this work, we study the question of whether LLMs are actually useful to accelerate principled Bayesian optimization in the
molecular space. We take a sober, dispassionate
stance in answering this question. This is done
by carefully (i) viewing LLMs as fixed feature extractors for standard but principled BO surrogate
models and by (ii) leveraging parameter-efficient
finetuning methods and Bayesian neural networks
to obtain the posterior of the LLM surrogate. Our
extensive experiments with real-world chemistry
problems show that LLMs can be useful for BO
over molecules, but only if they have been pretrained or finetuned with domain-specific data.

Ground truth: 98.079 g/mol
ChatGPT: To calculate the molecular mass of a compound, you need to sum the atomic masses of all the
atoms in the molecular formula. [. . . ] Therefore, the
molecular mass of OS(=O)(=O)O (sulfuric acid) is approximately 96.07 g/mol.
Llama-2-70b: The molecular formula for OS(=O)(=O)O
is O3S. [. . . ] Therefore, the molecular mass of
OS(=O)(=O)O is 80.07 g/mol.

Figure 1. LLMs seem to “understand” chemistry. However, they
often produce completely wrong answers while sounding very
convincing. Both APIs were accessed on 2024-01-07.

updating the initial design hypothesis (de Regt, 2020; Greenaway et al., 2023). While human researchers have largely
driven this process for the last century, there is demand for
more efficient automated methods in the face of pressing
societal challenges related to health care, nutrition, or clean
energy (Tom et al., 2024). Major challenges associated with
the discovery process are the complex and black box-like
mapping between a material’s structure and its properties, as
well as the vastness of the design space (Wang et al., 2023).
To address the aforementioned problems, Bayesian optimization (BO; Močkus, 1975) has been increasingly used in
chemistry (Griffiths et al., 2023; Hickman et al., 2023). Key
components of successful BO include its priors (informative priors imply efficient posterior inference with limited
data) and its probabilistic surrogate models—e.g. via Gaussian processes (Rasmussen & Williams, 2006; Snoek et al.,
2012) or Bayesian neural networks (Kim et al., 2022; Li
et al., 2024; Kristiadi et al., 2023). The probabilistic formulation of BO is useful since optimizing a black-box function
is an inherently uncertain problem. We do not know a priori
the form of the function and our approximation of it might
be imprecise. Probabilistic surrogate models are thus useful
to quantify the inherent uncertainty surrounding the optimization landscape, allowing for principled approaches to

1. Introduction
Material discovery describes the inherently laborious, iterative process of designing materials candidates, preparing
them experimentally, testing their properties, and eventually
1

Vector Institute 2 University of Toronto 3 University of Waterloo
University of British Columbia. Correspondence to: Agustinus
Kristiadi <akristiadi@vectorinstitute.ai>.

4

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

