Enhancing Sufficient Dimension Reduction via Hellinger Correlation

Seungbeom Hong 1 Ilmun Kim 2 Jun Song 1

Abstract

tion to accurately estimate or explain the response variable.
This approach is rooted in the idea that by identifying and
preserving the key relationships in the notion of conditional
independence as follows. For a univariate random variable
Y and a p-dimensional random vector X, the objective of
linear sufficient dimension reduction is to seek out a matrix
B ∈ Rp×d (d < p) that possesses the smallest achievable
column space such that

In this work, we develop a new theory and
method for sufficient dimension reduction (SDR)
in single-index models, where SDR is a subfield of supervised dimension reduction based on
conditional independence. Our work is primarily motivated by the recent introduction of the
Hellinger correlation as a dependency measure.
Utilizing this measure, we develop a method capable of effectively detecting the dimension reduction subspace, complete with theoretical justification. Through extensive numerical experiments,
we demonstrate that our proposed method significantly enhances and outperforms existing SDR
methods. This improvement is largely attributed
to our proposed method’s deeper understanding of
data dependencies and the refinement of existing
SDR techniques.

Y ⊥
⊥ X | BT X.

(1)

It is important to note that the conditional independence
does not change when B is multiplied by any non-singular
matrix A ∈ Rd×d . Thus, to make the target identifiable,
the parameter needed to seek is the space spanned by the
columns of B, i.e, Span(B), not a matrix B itself. The
column space of B with the smallest d is called the central
space denoted by SY |X and the dimension of the central
space is the structural dimension, say d.
The conditional independence (1) can also be represented as

1. Introduction

Y ⊥
⊥ X | R(X),

In the age of big data, the advent of high-dimensional
datasets has transformed the landscape of statistical analysis
and machine learning. However, as the number of features
in a dataset increases, so does the complexity of modeling
and interpretation. This phenomenon, often referred to as
the curse of dimensionality, poses a significant challenge
to researchers and practitioners who seek to extract meaningful information and insights from vast and intricate data
structures.

for a proper linear mapping, R : Rp → Rd . It can be further
represented as
Y | X ∼ Y | R(X),
where ∼ means equal in distribution, which tells us that once
R(X) is identified, no more information about Y can be
obtained from X, and all the regression information for the
predictor is preserved through R(X). Another equivalent
statement is

In response to this challenge, the field of sufficient dimension reduction (SDR) has emerged as a powerful approach
to navigating high-dimensional space and uncovering the
underlying structure without compromising interpretability.
Much like how sufficient statistics provide essential information for estimation, sufficient dimension reduction methods
furnish us with a subspace that contains adequate informa-

X | Y, R(X) ∼ X | R(X).
Consider rewriting that X represents data D and Y symbolizes a parameter θ. Under this reinterpretation, the above
statement is equivalent to D | (θ, R) ∼ D | R, which suggests that R acts as a sufficient statistic. Hence, the SDR
mapping R(·) aligns with the traditional concept of statistical sufficiency. A key distinction, however, lies in the nature
of the sufficient statistic versus the SDR: while a sufficient
statistic is observable, the SDR involves parameters that
require estimation. Adragni & Cook (2009) explains this
conceptual idea of sufficiency more rigorously.

1

Department of Statistics, Korea University, Seoul, South Korea
Department of Applied Statistics, Yonsei University, Seoul, South
Korea. Correspondence to: Jun Song <junsong@korea.ac.kr>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

