Understanding and Diagnosing Deep Reinforcement Learning

Ezgi Korkmaz 1

Abstract

initially in game-playing tasks (Mnih et al., 2015) and subsequently in continuous control (Lillicrap et al., 2015). Since
this initial success, there has been a continuous stream of developments both of new algorithms (Mnih et al., 2016; Hasselt et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2016), and striking new performance records in highly complex tasks (Silver et al., 2017;
Schrittwieser et al., 2020). While the field of deep reinforcement learning has developed rapidly (Mankowitz et al.,
2023), the understanding of the representations learned by
deep neural network policies has lagged behind.

Deep neural policies have recently been installed
in a diverse range of settings, from biotechnology
to automated financial systems. However, the utilization of deep neural networks to approximate
the value function leads to concerns on the decision boundary stability, in particular, with regard
to the sensitivity of policy decision making to
indiscernible, non-robust features due to highly
non-convex and complex deep neural manifolds.
These concerns constitute an obstruction to understanding the reasoning made by deep neural policies, and their foundational limitations. Hence, it
is crucial to develop techniques that aim to understand the sensitivities in the learnt representations
of neural network policies. To achieve this we
introduce a theoretically founded method that provides a systematic analysis of the unstable directions in the deep neural policy decision boundary
across both time and space. Through experiments
in the Arcade Learning Environment (ALE), we
demonstrate the effectiveness of our technique for
identifying correlated directions of instability, and
for measuring how sample shifts remold the set of
sensitive directions in the neural policy landscape.
Most importantly, we demonstrate that state-ofthe-art robust training techniques yield learning
of disjoint unstable directions, with dramatically
larger oscillations over time, when compared to
standard training. We believe our results reveal
the fundamental properties of the decision process made by reinforcement learning policies, and
can help in constructing reliable and robust deep
neural policies.

The lack of understanding of deep neural policies is of critical importance in the context of the sensitivities of policy
decisions to imperceptible, non-robust features. Beginning
with the work of (Szegedy et al., 2014; Goodfellow et al.,
2015), deep neural networks have been shown to be vulnerable to adversarial perturbations below the level of human perception. In response, a line of work has focused on proposing training techniques to increase robustness by applying
these perturbations to the input of deep neural networks
during training time (i.e. adversarial training) (Goodfellow
et al., 2015; Madry et al., 2017). Yet, concerns have been
raised on these methods including decreased accuracy on
clean data (Bhagoji et al., 2019), prohibiting generalization
(Korkmaz, 2023), and incorrect invariance to semantically
meaningful changes (Tramèr et al., 2020). While some studies argued that detecting adversarial directions could be the
best we can do so far (Korkmaz & Brown-Cohen, 2023),
the diagnostic perspective on understanding policy decision
making and vulnerabilities requires urgent further attention.
Thus, it is crucial to develop techniques to precisely understand and diagnose the sensitivities of deep neural policies,
in order to effectively evaluate newly proposed algorithms
and training methods. In particular, there is a need to have
diagnostic methods that can automatically identify policy
sensitivities and instabilities that arise under many different
scenarios, without requiring extensive research effort for
each new instance.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning algorithms leveraging the power of
deep neural networks have obtained state-of-the-art results

For this reason, in our paper we focus on understanding
the learned representations and policy vulnerabilities and
ask the following questions: (i) How can we analyze the
rationale behind deep reinforcement learning decisions?
(ii) What is the temporal and spatial relation between nonrobust directions on the deep neural policy manifold? (iii)

1
University College London (UCL). Correspondence to: Ezgi
Korkmaz <ezgikorkmazmail@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

