Unsupervised Parameter-free Simplicial Representation Learning
with Scattering Transforms

Hiren Madhu * 1 Sravanthi Gurugubelli * 1 Sundeep Prabhakar Chepuri 1

Abstract

et al., 2020). Such higher-order interactions occur naturally in social networks, email threads, and collaboration
networks, to name a few. While a graph can only represent
a pairwise friendship or a pairwise communication, simplicial complexes can model friend circles or group emails. A
simplicial complex is a collection of simplices of different
orders, namely, nodes, edges, triangles, and so on. Unlike in
graphs, where an entity only has adjacency based on edges,
a simplex in a simplicial complex has multiple adjacencies,
allowing for a richer representation.

Simplicial neural network models are becoming
popular for processing and analyzing higher-order
graph data, but they suffer from high training complexity and dependence on task-specific labels.
To address these challenges, we propose simplicial scattering networks (SSNs), a parameter-free
model inspired by scattering transforms designed
to extract task-agnostic features from simplicial
complex data without labels in a principled manner. Specifically, we propose a simplicial scattering transform based on random walk matrices
for various adjacencies underlying a simplicial
complex. We then use the simplicial scattering
transform to construct a deep filter bank network
that captures high-frequency information at multiple scales. The proposed simplicial scattering
transform possesses properties such as permutation invariance, robustness to perturbations, and
expressivity. We theoretically prove that including higher-order information improves the robustness of SSNs to perturbations. Empirical evaluations demonstrate that SSNs outperform existing
simplicial or graph neural models in many tasks
like node classification, simplicial closure, graph
classification, trajectory prediction, and simplex
prediction while being computationally efficient.

Building upon the success of graph neural networks
(GNNs) (Kipf & Welling, 2017; Hamilton et al., 2017;
Xu et al., 2018) for analyzing graph-structured data, simplicial neural networks (SNNs) are becoming popular for
learning representation from higher order simplices (Bodnar
et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2022; Roddenberry et al., 2021).
These neural networks overcome the limitations of GNNs
by processing higher-order interactions, thereby enriching
the function space learnt by the neural model and, in turn,
increasing the expressivity of representations (Bodnar et al.,
2021). Bodnar et al. (2021) also shows that MPSN outperforms graph-based neural models by clique lifting graph
data as this enables the model to increase the dimension of
the data and learning representations that are more expressive than graph-based models. However, the requirement to
aggregate information from various types of neighborhoods
and different orders of simplices significantly increases the
number of trainable parameters involved in SNNs, increasing its training complexity. Not only does this increase training time, but, as we show later on, it also requires substantial
training data, without which the performance of SNNs is
compromised. Another significant challenge in training the
parameters of SNN model is the need for task-specific labels.
It is hard to accurately label real-world, high-dimensional,
and complex data because of its complicated structures,
multiple true labeling schemes, and concerns about privacy.

1. Introduction
Higher-order interactions between more than two entities
occur naturally in various fields, such as biochemistry, social networks, and coauthorship networks (Ilya et al., 2020).
A simplicial complex is a mathematical structure that captures not only pairwise interactions between entities but also
higher-order interactions among groups of entities (Schaub

Addressing these challenges and drawbacks of SNNs, we
propose a parameter-free model (i.e., a model without any
learnable parameters) to obtain topology preserving simplicial representations in a principled manner. To do so, we
draw inspiration from scattering transforms (Mallat, 2012;
Bruna & Mallat, 2013a;b). In particular, we propose a

*

Equal contribution 1 Indian Institute of Science, India. Correspondence to: Hiren Madhu <hirenmadhu@iisc.ac.in>, Sravanthi
Gurugubelli <sravanthig@iisc.ac.in>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

