Seizing Serendipity: Exploiting the Value of Past Success in Off-Policy
Actor-Critic
Tianying Ji 1 Yu Luo 1 Fuchun Sun 1 Xianyuan Zhan 2 3 Jianwei Zhang 4 Huazhe Xu 3 5 6

Abstract

Learning high-quality Q-value functions plays a
key role in the success of many modern off-policy
deep reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms. Previous works primarily focus on addressing the
value overestimation issue, an outcome of adopting function approximators and off-policy learning. Deviating from the common viewpoint, we
observe that Q-values are often underestimated in
the latter stage of the RL training process, potentially hindering policy learning and reducing sample efficiency. We find that such a long-neglected
phenomenon is often related to the use of inferior actions from the current policy in Bellman
updates as compared to the more optimal action
samples in the replay buffer. To address this issue, our insight is to incorporate sufficient exploitation of past successes while maintaining
exploration optimism. We propose the Blended
Exploitation and Exploration (BEE) operator, a
simple yet effective approach that updates Qvalue using both historical best-performing actions and the current policy. Based on BEE, the
resulting practical algorithm BAC outperforms
state-of-the-art methods in over 50 continuous
control tasks and achieves strong performance
in failure-prone scenarios and real-world robot
tasks. Benchmark results and videos are available
at https://jity16.github.io/BEE/.

Figure 1. Example of the underestimation issue. In the DKittyWalkRandomDynamics task, when the current policy-generated
action is inferior to the best action in the replay buffer, which
usually occurs in the later stage of training, SAC is more prone
to underestimation pitfalls than BAC. The gap in Q estimation is
evaluated by comparing the SAC Q-values and the Monte-Carlo
Q estimates.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved impressive
progress in solving many complex decision-making problems in recent years (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2016;
Hutter et al., 2016; Ouyang et al., 2022). Many of these
advances are obtained by off-policy deep RL algorithms,
where the ability to leverage off-policy samples to learn
high-quality value functions underpins their effectiveness.
Value overestimation (Fujimoto et al., 2018; Moskovitz
et al., 2021) has long been recognized as an important issue
in off-policy RL algorithms, which is primarily associated
with the function approximation errors (Fujimoto et al.,
2018) and the side-effect of off-policy learning (Auer et al.,
2008; Jin et al., 2018; Azar et al., 2017), and can potentially
lead to suboptimal policies. To tackle this issue, techniques
for alleviating value overestimations, such as double-Q technique, have been ubiquitously adopted in modern off-policy
RL algorithms (Haarnoja et al., 2018a; Laskin et al., 2020;
Han & Sung, 2021; Moskovitz et al., 2021).

1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua
University 2 Institute for AI Industry Research, Tsinghua University 3 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 4 Department of
Informatics, University of Hamburg 5 Institute for Interdisciplinary
Information Sciences, Tsinghua University 6 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute. Correspondence to: Fuchun Sun <fcsun@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Intriguingly, we find that in common online off-policy actorcritic (AC) methods, the well-known value overestimation
issue could disappear and be replaced by value underestimation in the later training stage. Figure 1 shows an illustrative
example of such a phenomenon in a robotic task, and we
also observe similar patterns over a diverse range of RL
tasks and different off-policy AC algorithms, as will be

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

