PlanDQ: Hierarchical Plan Orchestration via D-Conductor and Q-Performer

Chang Chen 1 Junyeob Baek 2 Fei Deng 1 Kenji Kawaguchi 3 Caglar Gulcehre 4 Sungjin Ahn 2

Abstract

significant of which is the distributional shift between the
behavior policy and the learned policy. Additionally, the
quality and diversity of the offline data significantly impact
the performance and generalizability of the learned policies
(Levine et al., 2020; Bhargava et al., 2023).

Despite the recent advancements in offline RL,
no unified algorithm could achieve superior performance across a broad range of tasks. Offline
value function learning, in particular, struggles
with sparse-reward, long-horizon tasks due to the
difficulty of solving credit assignment and extrapolation errors that accumulates as the horizon of the task grows. On the other hand, models
that can perform well in long-horizon tasks are
designed specifically for goal-conditioned tasks,
which commonly perform worse than value function learning methods on short-horizon, densereward scenarios. To bridge this gap, we propose a
hierarchical planner designed for offline RL called
PlanDQ. PlanDQ incorporates a diffusion-based
planner at the high level, named D-Conductor,
which guides the low-level policy through subgoals. At the low level, we used a Q-learning
based approach called the Q-Performer to accomplish these sub-goals. Our experimental results
suggest that PlanDQ can achieve superior or competitive performance on D4RL continuous control
benchmark tasks as well as AntMaze, Kitchen,
and Calvin as long-horizon tasks.

In response to these challenges, recent advances in policy
learning highlighted the benefits of integrating expressive
diffusion models into offline RL. Among those works, the
pioneering works like Diffuser (Janner et al., 2022a) and
subsequent models (Li et al., 2023; Hong et al., 2023b; Chen
et al., 2024) focused on modeling trajectory distributions.
Thus, planning with these learned models is equivalent to
sampling from them, showing notable improvements, especially in domains requiring long-horizon planning. However, these diffusion planners often fall short in tasks characterized by short horizons and dense rewards. In contrast,
another line of research, utilizing diffusion models to represent complex behavior policies (Wang et al., 2023; Lu et al.,
2023), are optimized for maximizing expected Q values
and show superior performance in dense reward settings.
Nonetheless, these value-function learning methods often
exhibit limitations in long-horizon, sparse-reward scenarios
due to the distinct learning paradigms they employ.
As summarized in Table 1, value-based methods update the
value function at each timestep independently, propagating
optimal future rewards backward. Although effective in
short-horizon, dense-reward settings, the value propagation
over lengthy time horizons poses inherent challenges (Bhargava et al., 2023), necessitating the hierarchical structure in
long-horizon tasks (Park et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023; Hong
et al., 2023b; Chen et al., 2024). On the other hand, sequence modeling methods struggle with stitching optimal
policies from sub-optimal trajectories in short-horizon tasks
with dense rewards, an essential skill for offline RL (Yamagata et al., 2023; Kumar et al., 2022; Fu et al., 2020;
Hong et al., 2023a). This poses difficulty in learning an
efficient low-level policy due to the short-horizon property
of sub-tasks. Moreover, our empirical observations indicate
that, without Bellman updating, the guidance function in
diffusion-based sequence modeling methods tends to converge to sub-optimal solutions. A more detailed discussion
on Diffuser and Q-Learning for short-horizon problems is
provided in Appendix B.

1. Introduction
Offline reinforcement learning (RL) (Agarwal et al., 2020;
Gulcehre et al., 2020) aims to address the challenges of
learning policies from a fixed offline dataset without needing additional costly online interactions with the environment. This ability is particularly important in scenarios
where real-time interaction is either impractical or risky,
such as healthcare, autonomous driving, and robotics (Sinha
et al., 2021; De Lima & Krohling, 2021; Tang et al., 2022).
However, offline RL presents unique challenges, the most
1
Rutgers University 2 KAIST 3 National
sity of Singapore 4 EPFL. Correspondence to:
Chen
<chang.chen@rutgers.edu>,
Sungjin
<sungjin.ahn@kaist.ac.kr>.

UniverChang
Ahn

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

