U LTRA F EEDBACK: Boosting Language Models with Scaled AI Feedback

Ganqu Cui * 1 Lifan Yuan * 1 2 Ning Ding 1 Guanming Yao 1 3 Bingxiang He 1 Wei Zhu 4 Yuan Ni 4
Guotong Xie 4 Ruobing Xie 5 Yankai Lin 6 Zhiyuan Liu 1 Maosong Sun 1 7

Abstract

1. Introduction

Learning from human feedback has become a
pivot technique in aligning large language models (LLMs) with human preferences. However,
acquiring vast and premium human feedback is
bottlenecked by time, labor, and human capability, resulting in small sizes or limited topics of
current datasets. This further hinders feedback
learning as well as alignment research within the
open-source community. To address this issue,
we explore how to go beyond human feedback
and collect high-quality AI feedback automatically for a scalable alternative. Specifically, we
identify scale and diversity as the key factors
for feedback data to take effect. Accordingly, we
first broaden instructions and responses in both
amount and breadth to encompass a wider range
of user-assistant interactions. Then, we meticulously apply a series of techniques to mitigate annotation biases for more reliable AI feedback. We
finally present U LTRA F EEDBACK, a large-scale,
high-quality, and diversified AI feedback dataset,
which contains over 1 million GPT-4 feedback
for 250k user-assistant conversations from various aspects. Built upon U LTRA F EEDBACK, we
align a LLaMA-based model by best-of-n sampling and reinforcement learning, demonstrating
its exceptional performance on chat benchmarks.
Our work validates the effectiveness of scaled AI
feedback data in constructing strong open-source
chat language models, serving as a solid foundation for future feedback learning research.

Large language models (LLMs) (OpenAI, 2022; 2023) have
demonstrated proficiency in generating fluent text as well as
solving various language-oriented tasks. Trained on massive
corpora through likelihood maximization techniques, these
LLMs have equipped the ability to execute diverse tasks in
response to user directives (Ouyang et al., 2022; Wei et al.,
2022a; Sanh et al., 2022). Unfortunately, relying solely on
imitation learning during training leads to well-known issues
- LLMs may generate convincing but incorrect or unsafe
content that deviates from human preferences (Stiennon
et al., 2020; Perez et al., 2022). To further align LLMs with
human preferences, learning from human feedback (Ouyang
et al., 2022; Askell et al., 2021; Bai et al., 2022a; Touvron
et al., 2023b) has been introduced and widely adopted by
leading corporations. Over a period, feedback learning has
been widely applied to closed-source models but scarcely
used in open-source models.
Many factors hinder the implementation of feedback learning in the open-source community, but the first and primary
issue is data. Preference data, which rates and compares
different responses given the same prompt, is central to feedback learning. When scaled sufficiently, preference data reflects the intrinsic values of the annotators. Such annotators
are often assumed, by default, to be human beings who can
provide the most flexible and accurate supervision signals,
yet the data they generate is severely bounded by factors like
financial resources, time, and knowledge. As a result, existing preference datasets are either small in scale (Wu et al.,
2023) or limited on specific tasks (Stiennon et al., 2020;
Nakano et al., 2021). To this end, more efficient and principled methods to scale preference data are on the horizon.

*

Equal contribution 1 NLP Group, DCST, IAI, BNRIST,
Tsinghua University 2 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
3
ModelBest.Inc 4 PingAn Technology 5 Tencent 6 Renmin
University of China 7 Jiangsu Collaborative Innovation
Center for Language Ability. Correspondence to: Ganqu
Cui <cgq22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>, Lifan Yuan <lifan4@illinois.edu>, Wei Zhu <zhuwei972@pingan.com.cn>,
Zhiyuan Liu <liuzy@tsinghua.edu.cn>, Maosong Sun
<sms@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

This study aims to scale feedback data in an efficient manner. Specifically, we explore AI feedback (Bai et al., 2022b;
Lee et al., 2023), which substitutes human annotators with
advanced LLMs. Compared with human feedback, AI feedback is more scalable, which means (1) it is easier to collect
and expand with lower cost; (2) its quality improves as
the LLM annotators become more capable. In previous research, it is shown that advanced AI systems are capable of
conducting chatbot evaluations (Dubois et al., 2023; Zheng
et al., 2023a), giving textual critiques (Ye et al., 2023; Wang

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

