DySLIM: Dynamics Stable Learning by Invariant Measure for Chaotic Systems

Yair Schiff 1 Zhong Yi Wan 2 Jeffrey B. Parker 2 Stephan Hoyer 2 Volodymyr Kuleshov 1 Fei Sha 2
Leonardo Zepeda-Núñez 2 3

Abstract

1. Introduction
Building data-driven surrogate models to emulate the dynamics of complex time-dependent systems is a cornerstone
task in scientific machine learning (Farmer & Sidorowich,
1987), with applications ranging from fluid dynamics
(Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2020), weather forecasting (Lam
et al., 2022; Pathak et al., 2022; Bi et al., 2023), climate
modeling (Kochkov et al., 2023), molecular dynamics (Jia
et al., 2020; Merchant et al., 2023), quantum chemistry
(Chen et al., 2020; Zepeda-Núñez et al., 2021), and plasma
physics (Mathews et al., 2021; Anirudh et al., 2022).

Learning dynamics from dissipative chaotic systems is notoriously difficult due to their inherent
instability, as formalized by their positive Lyapunov exponents, which exponentially amplify
errors in the learned dynamics. However, many of
these systems exhibit ergodicity and an attractor:
a compact and highly complex manifold, to which
trajectories converge in finite-time, that supports
an invariant measure, i.e., a probability distribution that is invariant under the action of the dynamics, which dictates the long-term statistical behavior of the system. In this work, we leverage this
structure to propose a new framework that targets
learning the invariant measure as well as the dynamics, in contrast with typical methods that only
target the misfit between trajectories, which often leads to divergence as the trajectories’ length
increases. We use our framework to propose a
tractable and sample efficient objective that can
be used with any existing learning objectives. Our
Dynamics Stable Learning by Invariant Measure
(DySLIM) objective enables model training that
achieves better point-wise tracking and long-term
statistical accuracy relative to other learning objectives. By targeting the distribution with a scalable
regularization term, we hope that this approach
can be extended to more complex systems exhibiting slowly-variant distributions, such as weather
and climate models. Code to reproduce our experiments is available here.

Historically, various methods based on PCA (Pearson, 1901)
and Koopman theory (Koopman, 1931) have been proposed
to learn emulators by leveraging large datasets to build a
surrogate model during a, typically expensive, offline phase
(Schmid, 2010; Alexander & Giannakis, 2020; Kaiser et al.,
2021; Schmid, 2022). The learned emulator provides fast
and inexpensive inference, which is then used to accelerate
downstream tasks such as design, control, optimization, data
assimilation, and uncertainty quantification. Alas, many of
these techniques are inherently linear, which renders them
inadequate for problems with highly non-linear dynamics.
Indeed, many of the underlying physical processes driving
target applications are described by non-linear and chaotic
systems, which are characterized by strong instabilities, particularly with respect to initial conditions: trajectories with
close initial conditions diverge quickly due to the positive
Lyapunov exponents (Medio & Lines, 2001; Strogatz, 2018).
Fortunately, many of these systems are dissipative, which
implies the existence of a compact set, often called an attractor, towards which all bounded sets of initial conditions
converge in finite-time (Temam, 2012). In addition, many
of these systems also empirically exhibit ergodicity, whose
main consequence translates to the existence of an attractorinduced invariant measure, a measure that is unchanged by
the dynamics of the system, which captures the long-term
behavior of the system (Stuart & Humphries, 1998).

1
Department of Computer Sciences, Cornell Tech,
New York, NY, USA 2 Google Research, Mountain View,
CA, USA 3 Department of Mathematics, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, WI, USA. Correspondence to: Yair
Schiff <yairschiff@cs.cornell.edu>, Leonardo Zepeda-Núñez
<lzepedanunez@google.com>.

Recent advances in machine learning (ML) have driven the
development of several techniques for learning data-driven
surrogates for non-linear dynamics (Rajendra & Brahmajirao, 2020; Roy & Rana, 2021; Brunton & Kutz, 2022;
Ghadami & Epureanu, 2022; Nghiem et al., 2023). In the

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

