Training Greedy Policy for Proposal Batch Selection in
Expensive Multi-Objective Combinatorial Optimization

Deokjae Lee 1 2 Hyun Oh Song 1 2 Kyunghyun Cho 3 4

Abstract

These problems focus on identifying designs, represented as
discrete objects like strings or graphs, that optimize multiple
attributes, often requiring substantial resources for accurate
assessment (Ehrgott, 2005; Gómez-Bombarelli et al., 2016;
Stanton et al., 2022; Winter et al., 2019; Mirhoseini et al.,
2021). Active learning frameworks, which iteratively propose a batch of candidates and learn from the attributes
evaluated on those candidates, are increasingly employed in
these fields due to their query efficiency, which is a critical
component to handling expensive evaluation costs (Aggarwal et al., 2014; Jain et al., 2022; Gruver et al., 2023; Zhu
et al., 2023; Agnesina et al., 2023). In active learning, each
round entails an internal problem of selecting a proposal
batch of candidates for querying, formulated by cardinalityconstrained subset selection problem. This aims to identify
the optimal batch B ⊂ X of size n that maximizes the
batch acquisition function a : 2X → R, which quantifies the goodness of a batch considering interdependencies
among candidates (González et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2016;
Daulton et al., 2020). Unfortunately, the subset selection
problem is challenging due to its prohibitively large search
space of size O(|X |n ), which increases exponentially as
the batch size n increases, while the combinatorial space X
itself often has large size in practical scenarios (Polishchuk
et al., 2013).

Active learning is increasingly adopted for expensive multi-objective combinatorial optimization problems, but it involves a challenging subset selection problem, optimizing the batch acquisition score that quantifies the goodness of
a batch for evaluation. Due to the excessively
large search space of the subset selection problem, prior methods optimize the batch acquisition
on the latent space, which has discrepancies with
the actual space, or optimize individual acquisition scores without considering the dependencies
among candidates in a batch instead of directly
optimizing the batch acquisition. To manage the
vast search space, a simple and effective approach
is the greedy method, which decomposes the problem into smaller subproblems, yet it has difficulty
in parallelization since each subproblem depends
on the outcome from the previous ones. To this
end, we introduce a novel greedy-style subset selection algorithm that optimizes batch acquisition
directly on the combinatorial space by sequential
greedy sampling from the greedy policy, specifically trained to address all greedy subproblems
concurrently. Notably, our experiments on the
red fluorescent proteins design task show that our
proposed method achieves the baseline performance in 1.69× fewer queries, demonstrating its
efficiency.

A natural approach to efficiently solve a subset selection
problem is a greedy algorithm that sequentially constructs
a subset by adding the optimal candidate that maximizes
marginal gain in the objective set function, breaking down
the problem into a sequence of substantially smaller, manageable subproblems of size O(|X |) (Nemhauser et al.,
1978). Notably, the presence of monotone submodularity
in prevalent batch acquisition functions such as JES, SM,
EHVI, and NEHVI provides a theoretical performance guarantee for the greedy algorithm (Goundan & Schulz, 2007;
Azimi et al., 2010). In this regard, active learning methods
son continuous spaces already adopt greedy algorithms by
solving each subproblem with first-order methods (Tu et al.,
2022; Daulton et al., 2020; 2021). However, for MOCO
problems, applying greedy algorithms is even more challenging due to their discrete nature, which prohibits the use
of first-order solvers. Instead, previous works utilize latent
space optimization (LSO) algorithms, which alternatively

1. Introduction
In various practical design fields, including biological sequence design, molecular graph optimization, and chip design, challenges are typically posed as expensive multiobjective combinatorial optimization (MOCO) problems.
1

Seoul National University 2 Neural Processing Research
Center 3 New York University 4 Genentech. Correspondence to:
Kyunghyun Cho <kc119@nyu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

