Prompting a Pretrained Transformer Can Be a Universal Approximator

Aleksandar Petrov 1 Philip H.S. Torr 1 Adel Bibi 1

Abstract

(a prompt) which is prepended to the user input (Shin et al.,
2020; Liu et al., 2023). As optimizing over discrete tokens
is difficult, one can optimize the real-valued embeddings instead (soft prompting, prompt tuning, Lester et al. 2021). A
generalization to this approach is the optimization over the
embeddings of every attention layer (prefix-tuning, Li and
Liang 2021). These methods are attractive as they require
a few learnable parameters and allow for different prefixes
to be used for different samples in the same batch which
is not possible with methods that change the model parameters. As every prompt and soft prompt can be expressed
as prefix-tuning (Petrov et al., 2024), in this paper, we will
focus primarily on prefix-tuning.

Despite the widespread adoption of prompting,
prompt tuning and prefix-tuning of transformer
models, our theoretical understanding of these
fine-tuning methods remains limited. A key question is whether one can arbitrarily modify the
behavior of a pretrained model by prompting or
prefix-tuning it. Formally, whether prompting
and prefix-tuning a pretrained model can universally approximate sequence-to-sequence functions. This paper answers in the affirmative and
demonstrates that much smaller pretrained models
than previously thought can be universal approximators when prefixed. In fact, prefix-tuning a single attention head is sufficient to approximate any
continuous function making the attention mechanism uniquely suited for universal approximation.
Moreover, any sequence-to-sequence function can
be approximated by prefixing a transformer with
depth linear in the sequence length. Beyond these
density-type results, we also offer Jackson-type
bounds on the length of the prefix needed to approximate a function to a desired precision.

While these context-based fine-tuning techniques have seen
widespread adoption and are, in some cases, competitive
to full fine-tuning (Liu et al., 2022), our understanding of
their abilities and restrictions remains limited. How much
can the behavior of a model be modified without changing
any model parameter? Given a pretrained transformer and
an arbitrary target function, how long should the prefix be
so that the transformer approximates this function to an
arbitrary precision? Differently put, can prefix-tuning of a
pretrained transformer be a universal approximator? These
are some of the questions we aim to address in this work.
It is well-known that fully-connected neural networks with
suitable activation functions can approximate any continuous function (Cybenko, 1989; Hornik et al., 1989; Barron,
1993; Telgarsky, 2015), while Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNNs) can approximate dynamical system (Schäfer and
Zimmermann, 2006). The attention mechanism (Bahdanau
et al., 2015) has also been studied in its own right. Deora et al. (2023) derived convergence and generalization
guarantees for gradient-descent training of a single-layer
multi-head self-attention model, and Mahdavi et al. (2023)
showed that the memorization capacity increases linearly
with the number of attention heads. On the other hand, it
was shown that attention layers are not expressive enough
as they lose rank doubly exponentially with depth if MultiLayer Perceptrons (MLPs) and residual connections are
not present (Dong et al., 2021). However, attention layers,
with a hidden size that grows only logarithmically in the
sequence lengths, were shown to be good approximators for
sparse attention patterns (Likhosherstov et al., 2021), except
for a few tasks that require a linear scaling of the size of the

1. Introduction
The scale of modern transformer architectures (Vaswani
et al., 2017) is ever-increasing and training competitive
models from scratch, even fine-tuning them, is often prohibitively expensive (Lialin et al., 2023). To that end, there
has been a proliferation of research aiming at efficient training in general and fine-tuning in particular (Rebuffi et al.,
2017; Houlsby et al., 2019; Hu et al., 2021; 2023).
Motivated by the success of few- and zero-shot learning
(Wei et al., 2021; Kojima et al., 2022), context-based finetuning methods do not change the model parameters. Instead, they modify the way the input is presented. For
example, with prompting, one fine-tunes a string of tokens
1
Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford,
UK. Correspondence to: A. Petrov <aleks@robots.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

