Learning Latent Dynamic Robust Representations for World Models

Ruixiang Sun * 1 Hongyu Zang * 1 Xin Li

†

1

Riashat Islam 2

Abstract
Visual Model-Based Reinforcement Learning
(MBRL) promises to encapsulate agent’s knowledge about the underlying dynamics of the environment, enabling learning a world model as
a useful planner. However, top MBRL agents
such as Dreamer often struggle with visual pixelbased inputs in the presence of exogenous or irrelevant noise in the observation space, due to
failure to capture task-specific features while filtering out irrelevant spatio-temporal details. To
tackle this problem, we apply a spatio-temporal
masking strategy, a bisimulation principle, combined with latent reconstruction, to capture endogenous task-specific aspects of the environment for world models, effectively eliminating
non-essential information. Joint training of representations, dynamics, and policy often leads
to instabilities. To further address this issue, we
develop a Hybrid Recurrent State-Space Model
(HRSSM) structure, enhancing state representation robustness for effective policy learning. Our
empirical evaluation demonstrates significant performance improvements over existing methods in
a range of visually complex control tasks such as
Maniskill (Gu et al., 2023) with exogenous distractors from the Matterport environment. Our
code is avaliable at https://github.com/
bit1029public/HRSSM.

Figure 1. Our framework is composed of a Hybrid-RSSM and
actor-critic architecture. Hybrid-RSSM learns robust representations and dynamics through four distinct objectives: latent reconstruction, which aligns features between masked and raw observations; similarity loss based on the bisimulation principle; and
two additional objectives same as in Dreamer series (Hafner et al.,
2020; 2023).

et al., 2019b; Ha & Schmidhuber, 2018; Janner et al., 2020).
Most importantly, these world models such as recurrent
state-space model (RSSM) (Hafner et al., 2019b), enable
agents to understand and represent dynamics in the learnt
representation space, consisting of task specific information
with the hope to have filtered out exogenous or irrelevant
aspects from the observations, leading to superior performance compared to model-free RL algorithms. However,
most MBRL methods face challenges in environments with
large amounts of unpredictable or irrelevant exogenous observations (Burda et al., 2018; Efroni et al., 2022; 2021).

1. Introduction
Model-Based Reinforcement Leanring (MBRL) utilizes predictive models to capture endogenous dynamics of the world,
to be able to simulate and forecast future scenarios, enhancing the agent’s decision making abilities by leveraging
imagination and prediction in visual pixel-based contexts
(Hafner et al., 2019a; Kalweit & Boedecker, 2017; Hafner

Arguably, the Dreamer series of algorithms (Hafner et al.,
2019a; 2020; 2023) are probably the most effective and representative class of MBRL approaches where agents learn
representations and dynamics in latent space by minimizing reconstruction errors. Most MBRL approaches such
as Dreamer often includes a forward dynamics model to
predict observations and a reward model that evaluates the
potential of future states. Recent works however have shown
the ineffectiveness of forward dynamics based models when
learning from exogenous observation based visual inputs
(Efroni et al., 2022; Lamb et al., 2022; Islam et al., 2022).
This is because in noisy environments, emphasis on recon-

*

Equal contribution, order is determined by a random drawing.
Beijing Institute of Technology, China 2 DreamFold AI, Canada.
†
Correspondence to: Xin Li <xinli@bit.edu.cn>.

1

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

