Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with Hierarchical Coordination for
Emergency Responder Stationing

Amutheezan Sivagnanam 1 Ava Pettet 2 Hunter Lee 2 Ayan Mukhopadhyay 2 Abhishek Dubey 2 Aron Laszka 1

1. Introduction

Abstract
An emergency responder management (ERM) system dispatches responders, such as ambulances,
when it receives requests for medical aid. ERM
systems can also proactively reposition responders between predesignated waiting locations to
cover any gaps that arise due to the prior dispatch
of responders or significant changes in the distribution of anticipated requests. Optimal repositioning is computationally challenging due to
the exponential number of ways to allocate responders between locations and the uncertainty
in future requests. The state-of-the-art approach
in proactive repositioning is a hierarchical approach based on spatial decomposition and online Monte Carlo tree search, which may require
minutes of computation for each decision in a
domain where seconds can save lives. We address the issue of long decision times by introducing a novel reinforcement learning (RL) approach, based on the same hierarchical decomposition, but replacing online search with learning.
To address the computational challenges posed
by large, variable-dimensional, and discrete state
and action spaces, we propose: (1) actor-critic
based agents that incorporate transformers to handle variable-dimensional states and actions, (2)
projections to fixed-dimensional observations to
handle complex states, and (3) combinatorial techniques to map continuous actions to discrete allocations. We evaluate our approach using realworld data from two U.S. cities, Nashville, TN
and Seattle, WA. Our experiments show that compared to the state of the art, our approach reduces
computation time per decision by three orders of
magnitude, while also slightly reducing average
ambulance response time by 5 seconds.

Dynamically repositioning resources under uncertainty is
an important problem in societal-scale cyber-physical systems (Pettet et al., 2022), such as bike repositioning (Li
et al., 2018), ride-hailing and public transit (Jin et al., 2019;
Xi et al., 2021; Talusan et al., 2024), and emergency response management (ERM) (Mukhopadhyay et al., 2020).
In such problems, a decision-maker must sequentially optimize the allocation of resources in space and time to respond to uncertain demand (e.g., calls for service). We
focus specifically on ERM, a critical problem faced by urban communities across the globe. Indeed, 240 million
emergency medical service calls are made in the U.S. alone
each year (Mukhopadhyay et al., 2020). Whenever a request for medical aid is reported to an ERM, a responder is
dispatched to the scene of the incident. Responders administer critical services on the scene (e.g., basic life support),
transfer the patient to the nearest hospital, and head back to
their assigned waiting locations (called depots) to wait until
their next dispatch. Due to the critical nature of emergency
medical aid, dispatching decisions are typically constrained
to greedy policies that send the nearest available responder (Mukhopadhyay et al., 2020). However, it is possible
to proactively optimize the waiting locations of the responders so that expected response times for future incidents are
minimized (Pettet et al., 2022; 2020).
The problem of proactive repositioning is computationally
challenging due to the uncertainty in future demand and the
combinatorial state-action space of the problem—the number of possible responder assignments grows exponentially
with the number of responders. For example, in one of our
experimental settings, Nashville, TN, the number of possible allocations at each decision epoch is on the order of 1033 .
Prior works use centralized, decentralized, and hierarchical
approaches to solve the ERM reallocation problem. (Ji et al.,
2019) propose a learning-based approach for centralized reallocation, which can reallocate a responder each time it
finishes serving a request. Unfortunately, such centralized
solutions with a monolithic state-action space (Mukhopadhyay et al., 2018; Ji et al., 2019) do not scale to large ERM
systems. Decentralized approaches (Pettet et al., 2020), on
the other hand, split the state-action space such that each

1

Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, USA
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA. Correspondence to:
Amutheezan Sivagnanam <aqs7319@psu.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

