Representing Molecules as Random Walks Over Interpretable Grammars

Michael Sun 1 Minghao Guo 1 Weize Yuan 2 Veronika Thost 3 Crystal Elaine Owens 1
Aristotle Franklin Grosz 4 Sharvaa Selvan 5 Katelyn Zhou 6 Hassan Mohiuddin 5 Benjamin J Pedretti 4
Zachary P Smith 4 Jie Chen 3 Wojciech Matusik 1

Abstract

differ significantly from typical drug-like molecules. In addition, the specificity of the designs and use cases, and the
considerable cost of practical experiments, make it often
a scenario that is scarce in both data and labels; for example, datasets of ≈ 300 molecules or less are not uncommon
(Wang et al., 2018; Lopez et al., 2016; Helma et al., 2001).
As a consequence, materials science has not yet fully exploited the potential of machine learning methods (Karande
et al., 2022; Wang & Wu, 2023). We focus on such challenging datasets that feature complex molecules containing
functional groups and structural motifs which are applied in
multiple diverse, real-world application scenarios.

Recent research in molecular discovery has primarily been devoted to small, drug-like molecules,
leaving many similarly important applications
in material design without adequate technology.
These applications often rely on more complex
molecular structures with fewer examples that
are carefully designed using known substructures. We propose a data-efficient and interpretable model for representing and reasoning
over such molecules in terms of graph grammars
that explicitly describe the hierarchical design
space featuring motifs to be the design basis.
We present a novel representation in the form
of random walks over the design space, which
facilitates both molecule generation and property prediction. We demonstrate clear advantages over existing methods in terms of performance, efficiency, and synthesizability of predicted molecules, and we provide detailed insights into the method’s chemical interpretability.
Code is available at https://github.com/
shiningsunnyday/polymer_walk.

1. Introduction

Our goal is to represent and reason about molecules in
a data-efficient and interpretable way. Domain-specific
datasets typically exhibit distinct motifs and functional
groups, which serve as structural priors in our molecular
representation. Previous works show that structural priors
are highly advantageous for applications that require data
efficiency (Rogers & Hahn, 2010; Xia et al., 2023a; Shui
& Karypis, 2020; Jiang et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2022). We
propose a novel approach to molecular discovery that is
tailored to more complex molecules and low-data scenarios
and builds upon the above insights. The idea is to start from
a set of expert-defined motifs1 and learn a context-sensitive
grammar over the space of motifs. The novelty of this work
lies in our representation and learning of this grammar.

Property-driven molecular discovery represents a challenging application with great potential benefits for society, and
this is reflected in the large amount of research conducted
in the machine learning community on this topic in recent
years (Sawlani, 2024). Yet, most of the research focuses
on small, drug-like molecules, while many classes of more
complex molecules have been largely neglected. Materials
designed for applications such as gas-separation membranes
or photovoltaics, which are critical for a sustainable future,
often have specific distributions of molecule structure that

We define a motif graph – a hierarchical abstraction of the
molecular design space induced by the given data, where
each node is a motif and each edge represents a possible attachment between a pair of motifs. Our main technical contribution is an efficient and interpretable parameterization
over the context-sensitive grammar induced by the design
space, and the description of a molecule as a random walk
of context-sensitive transition rules. Our representation of
molecules combines the quality of representation learning
with the interpretability of a rule-based grammar.

1

MIT CSAIL 2 MIT Chemistry 3 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM
Research 4 MIT Chemical Engineering 5 MIT 6 Wellesley. Correspondence to: Michael Sun <msun415@csail.mit.edu>.

In terms of quality, we demonstrate our grammar representa1
Note that our method works with any given set of motifs (e.g.,
we can apply one of the more simple algorithms used in existing
works), but our evaluation shows that certain applications benefit
from high-quality domain knowledge.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

