Small-loss Adaptive Regret for Online Convex Optimization

Wenhao Yang 1 2 Wei Jiang 1 Yibo Wang 1 2 Ping Yang 3 Yao Hu 3 Lijun Zhang 1 2

Abstract

sion, a convex loss function ft : W 7→ R is revealed and
the online learner suffers a loss ft (wt ). The learner aims to
minimize the cumulative loss over T rounds. To measure
the performance, static regret is typically used:

To deal with changing environments, adaptive regret has been proposed to minimize the regret over
every interval. Previous studies have established
a small-loss adaptive regret bound for general
convex functions under the smoothness condition,
offering the advantage of being much tighter than
minimax rates for benign problems. However, it
remains unclear whether similar bounds are attainable for other types of convex functions, such
as exp-concave and strongly convex functions. In
this paper, we first propose a novel algorithm that
achieves a small-loss adaptive regret bound for
exp-concave and smooth function. Subsequently,
to address the limitation that existing algorithms
can only handle one type of convex functions, we
further design a universal algorithm capable of
delivering small-loss adaptive regret bounds for
general convex, exp-concave, and strongly convex functions simultaneously. That is challenging
because the universal algorithm follows the metaexpert framework, and we need to ensure that upper bounds for both meta-regret and expert-regret
are of small-loss types. Moreover, we provide a
novel analysis demonstrating that our algorithms
are also equipped with minimax adaptive regret
bounds when functions are non-smooth.

Regret(T ) =

T
X

ft (wt ) − min

w∈W

t=1

T
X

ft (w)

t=1

which is defined as the difference between the cumulative
loss of the online learner and that of the best decision chosen
in hindsight.
Since the seminal work of Zinkevich (2003), various algorithms have been developed to minimize the static regret
(Shalev-Shwartz, 2011; Hazan, 2016). However, the static
regret is not suitable to changing environments because it
chooses a fixed comparator. To address this limitation, recent advances in OCO introduce adaptive regret (Hazan &
Seshadhri, 2007), which measures the performance with
respect to a changing comparator. The goal is to minimize
the static regret of every interval [r, s] ⊆ [T ], i.e.,
Regret([r, s]) =

s
X

ft (wt ) − min

w∈W

t=r

s
X

ft (w).

t=r

In the literature, several online algorithms have been proposed to minimize
p the adaptive regret of convex functions,
which attain O( (s − r) log s), O( αd log s log(s − r)) and
O( λ1 log s log(s − r)) adaptive regret for general convex, αexponentially concave (abbr. α-exp-concave) and λ-strongly
convex functions (Hazan & Seshadhri, 2007; Jun et al.,
2017a; Zhang et al., 2018) respectively, where d is the
dimensionality. Furthermore, when the loss functions
are also
p smooth, Zhang et al. (2019) demonstrate that
an O( L∗r,s log L∗1,s log L∗r,s ) small-loss adaptive regret
bound (also known as first-order bound) is attainable for
general convex functions, where

1. Introduction
Online convex optimization (OCO) is a powerful framework
for online learning, which enjoys both theoretical guarantees and practical applications (Hazan, 2016). According to
the protocol of OCO, it can be seen as a structured repeated
game. At each round t, the online learner chooses a decision
wt from a given convex set W. After submitting this deci1

L∗r,s = min

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China 2 School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
3
Xiaohongshu Inc., Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Lijun
Zhang <zhanglj@lamda.nju.edu.cn>.

w∈W

s
X

ft (w)

(1)

t=r

is the total loss of the best decision
p over interval [r, s]. Such
bound is comparable to the O( (s − r) log s) bound in the
worst case, but could be much tighter when the comparator
has a small loss. Note that in the studies of static regret, we
also have small-loss bounds for exp-concave and strongly

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

