Dynamic Spectral Clustering with Provable Approximation Guarantee

Steinar Laenen 1 He Sun 1

Abstract

proposed model considers not only edge insertions but also
vertex insertions; as such the underlying graph can gradually form a new cluster-structure with a different number of
clusters from the initial graph.

This paper studies clustering algorithms for dynamically evolving graphs {Gt }, in which new
edges (and potential new vertices) are added into
a graph, and the underlying cluster structure of
the graph can gradually change. The paper proves
that, under some mild condition on the clusterstructure, the clusters of the final graph GT of nT
vertices at time T can be well approximated by
a dynamic variant of the spectral clustering algorithm. The algorithm runs in amortised update
time O(1) and query time o(nT ). Experimental
studies on both synthetic and real-world datasets
further confirm the practicality of our designed
algorithm.

As the second and algorithmic result, we design a randomised graph clustering algorithm that works in the abovementioned model, and our result is as follows:
Theorem 1.1 (Informal statement of Theorem 4.6). Let
e
G1 = (V1 , E1 ) be a graph of n1 vertices and k = O(1)
1
clusters. Assume that new edges, which could be adjacent
to new vertices, are added to Gt at each time t to obtain
Gt+1 , and there are O(poly(n1 )) added edges in total at
time T = O(poly(n1 )) to form GT of nT vertices and k ′
clusters. Then, there is a randomised algorithm such that
the following hold with high probability:
• The initial k clusters of G1 can be approximately come 1 |) time.
puted in O(|E

1. Introduction
For any graph G = (V, E) and parameter k ∈ N as input,
the objective of graph clustering is to partition the vertex set
of G into k clusters such that vertices within each cluster
are better connected than to the rest of the graph. Since
large-scale graphs are commonly used to model practical
datasets, designing efficient graph clustering algorithms is
an important problem in machine learning and related fields.

• The new k ′ clusters of GT can be approximately computed with amortised update time O(1) and query time
o(nT ).
To examine the result, we notice that, although the number of clusters k in G1 can be identified with the classical
eigen-gap heuristic (Ng et al., 2001; von Luxburg, 2007),
computing an eigen-gap is expensive and cannot be directly
applied to determine the change of k in dynamically evolving graphs. Our result shows that the new number of clusters
k ′ can be computed by a dynamic clustering algorithm with
sublinear query time. Secondly, as the running time of a
clustering algorithm is at least linear in the number of edges
in GT and it takes Ω(nT ) time to output the cluster membership of all the vertices, obtaining an o(nT ) amortised
query time2 is significant. To the best of our knowledge, our
work presents the first such result with respect to theoretical
guarantees of the output clusters, and time complexity.

In practice, these large-scale graphs usually evolve over
time: not only are new vertices and edges added into a
graph, but the graph’s clusters could also change gradually,
resulting in a new cluster-structure in the long term. Instead
of periodically running a clustering algorithm from scratch,
it is important to design algorithms that can quickly identify
and return the new clusters in dynamically evolving graphs.
In this paper we study clustering for dynamically evolving
graphs, and obtain the following results. As the first and conceptual contribution, we propose a model for dynamic graph
clustering. In contrast to the classical model for dynamic
graph algorithms (Thorup, 2007; Beimel et al., 2022), our
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh,
United Kingdom.
Correspondence to: Steinar Laenen
<steinar.laenen@ed.ac.uk>, He Sun <h.sun@ed.ac.uk>.

Our algorithm not only achieves strong theoretical guarantees, but also works very well in practice. For instance, for
input graphs with 300,000 vertices and up to 490,000,000
edges generated from the stochastic block model, our algo-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

e
We use O(n)
to represent O(n · logc (n)) for constant c.
Throughout the paper we use T to denote query time, and t as
arbitrary time throughout the sequence of graphs {Gt }.

1

1

2

1

