Dynamic Byzantine-Robust Learning: Adapting to Switching Byzantine Workers

Ron Dorfman 1 Naseem Yehya 1 Kfir Y. Levy 1

Abstract

learning process and could lead to reduced reliability and
accuracy in the predictions of the resulting models (Lamport
et al., 2019; Guerraoui et al., 2023).

Byzantine-robust learning has emerged as a
prominent fault-tolerant distributed machine
learning framework. However, most techniques
focus on the static setting, wherein the identity of
Byzantine workers remains unchanged throughout the learning process. This assumption fails
to capture real-world dynamic Byzantine behaviors, which may include intermittent malfunctions or targeted, time-limited attacks. Addressing this limitation, we propose DynaBRO – a
new method capable of withstanding any sublinear number of identity changes across rounds.
Specifically,
when the number of such changes is
√
O( T ) (where T is the total number of training
rounds), DynaBRO nearly matches the state-ofthe-art asymptotic convergence rate of the static
setting. Our method utilizes a multi-level Monte
Carlo (MLMC) gradient estimation technique applied at the server to robustly aggregated worker
updates. By additionally leveraging an adaptive
learning rate, we circumvent the need for prior
knowledge of the fraction of Byzantine workers.

Due to its significance in distributed ML, Byzantine faulttolerance has attracted considerable interest. Indeed, many
prior works have focused on Byzantine-robust learning, aiming to ensure effective learning in the presence of Byzantine
machines. These efforts have led to the development of algorithms capable of enduring Byzantine attacks (Feng et al.,
2014; Su & Vaidya, 2016; Blanchard et al., 2017; Chen
et al., 2017; Alistarh et al., 2018; Guerraoui et al., 2018;
Yin et al., 2018; Allen-Zhu et al., 2020; Karimireddy et al.,
2021; 2022; Farhadkhani et al., 2022; Allouah et al., 2023).
While the existing body of research has significantly advanced the understanding of Byzantine-robust learning, a
notable gap persists in the treatment of the problem. The
vast majority of research in this area has focused on the static
setting, wherein the identity of Byzantine workers remains
fixed throughout the entire learning process. Nevertheless,
real-world distributed learning systems may often encounter
dynamic Byzantine behaviors, where machines exhibit erratic and unpredictable fault patterns. Despite the importance of these scenarios, the investigation of robustness
against such dynamic behaviors remains underexplored.

1. Introduction

In federated learning, for instance, the concept of partial participation inherently introduces a dynamic aspect (Bonawitz
et al., 2019; Kairouz et al., 2021). Workers typically join
and leave the training process, leading to a scenario where a
Byzantine worker might be present in one round and absent
in the next. In fact, the same node might switch between
honest and Byzantine behaviors; such fluctuations could
stem from strategic manipulations by an adversary seeking
to evade detection, or due to software updates that inadvertently trigger or resolve certain security vulnerabilities. Another domain includes volunteer computing paradigms (Kijsipongse et al., 2018; Ryabinin & Gusev, 2020; Atre et al.,
2021), characterized by a large pool of less reliable workers
and regular occurrences of node failures. Prolonged training
times of complex ML models in these settings often result
in intermittent node failures, typically due to hardware issues, network instabilities, or maintenance activities. These
domains, where dynamic Byzantine behaviors are prevalent,
pose challenges unaddressed by the static approach.

Recently, there has been an increasing interest in largescale distributed machine learning (ML), where multiple
machines (i.e., workers) collaboratively aim at minimizing
some global objective under the coordination of a central
server (Verbraeken et al., 2020; Kairouz et al., 2021). This
approach, leveraging the collective power of multiple computation nodes, holds the promise of significantly reducing
training times for complex ML models, such as large language models (Brown et al., 2020). However, the growing
reliance on distributed ML systems exposes them to potential errors, malfunctions, and even adversarial attacks. These
Byzantine faults pose a significant risk to the integrity of the
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Technion, Haifa, Israel. Correspondence to: Ron Dorfman <rdorfman@campus.technion.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

