Revisiting Zeroth-Order Optimization for
Memory-Efficient LLM Fine-Tuning: A Benchmark

Yihua Zhang * 1 Pingzhi Li * 2 Junyuan Hong * 3 Jiaxiang Li * 4 Yimeng Zhang 1 Wenqing Zheng 3
Pin-Yu Chen 5 Jason D. Lee 6 Wotao Yin 7 Mingyi Hong 4 Zhangyang Wang 3 Sijia Liu 1 5 Tianlong Chen 2 8 9

1. Introduction

Abstract
In the evolving landscape of natural language processing (NLP), fine-tuning pre-trained Large Language Models (LLMs) with first-order (FO) optimizers like SGD and Adam has become standard.
Yet, as LLMs grow in size, the substantial memory
overhead from back-propagation (BP) for FO gradient computation presents a significant challenge.
Addressing this issue is crucial, especially for applications like on-device training where memory
efficiency is paramount. This paper proposes a
shift towards BP-free, zeroth-order (ZO) optimization as a solution for reducing memory costs during LLM fine-tuning, building on the initial concept introduced by Malladi et al. (2023). Unlike
traditional ZO-SGD methods, our work expands
the exploration to a wider array of ZO optimization techniques, through a comprehensive, firstof-its-kind benchmarking study across five LLM
families (Roberta, OPT, LLaMA, Vicuna, Mistral), three task complexities, and five fine-tuning
schemes. Our study unveils previously overlooked optimization principles, highlighting the
importance of task alignment, the role of the forward gradient method, and the balance between algorithm complexity and fine-tuning performance.
We further introduce novel enhancements to ZO
optimization, including block-wise descent, hybrid training, and gradient sparsity. Our study
offers a promising direction for achieving further memory-efficient LLM fine-tuning. Codes
to reproduce all our experiments are at https:
//github.com/ZO-Bench/ZO-LLM.

Fine-tuning pre-trained large language models (LLMs) has
become the de-facto standard in the current paradigms of
natural language processing (NLP) (Raffel et al., 2023; Sanh
et al., 2022). First-order (FO) optimizers, e.g., SGD (Amari,
1993) and Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014), have been the predominant choices for LLM fine-tuning. However, as LLMs
continue to scale, they encounter significant memory overhead due to the back-propagation (BP) required for FO gradient computation. For example, computing the gradient of
the LLM OPT-13B requires 12× more memory cost than
the model inference. This leads to the challenge of achieving memory-efficient fine-tuning in LLMs. Advancements in
addressing this challenge could also facilitate technological
breakthroughs in related areas, such as on-device training,
where memory efficiency is in high demand (Han et al.,
2015; Zhu et al., 2023).
To enhance memory efficiency, an emerging solution is to
replace a BP-required FO optimization method with a BPfree optimizer during LLM fine-tuning. This was initially
proposed by Malladi et al. (2023), where the FO gradient
is approximated using a finite difference of function values.
Despite its new application to LLM fine-tuning, the underlying optimization principle used in Malladi et al. (2023) is
commonly known as zeroth-order (ZO) optimization, and
the function value-based gradient estimate is referred to as
the ZO gradient estimate (Flaxman et al., 2005; Nesterov &
Spokoiny, 2017; Duchi et al., 2015; Ghadimi & Lan, 2013;
Liu et al., 2020). Malladi et al. (2023) employed the classical ZO stochastic gradient descent (ZO-SGD) algorithm
(Ghadimi & Lan, 2013), termed MeZO, to fine-tune the
pre-trained LLMs and leveraged the BP-free characteristics of ZO optimization to reduce memory costs. However,
from the perspective of ZO optimization, in addition to ZOSGD, many other ZO optimization methods have not yet
been explored in the context of LLM fine-tuning. Thus, it
remains elusive whether there are potential improvements
in accuracy and/or efficiency that can be achieved through
a benchmarking study of ZO optimization for LLM finetuning. This yields the primary question to be explored:

*
Equal contribution 1 Michigan State University 2 The University
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 3 UT Austin 4 University of Minnesota Twin Cities 5 IBM Research 6 Princeton University 7 DAMO
Academy, Alibaba Group US 8 MIT 9 Harvard University. Correspondence to: Sijia Liu <liusiji5@msu.edu>, Tianlong Chen
<tianlong@cs.unc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

