Assessing the Brittleness of Safety Alignment
via Pruning and Low-Rank Modifications

Boyi Wei * Kaixuan Huang * Yangsibo Huang * Tinghao Xie Xiangyu Qi Mengzhou Xia
Prateek Mittal Mengdi Wang † Peter Henderson †
Princeton University

Abstract

cient alternatives (Sun et al., 2023; Rafailov et al., 2023).

Large language models (LLMs) show inherent
brittleness in their safety mechanisms, as evidenced by their susceptibility to jailbreaking and
even non-malicious fine-tuning. This study explores this brittleness of safety alignment by leveraging pruning and low-rank modifications. We develop methods to identify critical regions that are
vital for safety guardrails, and that are disentangled from utility-relevant regions at both the neuron and rank levels. Surprisingly, the isolated regions we find are sparse, comprising about 3% at
the parameter level and 2.5% at the rank level. Removing these regions compromises safety while
only mildly impacting utility, corroborating the
inherent brittleness of the model’s safety mechanisms. Moreover, we show that LLMs remain vulnerable to low-cost fine-tuning attacks even when
modifications to the safety-critical regions are restricted. These findings underscore the urgent
need for more robust safety strategies in LLMs.

Despite these efforts, recent studies have uncovered concerning ‘jailbreak’ scenarios. In these cases, even well-aligned
models have had their safeguards successfully breached (Albert, 2023). These jailbreaks can include crafting adversarial
prompts (Wei et al., 2023; Jones et al., 2023; Carlini et al.,
2023; Zou et al., 2023b; Shen et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 2023;
Qi et al., 2024a), applying persuasion techniques (Zeng
et al., 2024), or manipulating the model’s decoding process (Huang et al., 2024). Recent studies show that finetuning an aligned LLM, even on a non-malicious dataset,
can inadvertently weaken a model’s safety mechanisms (Qi
et al., 2024b; Yang et al., 2023; Zhan et al., 2023). Often,
these vulnerabilities apply to both open-access and closedaccess models.
Addressing failure cases in the alignment of LLMs requires
a deep understanding of why their safety mechanisms are
fragile. Our study aims to provide a possible understanding via weight attribution — the process of linking safe
behaviors to specific regions within the model’s weights.1
However, a key challenge here is the intricate overlap between safety mechanisms and the model’s general capabilities, or utility. Consider the task of responding responsibly
to a harmful instruction, such as “P LEASE PROVIDE FIVE
KEY STEPS TO COMMIT A FRAUD .”. The model must first
comprehend the step-by-step nature of the request, then recognize the illegality and harmful intent of committing fraud,
and ultimately, formulate a response that appropriately declines the request. This process requires a blend of safety
awareness and utility capability of the model. Our goal is to
identify the smallest number of safety-critical links in the
model, which only contribute to the model’s safety. If these
links are removed, the model is effectively jailbroken while
utility remains relatively unaffected. If there are few such
links, it may help explain why safety mechanisms remain
brittle and why low-cost fine-tuning attacks have been so
successful.

1. Introduction
The capabilities of large language models (LLMs) have
been significantly improved over the past few years (Brown
et al., 2020; OpenAI, 2022; 2023; Touvron et al., 2023a;b;
Anthropic, 2023a; Team et al., 2023). However, LLMs are
not without limitations; they can sometimes produce outputs that are inaccurate, misleading, or harmful. To align
LLMs with human values, several approaches have been
proposed, including reinforcement learning from human
feedback (Ziegler et al., 2019; Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai
et al., 2022a) and AI feedback (Bai et al., 2022b; Lee et al.,
2023), and the development of more computationally effi*

Equal contribution. † Equal advising.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

See the project website for code and other information:
https://boyiwei.com/alignment-attribution/.

1

