Dealing With Unbounded Gradients in Stochastic Saddle-point Optimization

Gergely Neu 1 Nneka Okolo 1

Abstract

should one pick the size of these constraint sets to make
sure both that the optimum remains in there while keeping
the optimization process reasonably efficient? In this paper, we propose a method that addresses this question and
provides as good guarantees as the best known projectionbased method, but without having to commit to a specific
projection radius.

We study the performance of stochastic first-order
methods for finding saddle points of convexconcave functions. A notorious challenge faced
by such methods is that the gradients can grow arbitrarily large during optimization, which may result in instability and divergence. In this paper, we
propose a simple and effective regularization technique that stabilizes the iterates and yields meaningful performance guarantees even if the domain
and the gradient noise scales linearly with the size
of the iterates (and is thus potentially unbounded).
Besides providing a set of general results, we also
apply our algorithm to a specific problem in reinforcement learning, where it leads to performance
guarantees for finding near-optimal policies in an
average-reward MDP without prior knowledge of
the bias span.

It is well known that simply running gradient descent for
both the minimizing and maximizing players can easily
result in divergence, even when having access to exact gradients without noise (Goodfellow, 2016; Mertikopoulos et al.,
2018). While the average of the iterates may converge in
such cases, their rate of convergence is typically affected
by the magnitude of the gradients, which grows larger and
larger as the iterates themselves diverge, thus resulting in
arbitrarily slow convergence of the average. Numerous solutions have been proposed to this issue in the literature,
most notably using some form of gradient extrapolation
(Korpelevich, 1976; Popov, 1980; Gidel et al., 2018; Mertikopoulos et al., 2018). When these methods have access
to noiseless gradients and are run on smooth objectives,
these methods are remarkably stable: they can be shown
to converge monotonically towards their limit. That said,
convergence of such methods in the stochastic case is much
less well-understood, unless the iterates are projected to a
compact set (Juditsky et al., 2011; Gidel et al., 2018), or the
boundedness of the gradients ensured by other assumptions
(Mishchenko et al., 2020; Loizou et al., 2021; Sadiev et al.,
2023). Indeed, unless projections are employed, the iterates
of one player may grow large, which can result in large gradients observed by the opposite player, which in turn may
result in large iterates for the second player—which effects
may eventually cascade and result in instability and divergence. Our main contribution is proposing a stabilization
technique that eliminates the risk of divergence.

1. Introduction
We study the performance of stochastic optimization algorithms for solving convex-concave saddle-point problems
of the form minx∈X maxy∈Y f (x, y). The algorithms we
consider aim to approximate saddle points via running two
stochastic convex optimization methods against each other,
one aiming to minimize the objective function and the other
aiming to maximize. Both players have access to noisy
gradient evaluations at individual points xt and yt of the
primal and dual domains X and Y, and typically compute
their updates via gradient-descent-like procedures. Due to
the complicated interaction between the two concurrent procedures, it is notoriously difficult to ensure convergence of
these methods towards the desired saddle points, and in fact
even guaranteeing their stability is far from trivial. One
common way to make sure that the iterates do not diverge
is projecting them to bounded sets around the initial point.
While this idea does the job, it gives rise to a dilemma: how

For the sake of exposition, let us consider the special case
of bilinear objectives
f (x, y) = xT M y + bT x − cT y,

1

Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain. Correspondence to: Gergely Neu <gergely.neu@gmail.com>, Nneka Okolo
<nnekamaureen.okolo@upf.edu>.

and primal-dual stochastic gradient descent ascent starting
from the initial point x1 = 0 and y = 0 as a baseline:

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

xt+1 = xt − ηe
gx (t)
yt+1 = yt − ηe
gy (t),
1

