Reinformer: Max-Return Sequence Modeling for Offline RL

Zifeng Zhuang 1 2 Dengyun Peng 2 3 Jinxin Liu 2 Ziqi Zhang 2 Donglin Wang 2

Abstract

avoid expensive or even risky online interaction and reuse
pre-collected datasets, offline RL is proposed. Compared to
classical RL with environment interaction, offline RL shares
a paradigm more akin to supervised learning due to learning from datasets. This encourages researchers to explore
offline algorithms from the supervised perspective.

As a data-driven paradigm, offline reinforcement
learning (RL) has been formulated as sequence
modeling that conditions on the hindsight information including returns, goal or future trajectory.
Although promising, this supervised paradigm
overlooks the core objective of RL that maximizes
the return. This overlook directly leads to the lack
of trajectory stitching capability that affects the
sequence model learning from sub-optimal data.
In this work, we introduce the concept of maxreturn sequence modeling which integrates the
goal of maximizing returns into existing sequence
models. We propose Reinforced Transformer
(Reinformer), indicating the sequence model is
reinforced by the RL objective. Reinformer additionally incorporates the objective of maximizing returns in the training phase, aiming to predict the maximum future return within the distribution. During inference, this in-distribution
maximum return will guide the selection of optimal actions. Empirically, Reinformer is competitive with classical RL methods on the D4RL
benchmark and outperforms state-of-the-art sequence model particularly in trajectory stitching
ability. Code is public at https://github.
com/Dragon-Zhuang/Reinformer.

Decision Transformer (DT) (Chen et al., 2021) maximizes
the likelihood of actions conditioned on the historical trajectories (including returns), which essentially converts offline
RL to a supervised sequence modeling. Lots of subsequent
works have improved DT from different perspectives, including model architecture (Kim et al., 2023), online finetuning
(Zheng et al., 2022), unsupervised pretraining (Xie et al.,
2023) and stitching ability (Wu et al., 2023). However, these
supervised paradigms seem to overlook the fundamental objective of reinforcement learning that is to maximize returns.
The only naive approach to maximize return is to manually
provide an initial return that is as large as possible. This
approach is acceptable in some cases, but it becomes fatal when emphasizing trajectory stitching (Brandfonbrener
et al., 2022). A typical example, also Figure 2, is the stitching between a fail trajectory (R = 0: starting from the initial
point but not reaching the goal) and a successful trajectory
(R = 1: reaching the goal but not starting from the initial
point). Ideal returns should be 0 at first and then switch to 1
when stitching to the successful trajectory, which is conflict
with the naive max approach that manually sets 1.
In this work, we propose the concept of max-return sequence modeling, a supervised paradigm that integrates the
RL objective. Max-return sequence modeling not only maximizes the likelihood of actions, but also predicts the maximum in-distribution returns. Concretely, expectile regression (Sobotka & Kneib, 2012; Aigner et al., 1976) is adopted
to make the predicted returns as close as possible to the maximum returns that are achievable under the current historical
trajectory. When performing inference, the sequence model
first predicts the current maximum return and then selects
the best action from the offline dataset distribution, guided
by this predicted maximized return. An implementation of
max-return sequence modeling is Reinforced Transformer
(Reinformer), representing the sequence model reinforced
by the maximum return objective. When facing trajectory
stitching in Figure 2, Reinformer tends to predict 0 at the
initial point and predict 1 when switching to the successful

1. Introduction
In classical online reinforcement learning (RL), the agent
interacts with the environment to collect data and then uses
that to derive the policy which maximizes the returns (Sutton et al., 1998). Mainstream RL algorithms rely on fitting
optimal value functions (Watkins & Dayan, 1992) or calculating policy gradients (Sutton et al., 1999). Both in terms
of paradigms and algorithms, reinforcement learning differs significantly from data-driven supervised learning. To
1

Zhejiang University 2 School of Engineering, Westlake University Harbin Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Donglin
Wang <wangdonglin@westlake.edu.cn>.
3

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

