Sequential Asynchronous Action Coordination in Multi-Agent Systems: A
Stackelberg Decision Transformer Approach

Bin Zhang 1 2 Hangyu Mao 3 Lijuan Li 1 2 Zhiwei Xu 4 Dapeng Li 1 2 Rui Zhao 3 Guoliang Fan 1 2

Abstract

and widely applicable, self-interested agents with private
rewards are involved in both cooperative and competitive
dynamics. Moreover, in real-world scenarios, the decisionmaking process of agents is frequently influenced by the
actions taken by other agents at the same time (Ruan et al.,
2022). As a result, these methods exhibit limitations in effectively handling complex interactions among agents and
encounter difficulties even in simple coordination scenarios (Xu et al., 2023).

Asynchronous action coordination presents a pervasive challenge in Multi-Agent Systems (MAS),
which can be represented as a Stackelberg game
(SG). However, the scalability of existing MultiAgent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) methods
based on SG is severely restricted by network
architectures or environmental settings. To address this issue, we propose the Stackelberg Decision Transformer (STEER). It efficiently manages
decision-making processes by incorporating the
hierarchical decision structure of SG, the modeling capability of autoregressive sequence models, and the exploratory learning methodology of
MARL. Our approach exhibits broad applicability
across diverse task types and environmental configurations in MAS. Experimental results demonstrate both the convergence of our method towards
Stackelberg equilibrium strategies and its superiority over strong baselines in complex scenarios.

Game theory provides an effective conceptual framework
for addressing interactions among agents, thereby offers
a promising avenue to address the challenges associated
with mixed tasks and asynchronous action coordination (Hu
& Wellman, 2003). Notably, Stackelberg game (SG) explicitly models the sequential asynchronous action coordination among agents. It entails agents making decisions
in a prescribed sequence, with leaders committing to their
actions and followers discovering the optimal response to
leaders’ decisions. AQL (Könönen, 2004), BiRL (Zhang
et al., 2020), and STEP (Zhang et al., 2023b) are designed to
acquire Stackelberg equilibrium (SE) strategies via MARL.
However, they typically impose stringent requirements on
the network structure and environment, thereby constraining
their scalability:

1. Introduction
In multi-agent systems (MAS), agents must not only maximize their individual rewards by interacting with the environment, but also dynamically coordinate with other agents
to achieve the optimal collective strategy (Lu & Yan, 2020).
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has emerged
as a promising approach to tackle this task effectively, but it
also poses significant challenges (Shen et al., 2022). Existing prevalent methods for MARL primarily focus on fully
cooperative tasks and assume synchronous actions among
all agents (Rashid et al., 2018; Yu et al., 2021). However,
when considering mixed tasks, which are more generalized

(1) All methods are restricted to environments with shared
states, allowing followers to infer the actions of leaders
based on the same inputs. However, this significantly
limits their applicability in scenarios where agents have
private observations.
(2) As a heterogeneous policy learning approach, all methods update the policies of each agent in a sequential
manner, resulting in significant learning cost.
Recent advances in autoregressive sequence models derived
from natural language processing (NLP) (Radford et al.,
2019) have facilitated the development of novel reinforcement learning (RL) applications (Chen et al., 2021; Janner
et al., 2021). In this paper, our central insight lies in the
seamless alignment between the hierarchical decisionmaking structure of SG and the modeling approach of
autoregressive sequence models. Building upon this, we
propose a novel approach that utilizes sequence models to
address the aforementioned challenges.

1

Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy
of Sciences 3 SenseTime Research 4 School of Computer Science
and Technology, Shandong University. Correspondence to: Lijuan
Li <lijuan.li@ia.ac.cn>, Zhiwei Xu <diligencexu@gmail.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

