Learning with Complementary Labels Revisited: The
Selected-Completely-at-Random Setting Is More Practical

Wei Wang 1 2 Takashi Ishida 2 1 Yu-Jie Zhang 1 Gang Niu 2 Masashi Sugiyama 2 1

Abstract

that assigns correct labels to test data as in the standard
supervised learning. Collecting training data with complementary labels is much easier and cheaper than collecting
ordinary-label data. For example, when asking workers
on crowdsourcing platforms to annotate training data, we
only need to randomly select a candidate label and then
ask them whether the example belongs to that class or not.
Such “yes” or “no” questions are much easier to answer
than asking workers to determine the ground-truth label
from a large set of candidate labels. The benefits and effectiveness of complementary-label learning have also been
demonstrated in several machine learning problems and applications, such as domain adaptation (Zhang et al., 2021;
Han et al., 2023), semi-supervised learning (Chen et al.,
2020b; Ma et al., 2023; Deng et al., 2024), noisy-label
learning (Kim et al., 2019), adversarial robustness (Zhou
et al., 2022), few-shot learning (Wei et al., 2022), and medical image analysis (Rezaei et al., 2020).

Complementary-label learning is a weakly supervised learning problem in which each training example is associated with one or multiple complementary labels indicating the classes to which it
does not belong. Existing consistent approaches
have relied on the uniform distribution assumption to model the generation of complementary
labels, or on an ordinary-label training set to
estimate the transition matrix in non-uniform
cases. However, either condition may not be
satisfied in real-world scenarios. In this paper, we propose a novel consistent approach that
does not rely on these conditions. Inspired by
the positive-unlabeled (PU) learning literature,
we propose an unbiased risk estimator based
on the Selected-Completely-at-Random assumption for complementary-label learning. We then
introduce a risk-correction approach to address
overfitting problems. Furthermore, we find that
complementary-label learning can be expressed
as a set of negative-unlabeled binary classification problems when using the one-versus-rest
strategy. Extensive experimental results on both
synthetic and real-world benchmark datasets validate the superiority of our proposed approach
over state-of-the-art methods.

Existing research works with consistency guarantees have
attempted to solve complementary-label learning problems
by making assumptions about the distribution of complementary labels. The remedy started with Ishida et al.
(2017), which proposed the uniform distribution assumption that a label other than the ground-truth label is sampled from the uniform distribution to be the complementary label. A subsequent work extended it to arbitrary loss
functions and models (Ishida et al., 2019) based on the
same distribution assumption. Then, Feng et al. (2020a)
extended the problem setting to the existence of multiple
complementary labels. Recent works have proposed discriminative methods that work by modeling the posterior
probabilities of complementary labels instead of the generation process (Chou et al., 2020; Gao & Zhang, 2021; Liu
et al., 2023; Lin & Lin, 2023). However, the uniform distribution assumption is still necessary to ensure the classifier
consistency property (Liu et al., 2023). Yu et al. (2018) proposed the biased distribution assumption, elaborating that
the generation of complementary labels follows a transition
matrix, i.e., the complementary-label distribution is determined by the true label.

1. Introduction
Complementary-label learning is a weakly supervised
learning problem that has received a lot of attention recently (Ishida et al., 2017; Feng et al., 2020a; Gao & Zhang,
2021; Liu et al., 2023). In complementary-label learning,
we are given training data associated with complementary
labels that specify the classes to which the examples do
not belong. The task is to learn a multi-class classifier
1
The University of Tokyo 2 RIKEN. Correspondence to:
Masashi Sugiyama <sugi@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp>.

In summary, previous complementary-label learning approaches all require either the uniform distribution assump-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

