Feature Reuse and Scaling:
Understanding Transfer Learning with Protein Language Models

Francesca-Zhoufan Li 1 2 Ava P. Amini 3 Yisong Yue 4 Kevin K. Yang 3 Alex X. Lu 3

Abstract

the relationship between amino acid sequence and function
remains poorly understood, and most experimental methods
for measuring function are costly and low-throughput (Maynard Smith, 1970; Romero & Arnold, 2009). To overcome
the challenge presented by limited labelled data, researchers
have sought to use transfer learning, in which models are pretrained in a self-supervised fashion on large public datasets
in the hope that the pretrained features or model weights
will improve performance on downstream tasks where supervised data is limited (Fig. 1a-b).

Large pretrained protein language models (PLMs)
have improved protein property and structure prediction from sequences via transfer learning, in
which weights and representations from PLMs
are repurposed for downstream tasks. Although
PLMs have shown great promise, currently there
is little understanding of how the features learned
by pretraining relate to and are useful for downstream tasks. We perform a systematic analysis of
transfer learning using PLMs, conducting 370 experiments across a comprehensive suite of factors
including different downstream tasks, architectures, model sizes, model depths, and pretraining
time. We observe that while almost all downstream tasks do benefit from pretrained models
compared to naive sequence representations, for
the majority of tasks performance does not scale
with pretraining, and instead relies on low-level
features learned early in pretraining. Our results
point to a mismatch between current PLM pretraining paradigms and most applications of these
models, indicating a need for better pretraining
methods.

Protein language models (PLMs) have emerged as the most
popular framework for transfer learning for proteins (Rives
et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2022; Elnaggar et al., 2022; Brandes
et al., 2022; Alley et al., 2019; Elnaggar et al., 2023; Lin
et al., 2023). Most PLMs pretrain using the masked language modeling (MLM) task, in which the model is trained
to predict the original identity of masked or corrupted amino
acids. PLMs have been effective at improving performance
on many protein function prediction tasks, and some are
now integrated into bioinformatics and structure prediction
tools (Teufel et al., 2022; Thumuluri et al., 2022; Wu et al.,
2022; Flamholz et al., 2024). Despite their widespread
adoption, it is not understood how or why PLMs improve
performance on downstream tasks.
Drawing from other domains like computer vision where
investigations of transfer learning are more established, we
synthesize a set of possible hypotheses to explain improvement in downstream tasks, and design and conduct a comprehensive series of experiments to test them. We structure
our study around the following hypotheses:

1. Introduction
Proteins perform a myriad of critical biological functions,
and thus the ability to design proteins has vast impacts
on healthcare, environment, and industry (Lutz & Iamurri,
2018). Since a protein’s function is largely determined by
its amino acid sequence, specifying a sequence that will
yield a desired function is feasible in principle. However,

Feature reuse (Fig. 1c-i). One popular hypothesis is that
MLM pretraining learns general features of protein biology,
and that these features can be re-used across tasks. Previous
work has shown that transfer learning improves performance
across diverse downstream tasks (Rao et al., 2019; Dallago
et al., 2021). However, the degree of feature reuse is also
important: ideally, the pretrain and downstream tasks should
be aligned, such that transferring PLM representations improves downstream function prediction accuracy and that
this improvement increases with larger model sizes, deeper
layers, and better pretraining performance.

1

Department of Bioengineering, California Institute of Technology, California, USA 2 Initial work was conducted while F.Z.L.
was an intern at Microsoft. 3 Microsoft Research, Massachusetts,
USA 4 Department of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, California Institute of Technology, California, USA. Correspondence
to: Francesca-Zhoufan Li <fzl@caltech.edu>, Alex X. Lu <lualex@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

