Borda Regret Minimization for Generalized Linear Dueling Bandits

Yue Wu 1 Tao Jin 2 * Qiwei Di 1 * Hao Lou 3 Farzad Farnoud 3 Quanquan Gu 1

Abstract

Joachims, 2009), recommendation systems (Sui & Burdick,
2014), ranking (Minka et al., 2018), crowdsourcing (Chen
et al., 2013), etc. Moreover, numerical feedback is also more
difficult to gauge and prone to errors in many real-world
applications. For example, when provided with items to
shop or movies to watch, it is more natural for a customer to
pick a preferred one than scoring the options. This motivates
Dueling Bandits (Yue & Joachims, 2009), where the agent
repeatedly pulls two arms at a time and is provided with
feedback being the binary outcome of “duels” between the
two arms.

Dueling bandits are widely used to model preferential feedback prevalent in many applications
such as recommendation systems and ranking. In
this paper, we study the Borda regret minimization problem for dueling bandits, which aims to
identify the item with the highest Borda score
while minimizing the cumulative regret. We propose a rich class of generalized linear dueling
bandit models, which cover many existing models. We first prove a regret lower bound of order Ω(d2/3 T 2/3 ) for the Borda regret minimization problem, where d is the dimension of contextual vectors and T is the time horizon. To
attain this lower bound, we propose an explorethen-commit type algorithm for the stochastic
setting, which has a nearly matching regret upO(d2/3 T 2/3 ). We also propose an
per bound e
EXP3-type algorithm for the adversarial linear setting, where the underlying model parameter can
change in each round. Our algorithm achieves an
e
O(d2/3 T 2/3 ) regret, which is also optimal. Empirical evaluations on both synthetic data and a
simulated real-world environment are conducted
to corroborate our theoretical analysis.

In dueling bandits problems, the outcome of duels is commonly modeled as Bernoulli random variables due to their
binary nature. In each round, suppose the agent chooses to
compare arm i and j, then the binary feedback is assumed
to be sampled independently from a Bernoulli distribution.
For a dueling bandits instance with K arms, the probabilistic model of the instance can be fully characterized by a
K × K preference probability matrix with each entry being:
pi,j = P(arm i is chosen over arm j).
In a broader range of applications such as ranking, “arms”
are often referred to as “items”. We will use these two
terms interchangeably in the rest of this paper. One central
goal of dueling bandits is to devise a strategy to identify
the “optimal” item as quickly as possible, measured by
either sample complexity or cumulative regret. However,
the notion of optimality for dueling bandits is way harder to
define than for multi-armed bandits. The latter can simply
define the arm with the highest numerical feedback as the
optimal arm, while for dueling bandits there is no obvious
definition solely dependent on {pi,j |i, j ∈ [K]}.

1. Introduction
Multi-armed bandits (MAB) (Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2020)
is an interactive game where in each round, an agent chooses
an arm to pull and receives a noisy reward as feedback. In
contrast to numerical feedback considered in classic MAB
settings, preferential feedback is more natural in various
online learning tasks including information retrieval (Yue &

The first few works on dueling bandits imposed strong assumptions on pi,j . For example, Yue et al. (2012) assumed
that there exists a true ranking that is coherent among all
items, and the preference probabilities must satisfy both
strong stochastic transitivity (SST) and stochastic triangle
inequality (STI). While relaxations like weak stochastic
transitivity (Falahatgar et al., 2018) or relaxed stochastic
transitivity (Yue & Joachims, 2011) exist, they typically still
assume the true ranking exists and the preference probabilities are consistent, i.e., pi,j > 12 if and only if i is ranked
higher than j. In reality, the existence of such coherent
ranking aligned with item preferences is rarely the case. For

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United
States 2 Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, Virginia, United States 3 Department of Electrical
& Computer Engineering, University of Virginia, Charlottesville,
Virginia, United States. Correspondence to: Farzad Farnoud
<farzad@virginia.edu>, Quanquan Gu <qgu@cs.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

