Moreau Envelope for Nonconvex Bi-Level Optimization:
A Single-Loop and Hessian-Free Solution Strategy

Risheng Liu 1 2 Zhu Liu 1 Wei Yao 3 4 Shangzhi Zeng 5 3 Jin Zhang 4 3

1. Introduction

Abstract

Bi-Level Optimization (BLO) addresses the challenges
posed by nested optimization structures that arise in a
wide range of machine learning applications, such as hyperparameter optimization (Pedregosa, 2016; Franceschi et al.,
2018; Mackay et al., 2019), meta learning (Zügner &
Günnemann, 2018; Rajeswaran et al., 2019; Ji et al., 2020a),
neural architecture search (Liu et al., 2018; Chen et al.,
2019; Elsken et al., 2020), etc. Refer to recent survey papers
(Liu et al., 2021a; Zhang et al., 2023) for more applications of BLO in machine learning, computer vision and
signal processing. The inherent nested nature gives rise to
several difficulties and hurdles in effectively solving BLO
problems. Over the past decade, a large number of BLO
methods have emerged, with a primary emphasis on addressing BLO problems featuring strongly convex lower-level
(LL) objective. The LL strong convexity assumption ensures the uniqueness of LL minimizer (a.k.a., LL Singleton),
which simplifies both the optimization process and theoretical analysis, see, e.g., (Franceschi et al., 2018; Ghadimi &
Wang, 2018; Grazzi et al., 2020; Ji et al., 2020b; Chen et al.,
2021; Ji et al., 2022; Hong et al., 2023). To mitigate the
restrictive LL Singleton condition, another line of research
is dedicated to BLO with convex LL problems, which bring
about several challenges such as the presence of multiple LL
optimal solutions (a.k.a., Non-Singleton). This may hinder
the adoption of implicit-based approaches that rely on the
implicit function theorem. To address this concern, recent
advances include: aggregation methods (Liu et al., 2020; Li
et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2022; 2023b); difference-of-convex
algorithm (Gao et al., 2022; Ye et al., 2023); primal-dual
algorithms (Sow et al., 2022a); first-order penalty methods
(Lu & Mei, 2023).

This work focuses on addressing two major challenges in the context of large-scale nonconvex
Bi-Level Optimization (BLO) problems, which
are increasingly applied in machine learning
due to their ability to model nested structures.
These challenges involve ensuring computational
efficiency and providing theoretical guarantees.
While recent advances in scalable BLO algorithms have primarily relied on lower-level convexity simplification, our work specifically tackles large-scale BLO problems involving nonconvexity in both the upper and lower levels. We
simultaneously address computational and theoretical challenges by introducing an innovative
single-loop gradient-based algorithm, utilizing
the Moreau envelope-based reformulation, and
providing non-asymptotic convergence analysis
for general nonconvex BLO problems. Notably,
our algorithm relies solely on first-order gradient
information, enhancing its practicality and efficiency, especially for large-scale BLO learning
tasks. We validate our approach’s effectiveness
through experiments on various synthetic problems, two typical hyper-parameter learning tasks,
and a real-world neural architecture search application, collectively demonstrating its superior
performance.

1

School of Software Technology, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China 2 Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu), Guangzhou,
China. 3 National Center for Applied Mathematics Shenzhen,
Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen,
China 4 Department of Mathematics, Southern University of
Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China 5 Department of
Mathematics and Statistics, University of Victoria, Victoria,
British Columbia, Canada. Correspondence to: Jin Zhang
<zhangj9@sustech.edu.cn>.

In this work, we study a BLO problem with a nonconvex
LL problem:
min

x∈X,y∈Y

F (x, y) s.t.

y ∈ S(x),

(1)

where S(x) denotes the set of optimal solutions for the LL
problem given by

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

min φ(x, y) := f (x, y) + g(x, y),
y∈Y

1

(2)

