Bounding the Excess Risk for Linear Models Trained on Marginal-Preserving,
Differentially-Private, Synthetic Data

Yvonne Zhou 1 Mingyu Liang 1 Ivan Brugere 2 Danial Dervovic 2 Antigoni Polychroniadou 3 2 Min Wu 1
Dana Dachman-Soled 1

Abstract

i.e. the weights associated with the trained models do not
leak information about any single individual in the dataset–
without adding any additional noise during training. We
therefore refer to the methods we study in this work as
Preprocessing-Based Differentially-Private Machine Learning (Pre-DPML).

The growing use of machine learning (ML) has
raised concerns that an ML model may reveal private information about an individual who has contributed to the training dataset. To prevent leakage
of sensitive data, we consider using differentiallyprivate (DP), synthetic training data instead of real
training data to train an ML model. A key desirable property of synthetic data is its ability to preserve the low-order marginals of the original distribution. Our main contribution comprises novel
upper and lower bounds on the excess empirical
risk of linear models trained on such synthetic
data, for continuous and Lipschitz loss functions.
We perform extensive experimentation alongside
our theoretical results.

Pre-DPML techniques are an attractive option as opposed
to Training-DPML techniques for several reasons. First,
Training-DPML algorithms require significant trust since
the original sensitive data must be stored and handled
throughout the training process and can only be discarded
once all training has completed. Second, in Training-DPML
techniques the privacy budget must grow with the total number of models trained and when the budget is depleted no
further computations may be performed on the data.
In contrast, when Pre-DPML via DP synthetic data generation is employed, the synthetic data is generated once
and for all and the original sensitive data can be immediately discarded. Subsequently, one can perform any downstream task any number of times without requiring an increased privacy budget. Further, one can safely use any
optimization algorithm out-of-the-box for training on the
synthetic data (e.g. second order methods or built-in Python
optimization algorithms). Given the benefits of the PreDPML approach, our goal is to understand whether it is
information-theoretically possible to generate synthetic data
that achieves differential privacy and yields low excess risk
in ML tasks. To answer this question, we first highlight a
desirable property of DP synthetic data from the literature,
known as marginal-preserving synthetic data. The main
results of this work, which we summarize in Section 1.1,
provide novel upper and lower bounds on the excess empirical risk when training linear models on real versus marginalpreserving, synthetic data. To obtain a complete end-to-end
analysis, we prove that DP and marginal-preserving synthetic data is attainable, whereas the marginal-preserving
properties of prior DP mechanisms were heuristic.

1. Introduction
Machine learning (ML) is extensively utilized at present,
but a major concern is that the trained ML model may reveal
private information about an individual who has contributed
to the training dataset (Fredrikson et al., 2014; Shokri et al.,
2017; Wang et al., 2021). In response, various differentiallyprivate (DP) machine learning methods, which typically
add noise during the training process, have been proposed
in the literature (Abadi et al., 2016; Bassily et al., 2014a;
Papernot et al., 2016; 2018; Jayaraman et al., 2018; Yu
et al., 2021). We refer to these methods as Training-Based
Differentially-Private Machine Learning (Training-DPML).
In contrast, in this work, we consider using differentiallyprivate, synthetic training data instead of real training data
to train the machine learning model. By doing so, one automatically achieves the guarantee that any models trained
on the synthetic data are themselves differentially-private–
1

University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742 2 J.P. Morgan AI Research, New York, NY, 10017 3 AlgoCRYPT CoE .
Correspondence to: Yvonne Zhou <skyzhou@umd.edu>.

Marginal-preserving synthetic data generation. A dth order marginal of a distribution is the joint probability
distribution of a subset of d attributes. Similarly, a d-th

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

