The Illusion of State in State-Space Models

William Merrill 1 Jackson Petty 1 Ashish Sabharwal 2

Abstract
State-space models (SSMs) have emerged as a
potential alternative to transformers. One theoretical weakness of transformers is that they cannot
express certain kinds of sequential computation
and state tracking (Merrill & Sabharwal, 2023a),
which SSMs are explicitly designed to address
via their close architectural similarity to recurrent
neural networks. But do SSMs truly have an advantage (over transformers) in expressive power
for state tracking? Surprisingly, the answer is
no. Our analysis reveals that the expressive power
of S4, Mamba, and related SSMs is limited very
similarly to transformers (within TC0 ), meaning
these SSMs cannot solve simple state-tracking
problems like permutation composition and consequently are provably unable to accurately track
chess moves with certain notation, evaluate code,
or track entities in a long narrative. To supplement our formal analysis, we report experiments
showing that S4 and Mamba indeed struggle with
state tracking. Thus, despite their recurrent formulation, the “state” in common SSMs is an illusion: S4, Mamba, and related models have similar expressiveness limitations to non-recurrent
models like transformers, which may fundamentally limit their ability to solve real-world statetracking problems. Moreover, we show that only
a minimal change allows SSMs to express and
learn state tracking, motivating the development
of new, more expressive SSM architectures.

qlrlqZ0Z
Z0Z0Z0Z0
6
0Z0Z0Z0Z
5
Z0Z0Z0Z0
4
0Z0Z0Z0Z
3
Z0Z0Z0Z0
2
PO0Z0Z0Z
1
J0Z0Z0Zk
8
7

a

b

c

d

e

f

g

h

x = [ 0, 0, 1, 0, 0]
x[1], x[3] = x[3], x[1] # Swap 1, 3

Alice, Bob, Carl, Dan, and Emma each have a coin. All
are dimes except Carl’s. Alice and Carl trade coins.
Figure 1: We prove that SSMs, like transformers, cannot
solve inherently sequential problems like permutation composition (S5 ), which lies at the heart of state-tracking problems like tracking chess moves in source-target notation
(see Section 3.2), evaluating Python code, or entity tracking.
Thus, SSMs cannot, in general, solve these problems either.
Code: http://jpetty.org/ssm-illusion

cannot express simple kinds of state tracking problems, such
as composing sequences of permutations, which even simple recurrent neural networks (RNNs) can naturally express.
In a different line of work, state space model (SSM) architectures (Gu et al., 2021; 2022a; Fu et al., 2023; Gu & Dao,
2023; Wang et al., 2024) have been introduced as an alternative to transformers, with the goal of achieving RNN-like
expressive power for handling problems that are naturally
stateful and sequential (Gu et al., 2021; 2022b). But does the
seemingly stateful design of SSMs truly enable them to solve
sequential and state-tracking problems that transformers
cannot? If so, this would be a promising property of SSMs
because state tracking is at the heart of large language model
(LLM) capabilities such as tracking entities in a narrative

1. Introduction
Recent theoretical work has shown that transformer architecture based models are incapable of expressing inherently sequential computation (Merrill & Sabharwal, 2023a). These
results reveal a surprising limitation of transformers: they
1

New York University 2 Allen Institute for AI. Correspondence to: William Merrill <willm@nyu.edu>, Jackson Petty
<petty@nyu.edu>, Ashish Sabharwal <ashishs@allenai.org>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

