Enabling Uncertainty Estimation in Iterative Neural Networks

Nikita Durasov 1 Doruk Oner 1 Jonathan Donier 2 Hieu Le 1 Pascal Fua 1
Iteration #1

Abstract

Iteration #2

Iteration #3
Uncertainty

Turning pass-through network architectures into
iterative ones, which use their own output as input, is a well-known approach for boosting performance. In this paper, we argue that such architectures offer an additional benefit: The convergence
rate of their successive outputs is highly correlated with the accuracy of the value to which they
converge. Thus, we can use the convergence rate
as a useful proxy for uncertainty. This results in
an approach to uncertainty estimation that provides state-of-the-art estimates at a much lower
computational cost than techniques like Ensembles, and without requiring any modifications to
the original iterative model. We demonstrate its
practical value by embedding it in two application
domains: road detection in aerial images and the
estimation of aerodynamic properties of 2D and
3D shapes.

Low Uncertainty

Iteration #1

High Uncertainty

Variance

Iteration #2

Iteration #3

Variance

Figure 1. Uncertainty in recursive models. Such models use their
initial predictions as inputs to produce subsequent predictions. We
display the output of three consecutive iterations of a network
trained to compute distance maps to road pixels. (Top:) All roads
are clearly visible. The three maps are similar and the per pixel
variance is low. (Bottom:) The road in the red square is treecovered. It is eventually detected properly but the variance is high.

poster / code / web

performance over non-iterative methods using the same network architectures (Shen et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2018b;
Wang et al., 2019; Oner et al., 2021; 2022), while requiring less labeled data for training purposes (Mosińska et al.,
2018). In essence, giving a previous output as input to the
network sets up a virtuous circle in which the model receives
relevant spatial attention signals that serve as priors and help
generate improved predictions. For example, in the road delineation example of Fig. 1, the presence of road fragments
with gaps in them cues the network to the possible existence
of connecting segments. These ideas been explored before
the advent of Deep Learning, for example using Tensor Voting (Medioni et al., 2000), but incorporating them into deep
networks has given them a new lease on life.

1. Introduction
It has long been known that using deep networks to recursively refine predictions is often beneficial. This has been
demonstrated for semantic segmentation (Zhou et al., 2018;
Wang et al., 2019), pose estimation (Newell et al., 2016),
depth estimation (Zhang et al., 2018a), multi-task learning (Xu et al., 2018), delineation (Mosińska et al., 2018),
natural language processing (A.Vaswani et al., 2017; Devlin
et al., 2018), among others. Given a network f parameterized by weights Θ and takes as input a vector x, which
can represent an image or a text, and produces an output
y, the output of the recursion’s ith iteration can be written as yi = fΘ (x, yi−1 ), where yi−1 is the output of the
previous iteration. This recursion often yields improved

The key insight of this paper is that how fast this refinement
occurs is closely connected to the accuracy of the prediction.
A hard sample typically requires more refinement iterations
than an easy one. Thus, convergence speed can be used as a
proxy for certainty. This yields an approach to uncertainty
estimation that is on par with Deep Ensembles (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017), while delivering increased accuracy
at a much lower computational cost and without requiring
any modifications to the original iterative model. This makes
our approach practical and easy to deploy across many dif-

1
Computer Vision Laboratory, École Polytechnique Fédérale
de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland 2 Neural Concept SA,
Lausanne, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Nikita Durasov
<nikita.durasov@epfl.ch>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

