Contamination-Resilient Anomaly Detection via Adversarial Learning on
Partially-Observed Normal and Anomalous Data

Wenxi Lv 1 Qinliang Su 1 2 Hai Wan 1 Hongteng Xu 3 Wenchao Xu 4

Abstract

detection is to identify the diverse exceptional samples from
normal ones. With the capability of discovering various
kinds of anomalous samples, anomaly detection has been
successfully applied to many different fields like disease
diagnosis, industrial defect detection, cyber-crimes defense,
financial fraud detection, etc (Chandola et al., 2009). Due
to the difficulties of collecting anomalies for their diversity
and rarity in practical applications, many existing works are
established on the availability of only a clean normal dataset,
without needing to access any anomalous samples. Under
this assumption, these methods first leverage the normal
samples to learn the normality of data and then leverage it
to determine whether a testing sample is anomalous. Typical examples include the well-known one-class classifier
method (Ruff et al., 2018), reconstruction methods (Akcay et al., 2018; Gong et al., 2019) and the self-supervised
methods (Qiu et al., 2021; Shenkar & Wolf, 2022) etc.

Many existing anomaly detection methods assume
the availability of a large-scale normal dataset.
But for many applications, limited by resources,
removing all anomalous samples from a large unlabeled dataset is unrealistic, resulting in contaminated datasets. To detect anomalies accurately
under such scenarios, from the probabilistic perspective, the key question becomes how to learn
the normal-data distribution from a contaminated
dataset. To this end, we propose to collect two
additional small datasets that are comprised of
partially-observed normal and anomaly samples,
and then use them to help learn the distribution
under an adversarial learning scheme. We prove
that under some mild conditions, the proposed
method is able to learn the correct normal-data
distribution. Then, we consider the overfitting
issue caused by the small size of the two additional datasets, and a correctness-guaranteed flipping mechanism is further developed to alleviate
it. Theoretical results under incomplete observed
anomaly types are also presented. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that our method
outperforms representative baselines when detecting anomalies under contaminated datasets.

However, for many application scenarios, assuming the
availability of a large normal dataset is also unrealistic.
What we often have is a contaminated dataset that is composed of both normal and anomalous samples. Contaminated datasets could arise for many reasons, e.g., no labeling
or a coarse screening which only removes some obvious
anomalies due to limited labor or expertise resources. To
alleviate the detrimental impacts caused by the contamination samples (i.e., anomalies), it is proposed in (Zhou &
Paffenroth, 2017; Lai et al., 2020) to combine robust PCA
or robust projection with the normal-sample-based methods
to improve their contamination robustness. But due to the
intricate patterns of anomalies, it is often observed that the
improvement brought by these methods is limited. Later,
some works proposed to first pseudo-label some easy anomalies in the contaminated dataset and then remove them from
the dataset to boost the detection accuracy (Qiu et al., 2022;
Kim et al., 2023). However, this type of pseudo-labeling
methods heavily rely on the accuracy of pseudo-labels, and
the labeling error could be accumulated into the subsequent
stages, thereby affecting their overall performance.

1. Introduction
Anomalies are deemed as the instances that look considerably different from the majority ones. Anomalies in realworld applications are generally very diverse and could even
have countless types (Ruff et al., 2021). The task of anomaly
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, China. 2 Guangdong Key Laboratory of
Big Data Analysis and Processing, Guangzhou, China. 3 Gaoling
School of Artifical Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China. 4 Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong SAR. Correspondence to: Qinliang
Su <suqliang@mail.sysu.edu.cn>.

Instead of only leveraging the contaminated dataset, some
recent methods have proposed to further collect a small number of anomalous samples to help recognize the anomalies.
But due to the diversity nature of anomalies, the collected

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

