ODIM: Outlier Detection via Likelihood of Under-Fitted Generative Models
Dongha Kim* 1 Jaesung Hwang* 2 Jongjin Lee 3 Kunwoong Kim 4 Yongdai Kim 4

Abstract
The unsupervised outlier detection (UOD) problem refers to a task to identify inliers given training data which contain outliers as well as inliers,
without any labeled information about inliers and
outliers. It has been widely recognized that using fully-trained likelihood-based deep generative models (DGMs) often results in poor performance in distinguishing inliers from outliers. In
this study, we claim that the likelihood itself could
serve as powerful evidence for identifying inliers
in UOD tasks, provided that DGMs are carefully
under-fitted. Our approach begins with a novel
observation called the inlier-memorization (IM)
effect–when training a deep generative model with
data including outliers, the model initially memorizes inliers before outliers. Based on this finding,
we develop a new method called the outlier detection via the IM effect (ODIM). Remarkably,
the ODIM requires only a few updates, making
it computationally efficient–at least tens of times
faster than other deep-learning-based algorithms.
Also, the ODIM filters out outliers excellently,
regardless of the data type, including tabular, image, and text data. To validate the superiority and
efficiency of our method, we provide extensive
empirical analyses on close to 60 datasets.

Figure 1. An illustration of the ODIM method.

also used as a pre-processing step in supervised learning to
filter out anomalous training samples, which may degrade
the performance of a predictive model.
OD problems can be categorized into three areas in general:
1) Supervised outlier detection (SOD) requires label information about whether each training sample is inlier (also
normal) or outlier and solves the two-class classification
task. 2) Semi-supervised outlier detection (SSOD) refers
to methods that assume all training data being inliers and
construct patterns or models based only on the inliers. 3)
Unsupervised outlier detection (UOD) deals with the most
realistic situations where training data include some outliers
but no label information about anomalousness is available.
Most anomaly detection tasks in practice are involved in
UOD since the information of outliers in massive data is
hardly known in advance.
Likelihood-based approaches in OD To detect outliers
from data, a fundamental approach might involve using a
deep generative model (DGM) and regarding each sample as
either an inlier or not based on its likelihood value. However,
it is widely recognized that the likelihood value itself using
fully trained DGMs is by no means a reasonable indicator
to identify outliers, particularly in out-of-distribution (OOD)
tasks (or SSOD tasks) where none of the outliers are present
in training data. The likelihood values of outliers with a
fully trained DGM are often higher than those of inliers
(Nalisnick et al., 2019b; Nalisnick et al.; Lan & Dinh, 2021).

1. Introduction
Outlier detection Outlier (also anomaly) is an observation that differs significantly from other observations, and
outlier detection (OD) is the task of identifying outliers in a
given dataset. OD has wide applications such as fraud detection, fault detection, and defect detection in images. OD is
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics and Data Science
Center, Sungshin Women’s University, Seoul, Republic of Korea 2 SK Telecom, Seoul, Republic of Korea 3 Samsung Research,
Seoul, Republic of Korea 4 Department of Statistics, Seoul National
University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. Correspondence to: Yongdai
Kim <ydkim0903@gmail.com>.

Overview of our method In this study, we claim that
likelihood could serve as an effective score in UOD tasks,
provided we employ carefully trained under-fitting DGMs.
Our algorithm is motivated by the so called memorization
effect that is observed in noisy label problems (Arpit et al.,
2017; Jiang et al., 2018). The goal of noisy label problems is

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

