Semantic-Aware Human Object Interaction Image Generation

Zhu Xu 1 Qingchao Chen 2 Yuxin Peng 1 Yang Liu 1

Abstract
Recent text-to-image generative models have
demonstrated remarkable abilities in generating
realistic images. Despite their great success, these
models struggle to generate high-fidelity images
with prompts oriented toward human-object interaction (HOI). The difficulty in HOI generation arises from two aspects. Firstly, the complexity and diversity of human poses challenge
plausible human generation. Furthermore, untrustworthy generation of interaction boundary
regions may lead to deficiency in HOI semantics.
To tackle the problems, we propose a SemanticAware HOI generation framework SA-HOI . It
utilizes human pose quality and interaction boundary region information as guidance for denoising
process, thereby encouraging refinement in these
regions to produce more reasonable HOI images.
Based on it, we establish an iterative inversion
and image refinement pipeline to continually enhance generation quality. Further, we introduce
a comprehensive benchmark for HOI generation,
which comprises a dataset involving diverse and
fine-grained HOI categories, along with multiple custom-tailored evaluation metrics for HOI
generation. Experiments demonstrate that our
method significantly improves generation quality under both HOI-specific and conventional image evaluation metrics. The code is available at
https://github.com/XZPKU/SA-HOI.git

(a)

(b)
Figure 1: Existing problems in HOI image generation. (a)
The generated image deviates from the prescribed HOI category as it retrieves to another one. (b) Qualitative comparisons between Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) (top
row) and our SA-HOI (bottom row). Images within each
column are generated with the same text prompt describing
the HOI category on top of them.
produce realistic and diverse images closely aligned with
provided object-oriented text descriptions, our empirical
observations highlight challenges when they are exposed to
human-object interaction (HOI) oriented descriptions. As
shown in Figure 1(a), the generated image from the stable
diffusion model (Rombach et al., 2022) deviates from the
specified “kiss a dog” HOI category and aligns more with
“hug a dog”. Through a human study, we empirically noted
a 60.9% occurrence of semantic misalignment between the
generated 1000 images and their specified texts.
The primary reasons for the difficulty in HOI generation can
be attributed to two factors: (1) Complex Human Structure and Pose Diversity: Generating human images involves dealing with a complex structure comprising numerous interconnected body parts. As shown in Figure 1(b)
(first row), the recent stable diffusion model sometimes
results in deformations and unreliable poses, such as dis-

1. Introduction
Recently, the diffusion-based models (HuggingFace, 2022;
Song & Ermon, 2020) have shown great success in textto-image generation tasks (Ramesh et al., 2022; Rombach
et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022) through extensive training
on large-scale datasets. Despite their impressive ability to
1

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University 2 National Institute of Health Data Science, Peking University.
Correspondence to: Yang Liu <yangliu@pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

