RoSA: Accurate Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning via Robust Adaptation

Mahdi Nikdan * 1 Soroush Tabesh * 1 Elvir Crnčević 1 2 Dan Alistarh 1 3

Abstract

come an effective and popular approach to improve performance on specific tasks, e.g. (Wei et al., 2021; Ouyang et al.,
2022; Wang et al., 2022a; Liu et al., 2022), or adapt LLMs
to better fit expected user behavior (Askell et al., 2021; Bai
et al., 2022). Yet, full fine-tuning of all LLM parameters
(FFT), can be extremely expensive, especially in terms of
memory cost, rendering this process prohibitive.

We investigate parameter-efficient fine-tuning
(PEFT) methods that can provide good accuracy
under limited computational and memory budgets
in the context of large language models (LLMs).
We present a new PEFT method called Robust
Adaptation (RoSA) inspired by robust principal
component analysis that jointly trains low-rank
and highly-sparse components on top of a set of
fixed pretrained weights to efficiently approximate the performance of a full-fine-tuning (FFT)
solution. Across a series of challenging generative tasks such as grade-school math and SQL
query generation, which require fine-tuning for
good performance, we show that RoSA outperforms LoRA, pure sparse fine-tuning, and alternative hybrid methods at the same parameter budget, and can even recover the performance of
FFT on some tasks. We provide system support for RoSA to complement the training algorithm, specifically in the form of sparse GPU kernels which enable memory- and computationallyefficient training, and show that it is also compatible with low-precision base weights, resulting in
the first joint representation combining quantization, low-rank and sparse approximations. Our
code is available at https://github.com/
IST-DASLab/RoSA.

Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) methods address
this issue by allowing users to optimize only over a restricted
set of parameters, relative to the original model. On the one
hand, this allows partial accuracy recovery relative to FFT,
at a fraction of its computational and memory cost. An
extremely popular recent instance of PEFT in the context
of LLMs is given by the Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA)
family of methods (Hu et al., 2021), which train low-rank
“adapter” layers for a selection of the model layers. LoRA
methods are based on the intuition that the fine-tuning updates of pre-trained LLMs have low “intrinsic rank” during
specialization to a sub-task, which allow these updates to
be well-approximated by adapters. Besides memory and
computational cost reductions, low-rank adaptation also has
the advantage of implicit regularization, which can lead to
more stable training, and simplify hyper-parameter search.
One key weakness of LoRA-type methods is the fact that
they can fail to recover accuracy for “harder” fine-tuning
tasks, relative to FFT. This accuracy gap, illustrated in Figure 2, appears more likely to occur when the target tasks is
more complex, such as the case for mathematical reasoning
or coding tasks. It is therefore still an open question whether
there exist PEFT methods which combine the good practical
performance and ease-of-use of LoRA-type methods with
the high accuracy of FFT.

1. Introduction
The advances brought about by large language models
(LLMs) come with very large computational and memory
costs, especially for training such models from scratch. In
this context, fine-tuning LLMs using limited data has be-

Contribution. In this paper, we take a step towards addressing this question, by proposing a new PEFT method called
RobuSt Adaptation (RoSA). RoSA has similar computational and memory cost relative to LoRA-type methods, but
is significantly more accurate at similar parameter and computational budgets, while being easy to use and tune. Specifically, in practical experiments RoSA essentially matches
the accuracy of full fine-tuning, while offering stable convergence and relatively simple hyper-parameter tuning. We
complement these algorithmic observations with a practical
implementation, showing that RoSA preserves the memory

*
1
Equal contribution
ISTAustria 2 Graz University of Technology 3 Neural Magic.
Correspondence to:
Mahdi Nikdan <mahdi.nikdan@ista.ac.at>,
Soroush
Tabesh
<soroush.tabesh@ista.ac.at>,
Dan
Alistarh
<dan.alistarh@ista.ac.at>,
Elvir
Crnčević
<elvir.crncevic@ista.ac.at>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

