Position: Technical Research and Talent is Needed for Effective AI Governance
Anka Reuel * 1 Lisa Soder * 2 Ben Bucknall 3 4 Trond Arne Undheim 1

Abstract

As the adoption of AI grows, so too does the awareness of
its potential harms and risks. Over the past year, there has
been a notable rise in reported AI-related incidents (Maslej
et al., 2024)—i.e., instances where the failure or misuse of
an AI system led to real-world harm, such as the production
of harmful deepfakes or privacy breaches (McGregor, 2021).
Given these developments, the need for effective, robust,
and adaptable AI governance at national and international
levels is more pressing than ever (Trager et al., 2023).

In light of recent advancements in AI capabilities and the increasingly widespread integration
of AI systems into society, governments worldwide are actively seeking to mitigate the potential harms and risks associated with these technologies through regulation and other governance
tools. However, there exist significant gaps between governance aspirations and the current state
of the technical tooling necessary for their realisation. In this position paper, we survey policy documents published by public-sector institutions in
the EU, US, and China to highlight specific areas
of disconnect between the technical requirements
necessary for enacting proposed policy actions,
and the current technical state of the art. Our analysis motivates a call for tighter integration of the
AI/ML research community within AI governance
in order to i) catalyse technical research aimed at
bridging the gap between current and supposed
technical underpinnings of regulatory action, as
well as ii) increase the level of technical expertise
within governing institutions so as to inform and
guide effective governance of AI.

Governments around the world are responding to these challenges. For instance, Stanford’s 2024 AI Index reveals a
surge in AI-related laws, with relevant legislation increasing
from one instance in 2016 to 28 by 2023 across 128 countries (Maslej et al., 2024). Among these developments, for
example, China has recently enacted a new regulation on
generative AI (China Law Translate, 2023b), while the EU
has introduced the AI Act, with some rules scheduled to
come into effect as early as Summer 2024 (European Commission, 2023). Likewise, the US has issued an Executive
Order (E.O.) on the “Safe, Secure, and Trustworthy Development and Use of Artificial Intelligence” and garnered
voluntary commitments from major AI labs for governance
measures (The White House, 2023c).
However, current gaps—both in terms of the technical tools
and talent available to enact policy objectives—might negatively impact the capacity of governance actors to mitigate
risks through regulation, potentially even lead to counterproductive outcomes (Guha et al., 2023). Poorly designed
and executed policies, such as mandatory registration of
AI systems, information disclosure requirements, or premarket approvals, could not only fail to ensure safe and
reliable products but also burden AI research. Moreover,
such policies risk creating entry barriers that disproportionately favor well-established, larger AI companies, potentially limiting competition and stifling innovation within the
AI field (Dal Bó, 2006; Wu, 2023). To counter such issues,
we advocate for the following pair of positions:

1. Introduction
The growing integration of artificial intelligence (AI) into
various aspects of society over the past decade, including
education, hiring, and finance, has became particularly noticeable with ChatGPT’s release in late 2022. This event significantly heightened AI’s visibility among both the general
public and policymakers. The adoption of the technology,
especially generative AI, has since surged across various
sectors and is projected to further accelerate workforce automation and occupational switches (Ellingrud et al., 2023).
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, US 2 Interface, Brussels, BE 3 Centre
for the Governance of AI, Oxford, UK 4 Oxford Martin AI Governance Initiative, Oxford, UK. Correspondence to: Anka Reuel
<anka@cs.stanford.edu>.

• Targeted AI/ML research is urgently needed to ensure the effective enactment of current regulatory
proposals.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

• Closer collaboration between technical researchers
and policy makers is necessary to ensure informed
and effective governance.
1

