Interpreting Equivariant Representations

Andreas Abildtrup Hansen 1 Anna Calissano 2 3 Aasa Feragen 1

Abstract
Latent representations are extensively used for
tasks like visualization, interpolation, or feature
extraction in deep learning models. This paper
demonstrates the importance of considering the
inductive bias imposed by an equivariant model
when using latent representations as neglecting
these biases can lead to decreased performance
in downstream tasks. We propose principles for
choosing invariant projections of latent representations and show their effectiveness in two examples: A permutation equivariant variational autoencoder for molecular graph generation, where
an invariant projection can be designed to maintain information without loss, and for a rotationequivariant representation in image classification,
where random invariant projections proves to retain a high degree of information. In both cases,
the analysis of invariant latent representations
proves superior to their equivariant counterparts.
Finally, we illustrate that the phenomena documented here for equivariant neural networks have
counterparts in standard neural networks where
invariance is encouraged via augmentation.

Figure 1: Visualizing rotated MNIST images via their equivariant representation (left) hides structure that is apparent in
an invariant representation of the same latent codes (right).

illov et al., 2023); semantic interpolation (Berthelot et al.,
2018); interpretability using visualization tools such as TSNE (Van der Maaten & Hinton, 2008), UMAP (McInnes
et al., 2018) or PCA on latent embeddings; or counterfactual
explainability (Papernot & McDaniel, 2018).

Department of Visual Computing, Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark 2 INRIA d’Université Côte d’Azur,
France 3 Now at: Department of Mathematics, Imperial College
London, London, England. Correspondence to: Andreas Abildtrup
Hansen <andab@dtu.dk>.

However, the analysis of such latent representations is no
trivial task, and may yield misguided conclusions if done
naively. Usually, deep neural networks are designed with
specific geometric inductive biases in mind (Bronstein et al.,
2021); an inductive bias can be imposed on a deep learning
model by requiring the model to be invariant/equivariant to
certain transformations of the data (Cohen & Welling, 2016;
Puny et al., 2022) represented by a group of symmetries. A
consequence of incorporating such a property in the modelling procedure is to make sure that datapoints which are
similar are be mapped to similar outputs. This observation
has consequences for any representation we might want to
learn, as we will in general aim for any learned representation to be invariant to the transformation in question, while
maximizing expressive power (Wang et al., 2024). These invariant representations can be obtained in many ways using
for instance data augmentation or an inherently invariant
model (Kwon et al., 2023) or by quotienting out nuisance
parameters (Williams et al., 2021), however, in the case
of autoencoders – in this paper we use VAEs as a running
example – it is natural design these to be equivariant, and
thus the question of interest becomes: How to we obtain an
invariant representation using an equivariant model?

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

We contribute: An empirical demonstration of how a
naive interpretation of equivariant latent spaces can lead to

1. Introduction
Latent representations are used extensively in the interpretation and design of deep learning models. The latent
spaces of VAEs (Kingma et al., 2019) and masked autoencoders (He et al., 2022), learned from large amounts of
unlabeled data unsupervised or self-supervised, are prominent examples of powerful latent representations. These
representations are used for e.g. molecular-, chemical- or
protein discovery (Detlefsen et al., 2022); image generation,
synthesis (Goodfellow et al., 2020) and segmentation (Kir1

1

