On Computational Limits of Modern Hopfield Models:
A Fine-Grained Complexity Analysis

Jerry Yao-Chieh Hu * 1 Thomas Lin * 2 Zhao Song 3 Han Liu 4

Abstract

learning. More precisely, their deep learning derivatives
offer robust alternatives to attention mechanisms in various
transformer- and Hopfield-based methods (Hofmann et al.,
2024; Xu et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2024a;b; Hu et al., 2024a;
Schimunek et al., 2023; Fürst et al., 2022; Paischer et al.,
2022; Seidl et al., 2022; Widrich et al., 2020). However,
these models currently lack efficient implementations for
large-scale applications (Hu et al., 2023, Section C.2). This
issue becomes more relevant with the rise of Large Foundation Models (Bommasani et al., 2021), where expansive
attention-based architectures, pre-trained on vast datasets,
are pivotal across multiple scientific fields, including natural
language processing (Brown et al., 2020; Floridi and Chiriatti, 2020), financial analytics (Wu et al., 2023), genomic
research (Zhou et al., 2024; 2023; Ji et al., 2021), medical
science (Thirunavukarasu et al., 2023; Singhal et al., 2023;
Moor et al., 2023) and more. This work makes a timely
theoretical analysis of their computational limits, aimed at
advancing (Hopfield-based) large foundation models.

We investigate the computational limits of the
memory retrieval dynamics of modern Hopfield
models from the fine-grained complexity analysis. Our key contribution is the characterization
of a phase transition behavior in the efficiency
of all possible modern Hopfield models based on
the norm of patterns. Specifically, we establish
an upper bound criterion for the norm of input
query patterns and memory patterns. Only below
this criterion, sub-quadratic (efficient) variants of
the modern Hopfield model exist, assuming the
Strong Exponential Time Hypothesis (SETH). To
showcase our theory, we provide a formal example of efficient constructions of modern Hopfield
models using low-rank approximation when the
efficient criterion holds. This includes a derivation of a lower bound on the computational time,
scaling linearly with max{# of stored memory
patterns, length of input query sequence}. In addition, we prove its memory retrieval error bound
and exponential memory capacity.

Let x ∈ Rd be the input query pattern. The memory patterns
are stored in a matrix Ξ = [ξ1 , · · · , ξM ] ∈ Rd×M . Hopfield models are energy-based associative memory models.
These models store memory patterns Ξ on the local minima
of their energy landscapes, i.e. energy functions E. For
any input query x, they retrieve its closest memory pattern
through some energy minimization algorithms, i.e. retrieval
dynamics T , initialized at x.

1. Introduction
We investigate the computational limits of modern Hopfield models (Wu et al., 2024a;b; Hu et al., 2024a;b; 2023;
Ramsauer et al., 2021) from a fine-grained complexity analysis, and characterize a norm-based phase transition for all
possible efficient modern Hopfield model. This analysis
holds practical significance. Modern Hopfield models are
a type of associative memory model compatible with deep

Ramsauer et al. (2021) propose the Modern Hopfield Model
with a specific set of energy function E and memory retrieval dynamics T , and integrate it into deep learning architectures via its connection with the transformer attention (Vaswani et al., 2017), offering enhanced performance,
and theoretically guaranteed exponential memory capacity.
Specifically, they introduce the energy function:

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA 2 Department of Physics,
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan 3 Adobe Research,
Seattle, WA, USA 4 Department of Statistics and Data Science,
Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA. Correspondence to:
Jerry Yao-Chieh Hu <jhu@u.northwestern.edu>, Thomas Lin
<b12202026@ntu.edu.tw>, Zhao Song <zsong@adobe.com>,
Han Liu <hanliu@northwestern.edu>.

1
E(x) = − lse(β, ΞT x) + ⟨x, x⟩,
2

(1.1)

where the retrieval dynamics is given by
xnew = TDense (x) = Ξ · Softmax(βΞT x).
(1.2)
P

M
The function lse (β, z) := log
µ=1 exp{βzµ } /β is the

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

log-sum-exponential for any given vector z ∈ RM and β >
1

