Gambling-Based Confidence Sequences for Bounded Random Vectors

J. Jon Ryu 1 Gregory W. Wornell 1

Abstract

uniform guarantee dates back to Hoeffding (1963); Darling & Robbins (1967); Lai (1976), but the idea has regained attention only recently with the new modern applications such as A/B testing (Evidently, 2023) and election
audits (Waudby-Smith et al., 2021). As tight confidence sequences can directly lead to saving various resources in practical sequential decision making applications, there has been
a surge of interest in the research community, e.g., (WaudbySmith & Ramdas, 2024; Howard et al., 2021; Orabona &
Jun, 2024), to name a few.

A confidence sequence (CS) is a sequence of
confidence sets that contains a target parameter
of an underlying stochastic process at any time
step with high probability. This paper proposes
a new approach to constructing CSs for means
of bounded multivariate stochastic processes using a general gambling framework, extending
the recently established coin toss framework for
bounded random processes. The proposed gambling framework provides a general recipe for
constructing CSs for categorical and probabilityvector-valued observations, as well as for general
bounded multidimensional observations through a
simple reduction. This paper specifically explores
the use of the mixture portfolio, akin to Cover’s
universal portfolio, in the proposed framework
and investigates the properties of the resulting
CSs. Simulations demonstrate the tightness of
these confidence sequences compared to existing
methods. When applied to the sampling withoutreplacement setting for finite categorical data, it is
shown that the resulting CS based on a universal
gambling strategy is provably tighter than that of
the posterior-prior ratio martingale proposed by
Waudby-Smith and Ramdas.

While the field is rapidly evolving with new theories and constructions for CS (Waudby-Smith & Ramdas, 2024; Howard
et al., 2021; Jun & Orabona, 2019; Orabona & Jun, 2024;
Manole & Ramdas, 2023; Shekhar & Ramdas, 2023), we
remark that most of the development has been especially
for scalar-valued processes until recently; a few exceptions
include (Waudby-Smith & Ramdas, 2020) for categorical
observation in without replacement sampling, and (Whitehouse et al., 2023; Chugg et al., 2023) for unbounded vectors.
The goal of this paper is to develop a set of new methods for
constructing CSs for bounded, vector-valued stochastic processes. Note that there exist natural bounded vector-valued
data in practice, a canonical example of which is a categorical data. For bounded scalar-valued processes, WaudbySmith & Ramdas (2024) proposed a coin-toss-based framework, studying several gambling strategies and properties
of the resulting CSs. In the same framework, Orabona &
Jun (2024) considered applying the celebrated algorithm
of Cover’s universal portfolio (Cover, 1991) in information theory, proposed its tight outer approximations, and
established analytical properties of their algorithms. A subsequent work of Ryu & Bhatt (2022) further explored the
idea of universal gambling, arguing that the coin-toss framework can be understood as the continuous two-horse race,
which admits more natural interpretation and closes the conceptual gap between CS and universal gambling. Shekhar
& Ramdas (2023) recently established near-optimality of
gambling-based CSs.

1. Introduction
Time-uniform (or anytime-valid) confidence sets, which
is often called a confidence sequence (CS), is a sequence
of sets that contains a target parameter of the underlying
stochastic process at any time with high probability. The
time-uniformity guarantee implies that a practitioner can
make a decision by continuously acquiring new data in a
sequential manner, without the concern of the so-called
p-hacking problem with the classical (non-time-uniform)
confidence sets (Ramdas et al., 2020). The notion of time1
Department of EECS, MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
Correspondence to: J. Jon Ryu <jongha@mit.edu>.

Given the elegance of the coin-toss framework for bounded,
scalar-valued processes and its empirical tightness, especially in the small-sample regime (Orabona & Jun, 2024),
it is tempting to ask whether an analogous gambling frame-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

