Graph Adversarial Diffusion Convolution

Songtao Liu 1 Jinghui Chen 1 Tianfan Fu 2 Lu Lin 1 Marinka Zitnik 3 Dinghao Wu 1

Abstract

a specialized GNN architecture, aggregates information
from higher-order neighbors through generalized graph diffusion. Various GDC architectures (Li et al., 2019; Zhu &
Koniusz, 2021; Liu et al., 2021b; Yang et al., 2021; Zhao
et al., 2021; Jia & Benson, 2022) are derived from the Graph
Signal Denoising (GSD) problem, formulated as:


arg min L(F) := ∥F − X∥2F + λ tr F⊤ L̃F , (1)

This paper introduces a min-max optimization formulation for the Graph Signal Denoising (GSD)
problem. In this formulation, we first maximize
the second term of GSD by introducing perturbations to the graph structure based on Laplacian distance and then minimize the overall loss
of the GSD. By solving the min-max optimization problem, we derive a new variant of the
Graph Diffusion Convolution (GDC) architecture,
called Graph Adversarial Diffusion Convolution
(GADC). GADC differs from GDC by incorporating an additional term that enhances robustness
against adversarial attacks on the graph structure
and noise in node features. Moreover, GADC improves the performance of GDC on heterophilic
graphs. Extensive experiments demonstrate the
effectiveness of GADC across various datasets.
Code is available at https://github.com/
SongtaoLiu0823/GADC.

F

where X = X∗ + Υ is the observed noisy feature matrix,
Υ ∈ Rn×d is the noise matrix, X∗ is the clean feature
matrix, and L̃ ∈ Rn×n is the normalized graph Laplacian
matrix. A major strength of the GDC architecture is its ability to aggregate information from a larger set of neighbors,
enhancing ℓ2 -based graph smoothing (Liu et al., 2021b).
Despite significant advancements in GDC architectures, they
rely heavily on the Laplacian matrix to derive the graph diffusion matrix. This dependency can be problematic when
the graph structure is disrupted by adversarial attacks (Dai
et al., 2018; Zügner et al., 2018; Zügner & Günnemann,
2019a; Jin et al., 2020). Such attacks can cause GDC to
aggregate harmful information, disrupting node representations. Additionally, the limited number of neighbors restricts
GDC’s ability to effectively filter out large noise in node
features within some graphs (Liu et al., 2021a). These challenges raise a crucial question: Can we develop a versatile
GDC architecture that addresses these issues effectively?
In this work, we provide a positive solution to this question by reformulating the GSD problem. Based on this
reformulation, we design a new GDC architecture that mitigates the negative impact of adversarial attacks on the graph
structure, noise in node features, and inconsistent edges on
heterophilic graphs.

1. Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Kipf & Welling, 2017;
Hamilton et al., 2017; Veličković et al., 2018) have become
a popular approach for graph-based tasks due to their powerful ability to learn node representations. They have demonstrated remarkable performance in various tasks, including
traffic prediction (Guo et al., 2019), drug discovery (Dai
et al., 2019), and recommendation system (Ying et al., 2018).
The core principle of GNNs is the message-passing operation, which aggregates node features from neighboring
nodes, thereby enhancing the smoothness of the learned
node representations. As a result, GNN models produce
predictions based on both the features of individual nodes
and those of their immediate neighbors.

Inspired by the saddle point formulation of adversarial training (Madry et al., 2018), we propose a min-max variant
of the GSD problem, called the Adversarial Graph Signal
Denoising (AGSD) problem:
h
i
2
⊤ ′
arg min q(F) := ∥F − X∥F + λ · max
tr
F
L
F
,
′

Graph Diffusion Convolution (GDC) (Gasteiger et al., 2019),
1

The Pennsylvania State University 2 Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute 3 Harvard University. Correspondence to: Songtao Liu
<skl5761@psu.edu>.

F

L

(2)
where L′ is the added perturbation by the adversary. In the
inner optimization problem, we maximize the second term
of the AGSD. Then, we minimize the loss function q(F) in
the outer optimization problem.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

