Rolling Diffusion Models

David Ruhe 1 2 * Jonathan Heek 1 Tim Salimans 1 Emiel Hoogeboom 1

Abstract

2023). Other impressive results for generating video data
have been achieved by, e.g., (Blattmann et al., 2023; Ge
et al., 2023; Harvey et al., 2022; Singer et al., 2022; Ho
et al., 2022b). Applications of sequential generative modeling outside video include, e.g., fluid mechanics or weather
and climate modeling (Price et al., 2023; Meng et al., 2022;
Lippe et al., 2023).

Diffusion models have recently been increasingly
applied to temporal data such as video, fluid mechanics simulations, or climate data. These methods generally treat subsequent frames equally regarding the amount of noise in the diffusion process. This paper explores Rolling Diffusion: a
new approach that uses a sliding window denoising process. It ensures that the diffusion process
progressively corrupts through time by assigning
more noise to frames that appear later in a sequence, reflecting greater uncertainty about the
future as the generation process unfolds. Empirically, we show that when the temporal dynamics are complex, Rolling Diffusion is superior to
standard diffusion. In particular, this result is
demonstrated in a video prediction task using the
Kinetics-600 video dataset and in a chaotic fluid
dynamics forecasting experiment.

What is common across many of these works is that they
treat the temporal axis as an ‘extra spatial dimension’. That
is, they treat the video as a 3D tensor of shape K × H × W .
This has several downsides. First, the memory and computational requirements can quickly grow infeasible if one
wants to generate long sequences. Second, one is typically
interested in being able to roll out the sampling process for
a variable number of time steps. Therefore, an alternative
angle is a fully autoregressive approach by conditioning on
a sequence of input frames and simulating a single output
frame, which is then concatenated to the input frames, upon
which the recursion can continue. In this case, one has to
traverse the entire denoising diffusion sampling chain for
every single frame, which is computationally intensive. Additionally, iteratively sampling single frames leads to quick
autoregressive error accumulation. A middle ground can be
found by jointly generating blocks of frames. However, in
this block-autoregressive case, a diffusion model would use
the same number of denoising steps for every frame. This is
suboptimal since, given a sequence of conditioning frames,
the generative uncertainty about the next few is much lower
than the frames further into the future. Finally, both methods sample frames only jointly with earlier frames, which is
potentially a suboptimal parameterization.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Song & Ermon, 2019; Ho et al., 2020) have significantly boosted the
field of generative modeling. They provided the fundaments for large-scale text-to-image systems like DALL-E 2
(Ramesh et al., 2022), Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022), Parti
(Yu et al., 2022), and Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al.,
2022). Other applications of diffusion models include density estimation, text-to-speech, and image editing (Kingma
et al., 2021; Gao et al., 2023; Kawar et al., 2023).

In this paper, we propose a new framework called Rolling
Diffusion, a method that explicitly corrupts data from past
to future. This is achieved by reparameterizing the global
diffusion time to a local time for each frame. It turns out
that by doing this, one can (apart from boundary conditions)
completely focus on a local sliding window sequential denoising process. This has several temporal inductive biases,
alleviating some of the abovementioned issues.

After these successes in these domains, interest in developing diffusion models for time sequences has grown. Prominent recent large-scale works include, e.g., Imagen Video
(Ho et al., 2022a), Stable Diffusion Video (StabilityAI,
∗

Work done as a Student Researcher at Google. 1 Google
Deepmind, Amsterdam, Netherlands 2 University of Amsterdam, Netherlands.
Correspondence to: David Ruhe
<david.ruhe@gmail.com>, Jonathan Heek, Tim Salimans, Emiel
Hoogeboom <{jheek, salimans, emielh}@google.com>.

1. In denoising diffusion models, the model output tends
to contain low-frequency information in high noise
regimes and includes high-frequency information only
when corruptions are light. In our framework, the noise

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

