Stochastic Q-learning for Large Discrete Action Spaces

Fares Fourati 1 Vaneet Aggarwal 2 Mohamed-Slim Alouini 1

Abstract

advances in the field, a significant challenge lies in navigating complex environments with large discrete action
spaces (Dulac-Arnold et al., 2015; 2021). In such scenarios,
standard RL algorithms suffer in terms of computational
efficiency (Akkerman et al., 2023). Identifying the optimal
actions might entail cycling through all of them, in general,
multiple times within different states, which is computationally expensive and may become prohibitive with large
discrete action spaces (Tessler et al., 2019).

In complex environments with large discrete action spaces, effective decision-making is critical in reinforcement learning (RL). Despite the
widespread use of value-based RL approaches
like Q-learning, they come with a computational
burden, necessitating the maximization of a value
function over all actions in each iteration. This
burden becomes particularly challenging when
addressing large-scale problems and using deep
neural networks as function approximators. In
this paper, we present stochastic value-based RL
approaches which, in each iteration, as opposed
to optimizing over the entire set of n actions,
only consider a variable stochastic set of a sublinear number of actions, possibly as small as
O(log(n)). The presented stochastic value-based
RL methods include, among others, Stochastic
Q-learning, StochDQN, and StochDDQN, all of
which integrate this stochastic approach for both
value-function updates and action selection. The
theoretical convergence of Stochastic Q-learning
is established, while an analysis of stochastic maximization is provided. Moreover, through empirical validation, we illustrate that the various proposed approaches outperform the baseline methods across diverse environments, including different control problems, achieving near-optimal
average returns in significantly reduced time.

Such challenges apply to various domains, including combinatorial optimization (Mazyavkina et al., 2021; Fourati et al.,
2023; 2024b;a), natural language processing (He et al., 2015;
2016a;b; Tessler et al., 2019), communications and networking (Luong et al., 2019; Fourati & Alouini, 2021), recommendation systems (Dulac-Arnold et al., 2015), transportation (Al-Abbasi et al., 2019; Haliem et al., 2021; Li et al.,
2022), and robotics (Dulac-Arnold et al., 2015; Tavakoli
et al., 2018; Tang & Agrawal, 2020; Seyde et al., 2021;
2022; Gonzalez et al., 2023; Ireland & Montana, 2024). Although tailored solutions leveraging action space structures
and dimensions may suffice in specific contexts, their applicability across diverse problems, possibly unstructured,
still needs to be expanded. We complement these works by
proposing a general method that addresses a broad spectrum
of problems, accommodating structured and unstructured
single and multi-dimensional large discrete action spaces.
Value-based and actor-based approaches are both prominent
approaches in RL. Value-based approaches, which entail the
agent implicitly optimizing its policy by maximizing a value
function, demonstrate superior generalization capabilities
but demand significant computational resources, particularly
in complex settings. Conversely, actor-based approaches,
which entail the agent directly optimizing its policy, offer
computational efficiency but often encounter challenges in
generalizing across multiple and unexplored actions (DulacArnold et al., 2015). While both hold unique advantages and
challenges, they represent distinct avenues for addressing
the complexities of decision-making in large action spaces.
However, comparing them falls outside the scope of this
work. While some previous methods have focused on the
latter (Dulac-Arnold et al., 2015), our work concentrates
on the former. Specifically, we aim to exploit the natural
generalization inherent in value-based RL approaches while
reducing their per-step computational complexity.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL), a continually evolving field
of machine learning, has achieved notable successes, especially when combined with deep learning (Sutton & Barto,
2018; Wang et al., 2022). While there have been several
1

Computer, Electrical and Mathematical Science and Engineering Division, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
(KAUST), Thuwal, KSA. 2 School of Industrial Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA. Correspondence
to: Fares Fourati <fares.fourati@kaust.edu.sa>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

