Sparse is Enough in Fine-tuning Pre-trained Large Language Models

Weixi Song * 1 Zuchao Li * 1 2 Lefei Zhang 1 2 Hai Zhao 3 Bo Du 1 2

Abstract

efficient fine-tuning methods have been proposed (Houlsby
et al., 2019; Ben Zaken et al., 2022; Li & Liang, 2021; Hu
et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2023; Dettmers et al., 2024), which
can achieve the performance close to or even surpass that of
full fine-tuning with lower costs.

With the prevalence of pre-training-fine-tuning
paradigm, how to efficiently adapt the pre-trained
model to the downstream tasks has been an intriguing issue. Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning
(PEFT) methods have been proposed for low-cost
adaptation. Although PEFT has demonstrated
effectiveness and been widely applied, the underlying principles are still unclear. In this paper,
we adopt the PAC-Bayesian generalization error
bound, viewing pre-training as a shift of prior distribution which leads to a tighter bound for generalization error. We validate this shift from the perspectives of oscillations in the loss landscape and
the quasi-sparsity in gradient distribution. Based
on this, we propose a gradient-based sparse finetuning algorithm, named Sparse Increment FineTuning (SIFT), and validate its effectiveness on
a range of tasks including the GLUE Benchmark
and Instruction-tuning. The code is accessible at
https://github.com/song-wx/SIFT.

Although these methods have demonstrated their effectiveness to some extent and have been widely applied, the underlying principles are still unclear and the selection of trainable modules are typically heuristically. Li et al. (2018a)
points out that over-parameterized networks have a lower
intrinsic dimension, i.e. they can achieve 90% or even 100%
of the full parameter performance by training only fewer
parameters than the full parameter, which is the motivation
of LoRA (Hu et al., 2021). A natural question is:
What causes pre-trained language models to have the
lower intrinsic dimension?
To answer this question, we first need to understand what
changes occur from random initialization to pre-trained initialization. As indicated in Devlin et al. (2018), pre-trained
models rapidly generalize to downstream data through finetuning. Intuitively, the generalization error of pre-trained
models is controlled by a tighter bound compared to random
initialized models. Therefore, we shed a spotlight on a classic PAC-Bayesian generalization error bound to analysis the
difference between training from scratch and training after
pre-training, which is first proposed by McAllester (2003)
and refined by Maurer (2004); Catoni (2007); Thiemann
et al. (2017). In contrast to general PAC bounds that only
consider the complexity of the hypothesis space, typically
measured by VC-dimension (Vapnik, 1991) or Rademacher
complexity (Bartlett & Mendelson, 2002), PAC-Bayesian
bounds jointly consider a less accurate prior probability distribution for parameters and a more precise data-based posterior distribution. We view pre-training as a shift of prior,
where pre-training, by learning language features such as
grammar and syntax on a large corpus, moves the model
away from sub-manifolds of non-expressive parameters in
the parameter space. Pre-training initialization is equivalent to assigning relatively low probabilities in the prior for
non-expressive parameters. In contrast to random initialization, which assigns equal probabilities in the prior to all
parameters, the KL divergence between the pre-trained prior
and the data-based posterior is lower, as shown in Figure 1.
Therefore, pre-trained models have a tighter generalization

1. Introduction
With the prevalent pre-training-fine-tuning paradigm, Large
Language Models (LLMs) pre-trained on a internet-scale
corpus can be effectively adapted to the specific downstream
domains. However, as the number of parameters in large
language models increases, fine-tuning all parameters is
prohibitively expensive. Toward efficient adaptation from
pre-trained LLMs to downstream tasks, several parameter*

Equal contribution. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.62306216),
the Natural Science Foundation of Hubei Province of China
(No.2023AFB816), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (No.2042023kf0133). 1 National Engineering
Research Center for Multimedia Software, School of Computer
Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430072, P. R. China 2 Hubei
Luojia Laboratory, Wuhan 430072, P. R. China 3 Department of
Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200240, P. R. China. Correspondence to: Zuchao
Li <zcli-charlie@whu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

