Uniform Memory Retrieval with Larger Capacity for Modern Hopfield Models

Dennis Wu * 1 Jerry Yao-Chieh Hu * 1 Teng-Yun Hsiao 2 Han Liu 1 3

Abstract
We propose a two-stage memory retrieval dynamics for modern Hopfield models, termed U-Hop,
with enhanced memory capacity. Our key contribution is a learnable feature map Φ which transforms the Hopfield energy function into kernel
space. This transformation ensures convergence
between the local minima of energy and the fixed
points of retrieval dynamics within the kernel
space. Consequently, the kernel norm induced by
Φ serves as a novel similarity measure. It utilizes
the stored memory patterns as learning data to
enhance memory capacity across all modern Hopfield models. Specifically, we accomplish this by
constructing a separation loss LΦ that separates
the local minima of kernelized energy by separating stored memory patterns in kernel space.
Methodologically, U-Hop memory retrieval process consists of: (Stage I) minimizing separation
loss for a more uniformed memory (local minimum) distribution, followed by (Stage II) standard Hopfield energy minimization for memory
retrieval. This results in a significant reduction of
possible metastable states in the Hopfield energy
function, thus enhancing memory capacity by preventing memory confusion. Empirically, with
real-world datasets, we demonstrate that U-Hop
outperforms all existing modern Hopfield models
and SOTA similarity measures, achieving substantial improvements in both associative memory retrieval and deep learning tasks. Code is available
at GitHub; future updates are on arXiv.

Figure 1. Separation Loss over Memory Set v.s. Retrieval Error.
We perform 200 runs of memory retrieval with U-Hop on MNIST.
The result shows a strong correlation between low separation loss
and low retrieval error.

1. Introduction
We address the memory confusion problem in the modern
Hopfield models by proposing a two-stage optimization formulation, termed U-Hop, for the memory retrieval dynamics
of modern Hopfield models. We construct the similarity
measure of modern Hopfield models with a learnable kernel.
The feature map of the kernel is trained by maximizing the
separation among the entire stored memory set (Figure 2).
This allows Hopfield models under U-Hop to distinguish
different memory patterns with larger separation and hence
achieve larger memory capacity.
Let x ∈ Rd be the input query pattern, Ξ :=
[ξ1 , · · · , ξM ] ∈ Rd×M be the memory patterns, and
⟨a, b⟩ := aT b be the inner product for vectors a, b ∈ Rd .
Hopfield models are energy-based associative memory models. They store memory patterns on the local minima of
their energy landscapes. For any input query x, they retrieve
its closest memory pattern through some energy minimization algorithms initialized at x. These algorithms are also
known as memory retrieval dynamics. See Figure 2 for
a visualization. Ramsauer et al. (2020) proposed a large
foundation model compatible variant, the Modern Hopfield
Model (MHM). This model has a specific set of energy
function and retrieval dynamics, such that it subsumes transformer attention as its special case (see Appendix C) and
enjoys superior theoretical properties (see (Hu et al., 2023;
Wu et al., 2024; Ramsauer et al., 2020)). Specifically, they

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Northwestern, Evanston, USA 2 Department of Physics,
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan 3 Department of
Statistics and Data Science, University of Northwestern, Evanston,
USA. Correspondence to: Dennis Wu <hibb@northwestern.edu>,
Jerry Yao-Chieh Hu <jhu@northwestern.edu>, TengYun Hsiao <b10502058@ntu.edu.tw>, Han Liu <hanliu@northwestern.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

