Language Agents with Reinforcement Learning for
Strategic Play in the Werewolf Game

Zelai Xu 1 Chao Yu 1 Fei Fang 2 Yu Wang * 1 Yi Wu * 1 3
Prompt

Abstract

You are playing the Rock-Paper-Scissors game. You should first reason
about the Nash equilibrium of this game, and then choose one action
from Rock, Paper, and Scissors based on your reasoning.

Agents built with large language models (LLMs)
have shown great potential across a wide range of
domains. However, in complex decision-making
tasks, pure LLM-based agents tend to exhibit intrinsic bias in their choice of actions, which is inherited from the model’s training data and results
in suboptimal performance. To develop strategic
language agents, i.e., agents that generate flexible language actions and possess strong decisionmaking abilities, we propose a novel framework
that powers LLM-based agents with reinforcement learning (RL). We consider Werewolf, a
popular social deduction game, as a challenging
testbed that emphasizes versatile communication
and strategic gameplay. To mitigate the intrinsic
bias in language actions, our agents use an LLM
to perform deductive reasoning and generate a diverse set of action candidates. Then an RL policy
trained to optimize the decision-making ability
chooses an action from the candidates to play in
the game. Extensive experiments show that our
agents overcome the intrinsic bias and outperform
existing LLM-based agents in the Werewolf game.
We also conduct human-agent experiments and
find that our agents achieve human-level performance and demonstrate strong strategic play.

Reasoning
In the Rock-Paper-Scissors game, the Nash equilibrium occurs when
each player is randomly choosing their action with equal probability,
making it impossible for the other player to predict or gain an
advantage based on patterns. Thus, the strategy is to play each of
Rock, Paper, and Scissors with a probability of 1/3 for each choice.

Action Distribution

Figure 1: The intrinsic bias in the action distribution of pure
LLM-based agents despite the correct reasoning result.

models (LLMs) have shown great potential in constructing
intelligent agents and have led to many recent advancements (Ouyang et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022a). These LLMbased agents demonstrate proficiency in a wide range of
tasks including web surfing (Nakano et al., 2021; Yao et al.,
2022b; Zheng et al., 2024), complex video games (Wang
et al., 2023a; Ma et al., 2023), and real-world applications (Ahn et al., 2022; Shah et al., 2023). Moreover, in
multi-agent scenarios, LLM-based agents exhibit the ability to produce human-like interactions (Park et al., 2023;
Williams et al., 2023), achieve zero-shot cooperation (Li
et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023), and compete with adversarial
players (Meta et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023b).

1. Introduction
Building agents that are capable of logical reasoning, strategic decision-making, and communication with humans has
been a longstanding aspiration in the field of AI (Wooldridge
& Jennings, 1995; Goodwin, 1995). With their extensive
knowledge and emergent generalizability, large language

Despite the impressive achievements, we observe that in
complex decision-making tasks such as multi-agent games,
pure LLM-based agents built with prompting techniques
tend to exhibit intrinsic bias in their choice of actions, resulting in suboptimal performance. Consider a simple example
where we use GPT-4 to play the Rock-Paper-Scissors game.
To generate the optimal strategy, we prompt the LLM to

*
Equal advising 1 Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, United States 3 Shanghai
Qi Zhi Institute, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Zelai Xu
<zelai.eecs@gmail.com>, Yi Wu <jxwuyi@gmail.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

