Time-Series Forecasting for Out-of-Distribution Generalization
Using Invariant Learning

Haoxin Liu 1 Harshavardhan Kamarthi 1 Lingkai Kong 1 Zhiyuan Zhao 1 Chao Zhang 1 B. Aditya Prakash 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Time-series (TS) data are ubiquitous across various domains,
including public health (Kamarthi et al., 2021b; Rodriguez
et al., 2021), finance (Sezer et al., 2020), and urban computing (Tabassum et al., 2021). Time-series forecasting
(TSF), a foundational task in analyzing TS data, involving
predicting future events or trends based on historical TS
data, has received a longstanding research focus. TSF faces
certain challenges due to the dynamic and complex nature
of TS data: First, distributions of TS data change over time.
Second, the inherent complexity of TSF is compounded by
unforeseen exogenous factors, such as policy interventions
and climate changes in the context of influenza forecasting.

Time-series forecasting (TSF) finds broad applications in real-world scenarios. Due to the dynamic
nature of time-series data, it is crucial to equip
TSF models with out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization abilities, as historical training data and
future test data can have different distributions. In
this paper, we aim to alleviate the inherent OOD
problem in TSF via invariant learning. We identify fundamental challenges of invariant learning
for TSF. First, the target variables in TSF may
not be sufficiently determined by the input due
to unobserved core variables in TSF, breaking
the conventional assumption of invariant learning. Second, time-series datasets lack adequate
environment labels, while existing environmental
inference methods are not suitable for TSF.

Given the dynamic nature of TS data, where unforeseen
distribution shifts can occur between historical training and
future testing data, the TSF task asks for robust out-ofdistribution (OOD) generalization abilities. Instead, existing
TSF models employ empirical risk minimization to greedily
incorporate all correlations within the data to minimize average training errors. However, as not all correlations persist
in unknown test distributions, these models may lack OOD
generalization abilities. Note that existing works on temporal distribution shifts (Du et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2021; Liu
et al., 2022; Fan et al., 2023) merely focus on mitigating
the marginal distribution shifts of the input. These methods
are not generalizable enough for the OOD problem, which
consists of various types of distribution shifts (Liu et al.,
2021c), such as conditional distribution shifts, etc.

To address these challenges, we propose FOIL,
a model-agnostic framework that enables timeseries Forecasting for Out-of-distribution generalization via Invariant Learning. FOIL employs
a novel surrogate loss to mitigate the impact of
unobserved variables. Further, FOIL implements
a joint optimization by alternately inferring environments effectively with a multi-head network
while preserving the temporal adjacency structure,
and learning invariant representations across inferred environments for OOD generalized TSF.
We demonstrate that the proposed FOIL significantly improves the performance of various TSF
models, achieving gains of up to 85%.

In this paper, we propose to alleviate the OOD generalization problem of TSF via invariant learning (IL). IL seeks
to identify and utilize invariant features that maintain stable relationships with targets across different environments
while discarding unstable correlations introduced by variant features. Although IL has witnessed wide theoretical
and empirical success in various domains (Koyama & Yamaguchi, 2020; Ye et al., 2023; Weber et al., 2022), it remains
unexplored yet non-trivial to apply IL for TSF because of
the following challenges: First, TS data breaks IL’s conventional assumption. In TS data, there are always variables
that directly affect targets but remain unobserved, such as
the outbreak of an epidemic, sudden temperature changes,
policy adjustments, etc. IL fails to consider these unob-

1
School of Computational Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA. Correspondence to:
Haoxin Liu <hliu763@gatech.edu>, B. Aditya Prakash <badityap@cc.gatech.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

