Modelling Microbial Communities with Graph Neural Networks

Albane Ruaud 1 Cansu Sancaktar 2 Marco Bagatella 2 3 Christoph Ratzke 4 Georg Martius 2 1

Abstract

would acquire time-series data for every combination of bacteria to obtain a complete understanding of their dynamics.
However, in reality, this is not possible because the number of experiments grows exponentially with the number of
bacteria. Accordingly, several challenges are faced when
modeling bacterial interactions: (i) available data generally
depict a single time-point of a community; (ii) models of
interactions should generalize to new bacteria and communities to limit the need for additional experiments; (iii) models
should be interpretable and provide insights on the system.

Understanding the interactions and interplay of
microorganisms is a great challenge with many applications in medical and environmental settings.
In this work, we model bacterial communities
directly from their genomes using graph neural
networks (GNNs). GNNs leverage the inductive
bias induced by the set nature of bacteria, enforcing permutation invariance and granting combinatorial generalization. We propose to learn the
dynamics implicitly by directly predicting community relative abundance profiles at steady state,
thus escaping the need for growth curves. On
two real-world datasets, we show for the first time
generalization to unseen bacteria and different
community structures. To investigate the prediction results more deeply, we create a simulation
for flexible data generation and analyze effects of
bacteria interaction strength, community size, and
training data amount.

The most common approach to model interactions in bacterial communities is to use generalized Lotka-Volterra models (Gonze et al., 2018; van den Berg et al., 2022; Picot
et al., 2023) (gLV, see Sec. 2.1). However, these deterministic models fit parameters on time-series data for each
bacterium in the system: therefore, they cannot generalize to
new bacteria and are limited by experimental data. Furthermore, as they only model pairwise interactions, they may
fail to recover higher-order/complex interactions (Chang
et al., 2023; Gonze et al., 2018; Picot et al., 2023). However, it should be noted that there is a debate in the field
about whether bacterial communities are shaped by simple
(Friedman et al., 2017; Goldford et al., 2018) or complex
(Bairey et al., 2016; Chang et al., 2023) assembly rules. To
address the potential complexity of microbial systems, neural networks are emerging as alternatives to gLV models,
as they can capture complex interactions (Baranwal et al.,
2022; Michel-Mata et al., 2022). For instance, Baranwal
et al. (2022) fit recurrent neural networks to microbial communities of up to 26 bacteria to predict their assembly and
ultimately a function of interest, namely butyrate production.
Although their results are encouraging, their models are fitted on growth trajectories and rely on time-series, impeding
their generalization to new bacteria and communities.

1. Introduction
Microorganisms are ubiquitous and essential: in our gut,
they digest our food and influence our behavior (Cani
et al., 2019); in industrial plants, they treat our wastewater (Mathew et al., 2022); their biomining ability outside
of Earth was even tested on the International Space Station
(Cockell et al., 2020). Accordingly, understanding their
functioning and optimizing their use are crucial challenges.
Microbial communities are driven by interactions that dictate the assembly of communities and consequently microbial output. To comprehend the functioning of a community,
it is necessary to characterize these interactions. Ideally, one

In this work, we model bacterial communities directly from
bacterial genomes using graph neural networks (GNNs).
Our contribution can be described as follows.

1
Cluster of Excellence – ML for Science, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany 2 Autonomous Learning group, Max
Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 3 ETH
Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland 4 Cluster of Excellence – CMFI, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. Correspondence to:
Albane Ruaud <albane.ruaud@tuebingen.mpg.de>.

1. We propose using GNNs as a powerful class of function approximators to model microbial communities,
such that each node in the graph represents a bacterial
species and the GNN performs regression on nodes.
Through the graph structure, GNNs isolate information and share parameters across nodes, thus granting

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

