Federated Neuro-Symbolic Learning

Pengwei Xing 1 Songtao Lu 2 Han Yu 1

Abstract

symbolic work is generally divided into two categories: one
focuses on concept extraction, mapping the neural network’s
inter-node structure into hierarchical relationships, for instance, by using label hierarchies from label classification
(Ciravegna et al., 2023). This method covertly transforms
the network relationships into specific concepts through
methods such as binarization or truth table comparisons
(Ciravegna et al., 2020). The other category predominantly
involves knowledge graph (KG) (Rebele et al., 2016; Liu
et al., 2024b), concentrating on learning semantic logic rules
from natural language among KG. These approaches often
employ sequence models like Transformers to extract these
logic relationships (Qu et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2022) for KGrelated downstream tasks, such as KG completion (Bordes
et al., 2013; Wang et al., 2014), relation extraction (Weston
et al., 2013; Riedel et al., 2013) and entity classification
(Nickel et al., 2011; 2012). These two methods transform
the representations learned by neural networks into firstorder logic (FOL) systems. Through this transformation,
they can use a unified symbolic form to interpret, further
infer, and optimize the representations learned by the neural
networks.

Neuro-symbolic learning (NSL) models complex
symbolic rule patterns into latent variable distributions by neural networks, which reduces rule
search space and generates unseen rules to improve downstream task performance. Centralized NSL learning involves directly acquiring data
from downstream tasks, which is not feasible for
federated learning (FL). To address this limitation,
we shift the focus from such a one-to-one interactive neuro-symbolic paradigm to one-to-many
Federated Neuro-Symbolic Learning framework
(FedNSL) with latent variables as the FL communication medium. Built on the basis of our
novel reformulation of the NSL theory, FedNSL
is capable of identifying and addressing rule distribution heterogeneity through a simple and effective Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence constraint
on rule distribution applicable under the FL setting. It further theoretically adjusts variational
expectation maximization (V-EM) to reduce the
rule search space across domains. This is the first
incorporation of distribution-coupled bilevel optimization into FL. Extensive experiments based
on both synthetic and real-world data demonstrate
significant advantages of FedNSL compared to
five state-of-the-art methods. It outperforms the
best baseline by 17% and 29% in terms of unbalanced average training accuracy and unseen
average testing accuracy, respectively.

Personalized requirements for NSL can also be reflected
through the FOL symbolic form. Considering a scenario of
personalized movie recommendations based on user preferences. If there are two groups of people, the aged group
of men and the teenage group of men, there should be a
generality and a specificity in the degree of preference for
the type of movie. The more general logic rule that the
neuro-symbolic system can learn is ∀X∀Y ((is(X, M en) ∧
attribute(Y, Action M ovie)) → like(X, Y )). The more
personalized logic rule will be ∀X∀Y ((is(X, T eenager) ∧
attribute(Y, M odern Action)) → like(X, Y )) for the
teenager group of men and ∀X∀Y ((is(X, Aged) ∧
attribute(Y, Classical Action)) → like(X, Y )) for the
aged group of men, as shown in Figure 1 (a). Due to the heterogeneity of the rule from data heterogeneity, it is crucial to
seek a trade-off between personalization and generalization
across multiple domains. Moreover, privacy has emerged
as a critical concern with the rise of federated learning (FL)
(Tan et al., 2022; Goebel et al., 2023). In the above scenario,
the system utilizes first-order logic to capture individual
user preferences for movies. These preferences may contain
sensitive information about users’ tastes, interests, or poten-

1. Introduction
Neuro-symbolic learning (NSL) (Garcez et al., 2008) stands
at the frontier of artificial intelligence, amalgamating symbolic reasoning with the prowess of neural networks. Neuro*

Equal contribution 1 College of Computing and Data Science,
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 2 IBM Thomas J.
Watson Research Center Yorktown Heights, USA. Correspondence to: Pengwei Xing <pengwei001@e.ntu.edu.sg>, Songtao
Lu <songtao@ibm.com>, Han Yu <han.yu@ntu.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

