Quality-Weighted Vendi Scores And
Their Application To Diverse Experimental Design

Quan Nguyen 1 Adji Bousso Dieng 2 3

Abstract

experimentation rules out exhaustive search and motivates
the need for more sophisticated search strategies.

Experimental design techniques such as active
search and Bayesian optimization are widely used
in the natural sciences for data collection and discovery. However, existing techniques tend to favor exploitation over exploration of the search
space, which causes them to get stuck in local
optima. This collapse problem prevents experimental design algorithms from yielding diverse
high-quality data. In this paper, we extend the
Vendi scores—a family of interpretable similaritybased diversity metrics—to account for quality.
We then leverage these quality-weighted Vendi
scores to tackle experimental design problems
across various applications, including drug discovery, materials discovery, and reinforcement
learning. We found that quality-weighted Vendi
scores allow us to construct policies for experimental design that flexibly balance quality and diversity, and ultimately assemble rich and diverse
sets of high-performing data points. Our algorithms led to a 70%–170% increase in the number
of effective discoveries compared to baselines.

Powerful active search (AS) and Bayesian optimization
(BayesOpt) techniques have been developed over the
years (Garnett et al., 2012; Jiang et al., 2017; Nguyen et al.,
2021; Nguyen & Garnett, 2023; Eriksson et al., 2019) to
tackle the problems mentioned above. While these advances have led to a more flexible experimental design
framework, there has been a recent surge in interest in modifying existing algorithms to not only perform effective
search/optimization but also induce more diversity during
experimentation. For example, Malkomes et al. (2021) proposed an AS method in which data points sufficiently close
to discoveries already made are removed from the pool, effectively encouraging a more diverse search. Maus et al.
(2023), on the other hand, formulated a BayesOpt problem
where the goal is to maintain and optimize multiple solutions that are constrained to be different from one another.
These works leverage local penalization to induce diversity.
Even though local penalization is a natural way to encourage diversity, it requires defining constraints to control the
algorithms’ behavior. However, setting these constraints can
be challenging for complex, high-dimensional spaces. In
this work, we present an alternative approach to local penalization to enforce diversity in experimental design. More
specifically, we extend the Vendi scores (VS) (Friedman &
Dieng, 2023; Pasarkar & Dieng, 2023) to account for the
quality of the items in a given input set. We call these new
scores quality-weighted Vendi scores.

1. Introduction
Many real-world tasks can be framed as expensive discovery
problems, where one explores large databases in search of
rare, valuable items. For instance, a scientist aiming to find
a drug for a disease may need to iterate over millions of
molecules to discover those that bind to specific biological
targets. These search problems also often involve an expensive labeling process: the scientist will need to perform
costly, time-consuming experiments to test for a molecule’s
binding activity to study its characteristics. This high cost in

These quality-weighted Vendi scores offer us a mathematically convenient way to evaluate quality and diversity and
yield a unified framework for diverse experimental design.
We applied the quality-weighted Vendi scores to both AS
and BayesOpt across a wide variety of tasks involving drug
discovery, materials discovery, and reinforcement learning.
For all these tasks, we compared against strong existing
baselines for experimental design, as well as analyzed the
performance of our algorithms for various quality-diversity
trade-offs. In all our experiments, we found that experimental design algorithms leveraging quality-weighted Vendi
scores tend to outperform their counterparts in terms of both
the diversity and the quality of the data points they yield.

1
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis 2 Department of Computer Science,
Princeton University 3 Vertaix. Correspondence to: Quan Nguyen
<quan@wustl.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

