Reprompting: Automated Chain-of-Thought Prompt Inference
Through Gibbs Sampling

Weijia Xu 1 Andrzej Banburski-Fahey 1 Nebojsa Jojic 1

Abstract

the scalability and generalizability of the method. Furthermore, a problem can be reasoned in many different ways,
and some of them may work well on some LLMs but not on
others. To fairly compare the performance of various LLMs
on each task, we need to find the CoT prompt that works best
for each model in a feasible way, which remains a challenge.

We introduce Reprompting, an iterative sampling
algorithm that automatically learns the Chain-ofThought (CoT) recipes for a given task without
human intervention. Through Gibbs sampling,
Reprompting infers the CoT recipes that work
consistently well for a set of training samples by
iteratively sampling new recipes using previously
sampled recipes as parent prompts to solve other
training problems. We conduct extensive experiments on 20 challenging reasoning tasks. Results show that Reprompting outperforms humanwritten CoT prompts substantially by +9.4 points
on average. It also achieves consistently better
performance than the state-of-the-art prompt optimization and decoding algorithms.

In this paper, we propose Reprompting, an iterative sampling
algorithm that automatically finds effective CoT prompt
for each model given a few question-answer pairs without
human intervention. Specifically, the algorithm aims to
infer a set of CoT recipes that perform consistently well
as in-context examples for a set of training problems. We
frame it as a problem of sampling from a joint distribution
of CoT recipes given the training question-answer pairs,
which is infeasible to characterize directly but can be approached using Gibbs sampling – we initially sample a set
of recipes through zero-shot prompting, expand the set with
new recipes sampled iteratively by using previously sampled
recipes as parent prompts to solve a different training problem, and weed out the least-fit recipes that lead to wrong
answers. Thus, the algorithm will eventually converge to
a set of recipes that share similar chains of thought for effectively solving the training problems. These CoT recipes
optimized on the training set then serve as effective CoT
prompts for solving unseen test problems.

1. Introduction
Few-shot prompting with large language models (LLMs)
has revolutionized the landscape of natural language processing. Given natural language instructions and a few
demonstrations as in-context examples, LLMs can quickly
adapt to new tasks, approaching or even surpassing the performance of models fine-tuned on larger datasets on a wide
range of tasks (Brown et al., 2020). However, such prompting techniques fall short on tasks that require multi-step reasoning and constraint propagation (Wei et al., 2022), such as
logical deduction in the Big-Bench Hard benchmark (Suzgun et al., 2022). To address these limitations, prior works
proposed to teach LLMs to reason step by step like humans
by prompting them with chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning
steps for a few example problems (Wei et al., 2022). Despite
the improved performance, such a method requires human
experts with not only the task knowledge but also an understanding of how prompting works to craft the CoT prompt
for each task (Zamfirescu-Pereira et al., 2023), which limits

We evaluate Reprompting on 20 tasks from three reasoning benchmarks including Big-Bench Hard (BBH) (Suzgun et al., 2022), GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021) and
MATH (Hendrycks et al., 2021) using ChatGPT (OpenAI,
2023) and InstructGPT (Ouyang et al., 2022) as LLMs.
Compared with human-written CoT prompts, Reprompting
achieves +9.4 higher accuracy on average. It also consistently outperforms self-consistency decoding (Wang et al.,
2022b), Auto-CoT (Zhang et al., 2022) and Automatic
Prompt Optimization (Pryzant et al., 2023) by 11–33 points
on average. Furthermore, Reprompting facilitates model
combination by using different LLMs for initializing and
sampling new recipes. Empirically, leveraging ChatGPT to
sample initial recipes for InstructGPT brings up to +71 point
improvements over using InstructGPT alone and even outperforms ChatGPT alone on certain tasks. Lastly, our results
confirm that the CoT recipes that work well on one model

1 Microsoft Research, Redmond, USA. Correspondence to: Weijia Xu <weijiaxu@microsoft.com>.

Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

