Mean Field Langevin Actor-Critic: Faster Convergence
and Global Optimality beyond Lazy Learning

Kakei Yamamoto 1 Kazusato Oko 2 3 Zhuoran Yang 4 Taiji Suzuki 2 3

1. Introduction

Abstract

In recent years, the field of reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 2018) including the policy gradient method
(Williams, 1992; Baxter et al., 1999; Sutton et al., 1999) and
the temporal-difference (TD) learning (Sutton, 1988) has
made tremendous progress, with deep reinforcement learning methods. The combination of the actor-critic method
(Konda & Tsitsiklis, 1999) and neural networks has demonstrated significant empirical success in challenging applications, such as the game of Go (Silver et al., 2016; 2017) or
the human-like feedback alignment (Ouyang et al., 2022).
In these empirical successes, the employment of deep neural
networks plays an indispensable role — their expressivity
enable learning meaningful features that benefit decisionmaking. However, despite the impressive empirical results,
there remain many open questions about the theoretical
foundations of these methods. In particular, when viewing
deep RL methods as optimization algorithms in the space
of neural network policies, it remains elusive how deep RL
algorithms learn features during the course of finding the
optimal policy.

This work explores the feature learning capabilities of deep reinforcement learning algorithms
in the pursuit of optimal policy determination.
We particularly examine an over-parameterized
neural actor-critic framework within the meanfield regime, where both actor and critic components undergo updates via policy gradient and
temporal-difference (TD) learning, respectively.
We introduce the mean-field Langevin TD learning (MFLTD) method, enhancing mean-field
Langevin dynamics with proximal TD updates
for critic policy evaluation, and assess its performance against conventional approaches through
numerical analysis. Additionally, for actor policy updates, we present the mean-field Langevin
policy gradient (MFLPG), employing policy gradient techniques augmented by Wasserstein gradient flows for parameter space exploration. Our
findings demonstrate that MFLTD accurately identifies the true value function, while MFLPG ensures linear convergence of actor sequences towards the globally optimal policy, considering a
Kullback-Leibler divergence regularized framework. Through both time particle and discretized
analysis, we substantiate the linear convergence
guarantees of our neural actor-critic algorithms,
representing a notable contribution to neural reinforcement learning focusing on global optimality
and feature learning, extending the existing understanding beyond the conventional scope of lazy
training.

One source of difficulty in the analysis of neural policy optimization comes from the nonconvexity of the expected total
reward over the policy space. Also, TD learning used in
the policy evaluation subproblem faces classic challenges
(Baird, 1995; Tsitsiklis & Van Roy, 1996) stemming from
the bias of semi-gradient optimization (Sutton, 1988). Another source of difficulty is the nonlinearity associated with
the neural networks parameterizing both the policy and stateaction value functions. The tremendous success of deep RL
is attributed to its rich expressive power, which is backed
by the nonlinearity of neural networks, which at the same
time brings a considerable challenge to the optimization
aspect. Unfortunately, the advantages of data-dependent
learning of neural networks in the context of RL have only
a limited theoretical understanding. Classical theoretical
studies of policy optimization and policy evaluation problems, including the actor-critic method, limit their analysis
to the case of linear function approximation in both the actor
and the critic, where the feature mapping is fixed during
learning (Sutton et al., 1999; Kakade, 2001; Bhatnagar et al.,
2007; 2009). Recently, some analyses based on the theory

1
MIT, Cambridge, MA 2 The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, RIKEN 4 Yale University, New Haven, CT. Correspondence to: Kakei Yamamoto
<kakei@mit.edu>.
3

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

