Mollification Effects of Policy Gradient Methods

Tao Wang 1 Sylvia Herbert 1 Sicun Gao 1

Abstract
Policy gradient methods have enabled deep reinforcement learning (RL) to approach challenging
continuous control problems, even when the underlying systems involve highly nonlinear dynamics that generate complex non-smooth optimization landscapes. We develop a rigorous framework for understanding how policy gradient methods mollify non-smooth optimization landscapes
to enable effective policy search, as well as the
downside of it: while making the objective function smoother and easier to optimize, the stochastic objective deviates further from the original
problem. We demonstrate the equivalence between policy gradient methods and solving backward heat equations. Following the ill-posedness
of backward heat equations from PDE theory, we
present a fundamental challenge to the use of policy gradient under stochasticity. Moreover, we
make the connection between this limitation and
the uncertainty principle in harmonic analysis to
understand the effects of exploration with stochastic policies in RL. We also provide experimental
results to illustrate both the positive and negative
aspects of mollification effects in practice.

Figure 1. The Gaussian kernel in the policy gradient mollifies the
optimization landscape. However, when the variance σ 2 is too
small, the landscape remains highly non-smooth. Conversely, if
the variance is too large, the Gaussian kernel over-smooths the
landscape, eliminating the optimal solution. Both of these lead to
failures in the hopper stand task. Details are avaliable in Section 6.

classes of systems such as linear dynamics or tabular state
spaces (Fazel et al., 2018; Agarwal et al., 2021), its observed
effectiveness for nonlinear systems is not well understood.
In fact, it has been shown that in many control settings, especially those with chaotic dynamics, the RL formulation can
generate highly non-smooth optimization landscapes (Suh
et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023) that should challenge the use
of gradient-based optimization methods including policy
gradient. Existing attempts on bridging this gap have mostly
focused on the effectiveness of exploration (Haarnoja et al.,
2018a; Cai et al., 2020). However, while exploration is a
common element in every search-based algorithm, it alone
does not fully explain the success of RL over other schemes
in high-dimensional spaces.

1. Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (RL), especially methods
based on policy gradients (Silver et al., 2014; Lillicrap et al.,
2015; Schulman et al., 2017), has been successfully used
to solve challenging nonlinear control problems (Gu et al.,
2016; Kim et al., 2022). The approach considers control
design as an optimization problem over the parameter space
of the policy, and thus the effectiveness of policy gradient methods depend heavily on the optimization landscape
in the policy space. Although the global convergence of
policy gradient methods has been established for restricted

Given that the true gradient of the objective function may
not exist in many robotics systems, we aim to understand
the effectiveness of policy gradient methods through the
analytic perspectives of partial differential equations (PDEs)
and stochastic dynamical systems. We view the Gaussian
noise introduced in the stochastic policies as a smoothing
kernel that mollifies the objective function. Mollification is a
concept in analysis that corresponds to smoothing the sharp
features of a non-smooth function while remaining close to

1
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, USA. Correspondence to: Tao Wang <taw003@ucsd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

