Zero-Shot Reinforcement Learning via Function Encoders

Tyler Ingebrand 1 Amy Zhang 1 Ufuk Topcu 1

Abstract

Function representations

Function data

f2

Although reinforcement learning (RL) can solve
many challenging sequential decision making
problems, achieving zero-shot transfer across related tasks remains a challenge. The difficulty
lies in finding a good representation for the current task so that the agent understands how it relates to previously seen tasks. To achieve zeroshot transfer, we introduce the function encoder,
a representation learning algorithm which represents a function as a weighted combination of
learned, non-linear basis functions. By using a
function encoder to represent the reward function or the transition function, the agent has information on how the current task relates to previously seen tasks via a coherent vector representation. Thus, the agent is able to achieve transfer between related tasks at run time with no additional training. We demonstrate state-of-theart data efficiency, asymptotic performance, and
training stability in three RL fields by augmenting basic RL algorithms with a function encoder
task representation.

f1
f3

Function
Encoder

cf1

c f2
c f3

RL Alg.
π(s, cf )
Q(s, a, cf )

Figure 1. A diagram representing the workflow of function encoders. The set of functions is converted into a set of representations via a function encoder. Those representations are passed
into the RL algorithm as input to the policy and value functions.
The represented functions can be reward functions and/or transition functions, depending on the setting.

because there are conceivably infinite variations of reward
and transition functions for a given system.
A key desiderata for learning systems is zero-shot transfer,
the ability to solve any problem from the task continuum
at run time with no additional training. Zero-shot transfer would allow the robot to solve all of its kitchen objectives without retraining by reusing information from similar tasks. Likewise, the robot would be able to walk on a
slippery surface by slightly modifying policies capable of
walking on similar surfaces. In order for an autonomous
robot to achieve zero-shot transfer, it must know which reward function it should be optimizing and the properties
of its current transition function. In other words, the autonomous system needs an informative task description that
uniquely identifies the current task and describes how an
unseen task relates to prior tasks.

1. Introduction
While deep reinforcement learning (RL) has demonstrated
the ability to solve challenging sequential decision making
problems, many real-life applications require the ability to
solve a continuum of related tasks, where each task has a
fixed objective and dynamics function. For example, an
autonomous robot operating in a kitchen needs the ability
to achieve various cooking and cleaning objectives, each of
which has a separate reward function. Likewise, if the robot
is operating outside during winter, it must be able to operate
in various slippery conditions, each of which has a separate
transition function. However, it is not possible to learn a
policy using standard RL algorithms for every possible task

Prior works in zero-shot RL identify the task through a context variable, which is either given (Andrychowicz et al.,
2017) or calculated from data (Touati & Ollivier, 2021;
Benjamins et al., 2022; Jaderberg et al., 2017). Such context variables are often domain specific (Borsa et al., 2018;
Killian et al., 2017) and lack out-of-distribution guarantees
with respect to related but unseen tasks. In contrast, we
seek an algorithm that is applicable to many domains, and
a context representation that can provably generalize to unseen but related contexts. Recent works have also described
the task via natural language, and trained a policy through
imitation learning (Brohan et al., 2022; 2023). However,
this approach requires an enormous amount of data which
is impractical for most use cases.

1

University of Texas at Austin. Correspondence to: Tyler Ingebrand <tyleringebrand@utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).
Code: https://github.com/tyler-ingebrand/FunctionEncoderRL

In this paper, we introduce the function encoder, a repre1

