Stealing Part of a Production Language Model

Nicholas Carlini 1 Daniel Paleka 2 Krishnamurthy (Dj) Dvijotham 1 Thomas Steinke 1 Jonathan Hayase 3
A. Feder Cooper 1 Katherine Lee 1 Matthew Jagielski 1 Milad Nasr 1 Arthur Conmy 1 Eric Wallace 4
David Rolnick 5 Florian Tramèr 2

Abstract

information is available). Nevertheless, while these models’
weights and internal details are not publicly accessible, the
models themselves are exposed via APIs.

We introduce the first model-stealing attack that
extracts precise, nontrivial information from
black-box production language models like OpenAI’s ChatGPT or Google’s PaLM-2. Specifically, our attack recovers the embedding projection layer (up to symmetries) of a transformer
model, given typical API access. For under $20
USD, our attack extracts the entire projection matrix of OpenAI’s ada and babbage language
models. We thereby confirm, for the first time,
that these black-box models have a hidden dimension of 1024 and 2048, respectively. We
also recover the exact hidden dimension size of
the gpt-3.5-turbo model, and estimate it would
cost under $2,000 in queries to recover the entire
projection matrix. We conclude with potential
defenses and mitigations, and discuss the implications of possible future work that could extend
our attack.

In this paper we ask: how much information can an adversary learn about a production language model by making
queries to its API? This is the question studied by the field
of model stealing (Tramèr et al., 2016): the ability of an adversary to extract model weights by making queries its API.
Contributions. We introduce an attack that can be applied
to black-box language models, and allows us to recover
the complete embedding projection layer of a transformer
language model. Our attack departs from prior approaches
that reconstruct a model in a bottom-up fashion, starting
from the input layer. Instead, our attack operates top-down
and directly extracts the model’s last layer. Specifically,
we exploit the fact that the final layer of a language model
projects from the hidden dimension to a (higher dimensional) logit vector. This final layer is thus low-rank, and by
making targeted queries to a model’s API, we can extract
its embedding dimension or its final weight matrix.
Stealing this layer is useful for several reasons. First, it
reveals the width of the transformer model, which is often
correlated with its total parameter count. Second, it slightly
reduces the degree to which the model is a complete “blackbox”, which so might be useful for future attacks. Third,
while our attack recovers only a (relatively small) part of
the entire model, the fact that it is at all possible to steal any
parameters of a production model is surprising, and raises
concerns that extensions of this attack might be able to
recover more information. Finally, recovering the model’s
last layer (and thus hidden dimension) may reveal more
global information about the model, such as relative size
differences between different models.

1. Introduction
Little is publicly known about the inner workings of today’s
most popular large language models, such as GPT-4, Claude
2, or Gemini. The GPT-4 technical report states it “contains
no [...] details about the architecture (including model size),
hardware, training compute, dataset construction, training
method, or similar” (OpenAI et al., 2023). Similarly, the
PaLM-2 paper states that “details of [the] model size and
architecture are withheld from external publication” (Anil
et al., 2023). This secrecy is often ascribed to “the competitive landscape” (because these models are expensive to train)
and the “safety implications of large-scale models” (OpenAI
et al., 2023) (because it is easier to attack models when more

Our attack is effective and efficient, and is applicable to
production models whose APIs expose full logprobs, or a
“logit bias”. This included Google’s PaLM-2 and OpenAI’s
GPT-4 (Anil et al., 2023; OpenAI et al., 2023); after responsible disclosure, both APIs have implemented defenses to
prevent our attack or make it more expensive. We extract
the embedding layer of several OpenAI models with a mean
squared error of 10−4 (up to unavoidable symmetries). We

1

Google DeepMind 2 ETH Zurich 3 University of Washington
OpenAI 5 McGill University. Correspondence to: Nicholas Carlini
<nicholas@carlini.com>.
4

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

