Differentially private exact recovery for stochastic block models

Dung Nguyen 1 Anil Vullikanti 1

Abstract

tioning the network into “well-connected” communities,
e.g., (Blondel et al., 2008; Girvan & Newman, 2002; Holland et al., 1983) (see survey by (Fortunato, 2010)). There
is limited theoretical understanding of community detection, since these notions are very problem-specific. One
exception is the stochastic block model (SBM) (Holland
et al., 1983), a probabilistic generative model with welldefined communities, making them very amenable from a
theoretical perspective. Therefore, SBMs have been extensively studied in network science, and have become standard test benches for community detection algorithms.

Stochastic block models (SBMs) are a very commonly studied network model for community detection algorithms. In the standard form of an
SBM, the n vertices (or nodes) of a graph are
generally divided into multiple pre-determined
communities (or clusters). Connections between pairs of vertices are generated randomly
and independently with pre-defined probabilities,
which depend on the communities containing the
two nodes. A fundamental problem in SBMs
is the recovery of the community structure, and
sharp information-theoretic bounds are known
for recoverability for many versions of SBMs.

In the standard form of an SBM, the n vertices (or nodes) of
a graph are generally divided into multiple pre-determined
communities (or clusters). Connections between pairs of
vertices are generated randomly and independently with
pre-defined probabilities, which depend on the communities containing the two nodes; the Erdős-Rényi model is a
special case of SBM with a single cluster. The simplest
type of SBM is a Binary Symmetric SBM (BSSBM) (Abbe
et al., 2015), which consists of two communities with n/2
nodes each. A pair of nodes within the same community
are connected (forming an intra-cluster edge) with probability p, while a pair of nodes in the separate communities are connected with probability q (forming an intercluster edge). BSSBMs are quite restricted in terms of their
structure, and many more complex SBMs have been developed to model more realistic networks, such as: multiple equal-sized clusters (Symmetric SBMs (SSBM)), allowing two clusters of unequal sizes (Binary Asymmetric
SBM (BASBM)) (Hajek et al., 2016b), combining them together and with the existence of outliers (General Structure SBM (GSSBM)) (Hajek et al., 2016a), adding features
such as weight labels (Censored SBM (CSBM)) (Hajek
et al., 2016b), and by introducing new assumptions such
as degree distribution of vertices (Degree Corrected SBM),
e.g., (Qin & Rohe, 2013); see (Lee & Wilkinson, 2019) for
a survey on SBMs.

Our focus here is the recoverability problem
in SBMs when the network is private. Under the edge differential privacy model, we derive conditions for exact recoverability in three
different versions of SBMs, namely Asymmetric SBM (when communities have non-uniform
sizes), General Structure SBM (with outliers),
and Censored SBM (with edge features). Our
private algorithms have polynomial running time
w.r.t. the input graph’s size, and match the recovery thresholds of the non-private setting when
ϵ → ∞. In contrast, the previous best results for
recoverability in SBMs only hold for the symmetric case (equal size communities), and run
in quasi-polynomial time, or in polynomial time
with recovery thresholds being tight up to some
constants from the non-private settings.

1. Introduction
A very common first step in the analysis of networked
data in numerous applications, and unsupervised machine
learning is community detection or clustering, i.e., parti-

A fundamental problem is “recovering” the community
structure from a given SBM, and this has spurred a very
active area of research. Exact recovery is defined as when
the probability that the community detection algorithm successfully recovers the ground-truth communities converges
to 1 when the size of the input graph (the number of vertices n) goes to infinity, with the probability space is over

1

Department of Computer Science and Biocomplexity Institute
and Initiative, University of Virginia, Virginia, USA. Correspondence to: Dung Nguyen <dungn@virginia.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

