Efficient Non-stationary Online Learning by Wavelets
with Applications to Online Distribution Shift Adaptation

Yu-Yang Qian 1 2 Peng Zhao 1 2 Yu-Jie Zhang 3 Masashi Sugiyama 4 3 Zhi-Hua Zhou 1 2

Abstract

et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2023a; Zhao
et al., 2024). A standard formulation is the online convex
optimization framework (Hazan, 2016), in which the online
learning process is deemed as a T -round iterative game
between a learner and the environment. At iteration t ∈
{1, . . . , T }, the learner selects a decision θt from a convex
set Θ ⊆ Rd , and the environment simultaneously selects an
online function ft : Θ → R. Subsequently, the learner will
suffer a loss ft (θt ) and observe certain gradient information
as the feedback. Recent developments have demonstrated
a principled way for non-stationary online learning based
on dynamic regret minimization — aiming to optimize the
cumulative regret against changing comparators,

Dynamic regret minimization offers a principled
way for non-stationary online learning, where
the algorithm’s performance is evaluated against
changing comparators. Prevailing methods often employ a two-layer online ensemble, consisting of a group of base learners with different configurations and a meta learner that combines their outputs. Given the evident computational overhead associated with two-layer algorithms, this paper investigates how to attain optimal dynamic regret without deploying a model
ensemble. To this end, we introduce the notion of
underlying dynamic regret, a specific form of the
general dynamic regret that can encompass many
applications of interest. We show that almost
optimal dynamic regret can be obtained using a
single-layer model alone. This is achieved by an
adaptive restart equipped with wavelet detection,
wherein a novel streaming wavelet operator is introduced to online update the wavelet coefficients
via a carefully designed binary indexed tree. We
apply our method to the online label shift adaptation problem, leading to new algorithms with optimal dynamic regret and significantly improved
computation/storage efficiency compared to prior
arts. Extensive experiments validate our proposal.

T
Regd
T ({ft , ut }t=1 ) ≜

T
X
t=1

ft (θt ) −

T
X

ft (ut ).

(1)

t=1

The comparators u1 , . . . , uT ∈ Θ can be arbitrarily chosen
to model the unknown changes of non-stationary environments, so a desired dynamic regret upper bound should hold
for all feasible comparators universally. Therefore, this measure is usually referred to as universal dynamic regret, and
there have been rich theoretical developments (Zhang et al.,
2018; Cutkosky, 2020; Zhao et al., 2020; Baby & Wang,
2021; Zhao et al., 2024) as well as applications to online
distribution shift adaptation (Bai et al., 2022; Zhang et al.,
2023a; Baby et al., 2023; Qian et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2024).
To handle the fundamental uncertainty due to the unknown
environmental non-stationarity
(e.g., manifested as the variPT
ation quantity PT = t=2 ∥ut − ut−1 ∥2 ), prevailing methods often employ a two-layer online ensemble to optimize (1), which maintains diverse multiple base learners
and uses a meta learner to combine them to track the best
one on the fly. While achieving optimal dynamic regret,
the computational overhead associated with this ensemble
structure is evident, and it remains unclear how to attain
optimal dynamic regret without deploying an ensemble.

1. Introduction
Non-stationary online learning is an emerging field that
has received much attention in recent years, with appeals
both in theory and practice (Besbes et al., 2015; Zhang
et al., 2018; Baby & Wang, 2019; Cutkosky, 2020; Zhao
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, China 2 School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China 3 The University of Tokyo, Chiba, Japan
4
RIKEN AIP, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Peng Zhao
<zhaop@lamda.nju.edu.cn>.

In this paper, we discover that while it is hard to use a singlelayer model to trace all kinds of possible comparators, many
real-world problems exhibit specific structures that contain
certain information about comparators. We propose a new
performance measure named underlying dynamic regret,
where the learner can observe an unbiased empirical es-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

