DynSyn: Dynamical Synergistic Representation for Efficient Learning
and Control in Overactuated Embodied Systems

Kaibo He 1 Chenhui Zuo 1 Chengtian Ma 1 Yanan Sui 1

Abstract

robust and generalizable policies through iterative trial and
error within large-scale simulations, subsequently deploying
them onto real-world robots via sim-to-real methodologies
(Rudin et al., 2022; Duan et al., 2022; Radosavovic et al.,
2023). Overactuation and redundancy can often enhance
the safety and robustness of embodied intelligent systems,
mitigating the risk of sudden control failures (Hsu et al.,
1989; Schneiders et al., 2004; Tohidi et al., 2016). However,
overactuation will increase the complexity of the controlled
object, particularly by enlarging the dimensionality of the
action space, making it difficult for the deep RL controllers
to achieve motor control.

Learning an effective policy to control highdimensional, overactuated systems is a significant challenge for deep reinforcement learning
algorithms. Such control scenarios are often observed in the neural control of vertebrate musculoskeletal systems. The study of these control
mechanisms will provide insights into the control
of high-dimensional, overactuated systems. The
coordination of actuators, known as muscle synergies in neuromechanics, is considered a presumptive mechanism that simplifies the generation of
motor commands. The dynamical structure of a
system is the basis of its function, allowing us
to derive a synergistic representation of actuators.
Motivated by this theory, we propose the Dynamical Synergistic Representation (DynSyn) algorithm. DynSyn aims to generate synergistic representations from dynamical structures and perform
task-specific, state-dependent adaptation to the
representations to improve motor control. We
demonstrate DynSyn’s efficiency across various
tasks involving different musculoskeletal models, achieving state-of-the-art sample efficiency
and robustness compared to baseline algorithms.
DynSyn generates interpretable synergistic representations that capture the essential features of
dynamical structures and demonstrates generalizability across diverse motor tasks.

A common example of overactuated embodied systems is
musculoskeletal systems in nature. In contrast to existing
DRL agents, the motor control intelligence of vertebrates
can control musculoskeletal systems through the central
nervous system, exhibiting the ability to generalize across
a variety of motor tasks while maintaining stability even
under large disturbances, such as external force interference
and drastic changes of environmental parameters. Exploring
musculoskeletal motion control can help address the control
challenges posed by high-dimensional, overactuated systems, thereby advancing our progress towards embodied intelligence. Nevertheless, a musculoskeletal model of human
possesses characteristics that pose significant challenges for
motor control by a RL agent. Firstly, the muscle control
parameter space is high-dimensional, where over 600 skeletal muscles control hundreds of joints (Bernstein, 1966).
Secondly, the system is overactuated, as multiple muscles
actuate one joint and multiple joints may be affected by one
muscle (Ting et al., 2012). Thirdly, the dynamic of neuromuscular actuators is non-linear and inconstant (Zajac, 1989;
Wolpert & Ghahramani, 2000), and these actuators can only
generate tension and no reverse forces.

1. Introduction
In the evolution of embodied intelligence, researchers have
used reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms to train controllers across diverse robotic platforms, yielding notable
advancements in motor control. These agents can acquire

How does motor control in vertebrates effectively address
the challenge of redundant actuation? In neuroscience, there
is a hypothesis known as muscle synergies. It proposes
that coordinated recruitment of groups of muscles serves
as a modular framework for biological motor control, simplifying the generation of motor commands. Studies have
demonstrated that various motor behaviors can be reconstructed with high fidelity using a basic set of coordinated

1

School of Aerospace Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.
Correspondence to: Yanan Sui
<ysui@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

