Scalable and Flexible Causal Discovery with an Efficient Test for Adjacency

Alan Nawzad Amin 1 Andrew Gordon Wilson 1

Abstract

Modern state-of-the-art algorithms frame learning causal
relationships as a model selection problem (Chickering,
2002; van de Geer & Bühlmann, 2013). Each model corresponds to a directed acyclic graph representing which variables cause which others. Complex relationships between
variables are then modelled using flexible neural networks
(Lachapelle et al., 2019; Zheng et al., 2020). The central
practical challenge of this approach is the model search,
where one needs to explicitly search through the enormous
space of all directed acyclic graphs. Recently, a number
of gradient-based search methods have scaled this procedure to data of large complex systems (Zheng et al., 2018;
Lachapelle et al., 2019; Zheng et al., 2020; Nazaret et al.,
2023). However, these heuristic search procedures can be
unstable in practice and can be unreliable even in simple
settings (Wei et al., 2020; Nazaret et al., 2023; Deng et al.,
2023). The model search also becomes exponentially harder
as the number of variables increases.

To make accurate predictions, understand mechanisms, and design interventions in systems of
many variables, we wish to learn causal graphs
from large scale data. Unfortunately the space of
all possible causal graphs is enormous so scalably
and accurately searching for the best fit to the data
is a challenge. In principle we could substantially
decrease the search space, or learn the graph entirely, by testing the conditional independence of
variables. However, deciding if two variables are
adjacent in a causal graph may require an exponential number of tests. Here we build a scalable
and flexible method to evaluate if two variables
are adjacent in a causal graph, the Differentiable
Adjacency Test (DAT). DAT replaces an exponential number of tests with a provably equivalent
relaxed problem. It then solves this problem by
training two neural networks. We build a graph
learning method based on DAT, DAT-Graph, that
can also learn from data with interventions. DATGraph can learn graphs of 1000 variables with
state of the art accuracy. Using the graph learned
by DAT-Graph, we also build models that make
much more accurate predictions of the effects of
interventions on large scale RNA sequencing data.

To make more accurate predictions at scale we can shrink
the search space, or avoid searching by learning the graph
entirely, by taking the alternative approach of many classical graph learning algorithms. These approaches test the
data for conditional independence relationships, and then
exclude the corresponding edges from the graph (Spirtes
et al., 1993). Indeed recently, by reducing the model search
space with some limited testing, a gradient-based model
search strategy demonstrated large gains in accuracy on data
of large complex systems (Nazaret et al., 2023). And historically, by reducing the search space by testing as much
as possible before performing model search, classical nonflexible “hybrid” causal models achieved state-of-the-art
accuracy learning from data of simple systems (Tsamardinos et al., 2006; Bühlmann et al., 2014).

1. Introduction
Large scale studies have recently collected hundreds of thousands of measurements of thousands of variables and interventions across genetics, microbiology, and healthcare
(Van Hout et al., 2020; Regev et al., 2017; Franzosa et al.,
2019; Geiger-Schuller et al., 2023; Replogle et al., 2022;
Dixit et al., 2016). An algorithm that leverages this data to
learn cause and effect must scale to many measurements
and variables, flexibly accommodate complex interactions
between variables, and make reliable predictions in realistic
and large scale settings.

Unfortunately, classical testing-based procedures struggle
to scalably and reliably learn from data of large complex
systems. A particularly informative test, and the central step
in virtually all classical testing-based procedures, is evaluating if two variables are immediate causes or effects of
each other — that is, if they are adjacent in the causal graph
(Spirtes et al., 1993; Tsamardinos et al., 2006). Evaluating
this relationship for a pair of variables involves searching for
a set of other variables that renders them conditionally independent (Fig. 1(a)). For each pair this search can involve
an exponential number of tests. Because of the enormous

1
New York University, New York, USA. Correspondence to:
Alan Nawzad Amin <alanamin@nyu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

