Learning Modality Knowledge Alignment for Cross-Modality Transfer

Wenxuan Ma 1 Shuang Li 1 Lincan Cai 1 Jingxuan Kang 2

Abstract

(a) ℳ𝑡 = ℳ𝑠

Cross-modality transfer aims to leverage large
pretrained models to complete tasks that may not
belong to the modality of pretraining data. Existing works achieve certain success in extending
classical finetuning to cross-modal scenarios, yet
we still lack understanding about the influence
of modality gap on the transfer. In this work, a
series of experiments focusing on the source representation quality during transfer are conducted,
revealing the connection between larger modality
gap and lesser knowledge reuse which means ineffective transfer. We then formalize the gap as
the knowledge misalignment between modalities
using conditional distribution P (Y |X). Towards
this problem, we present Modality kNowledge
Alignment (MoNA), a meta-learning approach
that learns target data transformation to reduce
the modality knowledge discrepancy ahead of
the transfer. Experiments show that out method
enables better reuse of source modality knowledge in cross-modality transfer, which leads to
improvements upon existing finetuning methods

(b) ℳ𝑡 ⊆ ℳ𝑠

(c) 𝓜𝒕 ⊄ 𝓜𝒔
pretrain

pretrain
This is a
lovely dog.

finetune

/

Ein hund.

In-modality Transfer (a. single/b. multiple)

Modalities

✓

/

finetune

?

Cross-modality Transfer

ℳ𝑠 /ℳ𝑡

/

Src/trgt. modality

Uni-/Multi-modal model

Knowledge transfer

Figure 1. Comparison between in-modality finetuning (a)(b) and
cross-modal finetuning (c). Both unimodal and multimodal finetuning are considered to be in-modality finetuning because the
target modality is in the scope of the pretrained model’s modality.
In contrast, cross-modal finetuning exploits the pretrained model
on target modalities that the pretrained model is not trained on.

model and the downstream task come from the same modality, e.g., the model is a vision transformer pretrained on
ImageNet (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) and the task is CIFAR100 classification (Krizhevsky et al., 2009). However, recent stuides have been attempt to broaden this boundary to
cross-modality transfer, using vision transformer for audio
classification (Lin et al., 2023), and finetuning language
model for tabular data (Dinh et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2023).
Fig. 1 illustrates the difference between in-modality and
cross-modality transfer.

1. Introduction
Transferring knowledge from past experience to new tasks
is a fundamental ability of human intelligence (Pan & Yang,
2010; Long et al., 2018; Zhuang et al., 2020). Such an ability to acquire and reuse knowledge is continuously pursued
in machine learning community, aiming to build artificial
intelligence systems that predicts more accurately and learns
more data-efficiently. Today, as large fundation models that
are trained on massive data are widely available (Bai et al.,
2023; Touvron et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023), using such
pretrained model as powerful feature extractor for new tasks
has become a common practice of tranfer learning (Ding
et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023a). Naturally, the pretrained

The motivation of such cross-modal transfer is easy to comprehend, especially when the target modality is data scarce.
Scientific tasks like electrocardiogram classification (Clifford et al., 2017) and protein distance prediction (Adhikari,
2020) find difficulties in collecting large amount of training
data, and further requires much expensive annotating costs
from human experts. In such cases, it is desirable to leverage the pretrained model from other modalities like vision
and language, in which data are easier to collect, to help the
target modality tasks. However, the cross-modal transfer
is not as straightforward as the in-modality transfer due to
two challenges: 1) the input space and the label space are
different across modalities, and 2) the knowledge required
for addressing tasks in different modality may also differ.

1

Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China 2 University of
Illinois Urbana-Champaign, USA. Correspondence to: Shuang Li
<shuangli@bit.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Previous works tackle the first challenge by designing
modality-specific embedders and predictors to interface with
1

