Tight Partial Identification of Causal Effects with Marginal Distribution of
Unmeasured Confounders
Zhiheng Zhang 1

Abstract

U

Partial identification (PI) presents a significant
challenge in causal inference due to the incomplete measurement of confounders. Given that obtaining auxiliary variables of confounders is not
always feasible and relies on untestable assumptions, researchers are encouraged to explore the
internal information of latent confounders without
external assistance. However, these prevailing PI
results often lack precise mathematical measurement from observational data or assume that the
information pertaining to confounders falls within
extreme scenarios. In our paper, we reassess the
significance of the marginal confounder distribution in PI. We refrain from imposing additional restrictions on the marginal confounder distribution,
such as entropy or mutual information. Instead,
we establish the closed-form tight PI for any possible P(U ) in the discrete case. Furthermore, we
establish the if and only if criteria for discerning whether the marginal confounder information
leads to non-vanilla PI regions. This reveals a
fundamental negative result wherein the marginal
confounder information minimally contributes to
PI as the confounder’s cardinality increases. Our
theoretical findings are supported by experiments.

X

Y

Figure 1. We consider the fundamental causal graph involving
treatment X, outcome Y , and confounders U . Our focus lies
in achieving the tight PI of causal queries using only the information from the marginal distribution P (U ) in conjunction with the
observed P (X, Y ).

random variables X and Y via the causal diagram as described in Figure 1, the existence of two paths U → X and
U → Y may affect the judgment of the direct causal effect
from X to Y . This is also related to the famous “Simpson’s
paradox” (Pearl, 2014).
In the absence of unobserved confounders, it is well known
that causal effect is “identifiable” (Robins, 1987). Taking
Figure 1 again for instance, when the joint distribution of
random variables {X, Y, U } can be observed, the causal
effect from X to Y could be fully recovered according to
the famous “back-door criteria” (Pearl et al., 2000). When
unmeasured confounders exist, Tian & Pearl (2002) established the if and only if criteria for the identification of
causal queries. When it is not satisfied, one can at most
identify a region where the true causal effect belongs, which
is commonly known as the Partial identification (PI).

1. Introduction

When only the marginal distribution P(X, Y ) is accessible,
and the causal diagram follows Figure 1, the tight PI region of causal estimand is provided by Tian & Pearl (2000),
which is also known as the so-called “vanilla bound”. To
achieve an identification region tighter than just vanilla
bound, existing methods can be split into two categories.
The first category resorts to external auxiliary variables. For
example, Balke & Pearl (1997) proposed the famous “BalkePearl” bound via auxiliary instrument variables, which is
further extended by Kitagawa (2009) to the continuous case.
Ghassami et al. (2023) generalized the traditional doublenegative control method, which took advantage of the treatment and outcome confounding proxy variables to construct
valid PI bounds. Besides, Gabriel et al. (2022) selected the
outcome-dependent samples for assistance.

Estimating causal effect is important in a wide range
of fields, including medicine (Castro et al., 2020), economics (Hicks et al., 1980), education (Peng & Knowles,
2003), and climate (Zhang et al., 2020). Due to the existence
of latent confounders, the causal effect is usually not identifiable just from observational distribution. For example,
when there exists a latent confounder that affects observed
1

Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Zhiheng Zhang
<zhiheng-20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

