CogBench: a large language model walks into a psychology lab

Julian Coda-Forno 1 2 Marcel Binz 1 2 Jane X. Wang 3 Eric Schulz 1 2

Abstract

spectrum of capabilities that were previously unimagined
(Wei et al., 2022; Brown et al., 2020). Yet, these models
also present a significant challenge: their internal workings
are largely opaque, making it difficult to fully comprehend
their behavior (Tamkin et al., 2021). This lack of understanding fuels ongoing debates about their capabilities and
limitations (McCoy et al., 2023; Bubeck et al., 2023).

Large language models (LLMs) have significantly
advanced the field of artificial intelligence. Yet,
evaluating them comprehensively remains challenging. We argue that this is partly due to the predominant focus on performance metrics in most
benchmarks. This paper introduces CogBench,
a benchmark that includes ten behavioral metrics derived from seven cognitive psychology experiments. This novel approach offers a toolkit
for phenotyping LLMs’ behavior. We apply
CogBench to 40 LLMs, yielding a rich and diverse dataset. We analyze this data using statistical multilevel modeling techniques, accounting
for the nested dependencies among fine-tuned versions of specific LLMs. Our study highlights the
crucial role of model size and reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) in improving
performance and aligning with human behavior.
Interestingly, we find that open-source models are
less risk-prone than proprietary models and that
fine-tuning on code does not necessarily enhance
LLMs’ behavior. Finally, we explore the effects of
prompt-engineering techniques. We discover that
chain-of-thought prompting improves probabilistic reasoning, while take-a-step-back prompting
fosters model-based behaviors.

A notable issue in these discussions is the focus of many
benchmarks on performance metrics alone (Burnell et al.,
2023). This approach often overlooks the underlying behavioral mechanisms of the models, reducing benchmarks to
mere training targets rather than tools for genuine insight,
and thus failing to provide a comprehensive measure of
the models’ abilities (Schaeffer et al., 2023). How can we
overcome this problem and make progress toward a better
understanding of LLMs’ behaviors?
The field of cognitive psychology may offer solutions to
these problems. Experiments from cognitive psychology
have been used to study human behavior for many decades,
and have therefore been extensively validated. Furthermore,
they typically focus more on behavioral insights rather than
performance metrics alone. Finally, many of these experiments are programmatically generated, minimizing data
leakage concerns. Many of these concepts are important to
ensure a robust evaluation of an agent’s capabilities. However, while there have been studies investigating LLMs on
individual tasks from cognitive psychology (Binz & Schulz,
2023; Dasgupta et al., 2022; Hagendorff et al., 2023; Ullman, 2023), no study has evaluated them holistically.

1. Introduction

In this paper, we propose CogBench, a novel benchmark
consisting of ten behavioral metrics spanning seven cognitive psychology experiments, to fill this gap. We investigate
the behaviors of 40 LLMs in total, using our benchmark to
not only compare the performance of these models but also
apply techniques from computational cognitive modeling to
understand the inner workings of their behaviors.

Large language models (LLMs) have emerged as a groundbreaking technology, captivating the attention of the scientific community (Bommasani et al., 2021; Binz et al., 2023).
Modern LLMs have scaled to remarkable dimensions in both
architecture and datasets (Kaplan et al., 2020), revealing a
*
Equal contribution 1 Computational Principles of Intelligence
Lab, Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics, Tübingen,
Germany 2 Institute for Human-Centered AI, Helmholtz Computational Health Center, Munich, Germany 3 Google DeepMind,
London, UK. Correspondence to: Julian Coda-Forno <julian.codaforno@helmholtz-munich.de>.

Our results recover the unequivocal importance of size:
larger models generally perform better and are more modelbased than smaller models. Our results also show the importance of reinforcement learning from human feedback
(RLHF; Christiano et al., 2017) in aligning LLMs with
humans: RLHF’ed LLMs behave generally more humanlike and are more accurate in estimating uncertainty. Yet

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

