VinT-6D: A Large-Scale Object-in-hand Dataset
from Vision, Touch and Proprioception
Zhaoliang Wan 1 2 Yonggen Ling 2 Senlin Yi 1 Lu Qi 3 Wangwei Lee 2 Minglei Lu 2 Sicheng Yang 2
Xiao Teng 2 Peng Lu 2 Xu Yang 4 Ming-Hsuan Yang 3 Hui Cheng 1

Abstract
This paper addresses the scarcity of large-scale
datasets for accurate object-in-hand pose estimation, which is crucial for robotic in-hand manipulation within the “Perception-Planning-Control”
paradigm. Specifically, we introduce VinT-6D,
the first extensive multi-modal dataset integrating vision, touch, and proprioception, to enhance
robotic manipulation. VinT-6D comprises 2 million VinT-Sim and 0.1 million VinT-Real splits,
collected via simulations in MuJoCo and Blender
and a custom-designed real-world platform. This
dataset is tailored for robotic hands, offering models with whole-hand tactile perception and highquality, well-aligned data. To the best of our
knowledge, the VinT-Real is the largest considering the collection difficulties in the real-world environment so that it can bridge the gap of simulation to real compared to the previous works. Built
upon VinT-6D, we present a benchmark method
that shows significant improvements in performance by fusing multi-modal information. The
project is available at https://VinT-6D.github.io/.

VinT-Sim

Motion Capture System

VinT-Real
Robot Base

Hand Pose
Object Pose

Figure 1. Large-scale object-in-hand dataset VinT-6D comprising synthesized and real-world splits naming VinT-Sim and
VinT-Real. VinT-Sim aims to generate realistic data across vision,
touch, and proprioception. VinT-Real is gathered through a precisely calibrated and aligned multi-modal robot platform, where a
motion capture system obtains accurate object and hand poses.

2023b; Suresh et al., 2023) and grasping (Liang et al., 2020).
Specifically, utilizing multi-modal signals, including vision,
touch, and proprioception, is emerging as a significant research trend due to their unique characteristics (Liang et al.,
2020; Cui et al., 2021; Röstel et al., 2022; Kelestemur et al.,
2022; Lin et al., 2023b). These approaches align closely
with human biological mechanisms, where the coordination of eyes, muscles, and joints is central to manipulating
objects held in the hands.

1. Introduction
Estimating 6D object-in-hand pose (Wang et al., 2019;
Dikhale et al., 2022) is a crucial area in both computer vision and robotics, that benefits numerous applications such
as dexterous manipulation (Kelestemur et al., 2022; Qi et al.,
Zhaoliang Wan conducted this research during his internship at Robotics X, Tencent. 1 School of Computer Science
and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
2
Robotics X, Tencnet, Shenzhen, China 3 The University of
California, Merced, Merced, the U.S. 4 Chinese Academic of
Sciences, Automation Institute, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Yonggen Ling <rolandling@tencent.com>, Hui Cheng
<chengh9@mail.sysu.edu.cn>.

Despite significant progress in representation learning
across three modalities, this field faces two major issues
due to the existing low-quality real-world dataset. First, due
to the scarcity of large-scale public data, one common practice is to resort to synthesized data for training, resulting in
a substantial domain gap with real-world environments at
test time. Second, as existing methods focus on synthesized
data for two-finger grippers, they could not be applied to
complex scenarios such as occlusions in three or four-finger
grasping. Both aspects hinder the further deployment of 6D

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

