Local vs. Global Interpretability:
A Computational Complexity Perspective

Shahaf Bassan 1 Guy Amir 1 Guy Katz 1

Abstract

2017). The ML community has been studying two notions
of interpretability: global interpretability, aimed at understanding the overall decision logic of an ML model; and
local interpretability, aimed at understanding specific decisions made by that model (Zhang et al., 2021; Du et al.,
2019). The correlation between a model’s local and global
interpretability levels is not always entirely evident. For instance, (Molnar, 2020) argues that while the weights linked
to a linear classifier can be used in interpreting its local
decisions, this may not be the case for its global behavior.

The local and global interpretability of various
ML models has been studied extensively in recent
years. However, despite significant progress in
the field, many known results remain informal
or lack sufficient mathematical rigor. We propose a framework for bridging this gap, by using
computational complexity theory to assess local
and global perspectives of interpreting ML models. We begin by proposing proofs for two novel
insights that are essential for our analysis: (i) a
duality between local and global forms of explanations; and (ii) the inherent uniqueness of certain
global explanation forms. We then use these insights to evaluate the complexity of computing
explanations, across three model types representing the extremes of the interpretability spectrum:
(i) linear models; (ii) decision trees; and (iii) neural networks. Our findings offer insights into both
the local and global interpretability of these models. For instance, under standard complexity assumptions such as P ̸= NP, we prove that selecting
global sufficient subsets in linear models is computationally harder than selecting local subsets.
Interestingly, with neural networks and decision
trees, the opposite is true: it is harder to carry out
this task locally than globally. We believe that
our findings demonstrate how examining explainability through a computational complexity lens
can help us develop a more rigorous grasp of the
inherent interpretability of ML models.

Despite significant progress in ML interpretability techniques, there still remains a notable lack of mathematical
rigor in our comprehension of the inherent interpretability
of different ML models. The work of (Barceló et al., 2020)
proposes addressing this gap by analyzing interpretability
through the perspective of computational complexity theory. There, the goal is to deepen our understanding of
interpretability by exploring the computational complexity
involved in generating different kinds of explanations for
various ML models. A model is considered interpretable if
an explanation can be computed efficiently; and conversely,
if deriving an explanation is computationally intractable, the
model is regarded as uninterpretable.
The study on the complexity of obtaining explanations includes various ML models and diverse forms of explanations (Marques-Silva et al., 2020; Arenas et al., 2021a; 2022;
Wäldchen et al., 2021; Marques-Silva et al., 2021). However,
this prior work focused mainly on local forms of explanations — enabling the formal analysis of local interpretability
across various contexts, rather than addressing the overarching global interpretability of these models.
Our contributions. We present a formal computationalcomplexity-based framework for evaluating both the local
and global interpretability levels of ML models. We do
this by analyzing the complexity associated with computing
different forms of explanation, distinguishing between those
that are local (specific to a particular instance x) and global
(applicable to any potential instance x).

1. Introduction
Interpretability is becoming an increasingly important aspect of ML models, as it plays a key role in ensuring
their safety, transparency and fairness (Doshi-Velez & Kim,
1
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel. Correspondence to: Shahaf Bassan <shahaf.bassan@mail.huji.ac.il>.

Our study focuses on the analysis of formal notions of
explanations that satisfy logical and mathematical guarantees — a sub-field often referred to as formal explainable

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

