Generative Flows on Discrete State-Spaces:
Enabling Multimodal Flows with Applications to Protein Co-Design

Andrew Campbell * 1 Jason Yim * 2 Regina Barzilay 2 Tom Rainforth 1 Tommi Jaakkola 2

Abstract

well-studied: the function of the protein is endowed through
its structure while the sequence is the blueprint of how the
structure is made. This interplay motivates jointly generating the structure and sequence rather than in isolation. To
this end, the focus of our work is to develop a multimodal
generative framework capable of co-design.

Combining discrete and continuous data is an
important capability for generative models. We
present Discrete Flow Models (DFMs), a new
flow-based model of discrete data that provides
the missing link in enabling flow-based generative models to be applied to multimodal continuous and discrete data problems. Our key insight is that the discrete equivalent of continuous
space flow matching can be realized using Continuous Time Markov Chains. DFMs benefit from a
simple derivation that includes discrete diffusion
models as a specific instance while allowing improved performance over existing diffusion-based
approaches. We utilize our DFMs method to build
a multimodal flow-based modeling framework.
We apply this capability to the task of protein
co-design, wherein we learn a model for jointly
generating protein structure and sequence. Our
approach achieves state-of-the-art co-design performance while allowing the same multimodal
model to be used for flexible generation of the
sequence or structure.

Diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al.,
2020; Song et al., 2020) have achieved state-of-the-art performance across multiple applications. They have potential
as a multimodal framework because they can be defined
on both continuous and discrete spaces (Hoogeboom et al.,
2021; Austin et al., 2021). However, their sample time inflexibility makes them unsuitable for multimodal problems.
On even just a single modality, finding optimal sampling
parameters requires extensive re-training and evaluations
(Karras et al., 2022). This problem is exacerbated for multiple modalities. On the other hand, flow-based models
(Liu et al., 2023; Albergo & Vanden-Eijnden, 2023; Lipman
et al., 2023) improve over diffusion models with a simpler
framework that allows for superior performance through
sampling flexibility (Ma et al., 2024). Unfortunately, our
current inability to define a flow-based model on discrete
spaces holds us back from a multimodal flow model.
We address this by introducing a novel flow-based model
for discrete data named Discrete Flow Models (DFMs) and
thereby unlock a complete framework for flow-based multimodal generative modeling. Our key insight comes from
seeing that a discrete flow-based model can be realized using Continuous Time Markov Chains (CTMCs). DFMs are
a new discrete generative modeling paradigm: less restrictive than diffusion, allows for sampling flexibility without
re-training and enables simple combination with continuous
state space flows to form multimodal flow models.

1. Introduction
Expanding the capabilities of generative models to handle
discrete and continuous data, which we refer to as multimodal, is a fundamental problem to enable their widespread
adoption in scientific applications (Wang et al., 2023). One
such application requiring a multimodal generative model is
protein co-design where the aim is to jointly generate continuous protein structures alongside corresponding discrete
amino acid sequences (Shi et al., 2022). Proteins have been

Fig. 1A provides an overview of DFMs. We first define a
probability flow pt that linearly interpolates from noise to
data. We then generate new data by simulating a sequence
trajectory xt that follows pt across time which requires
training a denoising neural network with cross-entropy. The
sequence trajectory could have many transitions or few,
a property we term CTMC Stochasticity (Fig. 1B). Prior
discrete diffusion models are equivalent to picking a specific
stochasticity at training time, whereas we can adjust it at

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics, University of
Oxford, UK 2 Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Massachusetts, USA. Correspondence to: Andrew Campbell <campbell@stats.ox.ac.uk>, Jason Yim <jyim@csail.mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

