Improving Transformers with Dynamically Composable Multi-Head Attention

Da Xiao 1 Qingye Meng 2 Shengping Li 2 Xingyuan Yuan 2

Abstract

empirically successful, this choice leads to some drawbacks,
such as the low-rank bottleneck of attention score matrices
(Bhojanapalli et al., 2020; 2021) which decreases expressive
power, and the issue of redundant heads (Voita et al., 2019;
Michel et al., 2019) which causes waste of parameters and
computation.

Multi-Head Attention (MHA) is a key component of Transformer. In MHA, attention heads
work independently, causing problems such as
low-rank bottleneck of attention score matrices
and head redundancy. We propose Dynamically
Composable Multi-Head Attention (DCMHA), a
parameter and computation efficient attention architecture that tackles the shortcomings of MHA
and increases the expressive power of the model
by dynamically composing attention heads. At
the core of DCMHA is a Compose function that
transforms the attention score and weight matrices in an input-dependent way. DCMHA can
be used as a drop-in replacement of MHA in
any transformer architecture to obtain the corresponding DCFormer. DCFormer significantly outperforms Transformer on different architectures
and model scales in language modeling, matching the performance of models with ~1.7×–2.0×
compute. For example, DCPythia-6.9B outperforms open source Pythia-12B on both pretraining perplexity and downstream task evaluation.
The code and models are available at https:
//github.com/Caiyun-AI/DCFormer.

There has been a number of works in the literature that try
to improve MHA by introducing some form of interaction
or collaboration between heads. We categorize these works
and motivate ours from the viewpoint of head composition:
composing new heads from a fixed number of “base heads”.
Head composition can be performed in different places in
the computation graph of MHA. A common form of head
composition is to use more sophisticated ways of combining / selecting the outputs of multiple heads to replace the
simple concatenate-then-project approach of MHA, either
statically (Ahmed et al., 2017) or dynamically (Li et al.,
2019; Zhang et al., 2022). Operating at the uppermost level
of MHA computation, this is only a “surface” form of composition: heads still operate on their own and the underlying
information flow between tokens is unchanged. Due to this
nature, it is generally lightweight and efficient, but at the
same time the expressive power gain is limited.
Operating at the lowest level, another contrasting approach
is to compose the linear projections W Q , W K and W V of
heads in MHA (Cordonnier et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2022).
Projection composition allows genuinely new heads to be
composed with actually changed information flow, which is
a prerequisite for fundamental improvement of expressive
power. Though theoretically being more parameter-efficient
by sharing parameters among projections, this approach
usually incurs large computation cost in practice. Besides,
the composition is static, lacking adaptability to inputs. The
potential of head composition can not be fully realized.

1. Introduction
Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) have become the stateof-the-art model for various domains and tasks and the de
facto backbone for foundation models. Multi-head attention
(MHA) is a key component of Transformer responsible for
information exchange between tokens. MHA allows the
model to jointly attend to information from different representation subspaces at different positions. An important
feature of MHA is that multiple attention heads work in parallel and independent of each other. While being simple and

We opt for a third middle ground approach of composing the
attention score and/or attention weight matrices (collectively
referred to as attention matrices in this paper) (Shazeer et al.,
2020; Wang et al., 2022; Nguyen et al., 2022). Attention
matrix composition has some equivalent relationship with
projection composition (see Section 2), ensuring fundamental improvement in expressive power compared with head
output composition. Thanks to the smaller computation cost
compared with projection composition and a careful design,

1
School of Cyberspace Security, Beijing University of Posts
and Telecommunications, Beijing, China 2 ColorfulClouds Technology Co.,Ltd., Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Da Xiao
<xiaoda99@bupt.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

