Learning-Rate-Free Stochastic Optimization over Riemannian Manifolds

Daniel Dodd 1 Louis Sharrock 1 Christopher Nemeth 1

Abstract

RDoG

In recent years, interest in gradient-based optimization over Riemannian manifolds has surged.
However, a significant challenge lies in the reliance on hyperparameters, especially the learning
rate, which requires meticulous tuning by practitioners to ensure convergence at a suitable rate.
In this work, we introduce innovative learningrate-free algorithms for stochastic optimization
over Riemannian manifolds, eliminating the need
for hand-tuning and providing a more robust and
user-friendly approach. We establish high probability convergence guarantees that are optimal,
up to logarithmic factors, compared to the bestknown optimally tuned rate in the deterministic
setting. Our approach is validated through numerical experiments, demonstrating competitive
performance against learning-rate-dependent algorithms.

(a) Learning rate too large.

(b) Learning rate too small.

tuning of the learning rate or step size parameter. Selecting
an appropriate learning rate is imperative to the algorithm’s
performance, impacting the convergence rate, final solution
quality, and overall algorithm stability. To illustrate, Figure
1 showcases the impact of inadequate learning rates on the
convergence rate of Riemannian stochastic gradient descent
(RSGD, Bonnabel, 2013).
Recently, the expense and lack of robustness associated
with learning rate tuning have spurred substantial research
of learning-rate-free methods for Euclidean optimization.
These aim to automate tuning by crafting algorithms that
achieve near-optimal convergence rates with minimal knowledge of the function’s properties and do not have any tuning parameters. Notable examples include online learning
schemes like coin betting (Orabona & Pál, 2016) and exponentiated gradients (McMahan & Orabona, 2014) and
bisection subroutines (Carmon & Hinder, 2022). Our paper
addresses the absence of comparable tools for Riemannian
optimization with the first comprehensive study of learningrate-free algorithms in this setting.

We study Riemannian optimization problems of the form
min f (x),

Optima

Figure 1. Rayleigh quotient maximization on the unit sphere. Our
algorithm, RDoG, converges without tuning, while RSGD shows
sensitivity to the learning rate, leading to (a) overshooting or (b)
slow convergence.

1. Introduction

x∈M

RSGD

(1)

where f is a geodesically convex function, and M is a Riemannian manifold. In recent years, there has been a growing interest within the machine learning community in addressing optimization challenges on such geometric spaces.
These problems manifest in diverse applications, including
principal component analysis (Edelman et al., 1998), dictionary learning (Sun et al., 2017), low-rank matrix completion
(Boumal & Absil, 2011), tensor factorization (Ishteva et al.,
2011), Gaussian mixture models (Hosseini & Sra, 2015)
and metric learning (Zadeh et al., 2016).

Contributions: Building upon the recently proposed Distance over Gradients (DoG, Ivgi et al., 2023) and Distance
over Weighted Gradients (DoWG, Khaled et al., 2023) Euclidean optimization approaches, we introduce dynamic
learning-rate-scheduler algorithms for stochastic Riemannian optimization. Our results establish high probability convergence guarantees, achieving optimal convergence rates
with logarithmic factors in smooth and Lipschitz settings,
rendering them a robust solution for geodesically convex
stochastic optimization on Riemannian manifolds.

One of the prominent hurdles in applying Riemannian
gradient-based optimization is the requirement for careful
1

Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Lancaster University, UK. Correspondence to: Daniel Dodd
<d.dodd1@lancaster.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

