Optimizing Watermarks for Large Language Models

Bram Wouters 1

Abstract

This paper largely follows the watermarking strategy of
Kirchenbauer et al. (2023). Causal LLMs typically generate
text word-by-word. Before a word is generated, the complete vocabulary of the LLM is split in two disjunct lists
labelled green and red. This split is pseudo-random, where
the seed is determined by the previous word(s). Green-list
words are then sampled with a higher probability than the
original LLM prescribes, and red-list words with a lower
probability. A detector with knowledge of the pseudorandom green-red split can count the number of green-list
words in a text. If this number is larger than one would expect from a text generated without knowledge of the greenred split (e.g., a human-generated text), the null hypothesis
is rejected and the text is attributed to an LLM.

With the rise of large language models (LLMs)
and concerns about potential misuse, watermarks
for generative LLMs have recently attracted much
attention. An important aspect of such watermarks is the trade-off between their identifiability
and their impact on the quality of the generated
text. This paper introduces a systematic approach
to this trade-off in terms of a multi-objective optimization problem. For a large class of robust, efficient watermarks, the associated Pareto optimal
solutions are identified and shown to outperform
existing robust, efficient watermarks.

There are many perspectives of what a good watermark for
an LLM comprises of, and even their usefulness altogether
is under debate (Sadasivan et al., 2023; Jiang et al., 2023;
Zhang et al., 2023). Roughly speaking, the quality of a
watermark is assessed along four axes. A watermark must
be

1. Introduction
In recent years, transformer-based LLMs have proven to be
remarkably powerful. Their societal impact is potentially
enormous. As a consequence of their rapid rise, concerns
about potential misuse have been raised. One can think of,
for example, plagiarism (Meyer et al., 2023), online propaganda (Goldstein et al., 2023), examination in education
(Milano et al., 2023), misinformation (Vincent, 2022) and
copyright infringement (Rillig et al., 2023). One possible
strategy to partially address these concerns is to ensure that
LLM-generated text can be algorithmically distinguished
from human-generated text by means of a watermark.

• identifiable, meaning that a detector is able to correctly
identify the generator (LLM vs. human) of a text.
• stealthy, meaning that a watermark does not noticeably
change the quality of the generated text.
• robust against (moderate) post-generation adjustments
of the text that could obfuscate the watermark.

Initialized by Aaronson (2022) and the seminal work of
Kirchenbauer et al. (2023), the idea of watermarking LLMgenerated text has attracted much attention, in both the
scientific field (see Section 5 for an overview) and the industry (Bartz & Hu, 2023). Generally speaking, the process
of text generation by an LLM would be adjusted in a controllable manner. Based on the generated text, a detector
with knowledge of the watermarking strategy is then able to
identify a text as generated by an LLM. This is usually done
in the form of a hypothesis test, where the null hypothesis
is that the text has been generated by a human being.

• efficient at generation and detection time, i.e., without
the need for computationally costly processes.
This paper focusses on the trade-off between identifiability
and stealthiness of watermarks. The probability that the
hypothesis test of the detector draws the correct conclusion increases when the watermark more strongly promotes
green-list tokens. However, enforcing green-list tokens too
strongly can degrade the quality of the text in unacceptable
manners. We will refer to this trade-off between the quality
of test and text as the test-text trade-off.

1
University of Amsterdam. Correspondence to: Bram Wouters
<b.m.wouters@uva.nl>.

Our contribution. For a large class of robust, efficient
watermarks based on the green-red split of the vocabulary,
we translate the test-text trade-off into a multi-objective
optimization problem and identify the associated Pareto optimal solutions. We empirically validate the optimality of

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

