Vocabulary for Universal Approximation:
A Linguistic Perspective of Mapping Compositions

Yongqiang Cai 1

Abstract

ate coherent text based on the previous content, making
them invaluable tools in language understanding and generation (Vaswani et al., 2017). The success of these models
has also led to a new approach to solving non-sequential
problems by transforming them into sequential ones. For
instance, image processing can be turned into a sequence
learning problem by segmenting an image into small blocks,
arranging them in a certain order, and then processing the
resulting sequence using sequence learning algorithms to
achieve image recognition (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021). The
use of sequence learning algorithms has also been extended
to reinforcement learning (Chen et al., 2021), such as the
decision transformer which outputs the optimal actions by
leveraging a causally masked transformer and exceeds the
state-of-the-art performance.

In recent years, deep learning-based sequence
modelings, such as language models, have received much attention and success, which pushes
researchers to explore the possibility of transforming non-sequential problems into a sequential
form. Following this thought, deep neural networks can be represented as composite functions
of a sequence of mappings, linear or nonlinear,
where each composition can be viewed as a word.
However, the weights of linear mappings are undetermined and hence require an infinite number of
words. In this article, we investigate the finite case
and constructively prove the existence of a finite
vocabulary V = {ϕi : Rd → Rd | i = 1, ..., n}
with n = O(d2 ) for the universal approximation.
That is, for any continuous mapping f : Rd →
Rd , compact domain Ω and ε > 0, there is a sequence of mappings ϕi1 , ..., ϕim ∈ V, m ∈ Z+ ,
such that the composition ϕim ◦ ... ◦ ϕi1 approximates f on Ω with an error less than ε. Our results
demonstrate an unusual approximation power of
mapping compositions and motivate a novel compositional model for regular languages.

Sequence modeling has opened up new possibilities for solving a wide range of problems, and this trend seems to hold
in the field of theoretical research. As is well known, artificial neural networks have universal approximation capabilities, and wide or deep feedforward networks can approximate continuous functions on a compact domain arbitrarily
well (Cybenko, 1989; Hornik et al., 1989; Leshno et al.,
1993). However, in practical applications such as AlphaFold
(Jumper et al., 2021), BERT (Devlin et al., 2018) and GPT
(Brown et al., 2020), the residual network structures (He
et al., 2016a;b) are more preferred than the feedforward
structures. It is observed that residual networks (ResNets)
are forward Euler discretizations of dynamical systems (E,
2017; Sander et al., 2022), and this relationship has spawned
a series of dynamical system-based neural network structures such as the neural ODE (Chen et al., 2018). The
dynamical system-based neural network structures are expected to play an important role in various fields.

1. Introduction
Cognitive psychologists and linguisticians have long recognized the importance of languages (Pinker, 2003), which
has been further highlighted by the popularity of language
models such as BERT (Devlin et al., 2018) and GPT (Brown
et al., 2020). These models, based on RNNs or Transformers, have revolutionized natural language processing by
transforming it into a sequence learning problem. They
can handle the long-term dependencies in text and gener-

Notably, both the language models and the dynamical systems are linked to time series modeling and have been effectively applied to non-sequential problems. This observation
naturally leads us to question: is there an intrinsic relationship between their individual successes? This article aims
to ponder upon the question. Through a comparative study,
we obtain some initial results from the perspective of universal approximation. Specifically, we demonstrate that there
exists a finite set of mappings, referred to as the vocabulary

1
School of Mathematical Sciences, Laboratory of Mathematics and Complex Systems, MOE, Beijing Normal University,
Beijing, 100875, China. Correspondence to: Yongqiang Cai
<caiyq.math@bnu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

