Combining Experimental and Historical Data for Policy Evaluation

Ting Li * 1 Chengchun Shi * 2 Qianglin Wen 3 Yang Sui 1 Yongli Qin 4 Chunbo Lai 4 Hongtu Zhu 5

Abstract

Example 1: A/B testing with historical data. A/B testing is frequently used in modern technology companies
such as Amazon, eBay, Facebook, Google, LinkedIn, Microsoft, Netflix, Uber and Didi for comparing new products/strategies against existing ones (see Larsen et al., 2023,
for a recent review). A common challenge in A/B testing is the limited experiment duration coupled with weak
treatment effects. For example, in the ridesharing industry,
experiments usually last no more than two weeks, and the
effect sizes often range from 0.5% to 5% (Xu et al., 2018;
Tang et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2021; Qin et al., 2022). Yet,
prior to these experiments, companies often have access
to a substantial volume of historical data under the current
policy. Leveraging such historical data can significantly
improve the efficiency of A/B testing.

This paper studies policy evaluation with multiple data sources, especially in scenarios that involve one experimental dataset with two arms,
complemented by a historical dataset generated
under a single control arm. We propose novel data
integration methods that linearly integrate base
policy value estimators constructed based on the
experimental and historical data, with weights optimized to minimize the mean square error (MSE)
of the resulting combined estimator. We further
apply the pessimistic principle to obtain more robust estimators, and extend these developments to
sequential decision making. Theoretically, we establish non-asymptotic error bounds for the MSEs
of our proposed estimators, and derive their oracle, efficiency and robustness properties across
a broad spectrum of reward shift scenarios. Numerical experiments and real-data-based analyses
from a ridesharing company demonstrate the superior performance of the proposed estimators.

Example 2: Meta analysis. In medicine, data often spans
across multiple healthcare institutions. A notable example
is in the schizophrenia study that examined the efficacy of
cognitive-behavioral therapy in early-stage schizophrenia
patients (Tarrier et al., 2004). This study was a multicenter randomized controlled trial (RCT) executed in three
treatment centers (Manchester, Liverpool, and North Nottinghamshire). Given that each center had a relatively small
cohort, with fewer than 100 participants, pooling data from
all sources becomes crucial to enhance causal learning.

1. Introduction
Motivation. This paper seeks to establish data-driven approaches for evaluating the effectiveness of a newly target
policy against a conventional control. A basic approach
relies solely on experimental data to formulate the treatment
effect estimator, which we refer to as the experimental-dataonly (EDO) estimator. However, the often limited sample
size of experimental data prompts the need to incorporate
auxiliary external datasets to enhance the precision of the
treatment or policy effect estimator. We provide three illustrative examples to demonstrate this concept.

Example 3: Combining observational data. RCTs are
widely regarded as the benchmark for learning the causal
impacts of interventions or treatments on specific outcomes
(Imbens & Rubin, 2015). However, RCTs often face practical challenges such as high costs and time constraints,
resulting in limited participant numbers. Conversely, observational data, derived from sources such as biobanks or
electronic health records, boast larger sample sizes. Integrating both data presents a unique opportunity to improve
the statistical learning efficiency (Colnet et al., 2020).

*

Equal contribution 1 School of Statistics and Management,
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics 2 Department of
Statistics, London School of Economics and Political Science
3
Yunnan Key Laboratory of Statistical Modeling and Data Analysis, Yunnan University 4 Didi Chuxing 5 Department of Biostatistics,
The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. Correspondence
to: Hongtu Zhu <htzhu@email.unc.edu>.

Challenge. The challenge of merging multiple data sources
often lies in the distributional shifts that occur between
them. In the domain of ridesharing and healthcare, datasets
from different time frames frequently display temporal nonstationarity (Wan et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022; Wang et al.,
2023b). In the schizophrenia study, variations across various
treatment centers and ethnic groups introduce heterogeneity,
leading to distributional shifts (Dunn & Bentall, 2007; Shi

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

