Active Label Correction for Semantic Segmentation with Foundation Models

Hoyoung Kim 1 Sehyun Hwang 2 Suha Kwak 1 2 Jungseul Ok 1 2

Abstract

models with image-wise annotations (Ru et al., 2023), and
foundation models capable of useful zero-shot prediction
on superpixels (Kirillov et al., 2023) or even semantic segmentation (Liu et al., 2023). However, those are unreliable
to train and more importantly validate models for exquisite
or domain-specific prediction. For instance, despite recent
advances, the zero-shot prediction with foundation models (Kirillov et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023) is considerably
erroneous as demonstrated in Table 7. This can be more
problematic when the semantic segmentation requiring expertise such as medical knowledge (Ma et al., 2024).

Training and validating models for semantic segmentation require datasets with pixel-wise annotations, which are notoriously labor-intensive. Although useful priors such as foundation models
or crowdsourced datasets are available, they are
error-prone. We hence propose an effective framework of active label correction (ALC) based on
a design of correction query to rectify pseudo
labels of pixels, which in turn is more annotatorfriendly than the standard one inquiring to classify a pixel directly according to our theoretical
analysis and user study. Specifically, leveraging
foundation models providing useful zero-shot predictions on pseudo labels and superpixels, our
method comprises two key techniques: (i) an
annotator-friendly design of correction query with
the pseudo labels, and (ii) an acquisition function looking ahead label expansions based on the
superpixels. Experimental results on PASCAL,
Cityscapes, and Kvasir-SEG datasets demonstrate
the effectiveness of our ALC framework, outperforming prior methods for active semantic segmentation and label correction. Notably, utilizing
our method, we obtained a revised dataset of PASCAL by rectifying errors in 2.6 million pixels in
PASCAL dataset1 .

Hence, we consider the problem of active label correction
(ALC) to construct a reliable pixel-wise dataset from an
unreliable or unlabeled dataset with a minimum cost of user
intervention. To this end, we propose an ALC framework
which leverages foundation models and correction queries.
Our correction query is designed to rectify the pseudo labels
of pixels, only if these pseudo labels are incorrect. Unlike
the standard classification query that directly requests a specific class (Cai et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2023a), our correction
query allows annotators to skip labeling if the pseudo labels
are correct, making it more annotator-friendly. Borrowing
the information-theoretic annotation cost (Hu et al., 2020),
we prove that our correction query is less costly than the
classification query. Moreover, our user study in Section 4.2
reveals that the correction query is faster to complete than
the classification query in practice.
Specifically, we leverage useful zero-shot predictions on
pseudo labels and superpixels from foundation models.
These pseudo labels are employed in our correction query
to designate pixel labels. They also allow us to warm-start,
avoiding the typical cold-start problem that comes from the
absence of a reliable way to evaluate data at the beginning
of active learning (Mahmood et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2023).
Furthermore, we fully enjoy the decent superpixels to solve
the challenges of pixel-wise queries. Although pixel-wise
queries can generate a flawless dataset, they require substantial time and memory to examine each pixel and lead to
redundancy in the pixels chosen (Shin et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation has seen remarkable advancements
powered by deep neural networks capable of learning from
huge datasets with dense annotations for all pixels. However, such pixel-wise annotations are labor-intensive and
error-prone. To address or bypass these challenges, various approaches have been studied, including crowdsourcing
systems to collect large-scale human annotations (Crowston, 2012), weakly supervised learning methods to train
1

Graduate School of AI, POSTECH, Pohang, Republic of Korea
Department of CSE, POSTECH, Pohang, Republic of Korea.
Correspondence to: Jungseul Ok <jungseul@postech.ac.kr>.
2

To address the problems, we devise superpixel-aware strategies across our entire framework. Initially, we build a diversified pixel pool consisting of partial key pixels representing

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

1

https://github.com/ml-postech/active-label-correction

