DSD-DA: Distillation-based Source Debiasing for
Domain Adaptive Object Detection

Yongchao Feng 1 Shiwei Li 2 Yingjie Gao 1 Ziyue Huang 1 Yanan Zhang 1 Qingjie Liu 1 3 2 Yunhong Wang 1 2

Abstract
Though feature-alignment based Domain Adaptive Object Detection (DAOD) methods have
achieved remarkable progress, they ignore the
source bias issue, i.e., the detector tends to acquire more source-specific knowledge, impeding
its generalization capabilities in the target domain. Furthermore, these methods face a more
formidable challenge in achieving consistent classification and localization in the target domain
compared to the source domain. To overcome
these challenges, we propose a novel Distillationbased Source Debiasing (DSD) framework for
DAOD, which can distill domain-agnostic knowledge from a pre-trained teacher model, improving the detector’s performance on both domains.
In addition, we design a Target-Relevant Object Localization Network (TROLN), which can
mine target-related localization information from
source and target-style mixed data. Accordingly,
we present a Domain-aware Consistency Enhancing (DCE) strategy, in which these information are
formulated into a new localization representation
to further refine classification scores in the testing
stage, achieving a harmonization between classification and localization. Extensive experiments
have been conducted to manifest the effectiveness
of this method, which consistently improves the
strong baseline by large margins, outperforming
existing alignment-based works.

𝑆

source-biased
knowledge

𝑆

𝐿𝑑𝑒𝑡

𝑆

𝐿𝑎𝑑𝑣

𝐿𝑎𝑑𝑣

domain-agnostic
knowledge

𝑇

𝑇

𝑇

(a) Traditional Model

(b) Ideal Model
𝑆

𝐿𝑑𝑒𝑡
𝑆

𝑇′

𝑆

Classification
Teacher Model generate

𝐿𝑎𝑑𝑣
𝐿𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡

𝑇′

𝐿𝑎𝑑𝑣

𝑇

Source-specific knowledge Target-specific knowledge
Source data
Source2target (𝑇′) data

𝑇
Domain-agnostic knowledge

(c) Distillation-based Source Debiasing

Figure 1. In (a) traditional alignment approaches, the detector
tends to learn more source-specific knowledge due to the supervised detection loss Ldet , rather than domain-agnostic knowledge
(b). In (c) our proposed DSD framework, by introducing a distillation loss to the source data, the model can acquire more domainagnostic knowledge than (a). The red and green dotted arrows
represent the impact of source or target-related losses on knowledge transfer, respectively.

pressive performance when the training and testing data
exhibit consistent distributions. However, their performance
diminishes drastically when applied to novel domains, primarily due to domain shift (Chen et al., 2018), which impedes the generalization and transferability of the detectors
across different scenes. The inability of object detectors to
adapt to novel domains hampers their practical applicability
in real-world scenarios.

1. Introduction

Extensive researches have been dedicated to address the
challenge via Unsupervised Domain Adaption (UDA) methods, which aim to adapt to unlabeled target domain using
the annotated source domains. One of the fashionable frameworks of UDA is to align the feature distributions between
the source and target domains toward a cross-domain feature
space. Early researches (Chen et al., 2018; Saito et al., 2019;
Hsu et al., 2020; Jiang et al., 2021) aim to align image-level
and instance-level features and achieve great margins over
plain detectors. Recent works (Tian et al., 2021; Zhang et al.,
2021b; Li et al., 2022b) devote to aligning class-conditional

State-of-the-art object detectors (Redmon & Farhadi, 2018;
Ren et al., 2015; Tian et al., 2019) have demonstrated im1

State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University, Beijing, China. 2 Hangzhou Innovation
Institute, Beihang University, Hangzhou, China. 3 Zhongguancun
Laboratory, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Qingjie Liu
<qingjie.liu@buaa.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

