ELF: Encoding Speaker-Specific Latent Speech Feature
for Speech Synthesis

Jungil Kong 1 Junmo Lee 1 Jeongmin Kim 1 Beomjeong Kim 1 Jihoon Park 1 Dohee Kong 1 Changheon Lee 1
Sangjin Kim 1

Abstract

matrix to learn the speech characteristics of each speaker
in one model to model multiple speakers effectively; this
is commonly referred to as multi-speaker speech synthesis. Because the method enables a similar expression of
each speaker’s characteristics and the sharing of common
information among speakers, it is effective in synthesizing the speech of multiple speakers in high quality with
relatively less training data than training each speaker in
one model. However, the model must be trained for all
speakers whenever a new speaker is added, and synthesizing high-quality speech may not be possible for speakers
with a relatively small dataset. Considering the above aspects, the modeling of a fairly large number of speakers by
extending this method is limited. A fine-tuning approach
was employed to mitigate the necessity and limitations of
the training process (Chen et al., 2019; 2021; Huang et al.,
2022). This method fine-tunes a sufficiently trained model
using a small amount of target speaker data. However, it partially overcomes the problems of previous methods. It still
requires a training process, faces challenges in modeling
numerous speakers like the multi-speaker model, and necessitates careful controlling the training to avoid overfitting
and underfitting.

In this work, we propose a novel method for modeling numerous speakers, which enables expressing the overall characteristics of speakers in detail
like a trained multi-speaker model without additional training on the target speaker’s dataset.
Although various works with similar purposes
have been actively studied, their performance
has not yet reached that of trained multi-speaker
models due to their fundamental limitations. To
overcome previous limitations, we propose effective methods for feature learning and representing target speakers’ speech characteristics by discretizing the features and conditioning them to a
speech synthesis model. Our method obtained
a significantly higher similarity mean opinion
score (SMOS) in subjective similarity evaluation
than seen speakers of a high-performance multispeaker model, even with unseen speakers. The
proposed method also outperforms a zero-shot
method by significant margins. Furthermore, our
method shows remarkable performance in generating new artificial speakers. In addition, we
demonstrate that the encoded latent features are
sufficiently informative to reconstruct an original
speaker’s speech completely. It implies that our
method can be used as a general methodology to
encode and reconstruct speakers’ characteristics
in various tasks.

The most actively studied method to address the limitations
of training approaches is zero-shot speech synthesis. The
method synthesizes speech that represents speech characteristics similar to those of the corresponding speaker by
conditioning a speaker vector obtained from the short audio
of a target speaker. This is achieved by training a speaker encoder and speech synthesis model with large multi-speaker
datasets (Jia et al., 2018; Hsu et al., 2019; Cooper et al.,
2020; Casanova et al., 2022). A speaker vector is obtained
from a speaker encoder with short audio of a target speaker
as input, and the vector is conditioned to a speech synthesis
model to express the target speaker’s speech characteristics.
This method seems to enable synthesizing speech audio similar to that of the target speaker for an infinite number of
speakers without additional training. However, it has fundamental limitations in expressing a speaker’s overall speech
characteristics. Since humans express different timbres and
prosody depending on given contents, modeling overall
speech characteristics according to the given content is cru-

1. Introduction
Recently, research on modeling numerous speakers in the
real world has been actively studied. Previous works (Gibiansky et al., 2017; Ping et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2020;
Kim et al., 2020; 2021) used a trainable speaker embedding
1
SK Telecom, Jung-gu, Seoul, Republic of Korea. Correspondence to: Jungil Kong <jik876@sktelecom.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

