Vague Prototype-Oriented Diffusion Model for Multi-class Anomaly Detection

Yuxin Li 1 * Yaoxuan Feng 1 * Bo Chen 1 Wenchao Chen 1 Yubiao Wang 1 Xinyue Hu 1 Baoling sun 2
Chunhui Qu 1 3 Mingyuan Zhou 4

Abstract

1. Introduction
Unsupervised anomaly detection aims to identify and localize anomalies when only normal data is available, garnering significant attention in recent years across diverse
application scenarios such as medical image analysis (Fernando et al., 2021), video inspection (Ramachandra et al.,
2020), and defect detection (Bergmann et al., 2019). Given
the need to detect anomalies across multiple tasks, a common approach involves modeling the distribution of normal
samples following the one-for-one scheme (Gong et al.,
2019; Bergmann et al., 2020; Li et al., 2023). However,
this scheme can be memory-intensive, especially with an
increasing number of classes, and may not align well with
scenarios characterized by substantial intra-class diversity
among normal samples (You et al., 2022a; Lu et al., 2023).
Recent advancements in multi-class unsupervised anomaly
detection (You et al., 2022a; Lu et al., 2023; He et al., 2023)
aim to address these challenges by developing unified models for multiple classes. Modeling the normal distribution
remains an inherently challenging task, and the complexity
escalates when endeavoring to accurately capture multiclass distributions within a unified model.

Multi-class unsupervised anomaly detection aims
to create a unified model for identifying anomalies
in objects from multiple classes when only normal
data is available. In such a challenging setting,
widely used reconstruction-based networks persistently grapple with the “identical shortcut” problem, wherein the infiltration of abnormal information from the condition biases the output towards
an anomalous distribution. In response to this critical challenge, we introduce a Vague PrototypeOriented Diffusion Model (VPDM) that extracts
only fundamental information from the condition
to prevent the occurrence of the “identical shortcut” problem from the input layer. This model
leverages prototypes that contain only vague information about the target as the initial condition. Subsequently, a novel conditional diffusion
model is introduced to incrementally enhance details based on vague conditions. Finally, a Vague
Prototype-Oriented Optimal Transport (VPOT)
method is proposed to provide more accurate information about conditions. All these components
are seamlessly integrated into a unified optimization objective. The effectiveness of our approach
is demonstrated across diverse datasets, including the MVTec, VisA, and MPDD benchmarks,
achieving state-of-the-art results.

A prevalent approach to learning the distribution of normal data involves representation-based methods (Roth et al.,
2022; Gudovskiy et al., 2022; Shi et al., 2021; Zaheer et al.,
2020; Liang et al., 2023). These methods operate under
the assumption that a well-trained model cannot effectively
generate samples deviating from the normal distribution.
Consequently, when guided by an anomaly sample, the
model tends to produce normal samples, leading to noticeable reconstruction errors that can serve as indicators for
detecting anomalies (You et al., 2022a; Mousakhan et al.,
2023). However, this assumption may not always hold
true, as sometimes the infiltration of abnormal information
from the condition biases the output towards an anomalous distribution. This phenomenon, where abnormal inputs
are well-reconstructed, is known as the “identical shortcut”
problem (Gong et al., 2019; You et al., 2022b). Moreover,
in multi-class scenarios, the complexity of the normal data
distribution is heightened, exacerbating the effects of the
“identical shortcut” problem (You et al., 2022a).

*
Equal contribution 1 National Key Laboratory of Radar
Signal Processing, Xidian University, Xi’an, 710071, China.
2
Xidian University, Xi’an, 710071, China. 3 Aerospace Information Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100094, China 4 McCombs School of Business, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712. Correspondence to:
Bo Chen <bchen@mail.xidian.edu.cn>, Wenchao Chen <wcchen xidian@163.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Recently, there has been a surge in interest in diffusion1

