DISCRET: Synthesizing Faithful Explanations For Treatment Effect Estimation

Yinjun Wu * 1 Mayank Keoliya * 2 Kan Chen 3 Neelay Velingker 2 Ziyang Li 2 Emily J Getzen 4 Qi Long 2 4
Mayur Naik 2 Ravi B Parikh 4 Eric Wong 2

Abstract

dividual’s outcomes with and without receiving treatment.
Estimating ITE is a significant problem not only in healthcare (Basu et al., 2011) but also in other domains such as
linguistics (Pryzant et al., 2021; Feder et al., 2021) and
poverty alleviation (Jerzak et al., 2023a;b). A large body of
literature has investigated accurately estimating ITE using
various machine learning architectures, including GANs
(Yoon et al., 2018) and transformers (Zhang et al., 2022),
among others (Shalit et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2022).

Designing faithful yet accurate AI models is challenging, particularly in the field of individual treatment effect estimation (ITE). ITE prediction models deployed in critical settings such as healthcare
should ideally be (i) accurate, and (ii) provide faithful explanations. However, current solutions are inadequate: state-of-the-art black-box models do not
supply explanations, post-hoc explainers for blackbox models lack faithfulness guarantees, and selfinterpretable models greatly compromise accuracy. To
address these issues, we propose DISCRET, a selfinterpretable ITE framework that synthesizes faithful,
rule-based explanations for each sample. A key insight behind DISCRET is that explanations can serve
dually as database queries to identify similar subgroups of samples. We provide a novel RL algorithm
to efficiently synthesize these explanations from a
large search space. We evaluate DISCRET on diverse
tasks involving tabular, image, and text data. DISCRET outperforms the best self-interpretable models and has accuracy comparable to the best blackbox models while providing faithful explanations.
DISCRET is available at https://github.com/
wuyinjun-1993/DISCRET-ICML2024.

ITE prediction models deployed in critical settings should
ideally be (i) accurate, and (ii) provide faithful explanations in order to be trustable and usable. In this paper, we
follow prior work on evaluating the faithfulness of explanations in terms of consistency, which measures the degree to
which samples with similar explanations have similar model
predictions (Dasgupta et al., 2022; Nauta et al., 2023).
Current solutions for predicting ITE are either accurate or
faithful, but not both, as illustrated in the first two rows of
Figure 1. While self-interpretable models such as Causal
Forest and others (Athey & Wager, 2019; Chen et al.,
2023b) produce consistent explanations, they struggle to
provide sufficiently accurate ITE estimations. On the other
hand, while black-box models like transformers are typically the most accurate, explanations generated by post-hoc
explainers, such as Anchor (Ribeiro et al., 2018), are not
provably consistent.

1. Introduction

We therefore seek to answer the following central question:
Is it possible to design a faithfully explainable yet accurate learning algorithm for treatment effect estimation? To
this end, we propose DISCRET1 , the first provably-faithful,
deep learning based ITE prediction framework. Given a
sample x, DISCRET follows prior work and estimates ITE
by computing the average treatment effect (ATE) of samples
that are similar to x. However, in contrast to prior methods
that discover similar samples through statistical matching
(Anderson et al., 1980; Chen et al., 2023a) or clustering
(Xue et al., 2023), DISCRET finds similar samples by (i)
synthesizing a logical rule that describes the key features
of sample x (and hence explains the subgroup the sample
belongs to) and then (ii) evaluating this rule-based expla-

Designing accurate and explainable AI models is a key
challenge in solving a wide range of problems that require
individualized explanations. In this paper, we tackle this
challenge in the context of individual treatment effect (ITE)
estimation. ITE quantifies the difference between one in*
Equal contribution 1 School of Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China 2 Department of Computer and Information
Science, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United
States 3 School of Public Health, Harvard University, Boston, MA,
United States 4 Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States. Correspondence to:
Yinjun Wu <wuyinjun@pku.edu.cn>, Mayank Keoliya <mkeoliya@seas.upenn.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1
DIScovering Comparable items with Rules to Explain
Treatment Effect

1

