Concentration Inequalities for General Functions of Heavy-Tailed Random
Variables
Shaojie Li 1 2 Yong Liu 1 2 *

Abstract

The bounded difference inequality encapsulates the probabilities that a function of independent random variables varies
from its mean in terms of the sum of conditional ranges. It
surpasses the general Hoeffding-type and Bernstein-type inequalities that rely on the summation of independent random
variables (Vershynin, 2018; Wainwright, 2019) by characterizing a general function; this renders it more adaptable
and effective for estimating complex statistics beyond the
sum (Maurer, 2019; Maurer & Pontil, 2018; 2019).

Concentration inequalities play an essential role
in the study of machine learning and high dimensional statistics. In this paper, we obtain unbounded analogues of the popular bounded difference inequality for functions of independent
random variables with heavy-tailed distributions.
The main results provide a general framework
applicable to all heavy-tailed distributions with
finite variance. To illustrate the strength of our results, we present applications to sub-exponential
tails, sub-Weibull tails, and heavier polynomially
decaying tails. Applied to some standard problems in statistical learning theory (vector valued
concentration, Rademacher complexity, and algorithmic stability), we show that these inequalities
allow an extension of existing results to heavytailed distributions up to finite variance.

However, a limitation of the classical bounded difference
inequality (McDiarmid, 1998) is its requirement that conditional ranges be uniformly bounded, a constraint that significantly reduces its applicability. Many scenarios demand
the use of its unbounded variants. For example, extensive
research has focused on establishing generalization bounds
in unbounded situations, for which the classic inequality
is not readily applicable (Cortes et al., 2021; Kontorovich,
2014; Meir & Zhang, 2003). It is possible for conditional
ranges to be infinite, yet the conditional versions (obtained
by fixing all but one argument of the function) may exhibit
certain decaying tails (Maurer & Pontil, 2021). In such
relaxed conditions, one might anticipate the existence of
bounded difference-type inequalities. Some studies (Meir
& Zhang, 2003; Kontorovich, 2014; Kutin, 2002; Maurer
& Pontil, 2021) have successfully extended the classical
inequality to cover the unbounded case. Specifically, Kutin
(2002); Meir & Zhang (2003); Kontorovich (2014) have
provided concentration inequalities for sub-Gaussian decay
tails, while Maurer & Pontil (2021) have further contributed
inequalities for heavier sub-exponential decay tails.

1. Introduction
Concentration inequalities are fundamental in empirical science and serve as a critical toolkit for the study of both natural and artificial learning systems (Boucheron et al., 2005;
2013). They have been investigated over several decades
and applied in numerous fields, including convex geometry,
functional analysis, probability theory, information theory,
communications and coding theory, learning theory, and theoretical computer science (Raginsky & Sason, 2015; 2018).
The bounded difference inequality, also known as McDiarmid’s inequality (McDiarmid, 1998), is among the most
renowned concentration inequalities. It has been extensively
used within statistical learning theory (Bousquet & Elisseeff,
2002; Bartlett & Mendelson, 2002) as a potent instrument.

Unsatisfactory, both sub-Gaussian and sub-exponential
distributions are relatively light-tailed distributions
(Vladimirova et al., 2020; Wainwright, 2019). A distinctive difference between heavy-tailed distributions and
sub-Gaussian and sub-exponential distributions is the
moment generating function (MGF). The MGF exists for
sub-Gaussian and sub-exponential distributions (Vershynin,
2018), while it does not exist for heavy-tailed distributions
(Foss et al., 2011). Thus, the technique used in (Meir &
Zhang, 2003; Kontorovich, 2014; Kutin, 2002; Maurer
& Pontil, 2021) to find upper bounds for the MGF
clearly fails for heavy-tailed distributions. Meanwhile,
in many applications, such as probability theory (Wong

*

Corresponding Author 1 Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China 2 Beijing
Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Yong Liu <liuyonggsai@ruc.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

