Policy-conditioned Environment Models are More Generalizable

Ruifeng Chen * 1 2 Xiong-Hui Chen * 1 2 Yihao Sun 1 Siyuan Xiao 1 Minhui Li 1 Yang Yu 1 2

Abstract

ation (OPE) (Thomas et al., 2015; Doroudi et al., 2017) and
offline Reinforcement Learning (offline RL) (Lange et al.,
2012; Levine et al., 2020). In OPE, policy value is estimated
by calculating the return of simulated trajectories from the
learned model. In offline RL, approaches utilize the model
for planning or optimizing policy to maximize the return.
Model accuracy significantly affects the efficacy of these
methodologies. However, a learned model is known to have
a large value gap when used to evaluate a target policy different from data-collection policies (Xu et al., 2020; Clavera
et al., 2018; Janner et al., 2019; Yu et al., 2020). Although
the learned dynamics model achieves a small error measured under the offline data distribution, the target policy
tends to visit a different state-action distribution, which may
be unfamiliar to the dynamics model (Janner et al., 2019).
Therefore, the model will generate unreliable transitions for
the shifted distribution, resulting in erroneous value estimates (Xu et al., 2021). This issue hinders the adoption of
models in more scenarios.

In reinforcement learning, it is crucial to have an
accurate environment dynamics model to evaluate different policies’ value in downstream tasks
like offline policy optimization and policy evaluation. However, the learned model is known
to be inaccurate in predictions when evaluating
target policies different from data-collection policies. In this work, we found that utilizing policy
representation for model learning, called policyconditioned model (PCM) learning, is useful to
mitigate the problem, especially when the offline
dataset is collected from diversified behavior policies. The reason beyond that is in this case, PCM
becomes a meta-dynamics model that is trained to
be aware of and focus on the evaluation policies
that on-the-fly adjust the model to be suitable to
the evaluation policies’ state-action distribution,
thus improving the prediction accuracy. Based on
that intuition, we propose an easy-to-implement
yet effective algorithm of PCM for accurate model
learning. We also give a theoretical analysis and
experimental evidence to demonstrate the feasibility of reducing value gaps by adapting the dynamics model under different policies. Experiment
results show that PCM outperforms the existing
SOTA off-policy evaluation methods in the DOPE
benchmark with a large margin, and derives significantly better policies in offline policy selection
and model predictive control compared with the
standard model learning method.

In this article, we provide a new offline model learning
paradigm for accurate dynamics model learning, called
policy-conditioned model (PCM) learning. PCM learning
includes an extra context for model learning, representing
the policy to be evaluated, and an extra loss to learn policy
representation. Compared with the standard model learning
paradigm, which fits the whole dataset with a unified model
and rolls out whatever target policy within the model (Yu
et al., 2020), in this way, PCM becomes a meta-dynamics
model trained to be aware of the evaluation policies and
make predictions by adapting to the policies’ state-action
distribution to improve prediction accuracy. Our major finding is that PCM will enjoy more extra generalization benefits
from the adaptation mechanism when the offline dataset is
collected from more diverse behavioral policies. In practice,
we provide an easy-to-implement yet effective algorithm
for PCM learning: we implement PCM via policy representation techniques (Duan et al., 2016; Chen et al., 2021;
Nagabandi et al., 2019), which adopt an extra network module to on-the-fly encode policies’ representation and input
the policy representations as well as a state-action pair into
the meta-dynamics model for next-state predictions. PCM
produces different dynamics models given different policy
representations. We also theoretically show that PCM can
achieve a smaller value gap for a target policy compared

1. Introduction
Environment model learning, which learns a model to approximate state transitions and reward functions of the environment, has extensive applications in Offline Policy Evalu*
Equal contribution 1 National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China & School of Artificial
Intelligence, Nanjing University, China 2 Polixir Technologies. Correspondence to: Yang Yu <yuy@nju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

