ΦFlow : Differentiable Simulations for PyTorch, TensorFlow and Jax

Philipp Holl 1 Nils Thuerey 1

Abstract

et al., 2021b; Um et al., 2020), control complex physical systems (Bieker et al., 2020; Holl et al., 2020), encode physical
states and sequences (Raissi et al., 2019) and find conservation laws (Greydanus et al., 2019), among others. In all of
these tasks, the output of a neural network is interpreted as
a physical quantity that influences a physical system and the
learning objective is defined in terms of the resulting physical behavior, i.e. the network prediction passes through
a physics simulation before the loss is defined. Optimal
training methods for the first three tasks even require the
prediction to go through multiple simulation steps, passing
through the network multiple times along the way (Um et al.,
2020).

Differentiable processes have proven an invaluable tool for machine learning (ML) in scientific and engineering settings, but most ML libraries are not primarily designed for such applications. We present ΦFlow , a Python toolkit
that seamlessly integrates with PyTorch, TensorFlow, Jax and NumPy, simplifying the process
of writing differentiable simulation code at every step. ΦFlow provides many essential features
that go beyond the capabilities of the base libraries, such as differential operators, boundary
conditions, the ability to write dimensionalityagnostic code, floating-point precision management, fully differentiable preconditioned (sparse)
linear solves, automatic matrix generation via
function tracing, integration of SciPy optimizers, simulation vectorization, and visualization
tools. At the same time, ΦFlow inherits all important traits of the base ML libraries, such as GPU /
TPU support, just-in-time compilation, and automatic differentiation. Put together, these features
drastically simplify scientific code like PDE or
ODE solvers on grids or unstructured meshes, and
ΦFlow even includes out-of-the-box support for
fluid simulations. ΦFlow has been used in various
publications and as a ground-truth solver in multiple scientific data sets. It is available at https:
//github.com/tum-pbs/PhiFlow.

Training a neural network to directly minimize the loss for
any of the above-mentioned tasks requires the physical behavior to be differentiable in order to compute the derivative
of the loss w.r.t. the network weights. Differentiable simulations have long been used in classical optimization (Jarny
et al., 1991; Jameson, 2003) where the adjoint method is typically employed to compute the required gradients (Plessix,
2006). The adjoint method is also used in machine learning
(ML), where it is known as reverse-mode differentiation or
simply backpropagation. Consequently, it can also be used
to backpropagate through joint systems comprising of both
neural networks and physical simulations as long as all parts
are differentiable.
Despite this deep connection between the two fields, most
established software frameworks focus on only one of
them. There are frameworks for differentiable simulations (Todorov et al., 2012; Mitusch et al., 2019) and separate frameworks for neural network optimization, such as
PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019), TensorFlow (Abadi et al.,
2016), and Jax (Bradbury et al., 2018b; Babuschkin et al.,
2020; Hennigan et al., 2020). Combining these frameworks
is hard to achieve in practice and many researchers have
instead chosen to implement custom differentiable simulations compatible with one specific machine learning framework (Tompson et al., 2017; Kochkov et al., 2021b; Bieker
et al., 2020). However, this approach results in highly specialized and low-level simulation code, preventing adoption
to different projects.

1. Introduction
The combination of deep learning and physics simulations
has sparked a multitude of promising lines of research.
Neural networks have been used to accelerate simulations (Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2020; Tompson et al., 2017),
improve simulation accuracy for fixed resolutions (Kochkov
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Computation, Information and
Technology, Technical University of Munich, Germany. Correspondence to: Philipp Holl <philipp.holl@tum.de>.

A number of libraries combine differentiable physics and
ML (Schoenholz & Cubuk, 2020; Hu et al., 2019; Bezgin

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

