Community-Invariant Graph Contrastive Learning

Shiyin Tan * 1 Dongyuan Li * 1 Renhe Jiang † 2 Ying Zhang 3 Manabu Okumura 1

Abstract

has been proposed as one of the most successful graph representation learning methods, drawing a lot of attention (Li
et al., 2022b). The main goal of GCL is to maximize the
agreement of node representations between two augmented
views to capture graph invariance information (Tian et al.,
2020). Among various GCL variations, effective graph augmentation turns out to be the bread and butter for achieving
success (Wei et al., 2023). Early studies almost adopt random graph augmentation, such as randomly dropping edges
or masking features (You et al., 2020). Researchers also
attempt to incorporate expert knowledge to guide graph
augmentation. For instance, GCA (Zhu et al., 2021) and
MoCL (Sun et al., 2021) use network science or biomedical
knowledge to constrain edge dropping probabilities. However, such random or knowledge-based graph augmentations
are sensitive to different datasets (Shen et al., 2023) and may
yield suboptimal performance (Yin et al., 2022).

Graph augmentation has received great attention
in recent years for graph contrastive learning
(GCL) to learn well-generalized node/graph representations. However, mainstream GCL methods
often favor randomly disrupting graphs for augmentation, which shows limited generalization
and inevitably leads to the corruption of highlevel graph information, i.e., the graph community. Moreover, current knowledge-based graph
augmentation methods can only focus on either
topology or node features, causing the model to
lack robustness against various types of noise. To
address these limitations, this research investigated the role of the graph community in graph
augmentation and figured out its crucial advantage for learnable graph augmentation. Based
on our observations, we propose a communityinvariant GCL framework to maintain graph community structure during learnable graph augmentation. By maximizing the spectral changes, this
framework unifies the constraints of both topology
and feature augmentation, enhancing the model’s
robustness. Empirical evidence on 21 benchmark datasets demonstrates the exclusive merits
of our framework. Code is released on Github
[https://github.com/CI-GCL.git].

To achieve better generalization and globally optimal performance, learnable graph augmentation is proposed to automatically disrupt redundant information as much as possible
to share minimal yet sufficient core information between
augmented views (Tong et al., 2021; Suresh et al., 2021).
Although they have achieved great success, there still remain two open challenges worth exploring. (1) Community
structure plays a crucial role in various downstream tasks,
such as node classification and link prediction (Li et al.,
2022a; Chen et al., 2023b). However, current GCL methods
often randomly disrupt graphs during graph augmentation,
which inevitably leads to the corruption of high-level graph
information (i.e., community) and limits the generalization (Chiplunkar et al., 2018). (2) Current constraints employed in learnable graph augmentation methods primarily
focus either on topology or node features (Li et al., 2022b).
For instance, GAME (Wei et al., 2023) and GCL-SPAN (Lin
et al., 2023) use spectrum-based constraints for topology
augmentation. Due to the asymmetry of the feature matrix,
their methods cannot be extended to feature augmentation.
On the other hand, COSTA (Zhang et al., 2022) designs a
covariance-preserving constraint for feature augmentation,
which, however, lacks effectiveness in topology augmentation. By solely focusing on one type of graph augmentation
(topology or feature), models may not fully exploit all available information and lack robustness against different types
of noise (Liu et al., 2022b).

1. Introduction
Graph representation learning on graph-structured data,
such as molecules and social networks, has become one
of the hottest topics in AI (Cao et al., 2023). Typical
GNNs (Kipf & Welling, 2017) require large-scale taskspecific labels, which are expensive and labor-intensive to
collect. To alleviate this, graph contrastive learning (GCL)
*

Equal contribution with order determined by flipping a coin.
Corresponding Author. 1 Tokyo Institute of Technology 2 The
University of Tokyo 3 RIKEN. Correspondence to: Renhe Jiang
<jiangrh@csis.u-tokyo.ac.jp>. Ying Zhang conducted this research when she was worked at the Tokyo Institute of Technology.

†

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

