A Dual-module Framework for Counterfactual Estimation over Time
Xin Wang 1 Shengfei Lyu 2 Lishan Yang 1 Yibing Zhan 3 Huanhuan Chen 1
cascio, 2018), the inherent high costs and ethical constraints
have increased the emphasis on estimating counterfactuals
from observational data.

Abstract
Efficiently and effectively estimating counterfactuals over time is crucial for optimizing treatment
strategies. We present the Adversarial Counterfactual Temporal Inference Network (ACTIN),
a novel framework with dual modules to enhance counterfactual estimation. The balancing module employs a distribution-based adversarial method to learn balanced representations, extending beyond the limitations of current classification-based methods to mitigate confounding bias across various treatment types. The
integrating module adopts a novel Temporal Integration Predicting (TIP) strategy, which has a
wider receptive field of treatments and balanced
representations from the beginning to the current time for a more profound level of analysis.
TIP goes beyond the established Direct Predicting (DP) strategy, which only relies on current
treatments and representations, by empowering
the integrating module to effectively capture longrange dependencies and temporal treatment interactions. ACTIN exceeds the confines of specific
base models, and when implemented with simple
base models, consistently delivers state-of-the-art
performance and efficiency across both synthetic
and real-world datasets.

In causal inference with observational data in static settings,
addressing selection bias and emphasizing the unique roles
of treatments is crucial, with recent studies (Shalit et al.,
2017; Yao et al., 2018; Schwab et al., 2020; Nie et al., 2021;
Johansson et al., 2022) significantly advancing these aspects,
thus enhancing the accuracy of treatment effect estimation.
In longitudinal settings, similar challenges are encountered,
often presenting increased complexity.
Observational longitudinal data presents complex confounding bias due to time-varying confounders, which impact
subsequent treatment allocations and outcomes (Platt et al.,
2009). Current studies (Bica et al., 2020b; Melnychuk et
al., 2022) address this issue by learning balanced representations from historical data, centering on the principle
that these representations should not accurately classify current treatment assignments, which effectively removes the
association between patient history and treatment assignments. While proven effective, these methods are primarily
designed for scenarios with categorical treatments. Realworld applications, however, present diverse treatments like
continuous or mixed types, posing a challenge to designing
a wide-ranging method compatible with various treatment
types for mitigating confounding bias.
In longitudinal studies, another challenge is managing longrange dependencies, like enduring effects in long-term medical treatments (Latner et al., 2000; Jacobson et al., 2013).
Causal Transformer (CT) (Melnychuk et al., 2022) leverages
the advanced Transformer architecture, surpassing simpler
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) networks in capturing
these dependencies (Lim et al., 2018; Bica et al., 2020b; Li
et al., 2021). While CT adeptly handles general long-range
dependencies, it may not thoroughly tackle the intricate temporal synergy between historical and current treatments, a
critical aspect in medical settings. For instance, Roemhild et
al. (2022) highlight the importance of grasping the temporal
interactions between antibiotics for antibiotic optimization
and resistance minimization. CT employs the Direct Predicting (DP) strategy (Bica et al., 2020b), incorporating
current treatments and balanced representations for counterfactual estimation, yet it may not fully harness the potential
of complex temporal treatment interactions.

1. Introduction
Assessing the temporal impact of diverse treatments is critical in fields like personalized healthcare, which necessitates
the efficient and effective estimation of counterfactuals over
time, a crucial element in customizing treatment strategies
(Hill and Su, 2013). While Randomized Controlled Trials
are the gold standard for causal inference (Hariton and Lo1

School of Computer Science and Technology, University of
Science and Technology of China, China 2 Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 3 JD Explore Academy. Correspondence to: Huanhuan Chen <hchen@ustc.edu.cn>, Shengfei Lyu
<shengfei.lyu@ntu.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

