Decoding-time Realignment of Language Models

Tianlin Liu 1 † Shangmin Guo 2 † Leonardo Bianco 3 ‡ Daniele Calandriello 4 Quentin Berthet 4
Felipe Llinares 4 Jessica Hoffmann 5 Lucas Dixon 5 Michal Valko 4 Mathieu Blondel 4

Abstract

datasets that contrast favored and disfavored responses by
human annotators. It guides models to generate responses
that conform to human standards, such as engagement, helpfulness, and impartiality (Christiano et al., 2017; Ziegler
et al., 2019; Stiennon et al., 2020; Bai et al., 2022).

Aligning language models with human preferences is crucial for reducing errors and biases
in these models. Alignment techniques, such
as reinforcement learning from human feedback
(RLHF), are typically cast as optimizing a tradeoff
between human preference rewards and a proximity regularization term that encourages staying
close to the unaligned model. Selecting an appropriate level of regularization is critical: insufficient regularization can lead to reduced model
capabilities due to reward hacking, whereas excessive regularization hinders alignment. Traditional methods for finding the optimal regularization level require retraining multiple models
with varying regularization strengths. This process, however, is resource-intensive, especially
for large models. To address this challenge, we
propose decoding-time realignment (DeRa), a
simple method to explore and evaluate different
regularization strengths in aligned models without retraining. DeRa enables control over the
degree of alignment, allowing users to smoothly
transition between unaligned and aligned models.
It also enhances the efficiency of hyperparameter
tuning by enabling the identification of effective
regularization strengths using a validation dataset.

The alignment method of reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) initially trains a scalar-valued reward
model that reflects human judgment; it then uses reinforcement learning to finetune the LM based on this reward model
(Christiano et al., 2017; Ziegler et al., 2019; Stiennon et al.,
2020; Bai et al., 2022). More recent studies have investigated alignment methods that bypass the need for a separate
reward model, by aligning the LM directly from human
preferences (Rafailov et al., 2023; Azar et al., 2023; Zhao
et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024b). Despite these differences,
the primary objective remains the same: adopt a new desirable behavior without losing the expressive power and
fluency of the original model. The latter is usually enforced
using a proximity regularization, typically chosen to be the
Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between the distributions
of the unaligned and aligned models. The regularization
helps the aligned model maintain knowledge acquired during the self-supervised next-token-prediction training.
In practice, the hyperparameter for regularization strength
plays a critical role in determining the alignment outcome
(Ziegler et al., 2019; Stiennon et al., 2020; Bai et al., 2022).
On one hand, if the regularization strength is too high, the
trained model will closely follow the reference model, leading to limited alignment. On the other hand, if the regularization strength is too low, the model will significantly diverge
from the reference causing other performance characteristics to regress, termed reward hacking (Amodei et al., 2016;
Stiennon et al., 2020; Bai et al., 2022; Pan et al., 2022).
To find the optimal balance, practitioners typically use a
trial-and-error approach, by sweeping over varying regularization strengths. However, this approach is computationally
demanding, especially for large models.

1. Introduction
While self-supervised language models (LMs) excel at nexttoken prediction, they often exhibit factual errors, biases,
and other undesirable behaviors (Bai et al., 2022; Touvron
et al., 2023; Casper et al., 2023). Language model alignment aims to address these issues. Alignment training uses
†

Work done during an internship at Google DeepMind,‡ Work
done during an internship at Google Research 1 University of
Basel 2 University of Edinburgh 3 Université Paris-Saclay 4 Google
DeepMind 5 Google Research. Correspondence to: Tianlin Liu
<t.liu@unibas.ch>, Mathieu Blondel <mblondel@google.com>.

In this study, we introduce decoding-time realignment
(DeRa). Our proposal is best thought of as a modification
of the traditional response sampling procedure enabling to
blend, at decoding time, between the reference model and
an aligned one. Our approach allows us, without retrain-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

