Privacy Attacks in Decentralized Learning

Abdellah El Mrini 1 Edwige Cyffers 2 Aurélien Bellet 3

Abstract

as the number of participants increases (Lian et al., 2017).
It also raises privacy concerns: unless additional safeguards
are employed, the central server is able to observe the model
updates of each participant, which has been shown to sometimes leak as much information as the data itself (Zhu et al.,
2019; Geiping et al., 2020; Kariyappa et al., 2023).

Decentralized Gradient Descent (D-GD) allows
a set of users to perform collaborative learning
without sharing their data by iteratively averaging local model updates with their neighbors in
a network graph. The absence of direct communication between non-neighbor nodes might lead
to the belief that users cannot infer precise information about the data of others. In this work, we
demonstrate the opposite, by proposing the first
attack against D-GD that enables a user (or set of
users) to reconstruct the private data of other users
outside their immediate neighborhood. Our approach is based on a reconstruction attack against
the gossip averaging protocol, which we then extend to handle the additional challenges raised
by D-GD. We validate the effectiveness of our
attack on real graphs and datasets, showing that
the number of users compromised by a single or
a handful of attackers is often surprisingly large.
We empirically investigate some of the factors
that affect the performance of the attack, namely
the graph topology, the number of attackers, and
their position in the graph. Our code is available
at https://github.com/AbdellahElmrini/decAttack.

One way to mitigate these drawbacks is to consider fully
decentralized algorithms that eliminate the central server,
relying instead on peer-to-peer communications among participants, conceptualized as nodes within a network graph
(Boyd et al., 2006). Such algorithms, among which the popular Decentralized Gradient Descent (D-GD), have received
increasing attention from the community (Scaman et al.,
2017; Lian et al., 2017; Hegedűs et al., 2019; Berthier et al.,
2020; Koloskova et al., 2020). Beyond their enhanced scalability and robustness, they prevent any single node from
observing the individual contributions of all other nodes.
Indeed, while a node can observe the contributions of its immediate neighbors in the graph, making the reconstruction
of their values somewhat expected (Pasquini et al., 2023),
the contributions of more distant nodes are iteratively mixed
multiple times with other contributions before being observed. Intuitively, one might thus expect that individual
contributions are harder to retrieve from only indirect feedback, especially when the attacker node is far from its target.
This, in turn, leads to the common belief that decentralized learning may be more privacy-preserving by design.
Questioning this belief is the motivation of our work.

1. Introduction

To do so, we design and evaluate attacks performed by a
node (or a set of nodes) to retrieve other nodes’ private data
in two algorithms: gossip averaging, a key protocol in decentralized computation (Boyd et al., 2006; Xiao & Boyd,
2004; Olshevsky & Tsitsiklis, 2009), and the prominent
Decentralized Gradient Descent (D-GD) algorithm (Lian
et al., 2017; Koloskova et al., 2020). As our goal is to assess
the potential vulnerabilities specific to decentralization, we
focus on the strongest type of privacy leakage, namely data
reconstruction, executed by the weakest type of attackers,
namely honest-but-curious nodes. In other words, attacker
nodes follow the protocol and try to reconstruct as much
data as possible from other nodes using only their legitimate observations within the protocol. To the best of our
knowledge, the attacks we present are the first to be able to
reconstruct data from non-neighboring nodes.

Federated learning (Kairouz et al., 2021) enables collaborative model training among multiple data owners while
keeping data decentralized. Traditional federated algorithms
employ a central server to coordinate the training process
and aggregate model updates (McMahan et al., 2017). However, this centralized approach poses challenges regarding its
robustness and scalability, as the server constitutes a single
point of failure and becomes a communication bottleneck
1

School of Computer and Communication Sciences, EPFL,
Switzerland 2 Université de Lille, Inria, CNRS, Centrale Lille,
UMR 9189 - CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France 3 Inria, Univ Montpellier, Montpellier, France. Correspondence to: Edwige Cyffers
<edwige.cyffers@inria.fr>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

