Beyond ELBOs: A Large-Scale Evaluation of Variational Methods for Sampling

Denis Blessing 1 Xiaogang Jia 1 Johannes Esslinger 1 Francisco Vargas 2 Gerhard Neumann 1 3

Abstract

its Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) extensions (Del Moral
et al., 2006), have traditionally been considered the gold
standard for addressing the sampling problem. An alternative approach is Variational Inference (VI) (Blei et al., 2017),
where a tractable family of distributions is parameterized,
and optimization tools are employed to maximize similarity
to the intractable target distribution π.

Monte Carlo methods, Variational Inference, and
their combinations play a pivotal role in sampling from intractable probability distributions.
However, current studies lack a unified evaluation framework, relying on disparate performance
measures and limited method comparisons across
diverse tasks, complicating the assessment of
progress and hindering the decision-making of
practitioners. In response to these challenges, our
work introduces a benchmark that evaluates sampling methods using a standardized task suite and
a broad range of performance criteria. Moreover,
we study existing metrics for quantifying mode
collapse and introduce novel metrics for this purpose. Our findings provide insights into strengths
and weaknesses of existing sampling methods,
serving as a valuable reference for future developments. The code is publicly available here.

In recent years, there has been a surge of interest in the
development of sampling methods that merge MC with VI
techniques to approximate complex, potentially multimodal
distributions (Wu et al., 2020a; Zhang & Chen, 2021; Arbel
et al., 2021; Matthews et al., 2022; Jankowiak & Phan, 2022;
Midgley et al., 2022; Berner et al., 2022; Richter et al., 2023;
Vargas et al., 2023a;b; Akhound-Sadegh et al., 2024).
However, the evaluation of these methods faces significant
challenges, including the absence of a standardized set of
tasks and diverse performance criteria. This diversity complicates meaningful comparisons between methods. Existing evaluation protocols, such as the evidence lower bound
(ELBO), often rely on samples from the model, restricting
their evaluation capabilities to the model’s support. This
limitation becomes especially problematic when assessing
the ability to mitigate mode collapse on target densities with
well-separated modes. To overcome this challenge, others
propose the use of integral probability metrics (IPMs), like
maximum mean discrepancy (Arenz et al., 2018) or Wasserstein distance (Richter et al., 2023; Vargas et al., 2023a),
leveraging samples from the target density to assess performance beyond the model’s support. However, these metrics
often involve subjective design choices such as kernel selection or cost function determination, potentially leading to
biased evaluation protocols.

1. Introduction
Sampling methods are designed to address the challenge
of generating approximate samples or estimating the intractable normalization constant Z for a probability density
π on Rd of the form
Z
γ(x)
π(x) =
, Z=
γ(x)dx,
(1)
Z
Rd
where γ : Rd → R+ can be pointwise evaluated. This formulation has broad applications in fields such as Bayesian
statistics and the natural sciences (Liu & Liu, 2001; Stoltz
et al., 2010; Frenkel & Smit, 2023; Mittal et al., 2023).

To address these challenges, our work introduces a comprehensive set of tasks for evaluating variational methods for
sampling. We explore existing evaluation criteria and propose a novel metric specifically tailored to quantify mode
collapse. Through this evaluation, we aim to provide valuable insights into the strengths and weaknesses of current
sampling methods, contributing to the future design of more
effective techniques and the establishment of standardized
evaluation protocols.

Monte Carlo (MC) methods (Hammersley, 2013), including Annealed Importance Sampling (AIS) (Neal, 2001) and
1

Autonomous Learning Robots, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany 2 University of Cambridge, Cambridge,
United Kingdom 3 FZI Research Center for Information Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany. Correspondence to: Denis Blessing
<denis.blessing@kit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

