Decouple then Classify: A Dynamic Multi-view Labeling Strategy with Shared
and Specific Information

Xinhang Wan 1 Jiyuan Liu 2 Xinwang Liu 1 Yi Wen 1 Hao Yu 1 Siwei Wang 3 Shengju Yu 1 Tianjiao Wan 1
Jun Wang 1 En Zhu 1

Abstract

in the recommendation system. However, labeling them is
challenging and expensive because the number of users is
vast. In light of this, semi-supervised learning, which aims
to partition data into several groups with limited labeled
data, has been proposed recently and achieved great success
(Cai et al., 2020; Holmes et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2024a;b;
Zhang et al., 2024). Given an unlabeled dataset, most existing semi-supervised methods randomly select samples
to label and train the model with them. However, for a
given label ratio, the results frequently fluctuate a lot when
the model is trained on different annotated instances. The
reason is that samples contain different information and contribute variously to the model. Therefore, selecting samples
that convey richer information to annotate is significant to
reduce the label cost and attain better performance (Ren
et al., 2021; Cao et al., 2020).

Sample labeling is the most primary and fundamental step of semi-supervised learning. In
literature, most existing methods randomly label samples with a given ratio, but achieve unpromising and unstable results due to the randomness, especially in multi-view settings. To
address this issue, we propose a Dynamic Multiview Labeling Strategy with Shared and Specific
Information. To be brief, by building two classifiers with existing labels to utilize decoupled
shared and specific information, we select the
samples of low classification confidence and label them in high priorities. The newly generated
labels are also integrated to update the classifiers
adaptively. The two processes are executed alternatively until a satisfying classification performance. To validate the effectiveness of the
proposed method, we conduct extensive experiments on popular benchmarks, achieving promising performance. The code is publicly available
at https://github.com/wanxinhang/
ICML2024_decouple_then_classify.

Active learning addresses the abovementioned problem by
interactively selecting valuable samples from the unlabeled
dataset to label and retraining the model (Wang et al., 2022a;
He et al., 2023b;a). Nevertheless, most focus on data from
a single source and overlook multi-view data. Multi-view
data is widespread in the world with multimedia improves
by leaps and bounds; for instance, a person can be described
by his appearance, social networks, sound, etc. (Liu et al.,
2021a; Wang et al., 2022c; Liang et al., 2022; Wen et al.,
2023a; Wan et al., 2022; 2023; Liu et al., 2024; Yu et al.,
2024a;b). How to label multi-view data and reduce the label
cost is crucial to the analysis and utilization of multi-view
data. Unfortunately, annotating data from multiple sources
is challenging since the views usually contain two pieces
of information, i.e., the shared and specific information
(SSI), the efficient utilization of them and labeling the data
is more complicated than labeling single-view data. Some
samples might be easier to classify via shared information or
the opposite. Existing semi-supervised multi-view (SSMV)
methods frequently concentrate on the shared or specific
information individually or get trouble decoupling and utilizing them (Shen et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2022). Despite some
methods gaining two pieces of information adequately, the
random selection of instances to annotate leads to unstable
results (Wang et al., 2022b; Wu et al., 2023a).

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of information techniques, millions of unlabeled data are generated and collected. How to
label them for the downstream tasks is vital in many fields
(Wan et al., 2024b; Tu et al., 2023; Wan et al., 2024a; Liang
et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2022; 2023a;b; Wen et al., 2023b; Yu
et al., 2023b;a; Yan et al., 2024). For instance, it is beneficial
to recommend items personally for different types of users
1
College of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China 2 College of Systems Engineering,
National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
3
Intelligent Game and Decision Lab, Academy of Military Sciences, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Xinwang Liu <xinwangliu@nudt.edu.cn>, En Zhu <enzhu@nudt.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

