Replicable Learning of Large-Margin Halfspaces

Alkis Kalavasis * 1 Amin Karbasi * 1 2 Kasper Green Larsen * 3 Grigoris Velegkas * 1 Felix Zhou * 1

Abstract

how the reproducibility crisis in AI has a cascading effect
across many other scientific areas due to its widespread applications in other fields such as medicine. Thus, an urgent
goal is to design a formal framework through which we can
argue about the replicability of experiments in ML. Such a
theoretical framework was proposed in a recent work by
Impagliazzo et al. (2022) and has been studied extensively
in several learning settings (Esfandiari et al., 2023b;a; Bun
et al., 2023; Kalavasis et al., 2023; Chase et al., 2023b;
Dixon et al., 2023; Chase et al., 2023a; Eaton et al., 2023;
Karbasi et al., 2023).

We provide efficient replicable algorithms for
the problem of learning large-margin halfspaces.
Our results improve upon the algorithms provided by Impagliazzo, Lei, Pitassi, and Sorrell
(STOC, 2022). We design the first dimensionindependent replicable algorithms for this task
which runs in polynomial time, is proper, and
has strictly improved sample complexity compared to the one achieved by Impagliazzo et al.
(2022) with respect to all the relevant parameters. Moreover, our first algorithm has sample
complexity that is optimal with respect to the accuracy parameter 𝜖. We also design an SGDbased replicable algorithm that, in some parameters’ regimes, achieves better sample and time
complexity than our first algorithm. Departing
from the requirement of polynomial time algorithms, using the DP-to-Replicability reduction
of Bun, Gaboardi, Hopkins, Impagliazzo, Lei,
Pitassi, Sivakumar, and Sorrell (STOC, 2023),
we show how to obtain a replicable algorithm for
large-margin halfspaces with improved sample
complexity with respect to the margin parameter
𝜏 , but running time doubly exponential in 1/𝜏 2
and worse sample complexity dependence on 𝜖
than one of our previous algorithms. We then design an improved algorithm with better sample
complexity than all three of our previous algorithms and running time exponential in 1/𝜏 2 .

Definition 1.1 (Replicability (Impagliazzo et al., 2022)).
Let ℛ be a distribution over random binary strings. A
learning algorithm 𝒜 is 𝑛-sample 𝜌-replicable if for any
distribution 𝒟 over inputs and two independent datasets
𝑆, 𝑆 ′ ∼ 𝒟𝑛 , it holds that Pr𝑆,𝑆 ′ ∼𝒟𝑛 ,𝑟∼ℛ [𝒜(𝑆, 𝑟) ̸=
𝒜(𝑆 ′ , 𝑟)] ≤ 𝜌.
In words, this definition requires that when an algorithm 𝒜
is executed twice on different i.i.d. datasets 𝑆, 𝑆 ′ but using
shared internal randomness, then the output of the algorithm is exactly the same, with high probability. We note
that sharing the randomness across the executions is crucial in achieving this replicability guarantee. Importantly,
Dixon et al. (2023) showed that without sharing randomness, it is impossible to achieve such a strong notion of
replicability even for simple tasks such as mean estimation.
In practice, this can be achieved by simply publishing the
random seed that the ML algorithms are executed with. As
we extensively discuss in Section 1.2, Definition 1.1 turns
out to be connected with other notions of stability such as
differential privacy and perfect generalization (Ghazi et al.,
2021; Bun et al., 2023).

1. Introduction

In this work, we study the fundamental problem of learning
large-margin halfspaces, which means that no example is
allowed to lie too close to the separating hyperplane. This
task is related to foundational ML techniques such as the
Perceptron algorithm (Rosenblatt, 1958), SVMs (Cortes
and Vapnik, 1995), and AdaBoost (Freund and Schapire,
1997). Let us recall the concept class of interest.

The replicability crisis is omnipresent in many scientific
disciplines including biology, medicine, chemistry, and,
importantly, AI (Baker, 2016; Pineau et al., 2019). A recent article that appeared in Nature (Ball, 2023) explains
*
Equal contribution 1 Yale University 2 Google Research
Aarhus University.
Correspondence to: Alkis Kalavasis <alvertos.kalavasis@yale.edu>, Grigoris Velegkas <grigoris.velegkas@yale.edu>, Felix Zhou <felix.zhou@yale.edu>.
3

Definition 1.2 (Large-Margin Halfspaces). Let 𝒟 be a distribution over R𝑑 ×{−1, 1} whose support does not contain
𝑥 = 0. We say that 𝒟 has linear margin 𝜏 if there exists a
unit vector 𝑤 ∈ R𝑑 such that for any (𝑥, 𝑦) ∈ supp(𝒟) it

𝑠𝑡

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

