Position: Cracking the Code of Cascading Disparity Towards Marginalized
Communities
Golnoosh Farnadi 1 Mohammad Havaei 1 Negar Rostamzadeh 1

Abstract

often perform worse on language tasks involving dialects
spoken by low-resource languages (Liang et al., 2021). An
image generation or diffusion model primarily associating
certain professions with specific genders or ethnicities (Luccioni et al., 2023). Multimodal models can struggle with recognizing or classifying images of people from marginalized
groups, particularly those with darker skin tones or features
that do not align with dominant beauty standards (Buolamwini & Gebru, 2018; Schwemmer et al., 2020). A voice
assistant models often misinterpret commands spoken with
a regional accent which leads to frustration and exclusion
for the user (Tatman, 2017). Multimodal models might
generate hateful or offensive content that perpetuate discrimination and incite violence against already vulnerable
groups (Zellers et al., 2019).

The rise of foundation models holds immense
promise for advancing AI, but this progress may
amplify existing risks and inequalities, leaving
marginalized communities behind. In this position paper, we discuss that disparities towards
marginalized communities – performance, representation, privacy, robustness, interpretability and
safety – are not isolated concerns but rather interconnected elements of a cascading disparity phenomenon. We contrast foundation models with
traditional models and highlight the potential for
exacerbated disparity against marginalized communities. Moreover, we emphasize the unique
threat of cascading impacts in foundation models, where interconnected disparities can trigger
long-lasting negative consequences, specifically
to the people on the margin. We define marginalized communities within the machine learning
context and explore the multifaceted nature of
disparities. We analyze the sources of these disparities, tracing them from data creation, training
and deployment procedures to highlight the complex technical and socio-technical landscape. To
mitigate the pressing crisis, we conclude with a
set of calls to action to mitigate disparity at its
source.

While extensive research has focused on identifying and addressing specific types of disparities (see Section 3), a holistic understanding of how these disparities are interconnected
remains largely unaddressed. This narrow focus can worsen
existing biases and introduce new ones, disproportionately
harming marginalized communities. For example, counterfactual data augmentation (Gardner et al., 2020) that have
shown promising out-of-domain generalizability (Samory
et al., 2021), if implemented without careful consideration,
can reinforce harmful stereotypes or lead models to violate
established social norms (Sen et al., 2022).
Moreover, standard evaluation benchmarks, such as StereoSet (Nadeem et al., 2020), often focus on surface-level assessments of foundation models using non-robust prompting
metrics or post-deployment downstream task evaluations.
These approaches fail to directly probe the deeper sources
of bias embedded within the models.

1. Introduction
Foundation models with their ability to learn and adapt
across various domains, are rapidly transforming the landscape of AI. However, these large-scale models that often
trained on massive, unfiltered datasets, pose various risks
for marginalized communities. Foundation models can perpetuate and amplify existing biases, leading to disparities
in performance, privacy, robustness, model understanding,
and even the generation of harmful content for marginalized
communities. For example, large language models (LLMs)

In this position paper, we argue that these disparities are
interconnected elements of a cascading disparity phenomenon affecting marginalized communities. We discuss that representational disparities within the model lie
at the root of this phenomenon. The distinct, complex distributions representing marginalized communities are often
insufficiently captured during training, leading to the ”flattening” of their representations within the model. This, in
turn, manifests as performance disparities, reinforcement of
stereotypes, privacy violations, and other types of harmful
disparities. By analyzing the sources of disparities throughout the lifecycle of foundation models, from data collection

1

Google Research, Montreal, Canada. Correspondence to:
Golnoosh Farnadi <gfarnadi@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

