PruNeRF: Segment-Centric Dataset Pruning via 3D Spatial Consistency

Yeonsung Jung 1 Heecheol Yun 1 Joonhyung Park 1 Jin-Hwa Kim 2 3 Eunho Yang 1 4

Abstract

which are unexpected objects present only in specific
views (e.g., moving entities like pedestrians or birds).
If certain pixels become corrupted due to distractors, it
causes inconsistency in supervision, which inevitably
results in reducing the model’s performance. This issue
contributes to the limited number of benchmark datasets
in NeRF, especially compared with other domains such as
2D vision and point clouds. Constructing NeRF datasets
typically requires capturing 2D images of a scene from
multiple directions while maintaining consistent conditions,
a constraint that complicates the process. However, despite
its importance and timeliness, this challenge of handling
distractors in datasets remains largely unexplored.

Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) have shown remarkable performance in learning 3D scenes.
However, NeRF exhibits vulnerability when confronted with distractors in the training images –
unexpected objects are present only within specific views, such as moving entities like pedestrians or birds. Excluding distractors during dataset
construction is a straightforward solution, but
without prior knowledge of their types and quantities, it becomes prohibitively expensive. In this
paper, we propose PruNeRF, a segment-centric
dataset pruning framework via 3D spatial consistency, that effectively identifies and prunes the
distractors. We first examine existing metrics for
measuring pixel-wise distraction and introduce
Influence Functions for more accurate measurements. Then, we assess 3D spatial consistency
using a depth-based reprojection technique to obtain 3D-aware distraction. Furthermore, we incorporate segmentation for pixel-to-segment refinement, enabling more precise identification. Our
experiments on benchmark datasets demonstrate
that PruNeRF consistently outperforms state-ofthe-art methods in robustness against distractors.

A straightforward solution is a careful dataset curation to
prevent the inclusion of distractors. However, in real-world
scenarios, it is almost infeasible to preemptively inspect
all training images for unknown distractors without prior
knowledge about them. Therefore, simply allocating more
resources for curation is not effective. Alternatively, recent
studies have focused on developing a robust model designed
for distinguishing transient objects from the target scene.
NeRF-W (Martin-Brualla et al., 2021) uses a per-image latent code with an uncertainty-based network architecture to
separate transient objects in uncontrolled web datasets, yet
shows limited performance across datasets and has a hyperparameter selection issue. Several studies (Li et al., 2021;
Wu et al., 2022; Gao et al., 2021) focus on continuously
moving objects in monocular video but struggle to handle
unordered images which are more common in real-world
scenarios.

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF) (Mildenhall et al., 2021) have demonstrated
remarkable performance in high-quality novel view
synthesis using 2D supervision. However, achieving high
quality in NeRF is significantly challenged by the need
for well-curated multi-view images free from distractors

More recently, RobustNeRF (Sabour et al., 2023) demonstrated notable performance by applying a binary mask to
pixel-wise loss during training. They generate the mask in
each mini-batch through the intersection of three masks: the
first selects pixels with the lowest 50% of loss as inliers, the
second diffuses this inlier mask to neighboring pixels, and
the last refines the second one patch-wise. However, this
approach has performance limitations due to its heuristic
mask design and resilience on loss, which is not a precise
metric. It also requires selecting hyperparameters for patch
size and the threshold for patch-wise discrimination in the
third mask. Furthermore, these specific training schemes are
not compatible with other methods. For instance, integrating
mask-based reweighting of this approach into uncertainty-

1
Graduate School of AI, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Republic of Korea 2 NAVER AI
Lab, Republic of Korea 3 AI Institute of Seoul National University, Republic of Korea 4 AITRICS, Republic of Korea. Correspondence to: Yeonsung Jung <ys.jung@kaist.ac.kr>, Jin-Hwa Kim
<j1nhwa.kim@navercorp.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

