Bridging discrete and continuous state spaces:
Exploring the Ehrenfest process in time-continuous diffusion models

Ludwig Winkler * 1 Lorenz Richter * 2 3 Manfred Opper 1 4 5

Abstract

they are close to the equilibrium distribution of the process, from which we assume to be able to sample readily,
such that the time-reversal then brings us back to the desired target distribution (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015). In
this general setup, one can make several choices and take
different perspectives. While the original attempt considers discrete-time, continuous-space processes (Ho et al.,
2020), one can show that in the small step-size limit the
models converge to continuous-time, continuous-space processes given by stochastic differential equations (SDEs)
(Song et al., 2021). This continuous-time framework then
allows fruitful connections to mathematical tools such as
partial differential equations, path space measures and optimal control (Berner et al., 2024). As an alternative, one
can consider discrete state spaces in continuous time via
Markov jump processes, which have been suggested for
generative modeling in Campbell et al. (2022). Those are
particularly promising for problems that naturally operate
on discrete data, such as, e.g., text, images, graph structures
or certain biological data, to name just a few. While discrete
in space, an appealing property of those models is that timediscretization is not necessary – neither during training nor
during inference1 .

Generative modeling via stochastic processes has
led to remarkable empirical results as well as to
recent advances in their theoretical understanding. In principle, both space and time of the
processes can be discrete or continuous. In this
work, we study time-continuous Markov jump
processes on discrete state spaces and investigate
their correspondence to state-continuous diffusion
processes given by SDEs. In particular, we revisit the Ehrenfest process, which converges to an
Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process in the infinite state
space limit. Likewise, we can show that the timereversal of the Ehrenfest process converges to the
time-reversed Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process. This
observation bridges discrete and continuous state
spaces and allows to carry over methods from one
to the respective other setting, such as for instance
loss functions that lead to improved convergence.
Additionally, we suggest an algorithm for training the time-reversal of Markov jump processes
which relies on conditional expectations and can
thus be directly related to denoising score matching. We demonstrate our methods in multiple
convincing numerical experiments.

While the connections between Markov jump processes
and state-continuous diffusion processes have been studied extensively (see, e.g., Kurtz (1972)), a relationship between their time-reversals has only been looked at recently,
where an exact correspondence is still elusive (Santos et al.,
2023). In this work, we make this correspondence more precise, thus bridging the gap between discrete-state generative
modeling with Markov jump processes and the celebrated
continuous-state score-based generative modeling. A key
ingredient will be the so-called Ehrenfest process, which
can be seen as the discrete-state analog of the OrnsteinUhlenbeck process, that is usually employed in the continuous setting, as well as a loss function that directly translates
learning the rate functions of a time-reversed Markov jump
process to score functions in the continuous-state analog.

1. Introduction
Generative modeling based on stochastic processes has led
to state-of-the-art performance in multiple tasks of interest,
all aiming to sample artificial data from a distribution that
is only specified by a finite set of training data (Nichol &
Dhariwal, 2021). The general idea is based on the concept of time-reversal: we let the data points diffuse until
*
Equal contribution (the author order was determined by
numpy.random.rand(1)) 1 Technical University of Berlin
2
Zuse Institute Berlin 3 dida Datenschmiede GmbH 4 University
of Birmingham 5 University of Potsdam.
Correspondence
to: Ludwig Winkler <winkler@tu-berlin.de>, Lorenz Richter
<richter@zib.de>.

1

Note that this is not true for the time- and space-continuous
SDE case, where training can be done simulation-free, however,
inference relies on a discretization of the reverse stochastic process.
However, see Section 4.2 for high-dimensional settings in Markov
jump processes.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

