PARCv2: Physics-aware Recurrent Convolutional Neural Networks for
Spatiotemporal Dynamics Modeling

Phong C.H Nguyen 1 Xinlun Cheng 1 2 Shahab Azarfar 1 Pradeep Seshadri 3 Yen T. Nguyen 3 Munho Kim 4
Sanghun Choi 4 H.S. Udaykumar 3 Stephen Baek 1 5

1. Introduction

Abstract
Modeling unsteady, fast transient, and advectiondominated physics problems is a pressing challenge for physics-aware deep learning (PADL).
The dynamics of complex systems is governed
by large systems of partial differential equations
(PDEs) and ancillary constitutive models with
nonlinear structures, as well as evolving state
fields exhibiting sharp gradients and rapidly deforming material interfaces. Here, we investigate an inductive bias approach that is versatile
and generalizable to model the generic nonlinear field evolution problem. Our study focuses
on the recent physics-aware recurrent convolutions (PARC), which incorporates a differentiatorintegrator architecture that inductively models
the spatiotemporal dynamics of generic physical
systems. We extend the capabilities of PARC
to simulate unsteady, transient, and advectiondominant systems. The extended model, referred
to as PARCv2, is equipped with differential operators to model advection-reaction-diffusion equations, as well as a hybrid integral solver for stable,
long-time predictions. PARCv2 is tested on both
standard benchmark problems in fluid dynamics,
namely Burgers and Navier-Stokes equations, and
then applied to more complex shock-induced reaction problems in energetic materials. We evaluate
the behavior of PARCv2 in comparison to other
physics-informed and learning bias models and
demonstrate its potential to model unsteady and
advection-dominant dynamics regimes.

Physics-aware deep learning (PADL) has been gaining attention for the simulation of spatiotemporal dynamics, i.e.,
time-evolving fields of physical systems. The physical behaviors of continua are represented as a system of partial
differential equations (PDE), expressing the rate of change
∂x
∂t of a field x(t, r) as a function f (t, x, y, ∇x, ∇y, · · · )
where t is time, r ∈ Rd is a position vector, x is the evolving
field variable, and y(t, r) is a covariate field that influences
the evolution of x. As a simple case, the heat equation
∂x
2
∂t = ∇ x is one such governing PDE that describes the
diffusion of heat and appears frequently in various computer
vision and machine learning literature.
As the complexity of the physics displayed by a system
increases, the governing PDEs increase in number and complexity accordingly, with nonlinear coupling between the
dependent variables and source terms inducing a wide range
of spatial and temporal scales. The constitutive laws describing the material response can also become complex
nonlinear differential equations. Furthermore, depending
on the physics problem, governing PDEs relating x and y
may not even be available in an explicit form, and hence the
equations governing the evolution of these variables may
need to be learned from data.
Particularly, interesting machine-learning challenges may
emerge when there are large, localized spatial gradients in
x and y. Examples may include shocks, fast transients,
collapsing interfaces, reaction fronts, and evolving internal/external boundaries interacting with the evolving field.
An archetype of such problems is the shock-induced initiation of porous energetic materials (Perry et al., 2018; Mang
and Hjelm, 2021; Mi et al., 2020), as in the benchmark problem presented in Section 4.3. When exposed to external
shock loading, pores in these materials collapse and release
strong localized energy, forming high-temperature regions
called “hotspots.” In this process, both the traveling shock
and the energy localization near hotspots render intense
spatiotemporal gradients in the evolving temperature and
pressure fields. Collapsing pore boundaries also interact
with these evolving fields, producing intricate sharp patterns
on the reaction front. Hence, accurately predicting such

1

School of Data Science, University of Virginia, United States
Department of Astronomy, University of Virginia, United States
3
Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Iowa,
United States 4 School of Mechanical Engineering, Kyungpook
National University, Republic of Korea 5 Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, University of Virginia, United
States. Correspondence to: Stephen Baek <baek@virginia.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

