On the Emergence of Cross-Task Linearity in Pretraining-Finetuning Paradigm

Zhanpeng Zhou * 1 Zijun Chen * 1 2 Yilan Chen 3 Bo Zhang 2 Junchi Yan 1
Spawning
𝜽0

Abstract
The pretraining-finetuning paradigm has become
the prevailing trend in modern deep learning. In
this work, we discover an intriguing linear phenomenon in models that are initialized from a
common pretrained checkpoint and finetuned on
different tasks1 , termed as Cross-Task Linearity (CTL). Specifically, we show that if we linearly interpolate the weights of two finetuned
models, the features in the weight-interpolated
model are often approximately equal to the linear interpolation of features in two finetuned
models at each layer. We provide comprehensive empirical evidence supporting that CTL consistently occurs for finetuned models that start
from the same pretrained checkpoint. We conjecture that in the pretraining-finetuning paradigm,
neural networks approximately function as linear maps, mapping from the parameter space to
the feature space. Based on this viewpoint, our
study unveils novel insights into explaining model
merging/editing, particularly by translating operations from the parameter space to the feature
space. Furthermore, we delve deeper into the root
cause for the emergence of CTL, highlighting
the role of pretraining. We released our source
code at https://github.com/zzp1012/
Cross-Task-Linearity.

𝐷=

Pretraining-Finetuning
𝜽0

𝑛
𝑖=1

𝒙𝑖 , 𝑦𝑖

𝐷PT

𝜽𝑘
𝐷
𝜽1𝑇

𝜽PT
𝐷

Connected

𝐷𝑖
𝜽𝑇2

𝜽𝑖

𝐷𝑗

?

𝜽𝑗

Figure 1. The spawning method and the pretraining-finetuning
paradigm. θ 0 denotes random initialization of the network weights.
For spawning, the network is first trained for k epochs to get θ k ,
then spawned into two copies and updated until convergence to get
θ T1 , θ T2 . Note θ T1 , θ T2 are trained on same task but with different
SGD noise. With a proper chosen k , θ T1 and θ T2 can satisfy LMC
and LLFC. For pretraining-finetuning, the network is first trained
on pretraining task DPT to get θ PT . Then θ PT is finetuned on Di
and Dj to get θ i and θ j . Di and Dj can be different.

evolved as a predominant way for adapting the pretrained
model to various downstream tasks. Despite the prominent
success, our understanding of the pretraining-finetuning
paradigm still lags behind. There is a growing interest in
unraveling the hidden mechanisms of pretraining and finetuning, particularly in human preference alignment (Ouyang
et al., 2022), interpretability (Elhage et al., 2021; Olsson
et al., 2022), and AI ethics (Weidinger et al., 2021) etc.
Recent works on Linear Mode Connectivity (LMC) (Nagarajan & Kolter, 2019; Frankle et al., 2020) and Layerwise
Linear Feature Connectivity (LLFC) (Zhou et al., 2023) shed
light on understanding the training dynamics and hidden
mechanisms of neural networks. LMC depicts a linear path
in the parameter space of a network where the loss remains
approximately constant (see Definition 3.1). In other words,
linearly interpolating the weights of two different models,
which are of the same architecture and trained on the same
task, could lead to a new model that achieves similar performance as the two original models. LLFC indicates that
the features in the weight-interpolated model are proportional to the linear interpolation of the features in the two
original models (see Definition 3.2). Frankle et al. (2020)
observed LMC for networks that are jointly trained for a
short time before undergoing independent training on the
same task, termed as spawning method (see Figure 1). Zhou
et al. (2023) discovered the models that linearly connected

1. Introduction
Pretrained models have become the fundamental infrastructure of modern machine learning systems, and finetuning has
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Artificial Intelligence & Department of Computer Science and Engineering & MoE Lab of
AI, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China 2 Shanghai
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 3 Computer Science and Engineering, University of California San Diego. Correspondence
to: Bo Zhang <bo.zhangzx@gmail.com>, Junchi Yan <yanjunchi.sjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
In this work, task refers to dataset used for finetuning unless
otherwise stated.

1

