PointMC: Multi-instance Point Cloud Registration based on Maximal Cliques

Yue Wu 1 2 Xidao Hu 1 2 Yongzhe Yuan 1 2 Xiaolong Fan 1 3 Maoguo Gong 1 3 Hao Li 1 3 Mingyang Zhang 1 3
Qiguang Miao 1 2 Wenping Ma 4

Abstract

(Cheng et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2023b; Merras et al., 2017).
The task involves estimating a single rigid transformation
between two frames of point clouds. However, due to the
possibility that the target scene point cloud may contain
multiple instances of the same source point cloud, we need

Multi-instance point cloud registration is the problem of estimating multiple rigid transformations
between two point clouds. Existing solutions
rely on global spatial consistency of ambiguity and the time-consuming clustering of highdimensional correspondence features, making it
difficult to handle registration scenarios where
multiple instances overlap. To address these problems, we propose a maximal clique based multiinstance point cloud registration framework called
PointMC. The key idea is to search for maximal cliques on the correspondence compatibility
graph to estimate multiple transformations, and
cluster these transformations into clusters corresponding to different instances to efficiently and
accurately estimate all poses. PointMC leverages
a correspondence embedding module that relies
on local spatial consistency to effectively eliminate outliers, and the extracted discriminative features empower the network to circumvent missed
pose detection in scenarios involving multiple
overlapping instances. We conduct comprehensive experiments on both synthetic and real-world
datasets, and the results show that the proposed
PointMC yields remarkable performance improvements.

Figure 1. Given two frame point clouds, pairwise point cloud registration (left) focuses on estimating a single rigid transformation
between the source and target point clouds, while multi-instance
point cloud registration (right) aims to estimate multiple poses of
objects identical to the source point cloud within the target point
cloud.

to estimate multiple transformations between them. As
shown in Figure 1 (right), in the case where there is a chair
modeled as the source point cloud, we aim to find the poses
of the same object in the target indoor scene point cloud.
The existing literature has relatively little research on this
challenging problem, which is referred to as multi-instance
point cloud registration.

1. Introduction

For the problem of multi-instance point cloud registration,
due to its similarity to 3D object detection tasks (Li et al.,
2023; Zhou et al., 2023), one solution is to utilize a 3D
object detector to detect and segment instances within the
target point cloud, and then transform it into a traditional
pairwise point cloud registration problem. However, since
the object detector is trained for a specific object, it is less
robust when encountering point clouds of unknown objects.
Another solution relies on multi-model fitting algorithms
(Kluger et al., 2020; Magri & Fusiello, 2016; 2014). Nevertheless, traditional multi-model fitting algorithms generate
significant computational costs in scenarios with a large
number of outliers in multi-instance point cloud registration, as they require a large number of samples to generate

With the development of high-precision sensors, pairwise
point cloud registration techniques have been widely applied
in fields such as autonomous driving (Zhang et al., 2023b;
Zhao et al., 2024; Li et al., 2015) and 3D reconstruction
1
MoE Key Lab of Collaborative Intelligence Systems, Xidian
University, Xi’an, China 2 School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University, Xi’an, China 3 School of Electronic
Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an, China 4 School of Artificial
Intelligence, Xidian University, Xi’an, China. Correspondence to:
Maoguo Gong <gong@ieee.org>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

