Incremental Topological Ordering and Cycle Detection with Predictions

Samuel McCauley 1 Benjamin Moseley 2 Aidin Niaparast 2 Shikha Singh 1

Abstract

to optimize efficiency on a new problem instance. This
starting state can significantly improve performance over
the conventional method of solving problems from scratch.

This paper leverages the framework of algorithmswith-predictions to design data structures for two
fundamental dynamic graph problems: incremental topological ordering and cycle detection. In
these problems, the input is a directed graph on
n nodes, and the m edges arrive one by one. The
data structure must maintain a topological ordering of the vertices at all times and detect if the
newly inserted edge creates a cycle. The theoretically best worst-case algorithms for these problems have high update cost (polynomial in n and
m). In practice, greedy heuristics (that recompute
the solution from scratch each time) perform well
but can have high update cost in the worst case.
In this paper, we bridge this gap by leveraging
predictions to design a learned new data structure
for the problems. Our data structure guarantees
consistency, robustness, and smoothness with respect to predictions—that is, it has the best possible running time under perfect predictions, never
performs worse than the best-known worst-case
methods, and its running time degrades smoothly
with the prediction error. Moreover, we demonstrate empirically that predictions, learned from a
very small training dataset, are sufficient to provide significant speed-ups on real datasets.

Warm starting algorithms with machine-learned predictions
can be viewed through the lens of beyond-worst-case analysis. While the predominant algorithmic paradigm for
decades has been to use worst-case analysis, warm starting
takes into account that real-world applications repeatedly
solve a problem on similar instances that share a common
underlying structure. Predictions about these input instances
can be used to the improve running time of future computations.
This new line of research, called algorithms with predictions
or learning-augmented algorithms, leverages predictions to
achieve strong guarantees–much like those achieved using
worst-case analysis—for warm-started algorithms. Under
this setting, the performance of the algorithm is measured
as a function of the prediction quality. This ensures that
the algorithm is robust to prediction inaccuracies and has
performance that interpolates smoothly between ideal and
worst-case guarantees with respect to predictions.
Recent proof-of-concept results have demonstrated the potential to enhance the running time of offline algorithms.
The area was empirically initiated by Kraska et al. (2018).
Theoretically, Dinitz et al. (2021) were the first to provide a
theoretical framework for using warm-start to improve the
running time of the weighted bipartite matching problem.
Follow-up works include the application of learned predictions to improve the efficiency of computing flows using
Ford-Fulkerson (Davies et al., 2023), shortest path computations using Bellman-Ford (Lattanzi et al., 2023), binary
search (Bai & Coester, 2023), convex optimization (Sakaue
& Oki, 2022) and maintaining a dynamic sorted array (McCauley et al., 2023). These results showcase the promising
potential to harness predictions more broadly for algorithmic efficiency.

1. Introduction
A recent line of research has focused on how learned predictions can be used to enhance the running time of algorithms.
This novel approach, often referred to as warm starting, initializes an algorithm with a machine-learned starting state
1

Department of Computer Science, Williams College,
Williamstown, MA 01267 USA 2 Tepper School of Business,
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA. Correspondence to: Samuel McCauley <sam@cs.williams.edu>,
Benjamin Moseley <moseleyb@andrew.cmu.edu>, Aidin
Niaparast <aniapara@andrew.cmu.edu>,
Shikha Singh
<shikha@cs.williams.edu>.

Data structures are one of the most fundamental algorithmic domains, forming the backbone of most computer systems and databases. Leveraging predictions to improve data
structure design remains a nascent research area. Empirical investigations, initiated by Kraska et al. (2018) and
follow-ups such as Ferragina et al. (2021), demonstrate the
exciting potential of speeding up indexing data structures

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

