Improving Interpretation Faithfulness for Vision Transformers

Lijie Hu * 1 2 3 Yixin Liu * 4 Ninghao Liu 5 Mengdi Huai 6 Lichao Sun 4 Di Wang 1 2 3

Abstract

Recently, their ideas have also been borrowed in many computer vision tasks such as image recognition (Dosovitskiy
et al., 2021), objective detection (Zhu et al., 2021), image
processing (Chen et al., 2021) and semantic segmentation
(Zheng et al., 2021). Among them, the most successful
variant is the vision transformer (ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al.,
2021), which uses self-attention modules. Similar to tokens
in the text domain, ViTs divide each image into a sequence
of patches (visual tokens), and then feed them into selfattention layers to produce representations of correlations
between visual tokens. The success of these attention-based
modules is not only because of their good performance but
also due to their “self-explanation” characteristics. Unlike
post-hoc interpretation methods (Du et al., 2019), attention
weights can intrinsically provide the “inner-workings” of
models (Meng et al., 2019), i.e., the entries in attention vector could point us to the most relevant features of the input
image for its prediction, and can also provide visualization
for “where” and “what” the attention focuses on (Xu et al.,
2015).

Vision Transformers (ViTs) have achieved stateof-the-art performance for various vision tasks.
One reason behind the success lies in their ability to provide plausible innate explanations for
the behavior of neural architectures. However,
ViTs suffer from issues with explanation faithfulness, as their focal points are fragile to adversarial attacks and can be easily changed with even
slight perturbations on the input image. In this
paper, we propose a rigorous approach to mitigate
these issues by introducing Faithful ViTs (FViTs).
Briefly speaking, an FViT should have the following two properties: (1) The top-k indices of
its self-attention vector should remain mostly unchanged under input perturbation, indicating stable explanations; (2) The prediction distribution
should be robust to perturbations. To achieve this,
we propose a new method called Denoised Diffusion Smoothing (DDS), which adopts randomized
smoothing and diffusion-based denoising. We theoretically prove that processing ViTs directly with
DDS can turn them into FViTs. We also show that
Gaussian noise is nearly optimal for both ℓ2 and
ℓ∞ -norm cases. Finally, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach through comprehensive
experiments and evaluations. Results show that
FViTs are more robust against adversarial attacks
while maintaining the explainability of attention,
indicating higher faithfulness.

As a crucial characteristic for explanation methods, faithfulness requires that the explanation method reflects its reasoning process (Jacovi & Goldberg, 2020). Therefore, for ViTs,
their attention feature vectors should reveal what is essential
to their prediction. Furthermore, faithfulness encompasses
two properties: completeness and stability. Completeness
means that the explanation should cover all relevant factors
or patches related to its corresponding prediction (Sundararajan et al., 2017), while stability ensures that the explanation
is consistent with humans understanding and robust to slight
perturbations. Based on these properties, we can conclude
that “faithful ViTs” (FViTs) should have the good robustness performance, and certified explainability of attention
maps which are robust against perturbations.

1. Introduction
Transformers and attention-based frameworks have been
widely adopted as benchmarks for natural language processing tasks (Kenton & Toutanova, 2019; Radford et al., 2019).

While the self-attention module in ViTs already possesses
the property of completeness, it often suffers from stability
issues. For example, in language tasks, Wiegreffe & Pinter
(2019); Hu et al. (2022) have shown that attention is not
robust, as a slight perturbation on the embedding vector can
cause the attention vector distribution to change drastically.
Similarly, for vision tasks, we find that such a phenomenon
is not uncommon for ViTs, where attention modules are
sensitive to perturbations on input images. For instance, in
Fig. 1, we can see that a slight perturbation on the input

*

Equal contribution 1 King Abdullah University of Science
and Technology (KAUST) 2 Provable Responsible AI and Data
Analytics (PRADA) Lab 3 SDAIA-KAUST AI 4 Lehigh University
5
University of Georgia 6 Iowa State University. Correspondence to:
Di Wang <di.wang@kaust.edu.sa>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

