Attack-free Evaluating and Enhancing Adversarial Robustness on Categorical
Data
Yujun Zhou * 1 Yufei Han * 2 Haomin Zhuang 1 Hongyan Bao 3 Xiangliang Zhang 1

Abstract

Madry et al., 2017; Carlini & Wagner, 2017). To mitigate
these risks, defense strategies, known as robustness enhancement methods, have been developed to reduce the
model’s adversarial risk (Shafahi et al., 2019; Zhang et al.,
2019; Wong et al., 2020). Additionally, the evaluation of
robustness in current works is typically quantified by the
success rate of various attack methods against adversarial
risk (Madry et al., 2017; Carlini & Wagner, 2017; Kim et al.,
2024). Despite extensive research of these aspects in the
continuous domain, the discrete domain, which is prevalent
in real-world safety-critical applications, has not been as
thoroughly investigated (Bao et al., 2023). However, these
methods for robustness evaluation and enhancement in continuous settings are not directly transferable to categorical
data. Firstly, robustness evaluation through attacks is computationally demanding for categorical data. The generation
of commonly used L0 -norm bounded adversarial perturbations on categorical data (Lei et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2020)
poses an NP-hard problem (Lee & Leyffer, 2011). Secondly,
adversarial training, a typical robustness enhancement strategy that involves iterative generation of adversarial samples
for optimization, becomes computationally intensive when
transferred from continuous to categorical input. Besides,
due to the NP-hard nature of generating adversarial samples,
adversarial training can only cover a subset of adversarial
samples, leading to “robust overfitting” (Rice et al., 2020).
This leads us to our research questions:

Research on adversarial robustness has predominantly focused on continuous inputs, leaving categorical inputs, especially tabular attributes, less
examined. To echo this challenge, our work aims
to evaluate and enhance the robustness of classification over categorical attributes against adversarial perturbations through efficient attack-free
approaches. We propose a robustness evaluation
metric named Integrated Gradient-Smoothed Gradient (IGSG). It is designed to evaluate the attributional sensitivity of each feature and the decision boundary of the classifier, two aspects that
significantly influence adversarial risk, according
to our theoretical analysis. Leveraging this metric, we develop an IGSG-based regularization to
reduce adversarial risk by suppressing the sensitivity of categorical attributes. We conduct extensive empirical studies over categorical datasets
of various application domains. The results affirm the efficacy of both IGSG and IGSG-based
regularization. Notably, IGSG-based regularization surpasses the state-of-the-art robust training
methods by a margin of approximately 0.4% to
12.2% on average in terms of adversarial accuracy, especially on high-dimension datasets. The
code is available at https://github.com/
YujunZhou/IGSG.

Q1: How can the adversarial robustness of deep learning
models on categorical data be evaluated without performing
attacks?

1. Introduction

Q2: How can such an attack-free robustness assessment be
utilized for robustness enhancement?

Adversarial attacks (Goodfellow et al., 2014) pose significant concerns in safety-critical applications by exploiting
vulnerabilities in deep learning models, thereby impacting their decision-making (Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2016;

To answer these questions, we identify two primary factors affecting the adversarial robustness of one model on
categorical data. The first factor concerns the model’s overreliance on a limited subset of features. Such dependence
signifies that decisions within the model disproportionately
prioritize few features, leading to increased vulnerability
and a heightened risk of adversarial attacks (Grosse et al.,
2016). As shown in Fig.1(a), in models trained through standard methods (Std Train), only a few features are subjected
to attacks more frequently, e.g., the 30th to 32nd features

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, USA
2
INRIA, France 3 King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia. Correspondence to: Xiangliang
Zhang <xzhang33@nd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

