A Subquadratic Time Algorithm for Robust Sparse Mean Estimation

Ankit Pensia 1

Abstract

develop algorithms that are robust to outliers (Huber, 1964;
Andrews et al., 1972; Huber & Ronchetti, 2009). Before
proceeding further, we formally define the contamination
model we study in this paper.

We study the algorithmic problem of sparse mean
estimation in the presence of adversarial outliers.
Specifically, the algorithm observes a corrupted
set of samples from N (µ, Id ), where the unknown
mean µ ∈ Rd is constrained to be k-sparse. A
series of prior works has developed efficient algorithms for robust sparse mean estimation with
sample complexity poly(k, log d, 1/ϵ) and runtime d2 poly(k, log d, 1/ϵ), where ϵ is the fraction
of contamination. In particular, the fastest runtime
of existing algorithms is quadratic in the dimension, which can be prohibitive in high dimensions.
This quadratic barrier in the runtime stems from
the reliance of these algorithms on the sample
covariance matrix, which is of size d2 .

Definition 1.1 (Strong Contamination Model). Given a corruption parameter ϵ ∈ (0, 1/2) and a distribution P on
uncorrupted samples, an algorithm obtains samples from P
with ϵ-contamination as follows: (i) The algorithm specifies
the number n of samples it requires. (ii) A set S of n i.i.d.
samples from P is drawn but not yet shown to the algorithm.
(iii) An arbitrarily powerful adversary then inspects S, before deciding to replace any subset of ⌈ϵn⌉ samples with
arbitrarily corrupted points (“outliers”) to obtain the contaminated set T , which is then returned to the algorithm. We
say T is an ϵ-corrupted version of S and a set of ϵ-corrupted
samples from P .

Our main contribution is an algorithm for robust sparse mean estimation which runs in subquadratic time using poly(k, log d, 1/ϵ) samples,
with similar results for robust sparse PCA. Our
results build on algorithmic advances in detecting
weak correlations, a generalized version of the
light-bulb problem by Valiant (Valiant, 2015).

Our focus will be on high-dimensional distributions, i.e.,
when the distribution P is over Rd for large d. Dealing with
outliers becomes harder in high dimensions because classical outlier screening procedures (which otherwise work
well in low dimensions) rely on the norm of the data points
and are too coarse to distinguish outliers from inliers. Nevertheless, a long line of research, spurred by advances in
Diakonikolas et al. (2016); Lai et al. (2016), has developed
a systematic theory of handling outliers in high-dimensional
robust statistics (Diakonikolas & Kane, 2023). Notwithstanding this progress, major gaps persist in our fine-grained
understanding of fast robust algorithms for data with additional structure.

1. Introduction
Mean estimation, a fundamental unsupervised inference task
studied in literature, may be described as follows: Given a
family of distributions P over Rd , the algorithm observes a
set of i.i.d. points from an unknown P ∈ P, with the goal
of outputting µ
b such that, with high probability, ∥b
µ − µ∥2
is small. Although this framework is well-studied in the literature, the data observed in practice may deviate from the
i.i.d. assumption and additionally may contain outliers. Crucially, these outliers can easily break standard off-the-shelf
estimators, for example, sample mean, geometric median,
and coordinate-wise median. To address this challenge, the
field of robust statistics was initiated in the 1960s, aiming to
1
IBM Research.
<ankitp@ibm.com>.

Correspondence to:

Structured high-dimensional data distributions are ubiquitous in practice, e.g., natural images and sounds. Moreover,
leveraging these underlying structures often dramatically
improves algorithmic performance, e.g., in terms of error.
A well-studied structure both in the theory and practice of
high-dimensional statistics is sparsity, see, for example, the
textbooks Eldar & Kutyniok (2012); Hastie et al. (2015); van
de Geer (2016). Consequently, we concentrate our efforts
on structured mean estimation, where we assume that the
underlying mean is sparse, i.e., an overwhelming majority
of its coordinates are zero.

Ankit Pensia

In light of the challenges posed by outliers above and the
prevalence and importance of sparsity, we study the problem
of robust sparse mean estimation. We say a vector x ∈ Rd is

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

