LCA-on-the-Line: Benchmarking Out-of-Distribution
Generalization with Class Taxonomies
Jia Shi 1 Gautam Gare 1 Jinjin Tian 1 Siqi Chai 1 Zhiqiu Lin 1 Arun Vasudevan 1 Di Feng 2 3
Francesco Ferroni 2 4 Shu Kong 5 6

Abstract
We tackle the challenge of predicting models’
Out-of-Distribution (OOD) performance using indistribution (ID) measurements without requiring
OOD data. Existing evaluations with “Effective
robustness”, which use ID accuracy as an indicator of OOD accuracy, encounter limitations when
models are trained with diverse supervision and
distributions, such as class labels (Vision Models, VMs, on ImageNet) and textual descriptions
(Visual-Language Models, VLMs, on LAION).
VLMs often generalize better to OOD data than
VMs despite having similar or lower ID performance. To improve the prediction of models’
OOD performance from ID measurements, we
introduce the Lowest Common Ancestor (LCA)on-the-Line framework. This approach revisits
the established concept of LCA distance, which
measures the hierarchical distance between labels
and predictions within a predefined class hierarchy, such as WordNet. We assess 75 models
using ImageNet as the ID dataset and five significantly shifted OOD variants, uncovering a strong
linear correlation between ID LCA distance and
OOD top-1 accuracy. Our method provides a compelling alternative for understanding why VLMs
tend to generalize better. Additionally, we propose a technique to construct a taxonomic hierarchy on any dataset using K-means clustering,
demonstrating that LCA distance is robust to the
constructed taxonomic hierarchy. Moreover, we
demonstrate that aligning model predictions with
class taxonomies, through soft labels or prompt
engineering, can enhance model generalization.
Open source code in our Project Page.

Figure 1. Correlation between LCA Distance and Out-ofDistribution (OOD) Performance in Vision and VisionLanguage Models. In both panels, the X-axis represents the
top-1 accuracy on ObjectNet (OOD test dataset). The Y-axes depict the top-1 accuracy (left-axis) and LCA distance (right-axis)
on ImageNet (ID test dataset). The left plot reveals a divergent
trend where Vision Models (VMs) show a trade-off between OOD
and ID accuracy, while Vision-Language Models (VLMs) tend to
maintain higher OOD accuracy regardless of ID performance. The
right plot demonstrates a unified, strong positive correlation between LCA distance and OOD accuracy for both VMs and VLMs,
showing that LCA distance is a robust metric for evaluating model
generalization across different architectures.

1. Introduction
Generalizing models trained on in-distribution (ID) data to
out-of-distribution (OOD) conditions is a notoriously difficult task. Distribution shifts undermine the independent
and identically distributed (IID) assumption between training and testing data, challenging the model’s robustness.
Numerous OOD datasets have been proposed to study the
effects of different interventions, such as temporal shifts (Hu
et al., 2022; Lomonaco & Maltoni, 2017; Lin et al., 2021),
artificial noise (Hendrycks & Dietterich, 2019; Arjovsky
et al., 2019; Larochelle et al., 2008), and natural distribution shifts (Hendrycks et al., 2021; Hendrycks & Dietterich,
2019; Barbu et al., 2019; Recht et al., 2019). Maintaining
model robustness becomes significantly more difficult with
severe visual shifts in the image domain. However, many
studies evaluate generalization on OOD datasets with lim-

1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Work done at Argo AI GmbH
Apple 4 Nvidia 5 Texas A&M University 6 University of Macau.
Correspondence to: Jia Shi <jiashi@alumni.cmu.edu>, Shu Kong
<skong@um.edu.mo>.
3

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

