Position: Understanding LLMs Requires More Than Statistical Generalization

Patrik Reizinger * 1 Szilvia Ujváry * 2 3 Anna Mészáros * 2 Anna Kerekes * 4 5
Wieland Brendel 1 6 7 Ferenc Huszár † 2

Abstract
The last decade has seen blossoming research in
deep learning theory attempting to answer, “Why
does deep learning generalize?" A powerful shift
in perspective precipitated this progress: the study
of overparametrized models in the interpolation
regime. In this paper, we argue that another perspective shift is due, since some of the desirable
qualities of LLMs are not a consequence of good
statistical generalization and require a separate
theoretical explanation. Our core argument relies on the observation that AR probabilistic models are inherently non-identifiable: models zero
or near-zero KL divergence apart—thus, equivalent test loss—can exhibit markedly different
behaviors. We support our position with mathematical examples and empirical observations,
illustrating why non-identifiability has practical
relevance through three case studies: (1) the nonidentifiability of zero-shot rule extrapolation; (2)
the approximate non-identifiability of in-context
learning; and (3) the non-identifiability of finetunability. We review promising research directions focusing on LLM-relevant generalization
measures, transferability, and inductive biases.

Interpolation regime

Saturation regime

min Ltrain

non-unique
global min. reached

non-unique
global min. reached

min Ltest

no assumption

non-unique
global min. reached

Questions

Is Ltest
small enough?

zero-shot extrapolation
in-context learning
transfer, finetunability

Table 1. Comparison of Interpolation and Saturation regimes:
In the Interpolation regime we assume a global minimum of the
training loss is found, but is not unique, so we ask whether the
minimum we find generalises well. In the Saturation regime, we
further assume that a global minimum of the test loss is found,
but even that is not unique. We study additional properties of the
minimum found, which are not implied by good generalization.

capabilities (Brown et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2023a).
Modern theory of deep learning studies neural networks
in the interpolation regime (Zhang et al., 2016; Masegosa,
2020; Kawaguchi et al., 2022), i.e., when at the end of training, a model reaches a (non-unique) global minimum of the
training loss. Here, the question is whether this model will
also perform well on the in-distribution test set. Since Large
Language Models (LLMs) are trained on massive datasets,
these models achieve both low training and test loss; thus,
they generalize in the statistical sense. However, statistical generalization cannot guarantee good performance on
downstream tasks (Liu et al., 2023a).
This position paper argues that we ought to study LLMs
in the saturation regime1 (coined by Liu et al., 2023a) instead (Tab. 1). In the saturation regime, models reach the
(non-unique) global minimum of the test loss during training; since the same minimal test loss cannot distinguish
between out-of-distribution (OOD) model performance (Liu
et al., 2023a), we should ask what additional properties
hold for the minimum found by our algorithms. To formalize such questions, we need to substitute the black box
concept of average risk from statistical learning theory with

1. Introduction
Autoregressive (AR) language models trained on the nexttoken prediction objective can have remarkable reasoning (Ouyang et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023; Wei et al.,
2022), in-context learning (ICL) (Xie et al., 2022; Zhang
et al., 2023; Min et al., 2022), and data-efficient fine-tuning
*

Equal contribution † Senior author 1 Max Planck Institute for
Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 2 University of Cambridge, UK 3 AI Center, UCL, London, UK 4 Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich 5 Max Planck ETH Center for Learning Systems 6 ELLIS Institute Tübingen, Germany 7 Tübingen
AI Center, Germany. Correspondence to: Patrik Reizinger <patrik.reizinger@tuebingen.mpg.de>.

1

The term “saturation regime” has also been used to refer to
saturation of hidden units (Glorot & Bengio, 2010). Here we mean
exclusively the saturation of the test loss.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

