The Privacy Power of Correlated Noise in Decentralized Learning

Youssef Allouah 1 Anastasia Koloskova 1 Aymane El Firdoussi 1 Martin Jaggi 1 Rachid Guerraoui 1

Abstract

make it either impractical or undesirable to transfer the data
beyond their original sources, promoting the emergence
of federated and decentralized learning (McMahan et al.,
2017; Lian et al., 2017), where the training occurs directly
on the data-holding entities. Decentralized learning additionally removes the assumption of a central server, with
only the model updates being transmitted directly between
users. A classical decentralized learning algorithm is decentralized stochastic gradient descent (D-SGD) (Koloskova
et al., 2020), where users alternate between performing local
gradient updates and averaging local models via gossiping.

Decentralized learning is appealing as it enables
the scalable usage of large amounts of distributed
data and resources without resorting to any
central entity, while promoting privacy since
every user minimizes the direct exposure of their
data. Yet, without additional precautions, curious
users can still leverage models obtained from
their peers to violate privacy. In this paper, we
propose D ECOR, a variant of decentralized SGD
with differential privacy (DP) guarantees. In
D ECOR, users securely exchange randomness
seeds in one communication round to generate
pairwise-canceling correlated Gaussian noises,
which are injected to protect local models at
every communication round. We theoretically
and empirically show that, for arbitrary connected
graphs, D ECOR matches the central DP optimal
privacy-utility trade-off. We do so under SecLDP,
our new relaxation of local DP, which protects
all user communications against an external
eavesdropper and curious users, assuming that
every pair of connected users shares a secret, i.e.,
an information hidden to all others. The main theoretical challenge is to control the accumulation
of non-canceling correlated noise due to network
sparsity. We also propose a companion SecLDP
privacy accountant for public use.

When dealing with privacy-sensitive data, it is crucial not
only to confine the sensitive information locally with decentralization, but also to ensure that the algorithm avoids
leaking any sensitive information through its communicated
updates or the final model. These can be observed by an
external eavesdropper or even an honest-but-curious user,
who follows the algorithm but may attempt to violate the
privacy of other users. The notion of differential privacy
(DP) (Dwork et al., 2014) serves as a widely accepted theoretical framework for measuring formal privacy guarantees.
This notion has been extensively studied in centralized settings (Bassily et al., 2014; Abadi et al., 2016), i.e., assuming
a trusted data curator or server. Yet, much less attention has
been given to adapting DP to decentralized learning.
Several threat models have been considered in decentralized
learning, the strongest corresponding to the classical notion
of local differential privacy (LDP) (Kasiviswanathan et al.,
2011). Under LDP, users do not trust any other entity and
obfuscate all their communications independently. In contrast, central differential privacy (CDP) only protects the
final model, exactly as if the learning was conducted on a
single machine. Importantly, there is a significant gap in
performance between LDP and CDP algorithms. In a system of n users, the optimal privacy-utility trade-off under
LDP can be n times worse than CDP (Duchi et al., 2018).
Indeed, the CDP baseline is the variant of D-SGD adding
noise to protect the average of user models only, which is
much less noise than that needed under LDP, to protect every local model before averaging. Some prior works aimed
at reconciling this performance gap by investigating other
relaxations of LDP. For example, in federated learning with
an untrusted server, the shuffle model (Cheu et al., 2019) and
distributed DP (Kairouz et al., 2021a) restrict the view of the

1. Introduction
In numerous machine learning scenarios, the training dataset
is dispersed among diverse sources, including individual
users or distinct organizations responsible for generating
each data segment. The nature of such data often involves
privacy concerns, especially in applications like healthcare (Sheller et al., 2020), which can divulge sensitive
information about an individual’s health. Privacy issues
1
EPFL, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Youssef Allouah
<youssef.allouah@epfl.ch>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

