MFTN: A Multi-scale Feature Transfer Network Based on IMatchFormer for
Hyperspectral Image Super-Resolution

Shuying Huang 1 Mingyang Ren 2 Yong Yang 2 Xiaozheng Wang 3 Yingzhi Wei 2

Abstract

due to its ability to simultaneously capture two-dimensional
spatial information and three-dimensional spectral information of the targets. Because HSIs contain rich spatial
and spectral information, they have become a primary data
source in many critical domains such as mineral exploration
(Sabins, 1999) and plant detection (Lowe et al., 2017). However, due to the inherent physical limitations of single sensors, they cannot provide high-resolution data in both spectral and spatial (Dian et al., 2021), resulting in the inability
to meet the requirements of precise applications. Consequently, an increasing number of remote sensing satellites
are now equipped with multiple spectral imaging instruments to overcome these constraints by simultaneously obtaining multimodal remote sensing images, such as multispectral images (MSIs) and HSIs. Compared with HSIs,
MSIs have higher spatial resolution but lower spectral resolution, which can also affect the accuracy of subsequent
tasks. To obtain HSIs with both high spatial and spectral
resolutions, some researchers have proposed the hyperspectral image super-resolution (HISR) methods (Thomas et al.,
2008; Aiazzi et al., 2011; Vivone et al., 2015), also known
as the pansharpening methods, which fuse a low-spatialresolution HSI (LR-HSI) with a high-spectral-resolution
multispectral image (HR-MSI) in the same scene to obtain
a HSI with high spatial and spectral resolution (HR-HSI).
HISR methods can significantly improve the interpretability
of remote sensing information, which helps to improve the
performance of subsequent applications, such as land cover
analysis (Solomon & Agnes, 2023).

Hyperspectral image super-resolution (HISR)
aims to fuse a low-resolution hyperspectral image (LR-HSI) with a high-resolution multispectral image (HR-MSI) to obtain a high-resolution
hyperspectral image (HR-HSI). Due to some existing HISR methods ignoring the significant feature difference between LR-HSI and HR-MSI,
the reconstructed HR-HSI typically exhibits spectral distortion and blurring of spatial texture. To
solve this issue, we propose a multi-scale feature
transfer network (MFTN) for HISR. Firstly, three
multi-scale feature extractors are constructed to
extract features of different scales from the input images. Then, a multi-scale feature transfer
module (MFTM) consisting of three improved
feature matching Transformers (IMatchFormers)
is designed to learn the detail features of different
scales from HR-MSI by establishing the crossmodel feature correlation between LR-HSI and
degraded HR-MSI. Finally, a multiscale dynamic
aggregation module (MDAM) containing three
spectral aware aggregation modules (SAAMs)
is constructed to reconstruct the final HR-HSI
by gradually aggregating features of different
scales. Extensive experimental results on three
commonly used datasets demonstrate that the proposed model achieves better performance compared to state- of-the-art (SOTA) methods.

Early HISR methods (Akgun et al., 2005; Wang et al., 2017;
Irmak et al., 2018; Huang et al., 2014) mostly utilized single
LR-HSI to reconstruct the corresponding HR-HSI. However, due to the limited spatial information provided by
a single LR-HSI, such methods cannot reconstruct more
spatial information, resulting in edge blurring and spectral
distortion issues in the reconstructed HR-HSI. Therefore,
considering the imaging characteristics of different satellite
sensors, some researchers have studied multi-frame HISR
reconstruction methods (Gillespie et al., 1987; Laben &
Brower, 2000), which use MSIs or PAN images with the
same scene as reference images to reconstruct HR-HSIs. At
present, multi-frame HISR methods are mainly divided into
two categories: traditional methods and deep learning-based

1. INTRODUCTION
Hyperspectral remote sensing can obtain hyperspectral images (HSIs) with continuous and narrow spectral resolution
1

School of Software, Tiangong University, Tianjin, China
School of Computer Science and Technology, Tiangong University, Tianjin, China 3 School of Control Science and Engineering,
Tiangong University, Tianjin, China. Correspondence to: Yong
Yang <greatyangy@126.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

