Online Linear Regression in Dynamic Environments via Discounting

Andrew Jacobsen 1 Ashok Cutkosky 2
always possible to make predictions ŷt = ft (xt ) for any arbitrary transformation ft ∶ Rd → R, for instance by setting
2
wt = ft (xt )xt / ∥xt ∥ .

Abstract
We develop algorithms for online linear regression which achieve optimal static and dynamic regret guarantees even in the complete
absence of prior knowledge. We present a
novel analysis showing that a discounted variant of the Vovk-Azoury-Warmuth forecaster
achieves dynamic
√ regret of the form RT (u) ≤
O (d log(T ) ∨ dPTγ (u)T ), where PTγ (u) is a
measure of variability of the comparator sequence, and show that the discount factor achieving this result can be learned on-the-fly. We show
that this result is optimal by providing a matching lower bound. We also extend our results to
strongly-adaptive guarantees which hold over every sub-interval [a, b] ⊆ [1, T ] simultaneously.

The classical measure of the learner’s performance in this
setting is regret, the cumulative prediction error relative to
some fixed benchmark point u ∈ Rd :
T

RT (u) = ∑ ℓt (wt ) − ℓt (u).
t=1

Notice that this performance measure can only properly reflect prediction accuracy when there exists a fixed u ∈ Rd
which predicts well on average. For example, this may occur when when the (xt , yt ) pairs are all generated i.i.d.
from some well-behaved distribution. However, in many
true streaming settings the data-generating distribution may
change over time due to changes in the environment. Dynamic regret attempts to model such settings by comparing
against a sequence of comparators u = (u1 , . . . , uT ):

1. Online Linear Regression

T

This paper presents new techniques and analyses for online linear regression, a variant of the classic least-squares
regression problem tailored to streaming data (Azoury &
Warmuth, 2001; Vovk, 2001; Orabona et al., 2015; Foster
et al., 2016). Formally, consider T rounds of interaction
between a learner and an environment, in which learner’s
objective is to accurately predict some observable target
signal yt ∈ R before it’s revealed. On each round, a vector of features xt ∈ Rd is first revealed, representing the
context of the environment at the start of the round, and the
learner predicts ŷt = ⟨xt , wt ⟩ by means of a weight vector wt ∈ Rd . The signal yt ∈ Rd is then observed, and the
learner incurs a loss proportional to the prediction error,
ℓt (wt ) = 12 (yt − ⟨xt , wt ⟩)2 . Since wt is allowed to depend
on xt , this protocol is sometimes referred to as improper
online regression, as the learner is able to make predictions
outside of the class of linear models. Indeed, since xt is
revealed before the learner must make their prediction, it is

RT (u) = ∑ ℓt (wt ) − ℓt (ut ).
t=1

Notice that dynamic regret captures the usual notion of regret (referred to as static regret) as a special case by setting u1 = . . . = uT . Our goal in this work is to make favorable dynamic regret guarantees even in the complete
absence of any prior knowledge of the underlying datagenerating process. Naturally, because such an algorithm
leverages no prior knowledge, it necessarily must be adaptive to all problem-dependent quantities without requiring
any instance-specific hyperparameter tuning.
Contributions.
In this work we achieve the goal laid
out above and develop the first algorithms for online linear
regression that require no prior knowledge about the data
stream, yet still make strong performance guarantees. In
particular, our contributions are as follows:

1
Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Canada 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Boston University, Boston, Massachussetts. Correspondence to: Andrew Jacobsen <ajjacobs@ualberta.ca>.

• We show that even in the absence of any boundedness
assumptions, a discounted variant of the VAW forecaster
with a well-chosen discount factor
√ achieves dynamic
regret RT (u) ≤ O(d log (T ) ∨ dPTγ (u)T ), where
PTγ (u) is a measure of variability of the comparator
sequence (i.e. the magnitude of PTγ (u) is related to
how drastically the comparator changes over time). We

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

