Modeling Language Tokens as Functionals of Semantic Fields

Zhengqi Pei 1 2 Anran Zhang 1 2 Shuhui Wang 1 3 Qingming Huang 4 1 3

Abstract

understanding human language (Zhao et al., 2023). Currently the most representative language modeling methods
are built upon Transformer-based structures (Vaswani et al.,
2017; Devlin et al., 2018; Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al.,
2020). These models represent language tokens as highdimensional distributed embeddings (Bengio et al., 2000),
utilizing an attention mechanism (Vaswani et al., 2017) to
interpret the linguistic relations among tokens as linear relations. Although Transformer-based models demonstrate
outstanding performance in downstream NLP tasks, they encounter practical challenges regarding to the computational
efficiency (Fournier et al., 2023).

Recent advances in natural language processing
have relied heavily on using Transformer-based
language models. However, Transformers often
require large parameter sizes and model depth.
Existing Transformer-free approaches using statespace models demonstrate superiority over Transformers, yet they still lack a neuro-biologically
connection to the human brain. This paper proposes LasF , representing Language tokens as
Functionals of semantic fields, to simulate the
neuronal behaviors for better language modeling. The LasF module is equivalent to a nonlinear approximator tailored for sequential data.
By replacing the final layers of pre-trained language models with the LasF module, we obtain
LasF -based models. Experiments conducted for
standard reading comprehension and questionanswering tasks demonstrate that the LasF -based
models consistently improve accuracy with fewer
parameters. Besides, we use CommonsenseQA’s
blind test set to evaluate a full-parameter tuned
LasF -based model, which outperforms the prior
best ensemble and single models by 0.4% and
3.1%, respectively. Furthermore, our LasF -only
language model trained from scratch outperforms
existing parameter-efficient language models on
standard datasets such as WikiText103 and PennTreebank.

Some non-Transformer models, such as state-space models (SSM), including S4 (Gu et al., 2021), H3 (Fu et al.,
2022), and Hyena (Poli et al., 2023), have significantly
enhanced language model performance on public tasks. Despite their computational efficiency, they differ significantly
from how the human brain represents semantic relations
among language tokens. Specifically, they still rely on simplified linearity to express the highly nonlinear semantic
relations between language tokens, limiting the representational capacity. In contrast, the human brain processes
linguistic information in a highly nonlinear manner (Patterson et al., 2007). It transforms language tokens into signals
perceivable by neurons, representing the semantic relations
between different language tokens using nonlinear, field-like
relations. This mechanism allows for a more comprehensive
expression of dynamic semantic features from all neurons.
In linguistics, the field-like relation is interpreted as the
semantic field, denoting a semantically structured group
of the lexical set of language tokens (Jackson & Amvela,
2007). Each token has varying semantic fields that express
its multiple linguistic relations to other tokens.

1. Introduction
Language modeling is a crucial task in natural language processing (NLP), representing a key component in developing
brain-inspired artificial general intelligence capable of fully

In fact, many existing studies (Toneva & Wehbe, 2019; Oota
et al., 2022b;a; Sun & Moens, 2023) attempt to integrate
the brain-inspired mechanism into computational language
models. However, they have yet to demonstrate performance
comparable to Transformer-based or SSM-based language
models in practical scenarios. To address this issue, we propose a computationally friendly mechanism for interpreting
language tokens as functional representations of semantic
fields. This approach allows us to express semantic relations between language tokens using more complex semantic fields while maintaining low computational complexity.

1
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences. 2 School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences. 3 Peng Cheng Laboratory. 4 School
of Computer Science and Technology, University of Chinese
Academy of Sciences. Correspondence to: Shuhui Wang <wangshuhui@ict.ac.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

