Receptive Fields As Experts in Convolutional Neural Architectures

Dongze Lian 1 Weihao Yu 1 Xinchao Wang 1

Abstract
𝑮𝟐

𝑮𝟎

The size of spatial receptive fields, from the early
3×3 convolutions in VGGNet to the recent 7×7
convolutions in ConvNeXt, has always played a
critical role in architecture design. In this paper,
we propose a Mixture of Receptive Fields (MoRF)
instead of using a single receptive field. MoRF
contains the combinations of multiple receptive
fields with different sizes, e.g., convolutions with
different kernel sizes, which can be regarded as
experts. Such an approach serves two functions:
one is to select the appropriate receptive field according to the input, and the other is to expand
the network capacity. Furthermore, we also introduce two types of routing mechanisms, hard
routing and soft routing to automatically select
the appropriate receptive field experts. In the inference stage, the selected receptive field experts
are merged via re-parameterization to maintain a
similar inference speed compared to the single receptive field. To demonstrate the effectiveness of
MoRF, we integrate the MoRF concept into multiple architectures, e.g., ResNet and ConvNeXt.
Extensive experiments show that our approach
outperforms the baselines in image classification,
object detection, and segmentation tasks without
significantly increasing the inference time.

MoRF layer

×

✔

✔

𝑮𝟎 , 𝑮𝟏 , 𝑮𝟐

A"en%on Module

MoRF layer

Figure 1. An example of a Mixture of Receptive fields (MoRF)
layer involves selecting the first and third receptive fields via hard
routing for interaction, and the final output is a weighted sum of
the output of the two selected experts.

an alternative to CNNs. Despite this trend, different from
the NLP, where the knowledge has extremely high information density, visual images are filled with amounts of
redundant information. Thus, it remains arguable whether
convolutions can be completely replaced by the transformer
in vision architectures.
One critical issue in the design of vision backbones is the selection of the receptive field. VGGNet (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2015) popularizes the use of a 3×3 convolutional layer
with a local receptive field, and subsequent architectures
have followed this design by stacking more convolutional
layers to increase the receptive field size. Dosovitskiy et
al. (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021) introduce a paradigm shift
with the Vision Transformer (ViT), which uses multi-head
self-attention to obtain a global spatial receptive field. This
design is later modified by Liu et al. (Liu et al., 2021b)
with the Swin Transformer, which restricts the range of selfattention to a local window to obtain local receptive fields.
Other works (Xiao et al., 2021; Ding et al., 2022; Liu et al.,
2022a) have proposed alternative approaches, such as combining convolutions and self-attention, or employing large
kernels instead of self-attention. Despite the differences in
these approaches, all of them highlight the crucial role of the
receptive field in visual understanding. However, designing
manually an appropriate receptive field size is challenging.
A large receptive field may result in optimization difficulty
and bring more redundant computation costs. Consequently,
a key question that arises is how to design a module that

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have established
themselves as the cornerstone of various computer vision
tasks, with a series of CNN-based architectures (Krizhevsky
et al., 2012; Simonyan & Zisserman, 2015; He et al., 2016)
being proposed in recent years. Transformers, due to their
superior performance in natural language processing (NLP)
(Vaswani et al., 2017) and weakly dependent on the inductive bias, have gradually been introduced to vision tasks as
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National
University of Singapore, Singapore. Correspondence to: Xinchao
Wang <xinchao@nus.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

