On the Last-Iterate Convergence of Shuffling Gradient Methods

Zijian Liu 1 Zhengyuan Zhou 1 2

Abstract

is the stochastic gradient descent (SGD) algorithm, which
in every step only computes one gradient differing from
calculating n gradients in the classic gradient descent (GD)
method and hence is more computationally affordable.

Shuffling gradient methods are widely used in
modern machine learning tasks and include three
popular implementations: Random Reshuffle
(RR), Shuffle Once (SO), and Incremental Gradient (IG). Compared to the empirical success, the
theoretical guarantee of shuffling gradient methods was not well-understood for a long time. Until
recently, the convergence rates had just been established for the average iterate for convex functions
and the last iterate for strongly convex problems
(using squared distance as the metric). However,
when using the function value gap as the convergence criterion, existing theories cannot interpret
the good performance of the last iterate in different settings (e.g., constrained optimization). To
bridge this gap between practice and theory, we
prove the first last-iterate convergence rates for
shuffling gradient methods with respect to the objective value even without strong convexity. Our
new results either (nearly) match the existing lastiterate lower bounds or are as fast as the previous
best upper bounds for the average iterate.

However, in practice, the shuffling gradient method is more
widely implemented than SGD. Unlike SGD uniformly sampling the index in every step, shuffling gradient methods
split the optimization procedure into K epochs each of
which contains n updates where the index used in every step
is determined by a permutation σ of {1, 2, · · · , n}. Especially, three ways to generate σ are mainly used: (I) Random Reshuffle (RR) where σ is uniformly sampled without
replacement in every epoch. (II) Shuffle Once (SO) also
known as Single Shuffle where σ in every epoch is identical
to a pre-generated permutation by uniform sampling without replacement. (III) Incremental Gradient (IG) where σ in
every epoch is always the same as some deterministic order.
Though shuffling gradient methods are empirically popular
and successful (Bottou, 2009; 2012; Bengio, 2012; Recht
& Ré, 2013), the theoretical understanding has not been
well-developed for a long time due to the biased gradient
used in every step making the analysis notoriously harder
than SGD. (Gürbüzbalaban et al., 2021) is the first to demonstrate that RR provably converges faster than SGD under
certain conditions. Later on, different works give extensive
studies for the theoretical convergence of shuffling gradient
methods (see Section 2 for a detailed discussion).

1. Introduction
Solving the convex optimization problem in the form of
n

min F (x) ≜ f (x) + ψ(x) where f (x) ≜

x∈Rd

Despite the existing substantial progress, the convergence
of shuffling gradient methods is still not fully understood.
Specifically, prior works heavily rely on the following problem form that significantly restricts the applicability:

1X
fi (x)
n i=1

is arguably one of the most common tasks in machine learning. Many well-known problems such as the LAD regression (Pollard, 1991), SVMs (Cortes & Vapnik, 1995), the
Lasso (Tibshirani, 1996), and any general problem from
empirical risk minimization (ERM) (Shalev-Shwartz & BenDavid, 2014) fit the framework perfectly. A famous method
for the problem with a large n (the standard case nowadays)

The regularizer ψ(x) is always omitted. Almost all previous
studies narrow to the case of ψ(x) = 0, which even does not
include the common constrained optimization problems (i.e.,
taking ψ(x) = IX (x) where IX (x) = 0 if x ∈ X1 , otherwise, +∞). The only exception we know is (Mishchenko
et al., 2022), which allows the existence of a general ψ(x).
However, (Mishchenko et al., 2022) requires either fi (x) or
ψ(x) to be strongly convex, which can be easily violated in
practice like the Lasso.

1

Stern School of Business, New York University 2 Arena Technologies. Correspondence to: Zijian Liu <zl3067@stern.nyu.edu>,
Zhengyuan Zhou <zhengyuanzhou24@gmail.com>.

1

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

This notation X always denotes a nonempty closed convex set
in Rd throughout the paper.

1

