On the Feasibility of Single-Pass Full-Capacity Learning
in Linear Threshold Neurons with Binary Input Vectors

Ruipeng Liu * 1 Borui He * 1 Naveed Tahir * 1 Garrett Ethan Katz 1

Abstract

On the other hand, iterative methods such as perceptron
learning (Rosenblatt, 1958) and support vector machines
(Boser et al., 1992) have the capacity to fit any linearlyseparable data (Elizondo, 2006). However, they may require
multiple passes over the data and have higher computational
complexity. More recent approaches to associative memory (Krotov & Hopfield, 2016; Demircigil et al., 2017) and
single-pass learning (Liu & Xu, 2016) fall between these
two extremes, trading some amount of computational efficiency for higher capacity, or vice versa.

Known learning rules tend to fall near one of two
extremes: single-pass associative learning with
low complexity and capacity, and multi-pass iterative learning with high complexity and capacity.
In this work we investigate the mathematical feasibility of learning rules that are both single-pass
and achieve the theoretical upper bound on capacity. We consider a fairly broad family of learning
rules we call “span rules,” which include known
rules such as Hebbian learning, perceptron learning, and backpropagation as special cases. To
our knowledge, previous work has not determined
whether single-pass, full-capacity span rules exist, even in the most fundamental case of a linear
threshold neuron with binary input vectors, which
is the focus of this study. We derive a necessary
condition for the existence of such learning rules,
which takes the form of a linear program, and
show that the linear program is infeasible. This
establishes an impossibility result that span rules
can not be both single-pass and full-capacity.

This paper investigates the feasibility of single-pass learning
rules with the low computational complexity of classical associative methods, but the full capacity of iterative methods.
As a starting point, we focus on the simplest case of a single
linear threshold neuron with binary input vectors. To our
knowledge, even for this case, previous work has not yet determined whether such learning rules can exist. Specifically,
we consider learning rules satisfying two constraints: (i)
The new weights must lie in the span of the old weights and
the current example (which holds for many known learning
rules), and (ii) the new weights must immediately fit the
current example without changing the neuron’s output on
previous examples, as long as the examples remain linearly
separable. Constraint (i) defines the family of learning rules
we consider, and (ii) is the single-pass, full-capacity requirement. We investigate the mathematical feasibility of rules
satisfying (i) and (ii), deriving a necessary condition for
their existence which takes the form of a linear program.
It turns out that this linear program is feasible for input
dimension N ≤ 7, but infeasible for N ≥ 8. Therefore, it is
mathematically impossible for learning rules in the family
we consider to be both single-pass and full-capacity.

1. Introduction
Classical associative learning rules for linear threshold neurons, such as linear associative networks (Anderson, 1972;
Kohonen, 1972) and Hopfield networks (Hopfield, 1982),
can store training data with very low computational complexity. They require only one pass over the training examples, and each weight update calculates the new weights as
a simple linear combination of the old weights and the current example. Their main disadvantage is their low storage
capacity: The number of examples they can effectively store
is no greater than the input dimension.

2. Learning Model
We consider linear threshold functions over the vertices of
the N -dimensional hypercube defined by

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Syracuse University, Syracuse,
New York, USA. Correspondence to: Garrett Ethan Katz
<gkatz01@syr.edu>.

ϕ(w, x) = sign(w⊤ x),

(1)

where ϕ models a neuron with weight vector w ∈ RN
receiving binary input vector x ∈ {−1, +1}N . Since
ϕ(w, −x) = −ϕ(w, x), the neuron’s output on one half
of the hypercube fully determines its output on the other

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

