Bridging Mini-Batch and Asymptotic Analysis in Contrastive Learning:
From InfoNCE to Kernel-Based Losses
Panagiotis Koromilas * 1 Giorgos Bouritsas * 1 2 Theodoros Giannakopoulos 3 Mihalis A. Nicolaou 4
Yannis Panagakis 1 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Contrastive learning has revolutionised self-supervised
learning of representations from unlabelled data. Nonetheless, optimising contrastive losses exhibits significant
challenges in practice. These include the need for large
batches of negative samples leading to memory issues (He
et al., 2020b; Tian et al., 2020a; Chen et al., 2020), high
sensitivity to the temperature hyperparameter affecting
model performance (Wang & Liu, 2021; Zhang et al.,
2021), the propensity for dimensionality collapse in learned
representations (Hua et al., 2021; Jing et al., 2022), and a
reliance on sophisticated hard-negative sampling strategies
(Robinson et al., 2021).

What do different contrastive learning (CL) losses
actually optimize for? Although multiple CL
methods have demonstrated remarkable representation learning capabilities, the differences in their
inner workings remain largely opaque. In this
work, we analyse several CL families and prove
that, under certain conditions, they admit the same
minimisers when optimizing either their batchlevel objectives or their expectations asymptotically. In both cases, an intimate connection with
the hyperspherical energy minimisation (HEM)
problem resurfaces. Drawing inspiration from
this, we introduce a novel CL objective, coined
Decoupled Hyperspherical Energy Loss (DHEL).
DHEL simplifies the problem by decoupling the
target hyperspherical energy from the alignment
of positive examples while preserving the same
theoretical guarantees. Going one step further, we
show the same results hold for another relevant CL
family, namely kernel contrastive learning (KCL),
with the additional advantage of the expected loss
being independent of batch size, thus identifying
the minimisers in the non-asymptotic regime. Empirical results demonstrate improved downstream
performance and robustness across combinations
of different batch sizes and hyperparameters and
reduced dimensionality collapse, on several computer vision datasets.
Code: github.com/pakoromilas/DHEL-KCL.git

Although there are approaches to understand and address
some of the challenges above in isolation, theoretical analyses of CL often use loss functions and assumptions that
diverge from those effective in practice (e.g., SimCLR) or
depend on conditions often unrealistic in real-world settings,
e.g. infinite batch sizes, conditional independence, or simplified network architectures (Saunshi et al., 2019; Wang &
Isola, 2020; Jing et al., 2022; Balestriero & LeCun, 2022; Ji
et al., 2023).
This work poses a first step towards bridging the gap between different variants of the classical InfoNCE loss (Oord
et al., 2018). That is, we examine their optimal solutions
within two regimes: the finite regime concerning losses evaluated on a sampled mini-batch, and the asymptotic regime
of their expectation (i.e. in the limit of infinite batch size).
In the finite case, under a batch size condition, we show
multiple InfoNCE variants share the same unique optimal
solution attained when (i) positive pairs align perfectly and
(ii) representations form a regular simplex inscribed in the
sphere, with all pairwise distances equal. Additionally, we
show that they have the same asymptotic behaviour, and in
turn, the same minimisers: those identified in (Wang & Isola,
2020), i.e. (i) perfect alignment and (ii) uniform distribution
on the unit sphere. Interestingly, in both cases, outcome (ii)
coincides with the notion of minimal hyperspherical energy.

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Informatics and Telecommunications, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens
2
Archimedes AI/Athena Research Center 3 NCSR ”Demokritos”
4
The Cyprus Institute. Correspondence to: Panagiotis Koromilas
<pakoromilas@di.uoa.gr>.

However, despite commonalities in optima, many variants
exhibit notable performance discrepancies. This suggests

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

