MoE-RBench: Towards Building Reliable Language Models with Sparse
Mixture-of-Experts

Guanjie Chen * 1 2 Xinyu Zhao * 3 Tianlong Chen † 3 4 5 Yu Cheng † 6
Warning: This paper includes examples and model-generated content that may be deemed offensive.

Abstract

peatedly verified by the success of large language models
(LLMs) (OpenAI, 2023; Touvron et al., 2023). As the duration required to train an LLM, extending to weeks or
even months (Brown et al., 2020; Kaplan et al., 2020a), researchers propose various solutions aimed at reducing computational demands while preserving LLM efficacy, such
as distillation, quantization, etc (Hsieh et al., 2023; Lin
et al., 2023). Among these solutions, Mixture-of-Experts
(MoE) receives a lot of attention. The core idea of MoE
is conditional computation that only activates a fraction of
model parameters for each input example (Shazeer et al.,
2017). MoE combined with Transformer language models first benchmark on language modeling and translation
tasks (Fedus et al., 2022b; Lepikhin et al., 2020; Zoph et al.,
2022b), later extended to an array of domains such as vision, and multimodality (Mustafa et al., 2022; Puigcerver
et al., 2023; Riquelme et al., 2021). The success of MoE
lies primarily in its huge scalability with minimal increase
in computational load. For example, MoE model Switch
Transformers achieves 4-7× wall time speedups over its
dense counterpart under same computation cost Fedus et al.
(2022b). In addition, MoE suits well with large datasets,
another key factor in improving LLM performance in the
scaling law (Frantar et al., 2023; Kaplan et al., 2020a). MoE
also enjoys higher interpretability due to its inherent conditional structure (Lewis et al., 2021; Zoph et al., 2022b).

Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) has gained increasing
popularity as a promising framework for scaling up large language models (LLMs). However, the reliability assessment of MoE lags behind its surging applications. Moreover, when
transferred to new domains such as in fine-tuning
MoE models sometimes underperform their dense
counterparts. Motivated by the research gap
and counter-intuitive phenomenon, we propose
MoE-RBench, the first comprehensive assessment of SMoE reliability from three aspects: (i)
safety and hallucination, (ii) resilience to adversarial attacks, and (iii) out-of-distribution robustness. Extensive models and datasets are tested to
compare the MoE to dense networks from these
reliability dimensions. Our empirical observations suggest that with appropriate hyperparameters, training recipes, and inference techniques,
we can build the MoE model more reliably than
the dense LLM. In particular, we find that the
robustness of SMoE is sensitive to the basic training settings. We hope that this study can provide
deeper insights into how to adapt the pre-trained
MoE model to other tasks with higher-generation
security, quality, and stability. Codes are available
at https://github.com/UNITES-Lab/MoE-RBench

Although pre-trained MoE is on par with dense LLM on general benchmarks, whether it is trustworthy in downstream
application remains unknown, especially in scenarios with
high security priority. Dense LLM applications face key reliability issues, including harmful content generation, false
information spread, and performance drops from perturbations and distribution shifts. (Uppaal et al., 2023; Wang
et al., 2021; Wei et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023b; Zhu et al.,
2023). But there are few equivalent evaluations of MoE.
Also, some studies suggest that MoE may exhibit greater
instability upon domain transfer. Artetxe et al. (2021);
Narang et al. (2021) find that MoE underperforms on some
reasoning tasks compared to a dense model with similar
pre-training perplexity. In sum, the increasing reliance on
LLM and MoE is overshadowed by these performance inconsistencies and the absence of reliability evaluation.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, scaling model size has become the de facto
approach to improve deep learning models, which is re* Equal contribution, †Corresponding Authors 1 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3 The
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 4 MIT 5 Harvard University 6 The Chinese University of Hong Kong. Correspondence to:
Yu Cheng <chengyu@cse.cuhk.edu.hk>, Tianlong Chen <tianlong@cs.unc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

