Learning to Route Among Specialized Experts for Zero-Shot Generalization

Mohammed Muqeeth 1 Haokun Liu 2 3 Yufan Liu 4 Colin Raffel 2 3

Abstract
Recently, there has been a widespread proliferation of “expert” language models that are specialized to a specific task or domain through
parameter-efficient fine-tuning. How can we recycle large collections of expert language models to improve zero-shot generalization to unseen tasks? In this work, we propose Post-Hoc
Adaptive Tokenwise Gating Over an Ocean of
Specialized Experts (PHATGOOSE), which learns
to route among specialized modules that were
produced through parameter-efficient fine-tuning.
Unlike past methods that learn to route among
specialized models, PHATGOOSE explores the possibility that zero-shot generalization will be improved if different experts can be adaptively chosen for each token and at each layer in the model.
Crucially, our method is post-hoc - it does not require simultaneous access to the datasets used
to create the specialized models and only requires a modest amount of additional compute
after each expert model is trained. In experiments covering a range of specialized model collections and zero-shot generalization benchmarks,
we find that PHATGOOSE outperforms past methods for post-hoc routing and, in some cases, outperforms explicit multitask training (which requires simultaneous data access). To better understand the routing strategy learned by PHATGOOSE,
we perform qualitative experiments to validate
that PHATGOOSE’s performance stems from its
ability to perform per-token and per-module routing. We release all of our code to support future
work on improving zero-shot generalization by
recycling specialized experts.1

Figure 1. Average performance of different multitask training and
expert routing methods when using the same held-in and held-out
tasks as T0 (Sanh et al., 2021). Notably, our proposed method
PHATGOOSE outperforms all past methods for recycling experts as
well as explicit multitask training (which requires simultaneous
data access) and nearly matches the performance of an oracle
routing scheme. See Section 4 for more details. Exact numerical
results for all methods can be found in Table 3.

1

Introduction

The availability of performant pre-trained language models
has led to a proliferation of fine-tuned “expert” models that
are specialized to a particular task or domain. Many of these
expert models are created through parameter-efficient finetuning (PEFT) techniques (Ding et al., 2022; Lialin et al.,
2023; He et al., 2021), which produce a fine-tuned model
by adding small “modules” (such as Low-Rank Adapters
(Hu et al., 2021) or (IA)3 vectors (Liu et al., 2022)) that
only introduce or modify a small number of parameters.
Specialized PEFT modules can be easily shared due to their
small size, which has led to the distribution of an evergrowing number of adapters on various platforms – for
example, as of writing over 17,000 adapters based on the
peft library (Mangrulkar et al., 2022) have been uploaded
to the Hugging Face Model Hub.1 The availability of these
PEFT modules makes it cheap and easy to modularly adapt
a given pre-trained model to a specific task or domain.

1

MIT-IBM 2 University of Toronto 3 Vector Institute 4 University
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. Correspondence to: Mohammed
Muqeeth <muqeeth101@gmail.com>, Haokun Liu <haokunliu412@gmail.com>, Colin Raffel <craffel@gmail.com>.

In the meantime, extremely large-scale language models
(LLMs) are now being treated as “general-purpose” AI systems that can perform any task without any task-specific

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
https://github.com/r-three/phatgoose

1
https://huggingface.co/models?library=
peft

1

