Position: Building Guardrails for Large Language Models
Requires Systematic Design

Yi Dong * 1 Ronghui Mu * 1 Gaojie Jin 2 Yi Qi 1 Jinwei Hu 1 Xingyu Zhao 3 Jie Meng 4 Wenjie Ruan 1
Xiaowei Huang 1

Abstract

risks including, but not limited to, ethical use, data biases,
privacy and robustness (Huang et al., 2023d). In societal
contexts, worries also include the potential misuse by malicious actors for activities such as spreading misinformation
or aiding criminal activities, as indicated in studies by Kreps
et al. (2022); Goldstein et al. (2023); Kang et al. (2023). In
the scientific context, LLMs can be used in professional
contexts, where there are dedicated ethical considerations
and risks in scientific research (Birhane et al., 2023).

As Large Language Models (LLMs) become more
integrated into our daily lives, it is crucial to
identify and mitigate their risks, especially when
the risks can have profound impacts on human
users and societies. Guardrails, which filter the
inputs or outputs of LLMs, have emerged as a
core safeguarding technology. This position paper takes a deep look at current open-source solutions (Llama Guard, Nvidia NeMo, Guardrails
AI), and discusses the challenges and the road
towards building more complete solutions. Drawing on robust evidence from previous research, we
advocate for a systematic approach to construct
guardrails for LLMs, based on comprehensive
consideration of diverse contexts across various
LLMs applications. We propose employing sociotechnical methods through collaboration with a
multi-disciplinary team to pinpoint precise technical requirements, exploring advanced neuralsymbolic implementations to embrace the complexity of the requirements, and developing verification and testing to ensure the utmost quality of
the final product.

To address these issues, model developers have implemented
a variety of safety protocols intended to confine the behaviors of these models to a more secure range of functions. The
complexity of LLMs, characterized by intricate networks
and numerous parameters, along with the closed-source nature (such as ChatGPT), present substantial hurdles. These
complexities require different strategies compared to the
pre-LLM era, which focus on white-box techniques, enhancing models by various regularisations and architecture
adaptations during training. Therefore, in parallel to the reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) and other
training skills such as in-context training, the community
moves towards employing black-box, post-hoc strategies,
notably guardrails (Welbl et al., 2021; Gehman et al., 2020),
which monitors and filters the inputs and outputs of trained
LLMs. A guardrail is an algorithm that takes as input a set
of objects (e.g., the input and/or the output of LLMs) and
determines if and how some enforcement actions can be
taken to reduce the risks embedded in the objects. For example, if an input to the LLMs is related to child exploitation,
the guardrail may stop the input from being processed by
the LLMs or adapt the output so that it becomes harmless
(Perez et al., 2022). In other words, guardrails are to identify
the potential misuse in the query stage and try to prevent the
model from providing the answer that should not be given.

1. Introduction
Recent times have witnessed a notable increase in the utilization of Large Language Models (LLMs) like ChatGPT,
attributed to their extensive and general capabilities (OpenAI, 2023). However, the rapid deployment and integration
of LLMs have raised significant concerns regarding their
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Liverpool, UK 2 Key Laboratory of System Software
(Chinese Academy of Sciences) and State Key Laboratory of Computer Science, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
WMG, University of Warwick, Warwick, UK 4 Institute of Digital
Technologies, Loughborough University London, UK. Correspondence to: Xiaowei Huang <xiaowei.huang@liverpool.ac.uk>.

The difficulty in constructing guardrails often lies in establishing the requirements for them. E.g., AI regulations can
be different across different countries, and in the context
of a company, data privacy can be less serious than it is
in the public domain. Nevertheless, a guardrail of LLMs
may include requirements from one or more of the following categories: (i) Free from unintended responses e.g.,

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

