CLIPZyme: Reaction-Conditioned Virtual Screening of Enzymes

Peter G. Mikhael * 1 Itamar Chinn * 1 Regina Barzilay 1

Abstract

unlock a tremendous number of biosynthesis applications
that may otherwise be inaccessible.

Computational screening of naturally occurring
proteins has the potential to identify efficient catalysts among the hundreds of millions of sequences
that remain uncharacterized. Current experimental methods remain time, cost and labor intensive,
limiting the number of enzymes they can reasonably screen. In this work, we propose a computational framework for in silico enzyme screening. Through a contrastive objective, we train
CLIPZyme to encode and align representations
of enzyme structures and reaction pairs. With
no standard computational baseline, we compare
CLIPZyme to existing EC (enzyme commission)
predictors applied to virtual enzyme screening and
show improved performance in scenarios where
limited information on the reaction is available
(BEDROC85 of 44.69%). Additionally, we evaluate combining EC predictors with CLIPZyme and
show its generalization capacity on both unseen
reactions and protein clusters.

In this work, we propose CLIPZyme, a novel method to
address the task of virtual enzyme screening by framing it
as a retrieval task. Specifically, given a chemical reaction
of interest, the aim is to obtain a list of enzyme sequences
ranked according to their predicted catalytic activity. In
order to identify reaction-enzyme pairs, methods must contend with several unique challenges. First, in some cases,
small changes in enzyme structures can lead to a large impact on its activity. Yet in other cases, multiple enzymes
with completely different structural domains catalyze the
same exact reaction (Ribeiro et al., 2023). Similar principles
hold for changes to the molecular structures of the reactants
(substrates). This makes the task particularly challenging as
methods must capture both extremes. Second, the efficacy
of an enzyme is intricately linked to its interaction with
the reaction’s transition states (Martı́ et al., 2004; Liu et al.,
2021), which are difficult to model. Finally, in addressing
the challenge of screening extensive datasets of uncharacterized enzymes, the scalability of computational methods
becomes a critical factor.
CLIPZyme is a contrastive learning method for virtual enzyme screening. Originally developed to align between
image-caption pairs, CLIP-style training has been successfully extended to model the binding of drugs and peptides to
their target protein (Singh et al., 2023; Palepu et al.). Unlike
binding, however, the need to achieve transition state stabilization makes enzymatic catalysis a more nuanced process
(in fact, very strong binding may inhibit an enzyme). Therefore, in order to represent the transition state, we develop
a novel encoding scheme that first models the molecular
structures of both substrates and products then simulates a
pseudo-transition state using the bond changes of the reaction. To leverage the 3D organization of evolutionarily conserved enzyme domains, we encode AlphaFold-predicted
structures (Jumper et al., 2021; Varadi et al., 2022). Since
enzyme embeddings can be precomputed efficiently, screening large sets of proteins sequences for a new query reaction
is computationally feasible.

1. Introduction
Biosynthesis is the method of choice for the production of
small molecules due to the cost effectiveness, scalability
and sustainability of enzymes (Bornscheuer et al., 2012;
Hossack et al., 2023). To find enzymes that can catalyze
reactions of interest, practitioners often begin by identifying
naturally occurring enzymes to repurpose or optimize. Only
0.23% of UniProt is well studied and efficient enzymes
likely lie among the hundreds of millions of sequences that
are yet to be explored (Ribeiro et al., 2023). As a result,
the ability to computationally identify naturally occurring
enzymes for any reaction can provide high quality starting
points for enzyme optimization and has the potential to
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, U.S.A. Correspondence to: Peter
G. Mikhael <pgmikhael@csail.mit.edu>, Itamar Chinn <itamarc@csail.mit.edu>.

Since no standard method currently exists for virtual enzyme screening, we utilize enzyme commission (EC) number prediction as a baseline. Specifically, the EC number

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

