Position: Do pretrained Transformers Learn In-Context by Gradient Descent?

Lingfeng Shen * 1 Aayush Mishra * 1 Daniel Khashabi 1

Abstract

extend these patterns to similar tasks (Brown et al., 2020).
This fascinating on-the-fly learning behavior has motivated
ample studies to better of understand its dynamics.

The emergence of In-Context Learning (ICL) in
LLMs remains a remarkable phenomenon that is
partially understood. To explain ICL, recent studies have created theoretical connections to Gradient Descent (GD). We ask, do such connections
hold up in actual pre-trained language models?
We highlight the limiting assumptions in prior
works that make their setup considerably different
from the practical setup in which language models
are trained. For example, their experimental verification uses ICL objective (training models explicitly for ICL), which differs from the emergent ICL
in the wild. Furthermore, the theoretical handconstructed weights used in these studies have
properties that don’t match those of real LLMs.
We also look for evidence in real models. We observe that ICL and GD have different sensitivity
to the order in which they observe demonstrations.
Finally, we probe and compare the ICL vs. GD
hypothesis in a natural setting. We conduct comprehensive empirical analyses on language models pre-trained on natural data (LLaMa-7B). Our
comparisons of three performance metrics highlight the inconsistent behavior of ICL and GD
as a function of various factors such as datasets,
models, and the number of demonstrations. We
observe that ICL and GD modify the output distribution of language models differently. These
results indicate that the equivalence between ICL
and GD remains an open hypothesis and calls for
further studies.

In particular, a notable line of work tries to explain ICL
via Gradient Descent (GD) (Garg et al., 2022; Zhang et al.,
2023). This connection is interesting because GD has been
around for decades and is well-understood, while ICL is
a recent phenomenon that has emerged somewhat surprisingly (Wei et al., 2022), and is not fully understood. Therefore, a solid formal bridge between the two approaches
would be an exciting finding as it can open new doors for
understanding ICL.
Hypothesis 1. For any Transformer weights resulting
from self-supervised pretraining and for any well-defined
task, ICL is algorithmically equivalent to GD (whole
model or sub-model).
In this work, we revisit the hypothesis on the equivalence of
ICL and GD, i.e., whether these two approaches to “learning” are functionally equivalent. Consider hypothesis 1 that
defines a universal notion of equivalence between the ICL
and GD. It defines equivalence as a property that must hold
for any Transformer model with parameters that emerge naturally from pretraining on massive unlabeled data (Brown
et al., 2020), and is applicable for any choice of well-defined
tasks (Srivastava et al., 2023). For example, (Dai et al., 2023)
claims that ICL is equivalent to implicit finetuning.
Hypothesis 2. For a given well-defined task, there exist
d is algorithmically
Transformer weights such that ICL
equivalent to GD (whole model or sub-model).
However, other recent
works have focused on a
different claim outlined
whole model sub-model
in hypothesis 2, which
updates
updates
focuses on in-context
Hyp1
Hyp2
learning behavior that is
not emergent (denoted
as d
ICL). This deviates
emergent
not emergent
from hypothesis 1 in the
family of models (differences in training setups) and family
of tasks, as we will see in detail in §3. This hypothesis
articulates a tangential target: being able to simulate GD

1. Introduction
In-Context Learning (ICL) is an emergent behavior in Large
Language Models (LLMs), which allows them to recognize
patterns among demonstrations provided as prompts and
*
Equal contribution 1 Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore MD.
Correspondence to: Aayush Mishra <amishr24@jhu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

