Online Adaptive Anomaly Thresholding with Confidence Sequences

Sophia Sun 1 Abishek Sankararaman 2 Balakrishnan (Murali) Narayanaswamy 2

Abstract

The OAD algorithm first scores each sample and then calibrates a threshold to make the binary decision of whether
the given sample is anomalous or not. The choice of this
threshold is critical due to its significant downstream impact. In security systems, for example, failing to detect a
genuine anomaly or security event can have catastrophic
consequences (Ho et al., 2017a). Conversely, false positives
incur costs, as each detection necessitates investigation by a
security operator, potentially leading to ‘alert fatigue’ (Chen,
2017; Lin et al., 2018; He et al., 2023).

Selecting appropriate thresholds for anomaly detection in online, unsupervised settings is a challenging task, especially in the presence of data
distribution shifts. Addressing these challenges is
critical in many practical large scale systems, such
as infrastructure monitoring and network intrusion detection. This paper proposes an algorithm
that connects online thresholding with constructing confidence sequences achieving (1) adaptive
online threshold selection robust to distribution
shifts, (2) statistical guarantees on false positive
and false negative rates without any distributional
assumptions, and (3) improved performance when
given relevant offline data to warm-start the online
algorithm, while having bounded degradation if
the offline data is irrelevant. We complement our
theoretical results with empirical evidence that
our method outperforms commonly used baselines across synthetic and real world datasets.

Given the risk of incorrect decisions, a common methodology to set the threshold is by abstaining from decisions
for an initial ‘cold-start’ number of samples on the stream
(Huang and Kasiviswanathan, 2015; Katz and Raz, 2023).
At the end of the cold-start period, a threshold is chosen for
future decision making, either by algorithm or by an expert
based on the online scores during the cold-start, as well as
any offline data that is available (Ren et al., 2019; Bhatia
et al., 2021; Huang et al., 2022; Li et al., 2021). This approach has two drawbacks. Firstly, using a fixed cold-start
duration across all streams independent of stream statistics
is sub-optimal and can lead to much more abstains than necessary. Secondly, a static threshold is prone to performance
loss when the data stream undergoes distribution shift - a
common occurrence in many AD systems (Herley, 2022;
Gama et al., 2014). Although adapting anomaly scoring to
distribution drifts have been studied (Ma et al., 2018; Bhatia
et al., 2022; Sankararaman et al., 2022), limited advances
have occurred in adapting the threshold dynamically.

1. Introduction and Motivation
Online anomaly detection (OAD) is the task of identifying
deviations from the normal behavior in a streaming fashion,
where samples arrive sequentially, and decisions must be
made before the next sample is received. This task plays
a fundamental role in various practical applications within
cyber and cyber-physical systems, including maintenance
(Khan et al., 2020), monitoring (Hill and Minsker, 2010),
and security (Mirsky et al., 2018; Lazarevic et al., 2003).
In modern environments, the sheer volume and velocity of
data make it often impractical to have comprehensive labels
for all anomalous samples (Siffer et al., 2017; Schmidl et al.,
2022; Ren et al., 2019; Audibert et al., 2020).

We formulate adaptive threshold selection as online quantile
estimation by defining anomalies as tail quantile of anomaly
scores (Steinwart et al., 2005; Cadre et al., 2013; Gan and
Bailis, 2017; Siffer et al., 2017). Formally, we model that
each time t ∈ N, the anomaly score St ∈ R is independently
sampled from distribution ft . This score St is an anomaly if
it exceeds the pth quantile of the distribution ft . We assume
the quantile level p ∈ (0, 1) is known, while the distribution
ft as unknown to the algorithm. Knowledge of p arises
either from a constraint on the rate of anomalies that can
be investigated without succumbing to alert fatigue (Hassan
et al., 2019; Ho et al., 2021), or from domain knowledge
(Perini and Davis, 2023).

In deployment, typical AD algorithms assign a real-valued
anomaly score to each sample, where a higher score indicates a greater degree of anomaly (Chandola et al., 2009).
1

University of California, San Diego. Work done when interning with Amazon Web Services. 2 Amazon Web Services, Santa
Clara CA. Correspondence to: Sophia Sun <shs066@ucsd.edu>.

Performance of threshold selection is measured by false
positives (FP), benign samples marked as anomalous, false

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

