Graph Geometry-Preserving Autoencoders

Jungbin Lim* 1 Jihwan Kim* 1 Yonghyeon Lee 2 Cheongjae Jang 3 Frank Chongwoo Park 1

Abstract

produce latent representations that preserve the geometry of
the data manifold, i.e., actual distances and angles on the
manifold do not match those measured in the latent space.
These distortions can be effectively mitigated by applying
appropriate regularization techniques, as pointed out and
validated via a wide range of case studies in Chen et al.
(2020); Lee et al. (2022b); Nazari et al. (2023).

When using an autoencoder to learn the lowdimensional manifold of high-dimensional data,
it is crucial to find the latent representations that
preserve the geometry of the data manifold. However, most existing studies assume a Euclidean
nature for the high-dimensional data space, which
is arbitrary and often does not precisely reflect the
underlying semantic or domain-specific attributes
of the data. In this paper, we propose a novel
autoencoder regularization framework based on
the premise that the geometry of the data manifold can often be better captured with a welldesigned similarity graph associated with data
points. Given such a graph, we utilize a Riemannian geometric distortion measure as a regularizer to preserve the geometry derived from
the graph Laplacian and make it suitable for
larger-scale autoencoder training. Through extensive experiments, we show that our method
outperforms existing state-of-the-art geometrypreserving and graph-based autoencoders with
respect to learning accurate latent structures that
preserve the graph geometry, and is particularly
effective in learning dynamics in the latent space.
Code is available at https://github.com/
JungbinLim/GGAE-public.

Most autoencoder regularization techniques assume a Euclidean ambient data space and its standard geometry, and
attempt to preserve distances, angles, or volumes on the
data manifold (Chen et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2022b; Nazari
et al., 2023; Singh & Nag, 2021). It is worth noting that for
manifold learning purposes, the Euclidean ambient space
assumption is arbitrary; other non-Euclidean ambient space
metrics may be more appropriate for the problem at hand.
While some studies have tried to estimate the ambient space
metric (Alipanahi et al., 2008; Hauberg et al., 2012; Arvanitidis et al., 2020), these methods are for the most part quite
computation- and memory-intensive. Some approaches
like Arvanitidis et al. (2020) assume a diagonal ambient
space metric, but such simplifying assumptions may not
accurately reflect the data’s underlying semantic or domainspecific attributes, failing to capture the correct geometry
of the problem and leading to poor downstream task performance.
The essence of the data space can often be captured by using a well-designed similarity graph associated with data
points, in which a node represents each data point, and an
edge represents the similarity between a data pair (Costa &
Hero, 2004; Belkin & Niyogi, 2004; Chong et al., 2020).
Compared to obtaining explicit labels, these graphs provide
valuable information for semantic or domain-specific properties of the data in a relatively cost-effective manner. We
aim to leverage the geometry derived from these graphs in
finding better representations obtained from autoencoders.

1. Introduction
Autoencoders are widely used to learn the low-dimensional
manifold of high-dimensional data points and to find their
latent representations (Arvanitidis et al., 2017; Shao et al.,
2018; Lee & Park, 2023; Jang et al., 2022; Lee, 2023). It has
been widely observed that vanilla autoencoders often fail to

In this paper, we propose a novel autoencoder regularization
framework, the Graph Geometry-Preserving Autoencoder
(GGAE), to find representations that attempt to preserve the
geometry of the data manifold implied by a given similarity graph. We use an established Riemannian geometric
distortion measure as a regularizer (Jang et al., 2021; Lee
et al., 2022b), quantifying how a mapping between two Riemannian manifolds deviates from an isometry that preserves

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Mechanical Engineering,
Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea 2 Center for AI
and Natural Sciences, Korea Institute for Advanced Study, Seoul,
Republic of Korea 3 The AI Institute, Hanyang University, Seoul,
Republic of Korea. Correspondence to: Frank Chongwoo Park
<fcp@snu.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

