Open-Domain Text Evaluation via Contrastive Distribution Methods

Sidi Lu 1 Hongyi Liu 2 Asli Celikyilmaz 3 Tianlu Wang 3 Nanyun Peng 1

Abstract

able capabilities, such as producing human-like responses,
contributing to natural language comprehension, and even
performing complex tasks like programming and content
generation. With the empirical success, the development
of reliable and scalable automatic evaluation metrics for
these models become imperative, yet the problem remains
an unresolved challenge.

Recent advancements in open-domain text generation, driven by the power of large pre-trained
language models (LLMs), have demonstrated remarkable performance. However, assessing these
models’ generation quality remains a challenge.
In this paper, we introduce a novel method for
evaluating open-domain text generation called
Contrastive Distribution Methods (CDM). Leveraging the connection between increasing model
parameters and enhanced LLM performance,
CDM creates a mapping from the contrast of two
probabilistic distributions – one known to be superior to the other – to quality measures. We
investigate CDM for open-domain text generation evaluation under two paradigms: 1) Generative CDM, which harnesses the contrast of two
language models’ distributions to generate synthetic examples for training discriminator-based
metrics; 2) Discriminative CDM, which directly
uses distribution disparities between two language
models for evaluation. Our experiments on coherence evaluation for multi-turn dialogue and commonsense evaluation for controllable generation
demonstrate CDM’s superior correlate with human judgment than existing automatic evaluation
metrics, highlighting the strong performance and
generalizability of our approach. 1

Existing automatic evaluate metrics from pre-LLM eras
have their respective limitations. Specifically, referencebased statistical metrics (e.g. BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002),
ROUGE (Lin, 2004), METEOR (Banerjee & Lavie, 2005))
do not work well for open-ended generation problems with
high content diversity like storytelling (Yao et al., 2019) and
dialogue systems (Mesgar et al., 2019; Li et al., 2017; Wen
et al., 2016), as for these tasks, it is challenging, if not impossible, to collect a sufficiently large number of reference
examples to represent the distribution of all feasible outputs.
Therefore, prior works have shown their low correlation with
human judgments (Liu et al., 2016; Hu et al., 2020). With
recent progress in pretrained models, model-based reference
metrics like BERTScore (Zhang et al., 2019), Bluert (Sellam
et al., 2020) are proposed to facilitate automatic evaluation
for text generation. They alleviate the sample efficiency
issue of statistical reference-based methods by using pretrained models to compute the similarities between texts
based on higher-level semantics. However, the effectiveness
of such methods is still reliant on the representativeness
of the reference set, and thus falls short when the output
semantic space is also highly diverse.
Reference-free evaluation metrics, which assess text directly
and provide a quality score, offer a more flexible solution
for automatically evaluating open-domain text generation.
There are two major paradigms for training models to evaluate texts without references: 1) Discriminator-based approaches like ADEM (Lowe et al., 2017) and DEAM (Ghazarian et al., 2022), treat the problem as a prediction task.
They train a classifier or regressor to generate a score as the
quality assess. However, these methods typically require
extensive human annotations or involve dedicated manual
designs for generating negative samples to train the classifier.
2) Distribution/Divergence-based approaches (Pillutla et al.,
2021; Pimentel et al., 2022) focus on obtaining a continuous
divergence score between distributions. These approaches
have shown promising results in system-level evaluations.

1. Introduction
In recent years, open-domain text generation, fueled by
large pretrained generative language models (LLMs), has
made significant advancements, garnering substantial attention (Radford et al., 2018; 2019; Brown et al., 2020; OpenAI, 2022; 2023). These systems have showcased remark1

Department of Computer Science, University of California,
Los Angeles 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3 Meta FAIR. Correspondence to: Sidi Lu <sidilu@cs.ucla.edu>, Nanyun Peng <violetpeng@cs.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
Code: https://github.com/PlusLabNLP/CDM

1

