Projection-Free Variance Reduction Methods for Stochastic Constrained
Multi-Level Compositional Optimization
Wei Jiang 1 Sifan Yang 1 2 Wenhao Yang 1 2 Yibo Wang 1 2 Yuanyu Wan 3 1 Lijun Zhang 1 2

Abstract

where X is a closed convex set. We assume that each function fi and its gradient can only be accessed through noisy
estimations, symbolized as fi (·; ξ) and ∇fi (·; ξ) such that

This paper investigates projection-free algorithms
for stochastic constrained multi-level optimization. In this context, the objective function is a
nested composition of several smooth functions,
and the decision set is closed and convex. Existing
projection-free algorithms for solving this problem suffer from two limitations: 1) they solely
focus on the gradient mapping criterion and fail
to match the optimal sample complexities in unconstrained settings; 2) their analysis is exclusively applicable to non-convex functions, without considering convex and strongly convex objectives. To address these issues, we introduce novel
projection-free variance reduction algorithms and
analyze their complexities under different criteria. For gradient mapping, our complexities improve existing results and match the optimal rates
for unconstrained problems. For the widely-used
Frank-Wolfe gap criterion, we provide theoretical
guarantees that align with those for single-level
problems. Additionally, by using a stage-wise
adaptation, we further obtain complexities for
convex and strongly convex functions. Finally,
numerical experiments on different tasks demonstrate the effectiveness of our methods.

Eξ [fi (·; ξ)] = fi (·) and

where ξ denotes samples drawn from the oracle. Problem (1)
finds wide applications in machine learning tasks, such as
reinforcement learning (Dann et al., 2014), government
planning (Bruno et al., 2016), risk management (Dentcheva
et al., 2017), model-agnostic meta-learning (Ji et al., 2020),
robust learning (Li et al., 2021), risk-averse portfolio optimization (Shapiro et al., 2021), and graph neural network
training (Balasubramanian et al., 2021).
Although stochastic multi-level optimization has been investigated extensively in recent years (Yang et al., 2019; Balasubramanian et al., 2021; Zhang & Xiao, 2021; Chen et al.,
2021; Jiang et al., 2022b), current work mainly focuses on
unconstrained problems, i.e., X = Rd . For many practical
problems, such as risk-averse portfolio optimization, the decision set is constrained (e.g., the decision variable x should
be in a simplex for portfolio optimization). Traditional
constrained optimization typically employs a projection operation to ensure that the solutions are within the decision
set. However, projection is usually complicated and timeconsuming, and existing literature (Xiao et al., 2022) begin
to show interest in developing projection-free algorithms for
constrained multi-level problems by replacing projection (a
convex optimization problem) with multiple steps of more
efficient linear minimization operation.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we consider projection-free algorithms for
stochastic constrained multi-level compositional optimization in the form of
min F (x) = fK ◦ fK−1 ◦ · · · ◦ f1 (x),

x∈X

Eξ [∇fi (·; ξ)] = ∇fi (·),

Projection-free methods typically require two oracles: 1)
the Stochastic First-order Oracle (SFO), which takes a point
x and returns the pair (f (x; ξ), ∇f (x; ξ)), where ξ is a
sample drawn from the oracle; 2) the Linear Minimization Oracle (LMO), which takes a direction d and outputs
arg minx∈X ⟨x, d⟩. To evaluate different projection-free
algorithms, the most widely used measures are the number
of calls to SFO and LMO required to attain an acceptable
solution. For non-convex functions, such a solution x is usually defined by the Frank-Wolfe gap (Lacoste-Julien, 2016),
formalized as

(1)

1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China 2 School of Artificial Intelligence,
Nanjing University, Nanjing, China 3 School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University, Ningbo, China. Correspondence to:
Lijun Zhang <zhanglj@lamda.nju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

F(x) := max⟨x̂ − x, −∇F (x)⟩ ≤ ϵ,
x̂∈X

1

(2)

