Principled Preferential Bayesian Optimization

Wenjie Xu 1 2 Wenbin Wang 1 Yuning Jiang 1 Bratislav Svetozarevic 2 3 Colin N. Jones 1

Abstract

gate together with uncertainty quantification. Then BO algorithms, such as the popular Expected Improvement (Jones
et al., 1998) and GP-UCB algorithms (Srinivas et al., 2012),
use the information of this learned surrogate and uncertainty
quantification to choose the next sample point.

We study the problem of preferential Bayesian
optimization (BO), where we aim to optimize a
black-box function with only preference feedback
over a pair of candidate solutions. Inspired by
the likelihood ratio idea, we construct a confidence set of the black-box function using only
the preference feedback. An optimistic algorithm
with an efficient computational method is then
developed to solve the problem, which enjoys an
information-theoretic bound on the total cumulative regret, a first-of-its-kind for preferential BO.
This bound further allows us to design a scheme
to report an estimated best solution, with a guaranteed convergence rate. Experimental results
on sampled instances from Gaussian processes,
standard test functions, and a thermal comfort
optimization problem all show that our method
stably achieves better or competitive performance
as compared to the existing state-of-the-art heuristics, which, however, do not have theoretical guarantees on regret bounds or convergence.

The conventional BO setting assumes each sample, which
typically corresponds to a round of real-world experiment or
software simulation in practice, returns a noisy scalar evaluation of the black-box function. However, many human-inthe-loop systems can not return such a scalar value, or it is
much more difficult to directly obtain such a scalar evaluation from humans since humans are bad at sensing absolute
magnitude (Kahneman & Tversky, 2013). In contrast, it
is much easier for a human to compare a pair of solutions
and report which is preferred (Lichtenstein & Slovic, 1971;
Tversky & Kahneman, 1974; Kahneman & Tversky, 2013).
This gives rise to preferential Bayesian optimization (González et al., 2017), where the scalar evaluation
of the black-box function is not available. But rather, we
can query an oracle to compare a pair of solutions, or the
so-called duels. Such settings arise widely in a broad range
of applications, such as visual design optimization (Koyama
et al., 2020), thermal comfort optimization (Abdelrahman &
Miller, 2022) and robotic gait optimization (Li et al., 2021).

1. Introduction

Existing preferential Bayesian optimization methods are
mostly heuristic, without formal guarantees on cumulative
regret or convergence to the global optimal solution. For
example, (González et al., 2017) proposes several heuristic acquisition strategies, including expected improvement
and Thompson sampling-based methods, for preferential
Bayesian optimization. (Mikkola et al., 2020) extends the
preferential Bayesian optimization to the projective setting.
(Takeno et al., 2023) proposes a Thompson sampling-based
method for practical preferential Bayesian optimization with
skew Gaussian process. (Astudillo et al., 2023) proposes a
decision theoretical acquisition strategy with a convergence
rate guarantee for a finite input set. However, as far as we
know, all the existing preferential Bayesian optimization
methods can not provide theoretical guarantees on cumulative regret or global convergence with continuous input
space, partially due to the challenge of quantifying uncertainty in a principled way.

Bayesian optimization (BO) is a popular sample-efficient
black-box optimization method (Shahriari et al., 2015; Frazier, 2018). It is widely applied to tuning hyperparameters
of machine learning models (Snoek et al., 2012), optimizing
the performance of control systems (Xu et al., 2022b), and
discovering new drugs (Negoescu et al., 2011), etc.
The main idea of BO is based on surrogate modeling. That
is, a learning algorithm (typically Gaussian process regression) is applied to learn the unknown black-box function
using historical samples, which then outputs a learned surro1

Automatic Control Laboratory, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
Urban Energy Systems Laboratory, Empa, Zurich, Switzerland
3
The Institute for Artificial Intelligence Research and Development of Serbia, Serbia. Correspondence to: Yuning Jiang <yuning.jiang@ieee.org>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Beyond preferential BO, optimization from preference feed1

