Active Statistical Inference
Tijana Zrnic 1 Emmanuel J. Candès 2

Abstract

2016; Xie et al., 2016; Rolf et al., 2021); in proteomics,
tools like AlphaFold (Jumper et al., 2021) are revolutionizing our understanding of protein structures; even in the
realm of elections—including most major US elections—
technologies combining scanners and predictive models are
used as efficient tools for vote counting (Zdun, 2022). These
applications reflect a growing reliance on machine learning
for extracting knowledge from unlabeled datasets.

Inspired by the concept of active learning, we propose active inference—a methodology for statistical inference with machine-learning-assisted data
collection. Assuming a budget on the number of
labels that can be collected, the methodology uses
a machine learning model to identify which data
points would be most beneficial to label, thus effectively utilizing the budget. It operates on a simple yet powerful intuition: prioritize the collection
of labels for data points where the model exhibits
uncertainty, and rely on the model’s predictions
where it is confident. Active inference constructs
valid confidence intervals and hypothesis tests
while leveraging any black-box machine learning
model and handling any data distribution. The key
point is that it achieves the same level of accuracy
with far fewer samples than existing baselines
relying on non-adaptively-collected data. This
means that for the same number of collected samples, active inference enables smaller confidence
intervals and more powerful tests. We evaluate
active inference on datasets from public opinion
research, census analysis, and proteomics.

However, this reliance on machine learning is not without
its pitfalls. The core issue lies in the inherent biases of
these models. No matter how sophisticated, predictions
lead to dubious conclusions; as such, predictions cannot
fully substitute for traditional data sources such as goldstandard experimental measurements, high-quality surveys,
and expert annotations. This begs the question: is there a
way to effectively leverage the predictive power of machine
learning while still ensuring the integrity of our inferences?
Drawing inspiration from the concept of active learning,
we propose active inference—a novel methodology for statistical inference that harnesses machine learning not as a
replacement for data collection but as a strategic guide to it.
The methodology uses a machine learning model to identify
which data points would be most beneficial to label, thus
effectively utilizing the labeling budget. It operates on a
simple yet powerful intuition: prioritize the collection of
labels for data points where the model exhibits uncertainty,
and rely on the model’s predictions where it is confident.
Active inference constructs provably valid confidence intervals and hypothesis tests for any black-box machine learning
model and any data distribution. The key takeaway is that it
achieves the same level of accuracy with far fewer samples
than existing baselines relying on non-adaptively-collected
data. Put differently, this means that for the same number
of collected samples, active inference enables smaller confidence intervals and more powerful p-values. We will show
in our experiments that active inference can save over 80%
of the sample budget required by classical methods.

1. Introduction
In the realm of data-driven research, collecting high-quality
labeled data is a continuing impediment. The impediment
is particularly acute when operating under stringent labeling budgets, where the cost and effort of obtaining each
label can be substantial. Recognizing these limitations,
many have turned to machine learning as a pragmatic solution, leveraging it to predict unobserved labels across
various fields. In remote sensing, machine learning assists
in annotating and interpreting satellite imagery (Jean et al.,
1

Department of Statistics and Stanford Data Science, Stanford University, USA 2 Department of Statistics and Department
of Mathematics, Stanford University, USA. Correspondence to:
Tijana Zrnic <tijana.zrnic@stanford.edu>, Emmanuel J. Candès
<candes@stanford.edu>.

Although quite different in scope, our work is inspired
by the recent framework of prediction-powered inference
(PPI) (Angelopoulos et al., 2023a). PPI assumes access
to a small labeled dataset and a large unlabeled dataset,
drawn i.i.d. from the population of interest. It then asks how
one can use machine learning and the unlabeled dataset to
sharpen inference about population parameters depending

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

