Position: Why Tabular Foundation Models Should Be a Research Priority

Boris van Breugel 1 Mihaela van der Schaar 1 2

Abstract
Recent text and image foundation models are
incredibly impressive, and these models are attracting an ever-increasing portion of research
resources. In this position piece we aim to shift
the ML research community’s priorities ever so
slightly to a different modality: tabular data. Tabular data is the dominant modality in many fields,
yet it is given hardly any research attention and
significantly lags behind in terms of scale and
power. We believe the time is now to start developing tabular foundation models, or what
we coin a Large Tabular Model (LTM). LTMs
could revolutionise the way science and ML use
tabular data: not as single datasets that are analyzed in a vacuum, but contextualized with respect to related datasets. The potential impact
is far-reaching: from few-shot tabular models to
automating data science; from out-of-distribution
synthetic data to empowering multidisciplinary
scientific discovery. We intend to excite reflections on the modalities we study, and convince
some researchers to study large tabular models.

Figure 1. Representation of different modalities in foundation
model research across recent ML conferences, roughly estimated
as the number of accepted papers with abstracts containing keywords (see Appendix A). LLMs are booming and tabular data is
heavily underrepresented.

The immense public interest in text and image modalities,
as well as commercial incentives, may partly explain why
the majority of foundation model (FM) research is focused
on these modalities. The flip side is that other modalities
receive hardly any attention from the ML research community (see Figure 1). With this work, we prompt foundation
model researchers to reflect on the modality they study, to
consider alternative modalities, and to potentially redirect
their attention. In particular, in this paper we will argue how
tabular foundation models have been almost entirely unexplored, yet in some domains present a potential for impact
that is just as large, if not larger, than image and text models.
We will refer to this class of models as Large Tabular Model
(LTM).

1. Introduction
Let us start with the obvious: the recent progress in modelling text and image is incredibly impressive. It is not just
the capabilities of these models that has grabbed the public
imagination, it is also their seemingly “creative”, humanlike output; photorealistic images of horse-riding astronauts
and poems in the style of Sylvia Plath. We acknowledge
that text and image foundation models have large potentials
for real-world good—from low-cost, tailored educational
aids, to personalized medicine. Furthermore, these models
are already showcasing how the use of ML need not be
constrained to the ML community.

How to think about LTMs? LLMs are already widely used
as tools, and vision FMs (e.g. (Saharia et al., 2022)) can generate synthetic images or embed real images for downstream
tasks. LTMs can play a similar role for (multimodal settings
with) tabular data. For data scientists, LTMs could provide
an invaluable tool for cleaning and preprocessing datasets;
for finding relevant datasets (possibly from different domains or general knowledge-bases, e.g. Wikipedia tables);

1

Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics,
University of Cambridge, UK 2 Alan Turing Institute, London, UK.
Correspondence to: Boris van Breugel <bv292@cam.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

