Network Tight Community Detection

Jiayi Deng 1 Xiaodong Yang 2 Jun Yu 3 Jun S. Liu 2 Zhaiming Shen 4 Danyang Huang 1 Huimin Cheng 5

Abstract

works (Haggerty et al., 2014). Over the years, the field of
community detection methods has witnessed a surge (You
et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2019), starting with greedy algorithms
(Clauset et al., 2004; Newman & Girvan, 2004), advancing
to probabilistic model-based methods (Celisse et al., 2012;
Bickel et al., 2013), and further to spectral clustering methods (Rohe et al., 2011; Jin, 2015; Deng et al., 2024).

Conventional community detection methods often
categorize all nodes into clusters. However, the
presumed community structure of interest may
only be valid for a subset of nodes (named as
“tight nodes”), while the rest of the network may
consist of noninformative “scattered nodes”. For
example, a protein-protein network often contains
proteins that do not belong to specific biological
functional modules but are involved in more general processes, or act as bridges between different
functional modules. Forcing each of these proteins into a single cluster introduces unwanted
biases and obscures the underlying biological implication. To address this issue, we propose a
tight community detection (TCD) method to identify tight communities excluding scattered nodes.
The algorithm enjoys a strong theoretical guarantee of tight node identification accuracy and is
scalable for large networks. The superiority of
the proposed method is demonstrated by various
synthetic and real experiments.

One critical assumption in many community detection methods is that every node in the network can and should be
allocated to a community. However, real-world networks
often contain “scattered nodes” that do not fit into any specific community, thereby challenging this assumption. For
example, a protein-protein network often contains proteins
that do not belong to specific biological functional modules.
Such proteins may be involved in more general processes
such as system maintenance, or may act as bridges between
different functional modules. Assigning these non-specific
proteins to clusters can introduce biases and obscure underlying biological implications. Another example is an
email network within a university, where each node represents an email address, and a connection between two
nodes indicates communication. Spam accounts scattered
unsolicited messages across groups, posing security threats
(Shrivastava et al., 2008). Isolating these uninformative scattered nodes from tight communities mitigates privacy and
financial risks.

1. Introduction
Community detection, a task pervasive in numerous scientific realms, aims to extract coarse-grain community structures where nodes within each community are densely connected, and nodes between communities are sparsely connected. Community detection has been widely used in
many applications, including identifying allegiances in social networks (Cheng et al., 2021), elucidating biological
function in metabolic networks (Guimera & Nunes Amaral,
2005), and exploring homology in genetic similarity net-

Figure 1. (a) A network with 12 nodes. (b) Spectral clustering
results. (c) TCD results, where nodes 9-12 are flagged as scattered
nodes, while two tight communities are extracted: nodes 1-4 and
nodes 5-8.

Despite the urgent need, many conventional community detection methods overlook the presence of scattered nodes,
yielding undesirable results. To illustrate, consider a toy
example in Figure 1(a), where two clear communities are
formed by nodes 1-4 and 5-8, while nodes 9-12 appear as
scattered entities without apparent community structures.
Without taking into account scattered nodes, conventional
methods such as the spectral clustering method tend to inappropriately force these scattered nodes into existing clusters,
as shown in Figure 1(b). This obscures the intrinsic com-

1

Center for Applied Statistics and School of Statistics, Renmin
University of China, Beijing, China 2 Department of Statistics,
Harvard University, Cambridge MA, USA 3 School of Mathematics
and Statistics, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
4
Department of Mathematics, University of Georgia, Athens GA,
USA 5 Department of Biostatistics, Boston University, Boston MA,
USA. Correspondence to: Huimin Cheng <huimin23@bu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

