Designing Decision Support Systems using Counterfactual Prediction Sets

Eleni Straitouri 1 Manuel Gomez Rodriguez 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Throughout the years, one of the main focus in the area of
machine learning for decision support has been classification
tasks. In this setting, the decision support system typically
uses a classifier to predict the value of a ground truth label
of interest and a human expert uses the predicted value to
update their own prediction (Bansal et al., 2019; Lubars &
Tan, 2019; Bordt & von Luxburg, 2020). Classifiers have
become notably accurate in a variety of application domains
such as medicine (Jiao et al., 2020), education (Whitehill
et al., 2017), or criminal justice (Dressel & Farid, 2018), to
name a few. However, their data-driven predictions are not
always perfect (Raghu et al., 2019). As a result, there has
been a flurry of work on helping human experts understand
when and how to use the predictions provided by these systems to update their own (Papenmeier et al., 2019; Wang &
Yin, 2021; Vodrahalli et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023). Unfortunately, it is yet unclear how to guarantee that, by using
these systems, experts never decrease the average accuracy
of their own predictions (Yin et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020;
Suresh et al., 2020; Lai et al., 2021).

Decision support systems for classification tasks
are predominantly designed to predict the value
of the ground truth labels. However, since their
predictions are not perfect, these systems also
need to make human experts understand when
and how to use these predictions to update their
own predictions. Unfortunately, this has been
proven challenging. In this context, it has been recently argued that an alternative type of decision
support systems may circumvent this challenge.
Rather than providing a single label prediction,
these systems provide a set of label prediction
values constructed using a conformal predictor,
namely a prediction set, and forcefully ask experts to predict a label value from the prediction
set. However, the design and evaluation of these
systems have so far relied on stylized expert models, questioning their promise. In this paper, we
revisit the design of this type of systems from
the perspective of online learning and develop a
methodology that does not require, nor assumes,
an expert model. Our methodology leverages the
nested structure of the prediction sets provided
by any conformal predictor and a natural counterfactual monotonicity assumption to achieve an
exponential improvement in regret in comparison to vanilla bandit algorithms. We conduct a
large-scale human subject study (n = 2,751) to
compare our methodology to several competitive
baselines. The results show that, for decision support systems based on prediction sets, limiting
experts’ level of agency leads to greater performance than allowing experts to always exercise
their own agency.

Very recently, Straitouri et al. (2023) have argued that an alternative type of decision support systems may provide such
a guarantee, by design. Rather than providing a label prediction and letting human experts decide when and how to use
the predicted label to update their own prediction, this type
of systems provide a set of label predictions, namely a prediction set, and forcefully ask the experts to predict a label
value from the prediction set, as shown in Figure 1.1 Their
key argument is that, if the prediction set is constructed using conformal prediction (Vovk et al., 2005; Angelopoulos
& Bates, 2023), then one can precisely trade-off the probability that the ground truth label is not in the prediction set,
which determines how frequently the systems will mislead
human experts2 , and the size of the prediction set, which
1
There are many systems used everyday by experts that, under
normal operation, limit experts’ level of agency. For example, think
of a pilot who is flying a plane. There are automated, adaptive
systems that prevent the pilot from taking certain actions based on
the monitoring of the environment.
2
Since these systems do not allow experts to predict a label
value if it lies outside the prediction set, if the prediction set does
not contain the ground truth label, we know that the expert’s
prediction will be incorrect.

1

Max Planck Institute for Software Systems, Kaiserslautern,
Germany. Correspondence to: Eleni Straitouri <estraitouri@mpisws.org>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

