Adaptive Advantage-Guided Policy Regularization
for Offline Reinforcement Learning

Tenglong Liu 1 Yang Li 2 Yixing Lan 1 Hao Gao 1 Wei Pan 3 Xin Xu 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Reinforcement learning has made substantial breakthrough
advancements over the past decades, such as chess
games (Silver et al., 2016; Schrittwieser et al., 2020; Li
et al., 2023), video games (Perolat et al., 2022; Vinyals
et al., 2019), robotics (Hwangbo et al., 2019; Andrychowicz
et al., 2020; Rajeswaran et al., 2017) and so on. Specifically,
RL employs a trial-and-error approach, iteratively refining
its performance through interactions with the environment
in an online fashion (Sutton & Barto, 2018). However, the
trial-and-error paradigm poses significant challenges to the
seamless integration of RL into real-world applications such
as autonomous driving, healthcare, and other tasks. The
impracticality of trial-and-error in scenarios where active
interaction with the environment is unfeasible renders each
training run unrealistic. In recent times, offline RL has garnered considerable attention for its potential to exclusively
learn from pre-collected datasets, eliminating the need for
real-time interaction during training (Levine et al., 2020).

In offline reinforcement learning, the challenge
of out-of-distribution (OOD) is pronounced. To
address this, existing methods often constrain
the learned policy through policy regularization.
However, these methods often suffer from the issue of unnecessary conservativeness, hampering
policy improvement. This occurs due to the indiscriminate use of all actions from the behavior
policy that generates the offline dataset as constraints. The problem becomes particularly noticeable when the quality of the dataset is suboptimal.
Thus, we propose Adaptive Advantage-Guided
Policy Regularization (A2PR), obtaining highadvantage actions from an augmented behavior
policy combined with VAE to guide the learned
policy. A2PR can select high-advantage actions
that differ from those present in the dataset, while
still effectively maintaining conservatism from
OOD actions. This is achieved by harnessing
the VAE capacity to generate samples matching
the distribution of the data points. We theoretically prove that the improvement of the behavior
policy is guaranteed. Besides, it effectively mitigates value overestimation with a bounded performance gap. Empirically, we conduct a series
of experiments on the D4RL benchmark, where
A2PR demonstrates state-of-the-art performance.
Furthermore, experimental results on additional
suboptimal mixed datasets reveal that A2PR exhibits superior performance. Code is available at
https://github.com/ltlhuuu/A2PR.

In offline RL, a key challenge is addressing the overestimation of Q-values caused by out-of-distribution (OOD)
actions. Commonly, techniques rely on incorporating the
dataset’s behavior policy to tackle this challenge, constraining the learned policy through policy regularization methods (Levine et al., 2020). These regularization methods
introduce an extra term to calculate divergence metrics between the learned policy and the behavior policy, employing widely-used metrics such as behavior clone (Fujimoto
& Gu, 2021; Ran et al., 2023), Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence (Jaques et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2019), fisher divergence (Kostrikov et al., 2021a), and Maximum Mean
Discrepancy (MMD) (Kumar et al., 2019). To some extent, these methods alleviate overestimation from OOD actions (Levine et al., 2020). However, existing policy regularization methods are unnecessarily conservative (Hong
et al., 2023b) since they force the learned policy to closely
mimic actions of the behavior policy, even if those actions
are suboptimal. Such unnecessary conservatism hampers
policy performance, especially in datasets dominated by
low-return trajectories with sparse high-return instances.

1
National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
Shanghai Institute of Microsystem and Information Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China 3 Delft
University of Technology, The Netherlands. Correspondence
to: Xin Xu <Xinxu@nudt.edu.cn>, Yixing Lan <lanyixing16@nudt.edu.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

To address the issue of unnecessary conservatism (Hong
et al., 2023b), we introduce an Adaptive Advantage1

