Triplet Interaction Improves Graph Transformers:
Accurate Molecular Graph Learning with Triplet Graph Transformers

Md Shamim Hussain 1 Mohammed J. Zaki 1 Dharmashankar Subramanian 2

Abstract

volving localized convolutional/message-passing graph neural networks (MPNNs). First applied to molecular graphs,
GTs have shown superior performance on diverse graph
datasets including super-pixel and citation networks, and
have been used to solve problems like vehicle routing (Liu
et al., 2023) and the traveling salesman (TSP) problem (Hussain et al., 2022). This success is attributed to the ability
of GTs to model long-range dependencies between nodes,
overcoming the limitations of localized architectures.

Graph transformers typically lack third-order interactions, limiting their geometric understanding
which is crucial for tasks like molecular geometry prediction. We propose the Triplet Graph
Transformer (TGT) that enables direct communication between pairs within a 3-tuple of nodes
via novel triplet attention and aggregation mechanisms. TGT is applied to molecular property prediction by first predicting interatomic distances
from 2D graphs and then using these distances
for downstream tasks. A novel three-stage training procedure and stochastic inference further
improve training efficiency and model performance. Our model achieves new state-of-the-art
(SOTA) results on open challenge benchmarks
PCQM4Mv2 and OC20 IS2RE. We also obtain
SOTA results on QM9, MOLPCBA, and LITPCBA molecular property prediction benchmarks
via transfer learning. We also demonstrate the
generality of TGT with SOTA results on the traveling salesman problem (TSP).

Graph transformers utilize global self-attention to enable
dynamic information exchange among node representations.
Additionally, since graph topology and edge representations
are as crucial as node representations for many tasks, the
Edge-augmented Graph Transformer (EGT) (Hussain et al.,
2022) introduces dedicated edge channels that are updated
across layers, enabling new pairwise (i.e., both existing
and non-existing edge) representations to emerge over consecutive layers. This explicit modeling of both node and
edge embeddings benefits performance on both node-centric
and pairwise/link prediction tasks. However, although EGT
allows information flow between node and pair representations, it lacks direct communication between pairs. Instead,
neighboring pairs can only exchange information via their
common node, creating a bottleneck. This limits the expressivity of the model by allowing only 2nd-order interactions
(Joshi et al., 2023). As shown by Li et al. (2024) 3rd-order
interactions in the form of direct communication between
neighboring pairs, i.e., within a 3-tuple of nodes is important
for understanding important geometric concepts like angles.

1. Introduction
Recent works have demonstrated the effectiveness of transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) architectures across various
data modalities. Originally developed for textual data, the
transformer has since been adapted to image (Dosovitskiy
et al., 2020) and audio (Child et al., 2019), achieving stateof-the-art (SOTA) results. More recently, pure graph transformers (GTs) (Ying et al., 2021; Hussain et al., 2022; Park
et al., 2022) have emerged as a promising architecture for
graph-structured data, outperforming prior approaches in-

In particular, 3D molecular geometry plays a vital role in determining chemical properties. While molecular graphs represent atoms as nodes and bonds as edges (“2D” structure),
the relative positions of atoms in 3D space crucially influence quantum mechanical attributes like orbital energies and
dipole moments and also other properties like solubility and
interactions with proteins. Accordingly, prior works (Stärk
et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2021b) have shown that incorporating
3D geometry significantly improves performance on molecular property prediction. Geometric GNNs like GemNet
(Gasteiger et al., 2021) rely on input features derived from
the ground truth 3D geometry to predict molecular properties. However, determining ground truth 3D geometries

1

Department of Computer Science, Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute, Troy, NY, USA 2 IBM Thomas J. Watson Research
Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Md
Shamim Hussain <hussam4@rpi.edu>, Mohammed J. Zaki
<zaki@cs.rpi.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

