Language Models Represent Beliefs of Self and Others

Wentao Zhu 1 Zhining Zhang 1 Yizhou Wang 1 2 3 4

Abstract

for the nuanced navigation of human social interactions
but also for enabling machines to engage in cooperative,
adaptive, and sympathetic behaviors in diverse social environments (Kleiman-Weiner et al., 2016; Rabinowitz et al.,
2018; Zhu et al., 2023).

Understanding and attributing mental states,
known as Theory of Mind (ToM), emerges as
a fundamental capability for human social reasoning. While Large Language Models (LLMs)
appear to possess certain ToM abilities, the mechanisms underlying these capabilities remain elusive. In this study, we discover that it is possible
to linearly decode the belief status from the perspectives of various agents through neural activations of language models, indicating the existence
of internal representations of self and others’ beliefs. By manipulating these representations, we
observe dramatic changes in the models’ ToM
performance, underscoring their pivotal role in
the social reasoning process. Additionally, our
findings extend to diverse social reasoning tasks
that involve different causal inference patterns,
suggesting the potential generalizability of these
representations. *

The recent advancements in Large Language Models
(LLMs) appear to be a promising approach towards this
objective, as emerging research indicates that LLMs exhibit
reasonable ToM capabilities (Kosinski, 2023; Bubeck et al.,
2023). These studies suggest that LLMs could, to some
extent, predict and understand human intentions and beliefs,
thereby demonstrating a foundational level of social reasoning. Meanwhile, some other research underscores that these
capabilities tend to be superficial and fragile (Shapira et al.,
2023; Ullman, 2023; Ma et al., 2023; Verma et al., 2024).
Critics argue that while LLMs may mimic the outward appearance of understanding social contexts and mental states,
akin to the “Clever Hans” (Pfungst, 1911; Kavumba et al.,
2019) and “Stochastic Parrot” (Bender et al., 2021) analogies, this performance may not stem from a deep, genuine
comprehension similar to human ToM. Instead, it may simply reflect the models’ ability to replicate patterns observed
in their training data.

1. Introduction
Developing machine systems that can engage in sophisticated social reasoning in a human-like manner represents
one of the paramount goals in artificial intelligence. At the
core of such an endeavor is the necessity for these systems
to possess a “Theory of Mind” (ToM) capability, which involves recognizing and attributing mental states — such as
beliefs, desires, intentions, and emotions — to oneself and
others, while acknowledging that others may possess mental states distinct from one’s own (Leslie, 1987; Wellman
et al., 2001). This foundational capability is crucial not only

These observations highlight a critical gap in our understanding of LLM social reasoning capabilities extending beyond
mere black-box tests. Key questions remain unanswered,
such as whether LLMs develop an internal representation
of others’ mental states, and whether it is feasible to distinguish between the mental states of others and those of the
LLMs when the two have a conflict due to reasons such as
information mismatch. Addressing these questions not only
helps us gain a deeper insight on how LLMs understand
others’ mental states and perform social reasoning, but is
also meaningful for the trustworthiness and alignment of AI
systems (Wang et al., 2023; Ngo et al., 2023; Ji et al., 2023).

1
Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies, School of
Compter Science, Peking University 2 Inst. for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University 3 Nat’l Eng. Research Center
of Visual Technology, Peking University 4 Nat’l Key Lab of
General Artificial Intelligence, Peking University. Correspondence to: Wentao Zhu <wtzhu@pku.edu.cn>, Yizhou Wang
<yizhou.wang@pku.edu.cn>.

In this work, we undertake a preliminary exploration to understand the ToM capabilities of LLMs by studying their
internal representations, going beyond merely analyzing the
text responses they generate. Firstly, we seek to identify if
LLMs have internal representations of others’ beliefs and
their own (§ 3). If the answer is true, models potentially
possess the ability to recognize others’ mental states and
differentiate them from their own prior to generating a final

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
* Project page:
https://walter0807.github.io/
RepBelief/

1

