Variational Linearized Laplace Approximation for Bayesian Deep Learning

Luis A. Ortega 1 Simón Rodríguez Santana 2 Daniel Hernández-Lobato 1

Abstract

from a set of input attributes (He et al., 2016; Vaswani et al.,
2017). Despite this great success, DNNs exhibit limitations
when computing a predictive distribution that accounts for
the confidence in the predictions. Specifically, DNNs result
in weak calibration (Guo et al., 2017) and in poor reasoning
regarding model uncertainty (Blundell et al., 2015). These
issues become particularly critical in risk-sensitive situations like autonomous driving (Kendall & Gal, 2017) and
healthcare systems (Leibig et al., 2017) among others.

The Linearized Laplace Approximation (LLA)
has been recently used to perform uncertainty estimation on the predictions of pre-trained deep neural networks (DNNs). However, its widespread
application is hindered by significant computational costs, particularly in scenarios with a large
number of training points or DNN parameters.
Consequently, additional approximations of LLA,
such as Kronecker-factored or diagonal approximate GGN matrices, are utilized, potentially compromising the model’s performance. To address
these challenges, we propose a new method for approximating LLA using a variational sparse Gaussian Process (GP). Our method is based on the
dual RKHS formulation of GPs and retains, as the
predictive mean, the output of the original DNN.
Furthermore, it allows for efficient stochastic optimization, which results in sub-linear training
time in the size of the training dataset. Specifically, its training cost is independent of the number of training points. We compare our proposed
method against accelerated LLA (ELLA), which
relies on the Nyström approximation, as well as
other LLA variants employing the sample-thenoptimize principle. Experimental results, both on
regression and classification datasets, show that
our method outperforms these already existing
efficient variants of LLA, both in terms of the
quality of the predictive distribution and in terms
of total computational time.

A Bayesian approach, where probabilities describe degrees
of belief in the potential values of the DNN parameters,
has proven useful for treating these pathologies (MacKay,
1992b; Neal, 2012; Graves, 2011). Bayes’ rule is used here
to get a posterior distribution in the high-dimensional space
of DNN parameters. Nevertheless, due to the intractability
of the calculations, the exact posterior is often approximated
with a simpler distribution. Different techniques can be used
for this, including (but not limited to) variational inference
(VI) (Blundell et al., 2015), Markov chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) (Chen et al., 2014) and the Laplace approximation
(LA) (Mackay, 1992; Ritter et al., 2018).
LA offers several advantages over alternative methods. It
leverages the maximum a posteriori (MAP) solution, attainable via back-propagation, along with the inverse of the
Hessian of the DNN parameters there. The negative inverse
Hessian provides the covariances of a Gaussian posterior approximation and the MAP estimate furnishes the mean. Consequently, LA yields a Gaussian posterior approximation
following standard DNN training with back-propagation.
This resembles a pre-training step followed by fine-tuning, a
common practice in deep learning (Daxberger et al., 2021a).
The main drawback of LA is the necessity of computing the
Hessian at the MAP estimate, which becomes prohibitive
for large DNNs. To simplify this, the Hessian is often
approximated using the generalized Gauss-Newton (GGN)
matrix (Martens & Grosse, 2015). While this is known
to produce underfitting in LA (Lawrence, 2001), using a
linearized DNN for prediction alleviates it (Foong et al.,
2019). This approach aligns with the fact that the GGN
Hessian estimate is exact when applying LA to a linearized
DNN. This method is referred to as Linearized LA (LLA)
(Immer et al., 2021) and it simply consist in applying LA
on a first-order Taylor approximation of the DNN output.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have gained widespread popularity for addressing pattern recognition problems due to
their state-of-the-art performance in predicting target values
1
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid 2 Institute for Research
in Technology (IIT), ICAI Engineering School, Universidad
Pontificia Comillas. Correspondence to: Luis A. Ortega
<luis.ortega@uam.es>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

