Parameter-Dependent Competitive Analysis for Online Capacitated Coverage
Maximization through Boostings and Attenuations

Pan Xu 1

Abstract

Turk (AMT). As opposed to online agents, the other party
is called offline agents, such as sponsors in online advertising and tasks in AMT. The information of offline agents is
known as a priori, and they are assumed static. The second
feature is the real-time decision-making requirement (F2).
It is highly desirable to match each online agent with one
(or multiple) offline agent(s) upon its arrival due to online
agents’ low “patience”. Generally, each match of offline
and online agents contributes a certain amount of revenue to
the system. Consequently, a well-studied topic in OMMs is
to maximize the total revenue, which is modeled as a linear
function over all matches; see, e.g., (Ashlagi et al., 2019;
Bei & Zhang, 2018; Dickerson et al., 2024; 2021).

In this paper, we consider a model called Online
Capacitated Coverage Maximization, characterized by two features: (1) the dynamic arrival of
online agents following a known identical and independent distribution, and (2) each offline agent
is associated with a specific coverage valuation
over the groundset of online agents. Additionally,
both offline and online agents are assigned integer capacities, reflecting finite budgets and operational constraints. We introduce and analyze two
matching policies. The first, a non-adaptive policy, utilizes offline statistics derived from solving
a benchmark linear program. The second is an enhanced version equipped with real-time boostings
and attenuations. We conduct a comprehensive
competitive analysis and characterize the competitive ratio for both policies as functions of two
crucial parameters: a lower bound on the matching capacity among offline agents and an upper
bound on the number of online agents covering
any specific feature for offline agents.

In this paper, we consider a general setting introduced
by (Xu, 2023b) when the linear-maximization objective is
replaced by a (weighted) coverage maximization. One motivating example is called online multi-skilled task-worker
assignment problem in crowdsourcing markets, where
each task and worker is associated with a specific set of
skills (Barnabò et al., 2019; Cheng et al., 2016; Anagnostopoulos et al., 2012). A natural goal there is to assign each
task a set of workers such that the task has as many skills
covered as possible. In a general scenario, each task-skill
pair is associated with a specific positive weight reflecting
the importance or priority of the skill for the task. In that
case, the resulting objective is formulated as a maximization of a weighted coverage function. Similar issues exist
in other gig platforms such as Upwork, where we need to
enlist a diverse team of workers for each project (task) such
that as many expertises are covered as possible that are requested by the project. Observe that the two aforementioned
features (F1 and F2) distinguish our problem from the classical (offline) coverage maximization and pose significant
challenges in the matching-policy design.

1. Introduction
Matching markets involve heterogeneous agents (typically
from two parties) who are paired for mutual benefits. During
the last decade, matching markets have emerged and proliferated through the Internet. They have evolved into a new
style, called Online Matching Markets (OMMs), with examples ranging from crowdsourcing to Internet advertising.
There are two features distinguishing OMMs from traditional matching markets. The first feature is that users from
at least one party join the system dynamically, which are referred to as online agents (F1). Examples include keywords
in online advertising and workers in Amazon Mechanical

1.1. Main Model
For the ease of presentation, we include a brief description of a slightly simplified version of the model proposed
in (Xu, 2023b), where only the offline side is capacitated.
In Appendix H, we will demonstrate how to generalize the
current techniques and results to the two-sided capacitated
case, which is the exact setting in (Xu, 2023b). Throughout

1

Department of Computer Science, New Jersey Institute
of Technology, Newark, USA. Correspondence to: Pan Xu
<pxu@njit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

