Learning Causal Dynamics Models in Object-Oriented Environments

Zhongwei Yu 1 2 Jingqing Ruan 1 2 Dengpeng Xing 1 2

Abstract

et al., 2022), which are particularly prevalent in the non-i.i.d.
data produced in sequential decision-making.

Causal dynamics models (CDMs) have demonstrated significant potential in addressing various
challenges in reinforcement learning. To learn
CDMs, recent studies have performed causal discovery to capture the causal dependencies among
environmental variables. However, the learning
of CDMs is still confined to small-scale environments due to computational complexity and sample efficiency constraints. This paper aims to extend CDMs to large-scale object-oriented environments, which consist of a multitude of objects
classified into different categories. We introduce
the Object-Oriented CDM (OOCDM) that shares
causalities and parameters among objects belonging to the same class. Furthermore, we propose
a learning method for OOCDM that enables it
to adapt to a varying number of objects. Experiments on large-scale tasks indicate that OOCDM
outperforms existing CDMs in terms of causal discovery, prediction accuracy, generalization, and
computational efficiency.

Early research of CDMs exploits given causal structures of
environments (Boutilier et al., 2000; Guestrin et al., 2003b;
Madumal et al., 2020b), which may not be available in many
applications. Therefore, some recent studies have proposed
to develop CDMs using causal discovery techniques to learn
such causal structures, i.e. causal graphs (CGs), from the
data of history interactions (Volodin, 2021; Wang et al.,
2021; 2022; Zhu et al., 2022). These approaches have been
successful in relatively small environments consisting of a
few variables. Unfortunately, some RL tasks involve many
objects (e.g., multiple agents and environment entities in
multi-agent domains (Malysheva et al., 2019)), which together contribute to a large set of environment variables.
The applicability of CDMs in such large-scale environments
remains questionable — the excessive number of potential
causal dependencies (i.e., edges in CGs) makes causal discovery extremely expensive, and more samples and effort
are required to correctly discriminate causal dependencies.
Interestingly, humans can efficiently reason causality from
enormous real-world information. One possible explanation for this is that we intuitively perceive tasks through an
object-oriented (OO) perspective (Hadar & Leron, 2008) —
we decompose the world into objects and categorize them
into classes, allowing us to summarize and share causal
rules for each class. For example, “exercise causes good
health of each person” is a shared rule of the class “Human”, and “each person” represents any instance of that
class. This OO intuition has been widely adopted in modern programming languages, referred to as object-oriented
programming (OOP), to organize and manipulate data in a
more methodical and readable fashion (Stroustrup, 1988).

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 2018) and
causal inference (Pearl, 2000) have separately made much
progress over the past decades. Recently, the combination
of both fields has led to a series of successes (Zeng et al.,
2023), where the use of causal dynamics models (CDMs)
proves a promising direction. CDMs capture the causal
structures of environmental dynamics and have been applied to address a wide range of challenges in RL, including
learning efficiency, explainability, generalization, state representation, subtask decomposition, and transfer learning
(see Section 2.1). For example, a major function of CDMs
is to reduce spurious correlations (Ding et al., 2022; Wang

This work aims to extend CDMs to large-scale OO environments. Inspired by OOP, we investigate how an OO
description of the environment can be exploited to facilitate causal discovery and dynamics learning. We propose
the Object-Oriented Causal Dynamics Model (OOCDM),
a novel type of CDM that allows the sharing of causalities and model parameters among objects. To learn the
OOCDM, we present a modified version of Causal Dynamics Learning (CDL) (Wang et al., 2022) that can accommodate varying numbers of objects. We theoretically prove

1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, P. R. China 2 School of Artificial Intelligence, University of
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, P. R. China. Correspondence to: Dengpeng Xing <dengpeng.xing@ia.ac.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

