Classification Under Strategic Self-Selection

Guy Horowitz * 1 Yonatan Sommer * 1 Moran Koren 2 Nir Rosenfeld 1

Abstract

important fact that who will apply after model deployment—
and who will not—often depends on the screening rule itself.

When users stand to gain from certain predictive
outcomes, they are prone to act strategically to
obtain predictions that are favorable. Most current
works consider strategic behavior that manifests
as users modifying their features; instead, we
study a novel setting in which users decide
whether to even participate (or not), this in response to the learned classifier. Considering learning approaches of increasing strategic awareness,
we investigate the effects of user self-selection
on learning, and the implications of learning on
the composition of the self-selected population.
Building on this, we propose a differentiable
framework for learning under self-selective
behavior, which can be optimized effectively.
We conclude with experiments on real data and
simulated behavior that complement our analysis
and demonstrate the utility of our approach.

In this work we study classification of strategic agents that
choose whether to apply or not in response to the learned
classifier. Strategic candidates apply only if the expected
utility from passing screening outweighs associated costs;
thus, application choices derive from beliefs regarding classification outcomes. Since these choices in aggregate determine the test-time distribution, learning becomes susceptible
to self-selection—namely selection that is carried out by the
agents which predictions target. Our goal in this paper is to
study learning under such self-selective behavior, which we
believe is prevalent in many application domains. We seek
to: (i) establish the ramifications of self-selection on conventional learning methods; (ii) propose a strategically robust
method that is accurate on the self-selective distribution it
induces; (iii) study the power of such methods to influence
choices and shape the applicant population; and (iv) propose
means for regulating and mitigating potential ill effects.
Our setting considers a firm which trains a classifier to be
used for screening, where applicants who pass screening
then partake in an accurate but costly test (e.g., trial period)
that determines final outcomes (e.g., hiring). Candidates
would like to pass the test, but also to avoid unnecessary
testing costs; the challenge for them is that they do not know
a-priori whether or not they will pass screening, making
their decisions regarding application inherently uncertain.
To cope with this, candidates can make use of relevant statistics regarding their chances of being hired. We imagine
these as being made public either by a third party (e.g., auditor, media outlet), or by the firm itself, e.g. due to regulation
on transparency (Matthews & Murphy, 2023) or as a service
to prospective candidates.1 The statistics we consider rely
on a subset of (categorical) features describing candidates
that provide semi-individualized, group-level information,
useful to them for making informed application decisions.
Since the choice of classifier determines the reported statistics, these become the interface through which learning influences applications. This process is illustrated in Figure 1.

1. Introduction
Machine learning is increasingly being used for informing decisions regarding humans; some common examples
include loan approvals, university admissions, job hiring,
welfare benefits, and healthcare programs. In these domains,
learned models often serve as ‘gatekeepers’, used for screening potential candidates in order to determine their qualification (e.g., for a job, loan, or program). This approach is
based on the premise that more accurate models should provide better screening—which in turn should enable better
decisions regarding additional costly testing (e.g., who to interview or to recruit for a try-out period) and consequent actions (e.g., who to hire). But conventional learning methods
optimize for accuracy on the distribution of input data, i.e.,
the train-time population of candidates; this overlooks the
*

Equal contribution 1 Faculty of Computer Science, Technion – Israel Institute of Technology 2 Department of Industrial Engineering
and Management, Ben Gurion University. Correspondence to: Nir
Rosenfeld <nirr@cs.technion.ac.il>.

The goal of learning in our setting is to train a classifier
that will be accurate on the induced applicant distribution—

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

1

This is similar in spirit to e.g. credit calculators, that based on partial information provide an estimated range of likely credit scores.

