GaussianPro: 3D Gaussian Splatting with Progressive Propagation

Kai Cheng * 1 Xiaoxiao Long * 2 Kaizhi Yang 1 Yao Yao 3 Wei Yin 4 Yuexin Ma 5
Wenping Wang 6 Xuejin Chen 1
Rendered Image

Normal Map

3DGS

Gaussians

Ours

PSNR: 35.83

PSNR: 36.88

Figure 1: The sparse SfM points and less-constrained densification strategies of 3DGS pose challenges in optimizing 3D
Gaussians, particularly for textureless areas. 3DGS generates inaccurate Gaussians (blue circle) that overfit the training
images, leading to a noticeable performance drop in novel view rendering with erroneous geometries.

Abstract

ors of the existing reconstructed geometries of
the scene and utilizes patch matching to produce
new Gaussians with accurate positions and orientations. Experiments on both large-scale and
small-scale scenes validate the effectiveness of
our method. Our method significantly surpasses
3DGS on the Waymo dataset, exhibiting an improvement of 1.15dB in terms of PSNR. Codes
and data are available at https://github.
com/kcheng1021/GaussianPro.

3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has recently revolutionized the field of neural rendering with its
high fidelity and efficiency. However, 3DGS
heavily depends on the initialized point cloud
produced by Structure-from-Motion (SfM) techniques. When tackling large-scale scenes that
unavoidably contain texture-less surfaces, SfM
techniques fail to produce enough points in
these surfaces and cannot provide good initialization for 3DGS. As a result, 3DGS suffers from difficult optimization and low-quality
renderings. In this paper, inspired by classic multi-view stereo (MVS) techniques, we
propose GaussianPro, a novel method that applies a progressive propagation strategy to guide
the densification of the 3D Gaussians. Compared to the simple split and clone strategies
used in 3DGS, our method leverages the pri-

1. Introduction
Novel view synthesis is an important but challenging task
in computer vision and computer graphics. As it can generate images of novel viewpoints in the captured scene,
it has extensive applications in various domains, including virtual reality (Deng et al., 2022b), autonomous driving (Yang et al., 2023a; Cheng et al., 2023), and 3D content generation (Poole et al., 2022; Tang et al., 2023). Recently, the neural radiance field (NeRF) technique (Mildenhall et al., 2020) has significantly boosted this task, achieving high-fidelity renderings without explicitly modeling 3D
scenes, texture and illumination. However, due to the
heavy manner of volume rendering, NeRFs still suffer from
slow rendering speed, although various efforts have been
made (Müller et al., 2022; Barron et al., 2022; 2023; Chen
et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2022).

*
Equal contribution 1 MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired
Intelligent Perception and Cognition, University of Science and
Technology of China 2 The University of Hong Kong 3 Nanjing
University 4 The University of Adelaide 5 ShanghaiTech University 6 Texas A&M University. Correspondence to: Xuejin Chen
<xjchen99@ustc.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

