Differentially Private Post-Processing for Fair Regression

Ruicheng Xian 1 Qiaobo Li 1 Gautam Kamath 2 Han Zhao 1

Abstract

information in the training data collected for these applications (Dwork & Roth, 2014).

This paper describes a differentially private postprocessing algorithm for learning fair regressors
satisfying statistical parity, addressing privacy
concerns of machine learning models trained on
sensitive data, as well as fairness concerns of their
potential to propagate historical biases. Our algorithm can be applied to post-process any given
regressor to improve fairness by remapping its
outputs. It consists of three steps: first, the output
distributions are estimated privately via histogram
density estimation and the Laplace mechanism,
then their Wasserstein barycenter is computed,
and the optimal transports to the barycenter are
used for post-processing to satisfy fairness. We
analyze the sample complexity of our algorithm
and provide fairness guarantee, revealing a tradeoff between the statistical bias and variance induced from the choice of the number of bins in
the histogram, in which using less bins always
favors fairness at the expense of error.

While there has been significant effort at addressing these
concerns, few treats them in combination, i.e., designing
algorithms that train fair models in a privacy-preserving
manner. A difficulty is that privacy and fairness may not
be compatible: exactly achieving group fairness criterion
such as statistical parity or equalized odds requires precise
(estimates of) group-level statistics, but for ensuring privacy,
only noisy statistics are allowed under the notion of differential privacy. Resorting to approximate fairness, prior
work has proposed private learning algorithms for reducing
disparity, but the focus has been on the classification setting (Jagielski et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2019; Mozannar et al.,
2020; Tran et al., 2021).
In this paper, we propose and analyze a differentially private post-processing algorithm for learning attribute-aware
fair regressors under the squared loss, with respect to the
fairness notion of statistical parity. It can take any (privately pre-trained) regressor and remaps its outputs (with
minimum deviations) to improve fairness. At a high-level,
our algorithm consists of three steps: estimating the output
distributions of the regressor from data, computing their
Wasserstein barycenter, and the optimal transports (Chzhen
et al., 2020; Le Gouic et al., 2020; Xian et al., 2023). To
make this process differentially private, we use private histogram density estimates (HDE) for the distributions via the
Laplace mechanism (Diakonikolas et al., 2015; Xu et al.,
2012), followed by re-normalization, which introduces additional complexity in our analysis. The choice of the number
of bins in the HDE induces a trade-off between the statistical
bias and variance for the cost of privacy and fairness. Our
theoretical analysis and experiments show that using less
bins always improves fairness at the expense of higher error.

1. Introduction
Prediction and forecasting models trained from machine
learning algorithms are ubiquitous in real-world applications, whose performance hinges on the availability and
quality of training data, often collected from end-users or
customers. This reliance on data has raised ethical concerns including fairness and privacy. Models trained on
past data may propagate and exacerbate historical biases
against disadvantaged demographics, and producing less
favorable predictions (Bolukbasi et al., 2016; Buolamwini
& Gebru, 2018), resulting in unfair treatments and outcomes
especially in areas such as criminal justice, healthcare, and
finance (Barocas & Selbst, 2016; Berk et al., 2021). Models also have the risk of leaking highly sensitive private

Paper Organization. In Section 2, we introduce definitions, notation, and the problem setup. Section 3 describes
our private post-processing algorithm for learning fair regressors, with finite sample analysis of the accuracy-privacyfairness trade-offs in Section 3.4. Finally in Section 4, we
empirically explore the trade-offs achieved by our postprocessing algorithm on Law School and Communities &
Crime datasets.

1

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 2 University of Waterloo and Vector Institute. Correspondence to: Ruicheng Xian
<rxian2@illinois.edu>, Han Zhao <hanzhao@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

