Visual Transformer with Differentiable Channel Selection: An Information
Bottleneck Inspired Approach

Yancheng Wang 1 Ping Li 2 Yingzhen Yang 1

Abstract

DCS-Transformer.

Self-attention and transformers have been widely
used in deep learning. Recent efforts have been
devoted to incorporating transformer blocks into
different types of neural architectures, including
those with convolutions, leading to various
visual transformers for computer vision tasks.
In this paper, we propose a novel and compact
transformer block, Transformer with Differentiable Channel Selection, or DCS-Transformer.
DCS-Transformer features channel selection in
the computation of the attention weights and
the input/output features of the MLP in the
transformer block. Our DCS-Transformer is
compatible with many popular and compact
transformer networks, such as MobileViT and
EfficientViT, and it reduces the FLOPs of the
visual transformers while maintaining or even
improving the prediction accuracy.
In the
experiments, we replace all the transformer
blocks in MobileViT and EfficientViT with
DCS-Transformer blocks, leading to DCSTransformer networks with different backbones.
The DCS-Transformer is motivated by reduction
of Information Bottleneck, and a novel variational upper bound for the IB loss which can
be optimized by SGD is derived and incorporated into the training loss of the network with
DCS-Transformer. Extensive results on image
classification and object detection evidence that
DCS-Transformer renders compact and efficient
visual transformers with comparable or much
better prediction accuracy than the original visual
transformers. The code of DCS-Transformer
is available at https://github.com/
Statistical-Deep-Learning/

1. Introduction
Building upon the success of Transformer in natural language processing (Vaswani et al., 2017), visual transformers have demonstrated remarkable performance compared
to state-of-the-art Convolution Neural Networks (CNNs)
across a wide range of computer vision tasks, including image classification (Yuan et al., 2021; Dosovitskiy
et al., 2021a), object detection (Liu et al., 2021; Zhu et al.,
2021), image restoration (Liang et al., 2021), and semantic segmentation (Cai et al., 2023). However, the achievements of visual transformers are accompanied by heavy
computational costs (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021a; Touvron
et al., 2021), making their deployment impractical under
resource-limited scenarios. The aforementioned limitations have spurred recent research endeavors aimed at developing efficient visual transformers. Several approaches
have been explored, including incorporation of convolution layers into visual transformers and Neural Architecture Search (NAS), to design efficient transformer architectures, and pruning redundant weights in the transformer
networks. In this paper, we study the problem of compressing visual transformers by channel selection.
Channel selection is an effective method for pruning largeweight convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (Han et al.,
2015; Zhou et al., 2020; Sun et al., 2021). In addition to reducing the computation cost of network architecture, adaptively selecting informative channels is also shown to be
beneficial for representation learning (He et al., 2021; Han
et al., 2021). Models can extract and retain essential visual
information while discarding noise or irrelevant features by
focusing on the most relevant channels selected for different input images. Recent works in selecting informative
channels for visual transformers (Zheng et al., 2022a; Chen
et al., 2021c; Yu et al., 2022a) have already proven to be effective in compressing the size of the networks. However,
existing works usually select fixed channels in the linear
layers of transformer blocks (Yu et al., 2022b; Fang et al.,
2023). In addition, they neglect the importance of selecting
informative channels for calculating the affinity between

1
School of Computing and Augmented Intelligence, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85281, USA 2 VecML Inc.,
Bellevue, WA 98004, USA. Correspondence to: Yingzhen Yang
<yingzhen.yang@asu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

